<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml00)  [Next](eml02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# PREFACE

In this volume the myths and legends of ancient Egypt are embraced in a
historical narrative which begins with the rise of the great Nilotic
civilization and ends with the Græco-Roman Age. The principal deities
are dealt with chiefly at the various periods in which they came into
prominence, while the legends are so arranged as to throw light on the
beliefs and manners and customs of the ancient people. Metrical
renderings are given of such of the representative folk songs and poems
as can be appreciated at the present day.

Egyptian mythology is of highly complex character, and cannot be
considered apart from its racial and historical aspects. The Egyptians
were, as a Hebrew prophet has declared, a "mingled people", and this
view has been confirmed by recent ethnological research: "the process;
of racial fusion begun in the Delta at the dawn of history", says
Professor Elliot Smith, "spread through the whole land of Egypt". In
localities the early Nilotic inhabitants accepted the religious beliefs
of settlers, and fused these with their own. They also clung tenaciously
to the crude and primitive tribal beliefs of their remote ancestors, and
never abandoned an archaic conception even when they acquired new and
more enlightened ideas; they accepted myths literally, and regarded with
great sanctity ancient ceremonies and usages. They even

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

showed a tendency to multiply rather than to reduce the number of their
gods and goddesses, by symbolizing their attributes. As a result, we
find it necessary to deal with a bewildering number of deities and a
confused mass of beliefs, many of which are obscure and contradictory.
But the average Egyptian was never dismayed by inconsistencies in
religious matters: he seemed rather to be fascinated by them. There was,
strictly speaking, no orthodox creed in Egypt; each provincial centre
had its own distinctive theological system, and the religion of an
individual appears to have depended mainly on his habits of life. "The
Egyptian", as Professor Wiedemann has said, "never attempted to
systematize his conceptions of the different divinities into a
homogeneous religion. It is open to us to speak of the religious ideas
of the Egyptians, but not of an Egyptian religion."

In our introduction we deal with the divergent character of some of the
ancient myths so as to simplify the study of a difficult but extremely
fascinating subject. It is shown that one section of the people
recognized a Creator like Ptah, who begot himself and "shaped his limbs"
ere he fashioned the Universe, while another section perpetuated the
idea of a Creatrix who gave birth to all things. At the dawn of history
these rival conceptions existed side by side, and they were perpetuated
until the end. It is evident, too, that the theologies which were based
on these fundamental ideas had undergone, ere the fusion of peoples
occurred, a sufficiently prolonged process of separate development to
give them a racial, or, at any rate, a geographical significance. As
much is suggested by the divergent ideas which obtained regarding the
world. One section, for instance, had conceived of land surrounded by
sky-supporting mountains, peopled by gods and giants, round which the
sun ass

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

galloped to escape the night serpent; another section believed that the
world was embraced by the "Great Circle"--Ocean--and that the Nile
flowed from sea to sea; a third conception was of a heavenly and an
underground Nile. There were also two Paradises--the Osirian and the Ra
(sun god's). Osiris judged men according to their deeds. He was an
agricultural deity, and the early system of Egyptian ethics seems to
have had its origin in the experiences enshrined in the text:
"Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap". Admission to the
Paradise of the sun cult was secured, on the other hand, by the
repetition of magical formulæ. Different beliefs obtained also regarding
the mummy. In the *Book of the Dead* it would appear that the
preservation of the body was necessary for the continued existence of
the soul. Herodotus, however, was informed that after a period of 3000
years the soul returned to animate the dead frame, and this belief in
transmigration of souls is illustrated in the Anpu-Bata story, and is
connected with a somewhat similar conception that the soul of a father
passed to a son, who thus became "the image of his sire", as Horus was
of Osiris, and "husband of his mother".

Of special interest in this connection are the various forms of the
archaic chaos-egg myth associated with the gods Ptah, Khnûmû, Seb,
Osiris, and Ra. As the European giant hides his soul in the egg, which
is within the duck, which is within the fish, which is within the deer
and so on, and Bata hides his soul in the blossom, the bull, and the
tree ere he becomes "husband of his mother", so does Osiris "hide his
essence in the shrine of Amon", while his manifestations include a tree,
the Apis bull, the boar, the goose, and the Oxyrhynchus fish. Similarly
when Set was slain he became a "roaring serpent", a hippopotamus, a
crocodile, or a boar. The souls of Ra,

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

Ptah, and Khnûmû are in the chaos egg like two of the prominent Hindu
and Chinese gods. Other Egyptian deities who are "hidden" include Amon,
Sokar, and Neith. This persistent myth, which appears to have been
associated with belief in transmigration of souls, may be traced even in
Akhenaton's religion. We have "Shu (atmosphere god) in his Aton (sun
disk)", and a reference in the famous hymn to the "air of life" in the
"egg". There can be little doubt that the Transmigration theory
prevailed at certain periods and in certain localities in ancient Egypt,
and that the statement made by Herodotus was well founded, despite
attempts to discredit it.

It is shown that the conception of a Creator was associated with that
form of earth, air, and water worship which was perpetuated at Memphis,
where the presiding Deity was the hammer god Ptah, who resembles the
Chinese Pan-ku, Indra of the Aryans, Tarku and Sutekh of Asia Minor,
Hercules, Thor, &c. The Creatrix, on the other hand, was more closely
associated with lunar, earth, and water worship, and appears to have
been the principal Deity of the Mediterranean race which spread into
Asia Minor and Europe. In Scotland, for instance, as we show, she is
called Cailleach Bheur, and, like other archaic tribal deities and
ghosts, she was the enemy of mankind. Similarly the Egyptian goddesses
Sekhet and Hathor were destroyers, and Tefnut was goddess of plagues.
Even the sun god Ra "produced calamity after thy (Osiris's) heart", as
one of the late temple chants puts it.

In the chapter dealing with animal worship the racial aspect of early
beliefs, which were connected with fixed and definite ceremonies, is
illustrated in the Horus-Set myth. The "black pig" was Set (the devil)
in Egypt, pork was "taboo", and the swineherd was regarded as

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

"an abomination", and not allowed to enter temples. The Gauls and
Achæans, on the other hand, honoured the swineherd and ate pork freely,
while in the Teutonic Valhal and the Celtic (Irish) Paradise, swine's
flesh was the reward of heroes. In Scotland, however, the ancient
prejudice against pork exists in localities even at the present day, and
the devil is the "black pig". Professor Sir John Rhys, in his *Celtic
Folklore*, records that in Wales the black sow of All-Hallows was
similarly regarded as the devil. Even in parts of Ireland the hatred of
pork still prevails, especially among certain families. This evidence,
considered with that afforded by the study of skull forms, suggests that
Mediterranean racial ideas may not yet be wholly extinct in our own
country." Strange to say," writes Mr. R. N. Bradley, in his recent work
on *Malta and the Mediterranean Race*, "it is in these lands remote from
the origin that some of the best indications of the (Mediterranean) race
are to be found." The Gaulish treatment of the boar appears to be
Asiatic. Brahma, in one of the Hindu creation myths, assumes the form of
a boar, the "lord of creatures", and tosses up the earth with his tusks
from the primordial deep.

Another myth which seems to havoc acquired a remote racial colouring is
the particular form of the dragon story which probably radiated from
Asia Minor. The hero is represented in Egypt by Horus, with his finger
on his lips, in his character as Harpocrates, as the Greeks named this
mysterious form of the god. The god Sutekh of Rameses II, as we show,
was also a dragon slayer. So was Hercules, who fought with the Hydra,
and Thor, who at Ragnarok overcame the Midgard Serpent. Sigurd,
Siegfried, the Teutonic heroes, and the Celtic Finn-mac-Coul suck a
finger or thumb after slaying the dragon, or one of its forms, and
cooking part of it, to

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

obtain "knowledge" or understand "the language of birds". In an Egyptian
folk tale Ahura, after killing the "Deathless Snake", similarly
understands "the language of birds, fishes", &c. Harpocrates appears to
be the god Horus as the dragon-slaying Sutekh, the imported legend being
preserved in the Ahura tale of the Empire period, when Egypt received so
many Asiatic immigrants that the facial type changed as the statuary
shows. Professor Elliot Smith considers that while the early Egyptian
was "the representative of his kinsman the Neolithic European . . . the
immigrant population into both Europe and Egypt" represented "two
streams of the same Asiatic folk". Racial myths appear to have followed
in the tracks of the racial drift.

In our historical narrative the reader is kept in touch with the great
civilizations of the Cretans, Hittites, Babylonians, Assyrians, &c.,
which influenced and were influenced. by Egypt. Special attention is
also devoted to Palestine and the great figures in Biblical
narrative--Joseph, Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Nahum, and the notable kings
of Israel and Judah. There are numerous quotations from the Old
Testament, and especially from the prophets who dealt with the political
as well as the religious problems of their times. To students of the
Bible this part of the volume should make special appeal. It is
impossible to appreciate to the full the power and sagacity of Isaiah's
sublime utterances without some knowledge of the history of ancient
Egypt.

DONALD A. MACKENZIE.

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](eml02)

</div>
