<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eml29)  [Next](eml31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KKCXC6/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Egyptian Myth and Legend*, by Donald Mackenzie, \[1907\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

# CHAPTER XIX

### The Island of Enchantment

A Sailor's Story--Shipwrecked--The Sole Survivor--A Lonely Island--A
Voice like Thunder--The Giant Serpent God--A Threat--Sailor given
Protection--Sacrifice of Asses--Rescued by a Ship--The Parting--A Man of
Wisdom.

ONCE upon a time a ship set forth on a voyage to the mines of Sinai, and
it was swamped in a storm. All the sailors were drowned save one, who
swam to the Isle of Enchantment, which was inhabited by the
"manes"--serpent gods who have heads and arms like to human beings and
are able to hold converse in speech.

When this man returned to Egypt he related his wonderful story unto his
lord, saying: "Now, be well satisfied that I have come back although
alone. Your ship on which I have returned is safe, and no men are
missing. I was rescued by it, and I had no other means of escape. When
you have cleansed your limbs, I pray you to inform the Pharaoh of the
things which have befallen me."

The master said: "So you persist in repeating this tale of yours. But
speak on. I will hear you to the end, and, perchance, your words will
betray the truth. But lower your voice and say what you have to say
without excitement."

The sailor said: "I will begin at the beginning, and relate what
happened to myself. I voyaged towards the mines in your great ship, in
which were 150 of the finest

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

sailors in Egypt. They were all stout-hearted men. Now, some said that
the wind would be unfavourable, and others said that there would be no
wind at all. As it chanced., a great storm arose, and the ship was
tossed about in the midst of high billows so that it was swamped. When I
found myself in the angry waters., I clung to a floating spar. All the
others were drowned. In time I was cast ashore, and I found myself on a
lonely island, where I lay helplessly for three days and three nights.
Then I began to revive. I was faint with hunger and thirst, and went to
search for food, and I found fruit and birds and fishes, and ate
thereof. I gave thanks to the god because that I was alive, and offered
up a sacrifice.

"No sooner had I given thanks in this manner than I heard a loud noise
like to thunder, and the earth trembled beneath me and the trees were
stricken as with tempest. I hid my face with terror, and after I had
lain a time on the ground I looked up and beheld a giant serpent god
with human face and arms. He wore a long beard, and his body was golden
and blue.

"I prostrated myself before him, and he spake, saying: 'Speak and tell,
little fellow, speak and tell why you have come hither. If you do not
speak without delay, I will cause your life to end. If you do not tell
me what I have not heard and what I do not know, <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122) I will cause you to pass out of
existence like a flame which has been extinguished.'

"Ere I answered him he carried me inland and set me down without injury,
whereupon I said that I had come from the land of Egypt in a great ship
which perished in the storm, and that I had clung to a spar and was
washed ashore.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

"The serpent god heard, and said: 'Do not be terrified, little fellow,
do not be terrified, and be cheerful of countenance, for it is the god
who sent you hither to me. Here you may dwell until four moons wax and
wane; then a ship will come, and you will depart in it and return once
again to the land of Egypt. . . . It is pleasant to hold converse. Know,
then, that I dwell here with my kind, and I have children, and there is
also a girl who perished by accident in a fire. I will take you to my
home, and you will return to yours again in time.'

"When the giant serpent god had spoken thus I prostrated myself before
him, and I said: 'To the King of Egypt I will relate the things I have
seen. I will laud your name, and offerings of oil and perfumes will be
made to you. Asses <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123) and birds will
I sacrifice to you, and the king will send you rich offerings because
you are a benefactor of mankind.'

"'I need not your perfumes,' answered the serpent god. 'I am a ruler of
Punt, and these I possess in abundance, but I have no oil of Egypt here.
But know that when you go away this island will never again be seen by
any man; it will vanish in the midst of the sea.'

"When four moons had waxed and waned, a ship appeared as the serpent god
had foretold. I knelt down and bade farewell to the inhabitants of the
island of enchantment, and the great god gave me gifts of perfumes and
ivory and much treasure, and he gave me also rare woods and baboons. I
took my leave with grateful heart, and I thanked the god because of my
deliverance. Then I went to the shore and hailed the ship, and was taken
aboard it.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

These are the things which happened unto me, my lord and master. Now
conduct me, I pray you, before His Majesty that I may present him with
the gifts of the serpent god. . . . Look upon me, for I have returned to
tell of the wonders I did behold with mine eyes. . . . In my youth I was
instructed to acquire wisdom so that I might be highly esteemed. Now I
have become a wise man indeed."

Apparently "the master" was convinced by this wonderful story, which was
duly recorded by a scribe of the temple of Amon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[249:1](eml30.htm#fr_122) The Norse giant
Vafthrudner similarly puts to death those who cannot tell him something
he does not know.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[250:1](eml30.htm#fr_123) The reference is
unique. Set is associated with the wild ass, but except in this tale
there is no indication that asses were sacrificed in Egypt. The Aryans
sacrificed the horse.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX: The Hyksos and their Strange God](eml31)

</div>
