[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc30011)  [Next](cc30013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span>Chapter 9

<span id="iii.x.i"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p2"></span>**1.** The burden of the word of the Lord
in the land of Hadrach, and Damascus *shall be* the rest thereof: when
the eyes of man, as of all the tribes of Israel, *shall be* toward the
Lord

<span id="iii.x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Onus sermonis Iehovae in terra
Chadrak**,** et Damascus quies ejus; quia ad Iehovam oculus hominis et
omnium tribuum Israel.

<span id="iii.x.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.i-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p6"></span>One thing had escaped my notice in the
words of the Prophet — that *great people and strong nations would
come*. We have said that “great” rather than “many” ought to be adopted.
The latter meaning may indeed be allowed that the worshipers of God
would come from various cities; but as the word <span
id="iii.x.i-p6.1"></span>עצומים, *otsumim* properly signifies strong,
and as it is certain that the Prophet means the same thing by the two
words, it is more probable that he speaks of strong and valiant people,
as they are not so easily subdued; for the more any one excels in
prowess, the more stiff is his neck to undertake the yoke. As then the
strong and the brave, and such as are eminent in the world, are not so
easily brought to submit to God, the Prophet expressly says, that they
shall become teachable, and be made willing, so that pride, as it is
usually the case, shall not be a hindrance to them.  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md)

<span id="iii.x.i-p8"></span>I come now to the passage in which the
Prophet announces a heavy burden, or a severe and fearful prophecy
respecting Syria and other neighboring nations. I prefer to retain the
word “burden,” rather than to render it prophecy, as many expositors
have done; for though <span id="iii.x.i-p8.1"></span>משא, *mesha*, is
sometimes taken simply for prophecy, yet there is here, as it appears to
me, something particular intended; for the Prophet denounces God’s
judgment both on Syria and on the surrounding countries, and the word
prophecy is not suitable; for to say “the prophecy of the word,” would
be strange and without meaning. But when he says, *The burden of the
word* of God, the sentence is full, and flows well; for he reminds us
that his word would not be ineffectual, but full of effect, as it would
lie as a burden on Syria and on other countries, which they should not
be able to shake off. *The burden* then *of the word of Jehovah*; that
is, “I have now a prediction which will be grievous and severe to those
heathens who now disturb the Jews, the chosen people.”

<span id="iii.x.i-p9"></span>But this doctrine contains consolation to
the godly; for they may hence know that they are safe under God’s
protection, as he carries on war with their enemies; nay, his vengeance
was now prepared against all those who harassed the Jews. As then he had
before promised that incredible favor of God which we have noticed, so
now he declares that the Church would be safe under the protection of
God, inasmuch as vengeance was in readiness for all the ungodly.

<span id="iii.x.i-p10"></span>But the Prophet mentions here only the
cities known to the Jews, for it was enough to refer to them as an
example, that the Jews might hence conclude that God would be always the
protector of his Church, so that no enemies shall escape unpunished. The
Prophet then no doubt mentioned these few cities to the Jews, that they
might feel assured that nothing is so strong and impetuous in the world
which God cannot easily subdue and lay prostrate. Now as we apprehend
the Prophet’s object, we shall come to the words.

<span id="iii.x.i-p11"></span>Some think that the word <span
id="iii.x.i-p11.1"></span>חדרך, *chedrak*, includes the whole of Syria,
which seems to me probable. Others suppose that some notable city is
meant, as Damascus is immediately subjoined. But as the matter is
uncertain, and as there is no doubt but that the Prophet speaks of the
kingdom of Syria, I will not contest the point. Be it then the name of a
city or of a country,  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md) it is all
the same, for the Prophet means that the vengeance of God was impending
over the Syrians, and impending in such a manner, that it would not
depart from them until they were wholly destroyed. For when he adds that
*its rest would be Damascus*, he intimates that God’s judgment would not
be like a storm, which soon passes away, but that it would be a heavy
and burdensome mass, which could not be dissipated, according to what
Isaiah says —

<span id="iii.x.i-p13"></span>“The word came on Jacob and fell on
Israel;” (<span id="iii.x.i-p13.1"></span>[Isa
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009)<span id="iii.x.i-p13.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="iii.x.i-p14"></span>that is, what God pronounced against Jacob
fell on Israel. He indeed changes the name, but it is the same as though
he had said — “When God shall punish Jacob, can the Israelites escape?”
for they were the same. The sentence then shall fall, that is, it shall
find its own place: in vain will they run here and there to escape. The
Jews then will gain nothing by their flight; for the vengeance now
denounced by the Lord shall lay hold on them. So also in this place he
says, *the burden of the word of Jehovah on the land of Chadrak and
Damascus*, the royal city, the metropolis, *shall be its rest*, its
dwelling; for the Lord’s vengeance will fix its station there, and it
cannot be thence removed. In vain then will the Syrians try in various
ways to escape, for they must be pressed down by God’s hand, until they
be laid prostrate. We now then understand in what sense the Prophet says
that Damascus would be the rest, the habitation, or the abode of God’s
vengeance.

<span id="iii.x.i-p15"></span>He afterwards adds, *For to Jehovah the
eye of man*. The particle <span id="iii.x.i-p15.1"></span>כי, *ki* is to
be taken here, I think, as an adverb of time, “When”. There is indeed in
reality but little difference, except that the common rendering of it
greatly obscures the meaning of the Prophet. But if it be taken as an
adverb of time, the passage will read better, *When the eye of man shall
be to Jehovah, and of all the tribes of Israel*; that is, when the Jews
shall begin to turn to God without any dissimulation, but with real
sincerity; then he says, God will in every way bless them, and raise up
his hand against their enemies. The Prophet had before exhorted the Jews
to repentance; for they had been too much given to sacrifices and
fastings, while no integrity existed among them. So also he shows again
that their hypocrisy was an hindrance, which prevented God to manifest
his favor to them; and thus he reminds them, that the gate would be
opened, and the way made plain and even for God’s favor and blessings,
whenever they raised their eyes to him, that is, whenever they derived
their hopes from him, and fixed on him their dependence. For to direct
the eyes to God is nothing else than to look to him so as to fix on him
all our thoughts. Some understand by “man” all mortals, but of this I
approve not; nor do I doubt but that the Prophet refers to the Jews
alone; and doubtless it is not consistent with the context to regard any
but the Jews. It is indeed true, that the Prophet speaks here of the
calling of the Gentiles, but so as to begin with the Jews; for as they
were the first-born, so it was necessary for them to have the
precedence. The Prophet then here declares that God would be glorious in
his chosen people, and would lay prostrate all the bordering enemies.
Then the eye of man signifies the same as the eye of the whole people;
as though he had said, that after the Jews had begun to lay aside all
dissimulation and devoted themselves to God, and cast all their hopes on
him, they would then find God sufficiently powerful to lay in the dust
all their enemies.

<span id="iii.x.i-p16"></span>But he afterwards adds, by way of
explanation, *and of all the tribes of Israel*. Some give this
rendering, “How much more,” as though the Prophet reasoned here from the
less to the greater. But, as I have already said, this cannot be
maintained. First, this explanation is strained, “The eye of man, and
especially of all the tribes of Israel;” for the Jews ought to have had
the first place: and secondly, the particle waw has no amplifying sense.
In short, he intended by a small particle to show that precedence
belonged to the Jews. I do not then understand what they mean, who would
include all nations in the word “man,” and then regard the Prophet as
proceeding to mention the tribes of Israel. Now what I have stated, that
the true servants of God were then few, is probable enough; hence the
Prophet here exhorts the whole people to a union in religion. Whenever
then the whole tribes of Israel directed their eyes to God, the burden
of his word would then come upon Damascus and all the Syrians.  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md)

<span id="iii.x.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.x.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou kindly
and graciously extends thy hand to us, not only to show us once for all
the right way, but also to lead us through our whole life, and even to
sustain us when wearied, and to raise us up when fallen, — O grant, that
we may not be ungrateful for this thy great kindness, but render
ourselves obedient to thee; and may we not experience the dreadful power
of thy judgment, which thou denounces on all thine enemies, who are to
sustain a vengeance that is to sink them in the abyss of endless
perdition; but may we suffer ourselves to be ever raised up by thy hand,
until we shall at length reach that blessed rest, to which thou invites
us, and art ready to lead us, where we shall enjoy the fullness of those
blessings which have been obtained for us by thy only-begotten Son —
Amen.

<span id="iii.x.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-second

<span id="iii.x.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p2"></span>**2.** And Hamath also shall border
thereby; Tyrus, and Zidon, though it be very wise.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p3"></span>**2.** Etiam Chemath terminabit in ea;
Tyrus et Sidon**,** quia (*vel* quamvis) sapiens sit valde.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p4"></span>**3.** And Tyrus did build herself a
strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire
of the streets.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p5"></span>**3.** Et aedificavit Tyrus munitionem
sibi**,** et coacervavit argentum quasi pulverem**,** et aurum quasi
lutum platearum.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p6"></span>**4.** Behold, the Lord will cast her out,
and he will smite her power in the sea; and she shall be devoured with
fire.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p7"></span>**4.** Ecce Dominus expellet (*vel***,**
ad inopiam rediget) eam**,** et percutiet in mari potentiam ejus**,** et
ipsa igne devorabitur.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.iv-p9"></span><span id="iii.x.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p10"></span>Zechariah goes on with the same subject:
for he says now, that destruction was nigh all the nations who, being
neighbors, harassed the people of God. Yesterday I briefly referred to
what he had in view, which was to show, that God would so defend his
Church as to execute vengeance on all the ungodly who had unjustly
persecuted it; and he spoke of the kingdom of Syria, which was
contiguous to Judea. But he now goes farther, — that the wrath of God
would extend to the remoter parts of Syria: for Hamath is Antioch the
great, and it gave a name to a part of Syria. Damascus was the
metropolis of the Syrian empire. But as we have said elsewhere, this
word is variously taken in Scripture, but generally for the whole
country extending from Judea to the Euphrates and even beyond it. We now
then see why Zechariah adds Antioch to Syria, as though he had said,
that God would now be the avenger of his people, not only by rewarding
bordering cities, but also those afar off. He then passes on to Tyrus
and Simon, which were, as it is well known, cities on the sea-side, and
were also nigh to the Jews; for there was no great distance between
Galilee and Phoenicia. But as we said yesterday, destruction is
denounced on all the nations who had been inimical to the chosen people.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p11"></span>He says that Hamath, or Antioch, would be
in *its border*. All nearly with one consent apply this to Judea or to
Jerusalem, but they are mistaken; and this whole chapter is
misunderstood by all expositors, Jews and others. I indeed feel ashamed
when I see how widely they have departed from the meaning of the
Prophet, and it will be almost a trial to me wholly to reject their
mistakes. But it will become plainly evident that none of them have
understood what the Prophet means.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p12"></span>They thus explain the passage, that
Antioch would be within the borders of Judea, as God would consecrate to
himself the lands which were before heathen. But the Prophet no doubt
says, as I have already stated, that Antioch would be within the borders
of Syria whenever God should visit them all for their wickedness, as
though he had said, “God will involve in the same punishment that part
of Syria which derives its name from Antioch, because with united forces
had all the Syrians assailed his chosen people; though then they are far
distant from Judea, they shall yet partake of the same punishment,
because they took up arms against his Church.” *Hamath* then, or
Antioch, *shall be in the borders* of Damascus; that is, it shall not be
exempt from the punishment which God will inflict on the bordering
kingdom of and. And as we advance this view will become more clear.
 <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md)

<span id="iii.x.iv-p20"></span>He adds, *Tyrus and Sidon, though it be
very wise*. The particle <span id="iii.x.iv-p20.1"></span>כי, *ki*, is
used, which is properly causal; but we may gather from many parts of
Scripture that it is taken as an adversative. Either meaning would not,
however, be unsuitable, that God would take vengeance on the Sidonians
and Syrians, because they were very crafty, or *though* they were
cautious, and seemed skillful and cunning in managing their affairs:
they were not however to escape God’s judgment. If the former meaning be
approved, it was the Prophet’s object to show, that when men are
extremely provident and labor to fortify themselves by crafty means, God
is opposed to them; for it is his peculiar office to take the crafty by
their own craftiness. As then too much cunning and craftiness displease
God, it may suitably be said, that the Syrians and Sidonians were now
summoned before God’s tribunal, because they were extremely crafty, as
is commonly the case with merchants in wealthy and maritime cities; for
they learn much cunning by the many frauds which they are almost
compelled to use. Since then the Sidonians and Syrians were such, it was
right to denounce vengeance on them. But the other view is equally
suitable, that all the craft of Tyrus and Simon would not prevent God
from executing his judgment. As to myself, I think that a reason is here
given why God threatens ruin to the Syrians and Sidonians, even because
they were given to crafty artifices, and thus circumvented all their
neighbors.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p21"></span>But he uses a good word by way of
concession; for all who intend to deceive cover their craft with the
name of wisdom or prudence. “They wish to be cautious,” when yet they
wickedly deceive others by their intrigues and frauds. A concession then
is made as to the word wise: but the Prophet at the same time teaches
us, that this kind of wisdom is hateful to God, when by the loss of
others we increase our own wealth: for an explanation immediately
follows —

<span id="iii.x.iv-p22"></span><span id="iii.x.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p23"></span>*For Tyrus has for herself built a
fortress*. The Prophet shows by these words how very cautious or prudent
the Syrians had been; for they fortified themselves by strongholds, and
thought themselves to be beyond the reach of danger. He then adds, *and
heaped to herself silver as dust, and gold as the mire of the streets*,
that is, accumulated wealth above measure; for he mentions “dust” and
“mire” as signifying an immense heap; as though he had said, “They have
worthless heaps of silver and gold for their vast abundance”. He no
doubt includes silver and gold in the fortress which he mentions; for I
do not confine the word fortress only to towers and strongholds; but the
Prophet, as I think, states generally, that Tyrus was so furnished and
fortified with wealth, forces, and all kinds of defences, that it
thought itself impregnable.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p24"></span>There is a striking correspondence
between <span id="iii.x.iv-p24.1"></span>צור, *tsur*, and <span
id="iii.x.iv-p24.2"></span>מצור, *metsur* <span
id="iii.x.iv-p24.3"></span>צור, *Tsur*, he says, has built <span
id="iii.x.iv-p24.4"></span>מצור, *metsur*, a fortress. It is a
paronomasia worthy of notice, but cannot be retained in Latin.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p25"></span><span id="iii.x.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p26"></span>He now declares that God would be an
avenger. Behold, he says, *Jehovah will possess*, or cause to possess,
as some read, but they are mistaken, owing to the two meanings of the
verb <span id="iii.x.iv-p26.1"></span>ירש, *iresh*, which means to
possess and also to expel or impoverish;  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md) for interpreters think that a hope of
favor and of salvation is here given to these cities, and say that they
are now chosen by God as a possession. But this is wholly contrary to
the intention of the Prophet, as it appears more clearly from a view of
each clause.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p28"></span>*Jehovah* then *will expel her, and smite
her strength*. The Prophet no doubt alludes to what he had already said
— that Tyrus had heaped silver and gold; now on the other hand he
declares that Tyrus would be exposed to a scattering; for the heap of
gold and silver it had laid up would be dissipated by God: *he will then
dissipate*; or if one chooses to take the verb as meaning to reduce to
want, the contrast would thus be suitable — God *will* then
*impoverish*, or expel her. Afterwards he adds, *In the sea will he
smite her strength*. As Tyrus, we know, was surrounded by the sea, the
Prophet by this reference shows God’s power in taking vengeance on her;
for the sea would be no restraint or hindrance to God, when he resolved
to enter there. The Syrians, indeed, thought themselves safe from every
hostile attack, for they had the sea on every side as a triple wall and
a triple rampart. Nor was Tyrus altogether like Venice; for Venice is
situated in a stagnant sea, while the situation of Tyrus was in a very
deep sea, as historians plainly show who relate its assault by Alexander
the Great. It had indeed been before taken and plundered; but he did
what none had ever thought of — he filled up a part of the sea, so that
Tyrus was no longer an island.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p29"></span>We now see what Zechariah had in view,
when he threatened ruin to Tyrus, though its strength was in the midst
of the sea, beyond the reach of fortune, as it is commonly said. *And
she shall be consumed by fire*. He means that Tyrus would not only be
plundered, but wholly demolished; for we know that even the strongest
things are consumed by fire. It follows —

<span id="iii.x.v"></span>

<span id="iii.x.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.v-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.v-p2"></span>**5.** Ashkelon shall see *it*, and fear;
Gaza also *shall see it*, and be very sorrowful, and Ekron; for her
expectation shall be ashamed; and the king shall perish from Gaza, and
Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.

<span id="iii.x.v-p3"></span>**5.** Videbit Ascalon et timebit; et
Aza**,** et dolebit valde; et Ekron**,** quia confusus erit (*aut***,**
pudefactus) aspectus ejus; et peribit rex ab Aza (*hoc est***,** Gaza)
et Ascalon non habitabitur.

<span id="iii.x.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.v-p6"></span>In this verse also is described the
devastation of those cities which the Prophet names; as though he had
said, that all those cities which had risen up against God’s people were
devoted to extreme vengeance. Zechariah says that none would be exempt
from punishment, since the hand of God would be stretched forth, and
extend everywhere, so that it might be easily concluded, that all those
who had unjustly harassed the Church would be thus rewarded for their
cruelty. This is the import of what is here said.

<span id="iii.x.v-p7"></span>He says that *Ascalon would see and fear*;
for at that time the Ascalonites were hostile to the Jews. He speaks the
same of Aza, which the Greeks called Gaza; but they were deceived in
thinking it was a name given to it by Cambyses, for the reason that Gaza
means a treasure in the Persian language. This is childish. It is indeed
certain that it has been owing to a change in the pronunciation of one
letter; for <span id="iii.x.v-p7.1"></span>ע, *oin*, is guttural among
the Hebrews, and was formerly so pronounced, like our g: as they called
Amorrah, Gomorrah, so Aza is Gaza. We have spoken of this elsewhere.

<span id="iii.x.v-p8"></span>Now it appears from geography that these
cities were near the sea, or not far from the sea, and having this
advantage they gathered much wealth. But as wealth commonly generates
pride and cruelty, all these nations were very troublesome to the Jews.
This is the reason why the Prophet says that *grief* would come on Gaza,
and then on Ekron and on other cities. He adds, *Because ashamed shall
be her expectation*. There is no doubt but they had placed their trust
in Tyrus, which was thought to be impregnable; for though enemies might
have subdued the whole land, there a secure station remained. Since they
all looked to Tyrus, the Prophet says that their hope would be
confounded, when Tyrus was overthrown and destroyed. The sum of the
whole is, that the beginning of the vengeance would be at Tyrus, which
was situated as it were beyond the world, so as not to be exposed to any
evils. He says then that the beginning of the calamity would be in that
city, to which no misfortunes, as it was thought, could find an access.
And then he mentions that other cities, on seeing Tyrus visited with
ruin, would be terrified, as their confidence would be thus subverted.
He afterwards adds, *Perish shall the king from Gaza, and Ascalon shall
not be inhabited*; that is, such a change will take place as will almost
obliterate the appearance of these cities. It follows —

<span id="iii.x.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.vi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.x.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p2"></span>**6.** And a bastard shall dwell in
Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Et habitabit extraneus in
Azdoth**,** (*hoc est* Azoti**,** *et Azdoth* *verterunt Graci
Azotum***,**) et excidam superbiam Philistim.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p6"></span>In this verse the Prophet denounces a
similar ruin on Azotus, and the whole land of the Philistines, or on the
whole land of Palestine. For what interpreters say, that the Jews would
dwell at Azotus as strangers, that is, though they had previously been
counted aliens, is to reach neither heaven nor earth. The Prophet on the
contrary means, that after the destruction of these cities, if any
inhabitants remained, they would be like strangers, without any certain
habitation. The Prophet then mentions the effect, in order to show that
the country would be waste and desolate, so as to contain no safe or
fixed dwellings for its inhabitants. Some render it spurious, as it is
rendered in some other places; and they understand it of the Jews,
because they had been before in a mean condition, as though they were
like a spurious race. But their opinion is probable, who derive <span
id="iii.x.vi-p6.1"></span>ממזר, *memezar*, from <span
id="iii.x.vi-p6.2"></span>זור, *zur*, which means to peregrinate; and
they quote other instances, in which the double <span
id="iii.x.vi-p6.3"></span>ממ, *mem*, is used in the formations of a
noun; and it is easy to prove, from many passages of scripture, that
<span id="iii.x.vi-p6.4"></span>ממזר, *memezar*, means a stranger.
 <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) And if any one carefully considers
the design of the Prophet, he will see the truth of what I have said —
that is, that his object is to show, that all the inhabitants of Azotus,
and of the land of the Philistine, would be like lodgers, because all
places would be desolate through the slaughter and devastations of
enemies. As then Ashdod and Palestine had been before noted for the
number of their people, the Prophet says that all the cities of
Palestine, and the city Ashdod, would be deserted, except that there
would be there a few scattered and wandering inhabitants, like those who
sojourn in a strange land. It follows —

<span id="iii.x.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.vii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.x.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p2"></span>**7.** And I will take away his blood out
of his mouth, and his abominations from between his teeth: but he that
remaineth, even he, *shall be* for our God, and he shall be as a
governor in Judah, and Ekron as a Jebusite.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Et auferam sanguines ejus ex ore
ejus**,** et abominationes ejus e medio dentium ejus; et qui residuus
erit**,** etiam ipse**,** erit Deo nostro; et erit quasi dux in
Iehuda**,** et Ekron quasi Iebusaeus.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p6"></span>Interpreters do also pervert the whole of
this verse; and as to the following verse, that is, the next, they do
nothing else but lead the readers far astray from its real meaning. God
says now, that he will *take away blood from the mouth of enemies*; as
though he had said, “I will check their savage disposition, that they
may not thus swallow down the blood of my people.” For here is not
described any change, as though they were to become a different people,
as though the Syrians, the Sidonians, the Philistine, and other nations,
who had been given to plunders, and raged cruelly against the miserable
Jews, were to assume the gentleness of lambs: this the Prophet does not
mean; but he introduces God here as armed with power to repress the
barbarity of their enemies, and to prevent them from cruelly assaulting
the Church.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p7"></span>*I will take away blood*, he says, *from
their mouth*; and he says, from their *mouth*, because they had been
inured in cruelty. I will cause, then, that they may not as hitherto
satiate their own lust for blood. He adds, *and abominations*, that is,
I will take *from the midst of their teeth* their abominable plunders;
for he calls all those things abominations which had been taken by
robbery and violence.  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) And he
compares them to wild beasts, who not only devour the flesh, but drink
also the blood and tear asunder the raw carcass. In short, he shows
here, under the similitude of wolves and leopards and wild boars, how
great had been the inhumanity of enemies to the Church; for they
devoured the miserable Jews, as wild and savage beasts are wont to
devour their prey.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p9"></span>It afterwards follows, *and he who shall
be a remnant*. Some translate, “and he shall be left,” and explain it of
the Philistine and other nations of whom mention is made. But the
Prophet doubtless means the Jews; for though few only had returned to
their country as remnants from their exile, he yet says that this small
number would be sacred to God, and that all who remained would be, as it
were, leaders in Judah, however despised they might have been. For there
was no superiority even in the chief men among them; only they
spontaneously paid reverence to Zerubbabel, who was of the royal seed,
and to Joshua on account of the priesthood; while yet all of them were
in a low and mean condition. But the Prophet says, that the most
despised of them would be leaders and chiefs in Judah. We now perceive
the Prophet’s meaning; for after having predicted the ruin that was nigh
all the enemies of the Church, he now sets forth the end and use of his
prophecy; for God would provide for the good of the miserable Jews, who
had been long exiles, and who, though now restored to their country,
were yet exposed to the ill treatment of all, and also despised and made
even the objects of scorn to their enemies. *He* then *who shall be a
remnant, even he shall be for our God*, as though he had said, “Though
the Lord had for a time repudiated you as well as your fathers, when he
drove you here and there and scattered you, yet now God has gathered
you, and for this end — that you may be his people: ye shall then be the
peculiar people of God, though ye are small in number and contemptible
in your condition.”  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md)

<span id="iii.x.vii-p12"></span>Then he adds, these remnants *shall be
as leaders in Judah*, that is, God will raise them to the highest honor;
though they are now without any dignity, they shall yet be made by God
almost all of them princes. It then follows, *And Ekron shall be as a
Jebusite*. Some explain thus — that the citizens of Ekron would dwell in
Jerusalem, which the Jebusites had formerly possessed; and others give
another view, but nothing to the purpose. The Prophet speaks not here of
God’s favor to the citizens of Ekron, but on the contrary shows the
difference between God’s chosen people and heathen nations, who gloried
in their own good fortune: hence he says, that they should be like the
Jebusites, for they at length would have to endure a similar
destruction. We indeed know, that the Jebusites had been driven out of
that town, when Jerusalem was afterwards built; but it was done late,
even under David. As then they had long held that place and were at
length dislodged, this is the reason why the Prophet says, that though
the citizens of Ekron seemed now to be in the very middle of the holy
land, they would be made like the Jebusites, for the Lord would drive
away and destroy them all. He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.x.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.viii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.x.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p2"></span>**8.** And I will encamp about mine
house because of the army, because of him that passeth by, and because
of him that returneth: and no oppressor shall pass through them any
more: for now have I seen with mine eyes.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Et castra metabor ad domum meam
ab exercitu**,** a transeunte et redeunte; et non transibit super eos
amplius exactor; quia nunc vidi oculis meis.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p6"></span>He concludes what he had been speaking
of, — that God would be the guardian of his chosen people, so as to
repel on every side the violent assaults of enemies. It is then the same
as though he had said, “though the Church is not strongly fortified, it
shall yet be impregnable, for God’s protection is of more value than all
human strength, than all aids and helps.” God then compares himself here
to a moat and a bulwark, and other kinds of fortresses, *I will be*, he
says, *a camp to my house*. He mentions here house rather than city,
that the Jews might feel confident that there was sufficient help in God
alone, though they might dwell in a private house or in a cottage. “My
Church, though it be a small house, will I yet surround with my
defences, so as to render it safe from all harm.”

<span id="iii.x.viii-p7"></span>He says, *from the army*; and then,
*from him that passes through, and from him that returns*. He places the
army in opposition to the house; and thus he exhorts the Jews, not to
regard their own strength, but to know that God alone is far better
shall all armies. Though then the whole world united together and
collected all its forces, he still bids them to be calmly confident, for
God alone would be sufficient to put to flight all armies. And according
to the same meaning he refers to him that *passes through* and who
*returns*; as though he had said, “Though enemies may wander through the
whole earth and occupy it from one end to the other, yet I will cause my
house to remain safe.” By him that returns, he intimates, that though
enemies renewed their armies the second and the third time, yet God’s
strength would be always sufficient to check their assaults. In a word,
what is here taught is the perpetuity of the safety of God’s people, for
he will never be wearied in defending them, nor will his power be ever
lessened. It often happens that those who with the best intention succor
their neighbors, by degrees grow wearied, or they may have their efforts
prevented by various events; but the Prophet tells us, that God is not
like men, wearied or unable, after having once helped his people and
repelled their enemies; for he will be always ready to aid his people,
were enemies to renew the battle a hundred times.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p8"></span>By *enemy* then he means forces; by
*passing through*, the obstinate cruelty of enemies; and by *returning*,
new wars, which one undertakes, when disappointed of his hope, by
collecting a new army and repairing his strength.  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md)

<span id="iii.x.viii-p21"></span>At length he adds, *And pass shall no
more the extortioner through them*. This sentence explains what he had
figuratively expressed, — that though the Jews had been exposed to the
will of their enemies, yet God would not hereafter suffer them to be
unjustly treated and to be plundered as they had been: for under the
name of extortioner he includes all plunderers who had spoiled the
miserable Jews of their goods. Then he says, *For I have seen with mine
eyes*. It would be frigid, nay insipid, to explain this clause as some
do, that is, as though the Prophet had said, — that he related what had
been made known to him from above: for on the contrary God testifies
here, that he had seen with his eyes how cruelly and disgracefully the
Jews had been treated. And some, while they regard God as the speaker,
very unwisely give this explanation, — that God already foresaw what he
would do. But evidently God assigns here, as I have said, a reason why
he purposed to deliver the Jews from injuries, and for the future to
keep them safe and defend them; and the reason given is, because he saw
what grievous wrongs they were suffering. And the Prophet speaks
according to the usual manner adopted in Scripture; for though nothing
is hid from God’s eyes, yet he is rightly said to see what he takes
notice of, and what he declares must be accounted for before his
tribunal. Though then God saw even before the creation of the world what
was to take place afterward in all ages, yet he is rightly said to see
what he begins to call to judgment. The Jews indeed thought they were
neglected by him; for the Scripture everywhere says, that God closes his
eyes, is asleep, lies down, forgets, cares not, when he hides himself
and appears not as the avenger of wrongs. Hence, on the other hand, the
Lord declares here, that he saw with his eyes those things which were
not to be tolerated, inasmuch as enemies had passed all bounds, and had
so far advanced and indulged in wantonness, that their pride and cruelty
were become intolerable.

<span id="iii.x.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.x.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as the ungodly
at this day take such delight in their own filth, that the weakness of
our faith is somewhat disturbed by their pride and arrogance, — O grant,
that we may learn to lift up our eyes to thy judgments, and patiently
wait for what is now concealed, until thou puttest forth the power of
thine hand and destroyest all those who now cruelly rage and shed
innocent blood, and persecute thy Church in every way they can: and may
we so cast ourselves on thy care, so as not to doubt but that thou art
sufficient for our safety, and that thou wilt at length make evident
what thou hast testified, even that there is so much protection in thine
hand, as that we may safely boast that we are safe and blessed, as long
as thou art pleased to exercise care over us, until we shall at length
reach that blessed rest, which has been prepared for us in heaven by
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-third

<span id="iii.x.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.xi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.x.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p2"></span>**9.** Rejoice greatly, O daughter of
Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee:
he *is* just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and
upon a colt the foal of an ass.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Exulta valde filia Sion**,** jubila
fila Ierusalem: Ecce**,** rex tuus veniet tibi**,** justus et servatus
ipse (*vel***,** idem**,**) pauper**,** et equitans super asinum**,** et
super pullum filium asinarum.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet here briefly shows the manner
in which the Church was to be restored; for a king from the tribe and
family of David would again arise, to restore all things to their
ancient state. And this is the view given everywhere by the Prophets;
for the hope of the ancient people, as our hope, was founded on Christ.
Inasmuch then as things were as yet in a decayed state among the Jews,
Zechariah here testifies that God had not in vain formerly spoken so
often by his servants concerning the advent of a Redeemer, but that a
firm hope was to be entertained, until the prophecies were in due time
fulfilled. As then Zechariah has been hitherto speaking of the
prosperous and happy state of the Church, he now confirms what he had
said; and this was especially necessary, for they could not, as I have
already said, have raised up their minds so as to feel confidence as to
their salvation, without having a Mediator set before them. But as the
faithful were then in great grief and sorrow, Zechariah here exhorts
them to perseverance: for by bidding them to *rejoice greatly*, and even
to *shout for joy*, he no doubt intimates, that though grief and sorrow
took fast hold on their hearts, they ought yet to strive manfully, so as
to receive the favor of God; for they must have a hundred times
succumbed under their evils, had they not Christ before their eyes; not
indeed in a carnal manner, but in the mirror of the word; as the
faithful see in that what is far distant and even hidden from them.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p7"></span>We now then understand, first, why the
Prophet here makes such a sudden reference to Christ; and secondly, why
he does not simply exhort the faithful to rejoice, but encourages them
greatly to exult as though they were already in a safe and most happy
condition.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p8"></span>By the word *king*, the Prophet intimates,
that except they thought God unfaithful in his promises, they were to
entertain hope, until the kingdom of David, then apparently fallen,
arose again. As God then would have himself acknowledged faithful, and
his adoption counted fixed and ratified in the Messiah, it is no wonder
that the Prophet now briefly refers to a king; for this mode of speaking
was well known by the people. And we have also seen elsewhere, that when
the Prophets speak of the safety of the Church, they mention a king,
because the Lord designed to gather again the dispersed Church under one
head, even Christ. And no doubt there would ever remain a dreadful
dispersion, were not Christ the bond of union. He then says that a king
would come. But he speaks not as of a king unknown; he only reminds them
that God would be true and faithful to his promises. Now since the whole
law, and adoption, must have vanished away, except Christ came, his
coming ought to have been patiently waited for.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p9"></span>Further, that God’s children might be more
confirmed, he says also that this king would come to the people, *the
daughter of Sion*, as though he had said, that God, for the sake of the
whole Church, had fixed the royal throne in the family of David: for if
the king was to come, that he might indulge in his own triumphs, and be
contented with pomps and pleasures, it would have been but a small and
wholly barren consolation: but as God in determining to send the
Messiah, provided for the safety of the whole Church, which he had
promised to do, the people might here derive solid confidence. It is not
then a matter of small moment, when the Prophet teaches us, that the
king would come to *Sion* and to Jerusalem; as though he had said, “This
king shall not come for his own sake like earthly kings, who rule
according to their own caprice, or for their own advantage:” but he
reminds us, that his kingdom would be for the common benefit of the
whole people, for he would introduce a happy state.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p10"></span>He afterwards states what sort of king he
was to be. He first names him *just*, and then *preserved* or *saved*.
As to the word, just, it ought, I think, to be taken in an active sense,
and so the word which follows: *Just* then and *saved* is called the
king of the chosen people, for he would bring to them righteousness and
salvation. Both words depend on this clause, — that there would come a
king to Sion. If he came privately for himself, he might have been for
himself just and saved, that is, his righteousness and salvation might
have belonged to himself or to his own person: but as he came for the
sake of others, and has been for them endued with righteousness and
salvation; then the righteousness and salvation of which mention is made
here, belong to the whole body of the Church, and ought not to be
confined to the person of the king. Thus is removed every contention,
with which many have foolishly, or at least, very inconsiderately,
wearied themselves; for they have thought that the Jews cannot be
otherwise overcome, and that their perverseness cannot be otherwise
checked, than by maintaining, that <span
id="iii.x.xi-p10.1"></span>נושע, *nusho*, must be taken actively; and
they have quoted some passages of Scripture, in which a verb in Niphal
is taken in an active sense.  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md)
But what need there is of undertaking such disputes, when we may well
agree on the subject? I then concede to the Jews, that Christ is saved
or preserved, and that he is said to be so by Zechariah.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p16"></span>But we must see what this salvation is
which belongs to Christ. This we may gather from what is said by the
Prophet. We are not then to contend here about words, but to consider
what the subject is, that is, that a just and saved king comes to his
chosen: and we know that Christ had no need of salvation himself. As
then he was sent by the Father to gather a chosen people, so he is said
to be saved because he was endued with power to preserve or save them.
We then see that all controversy is at an end, if we refer those two
words to Christ’s kingdom, and it would be absurd to confine them to the
person of one man, for the discourse is here concerning a royal person;
yea, concerning the public condition of the Church, and the salvation of
the whole body. And certainly when we speak of men, we say not that a
king is safe and secure, when he is expelled from his kingdom, or when
his subjects are disturbed by enemies, or when they are wholly
destroyed. When therefore a king, deprived of all authority, sees his
subjects miserably oppressed, he is not said to be saved or preserved.
But the case of Christ, as I have said, is special; for he does not
exercise dominion for his own sake, but for the preservation of his
whole people. Hence with regard to grammar, I can easily allow that
Christ is called just and saved, passively; but as to the matter itself,
he is just with reference to his people, and also saved or preserved,
for he brings with him salvation to the lost; for we know that the Jews
were then almost in a hopeless state.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p17"></span>He however at the same time adds, that
the king would be saved, not because he would be furnished with arms and
forces, or that he would defend his people after the manner of men; for
he says, that he would be *poor*  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) He must then be otherwise preserved
safe than earthly princes are wont to be, who fill their enemies with
fear, who fortify their borders, prepare an army, and set up every
defense to ward off assaults. Zechariah teaches us, that Christ would be
otherwise preserved, as he would prove superior to his enemies through a
divine power. As then he is poor, he must be exposed to all kinds of
injuries; for we see, that when there is no earthly fortress, all the
wicked immediately fly together as it were to the prey. If Christ then
is poor, he cannot preserve his own people, nor can he prosper in his
kingdom. It hence follows, that he must be furnished with celestial
power, in order to continue himself safe, and in order to prevent harm
to his Church; and this is what Zechariah will presently tell us, and
more clearly express. It is now sufficient briefly to state his object.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p19"></span>He afterwards adds, *Riding on an ass,
the colt, the foal of an ass*  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md)
Some think that the ass is not mentioned here to denote poverty, for
they who excelled in power among the people were then in the habit of
riding on asses. But it seems to me certain, that the Prophet added this
clause to explain the word <span id="iii.x.xi-p20.2"></span>עני, *oni*,
poor; as though he had said, that the king of whom he spoke would not be
distinguished by a magnificent and splendid appearance like earthly
princes, but would appear in a sordid or at least in an ordinary
condition, so as not to differ from the humblest and lowest of the
people.  <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md) He then bids the
faithful to raise up their eyes to heaven, in order to come to the true
knowledge of Christ’s kingdom, and to feel assured that righteousness
and salvation are to be expected from him. How so? Because he will be
accompanied with nothing that may strike men with fear, but will serve
as an humble and obscure individual. We may also here add, that
righteousness and salvation must be understood according to the
character of Christ’s kingdom; for as the kingdom of Christ is not
temporal or what passes away, we conclude that the righteousness he
possesses is to be perpetual, together with the salvation which he
brings. But I am not disposed ingeniously to speak here of the
righteousness of faith; for I think, on the contrary, that by the word
is meant here a right order of things, as all things were then among the
people in a state of confusion; and this might be easily proved by many
passages of Scripture.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p22"></span>The sum of the whole is, that the
predictions by which God gave to his chosen people a hope of redemption
were not vain or void; for at length in due time Christ, the son of
David, would come forth, — secondly, that this king would be just, and
saved or preserved; for he would restore things into order which were in
a disgraceful state of confusion, — and thirdly, he adds, that this king
would be poor; for he would ride on an ass, and would not appear in
great eminence, nor be distinguished for arms, or for riches, or for
splendor, or for number of soldiers, or even for royal trappings which
dazzle the eyes of the vulgar: he shall *ride on an ass*

<span id="iii.x.xi-p23"></span>This prophecy we know was fulfilled in
Christ; and even some of the Jews are constrained to confess that the
Prophet’s words can be justly applied to none else. Yet they do not
acknowledge as the Christ of God the Son of Mary; but they think that
the Prophet speaks of their imaginary Messiah. Now we, who are fully
persuaded and firmly maintain that the Christ promised has appeared and
performed his work, do see that it has not been said without reason that
he would come *poor* and *riding on an ass*. It was indeed designed that
there should be a visible symbol of this very thing; for he mounted an
ass while ascending into Jerusalem a short time before his death. It is
indeed true, that the Prophet’s words are metaphorical: when he says,
*Come shall a king, riding on an ass*, the words are figurative; for the
Prophet means, that Christ would be as it were an obscure person, who
would not make an appearance above that of the common people. That this
is the real meaning is no doubt true. But yet there is no reason why
Christ should not afford an example of this in mounting an ass.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p24"></span>I will adduce a similar instance: it is
said in the twenty second Psalm, ‘They have cast lots on my garments.’
The metaphor there is no doubt apparent, which means that David’s
enemies divided his spoils. He therefore complains that those robbers,
by whom he had been unjustly treated, had deprived him of all that he
had: and fulfilled has this been in a literal manner, so that the most
ignorant must acknowledge that it has not in vain been foretold. We now
then understand how well do these things agree — that the Prophet speaks
metaphorically of the humble appearance of Christ; and yet that the
visible symbol is so suitable, that the most ignorant must acknowledge
that no other Christ but he who has already appeared is to be expected.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p25"></span>I omit many frivolous things, which in no
degree tend to explain the Prophet’s meaning, but even pervert it, and
destroy faith in prophecy: for some think that Christ rode on an ass,
and also on a colt, because he was to govern the Jews, who had been
previously accustomed to bear the yoke of the law, and that he was also
to bring the Gentiles to obedience, who had been hitherto unnameable.
But these things are very frivolous. It is enough for us to know what
the Prophet means. It afterwards follows —

<span id="iii.x.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.x.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p2"></span>**10.** And I will cut off the chariot
from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be
cut off: and he shall speak peace unto the heathen: and his dominion
*shall be* from sea *even* to sea, and from the river *even* to the ends
of the earth.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Et excidam quadrigas (*vel***,**
currum) ab Ephraim**,** et equum ab Ierusalem**,** et excidetur arcus
bellicus (arcus belli;) et loquetur pacem ad gentes; et imperium ejus a
mari usque ad mare**,** et a fluvio usque ad terminos terrae.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet here expresses more clearly
what he had briefly referred to by the word *poor*, and by the metaphor
which we have explained. Hence he says, that there would be no horses,
no chariots, no bows, no warlike instruments in Christ’s kingdom; for
tranquillity would prevail in it. The sum of the whole is, that Christ
and his people would not be kept safe and secure by human defences, by
means of many soldiers and of similar helps being at hand; but that God
would restrain, and even compose and allay all warlike commotions, so
that there would be no need of such aids. We now understand the
Prophet’s design.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p7"></span>But we must notice the language here
used. God declares here that he would be the giver of peace, so that the
Messiah would continue safe in his kingdom; *I will cut off*, he says;
for it might have been objected — “If he is to be poor, what hope can
there be of safety?” The answer is, because it will be God’s work to
restrain all the assaults of enemies. He means, in short, that the
Messiah’s kingdom would be safe, because God from heaven would check all
the rage of enemies, so that however disposed they might be to do harm,
they would yet find themselves held captive by the hidden bridle of God,
so as not to be able to move a finger.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p8"></span>But after having said that the Jews and
Israelites would be safe, though stripped naked of all defences, he
adds, *He will speak peace to the nations*; that is, though he will not
use threats or terrors, nor bring forth great armies, yet the nations
will obey him; for there will be no need of employing any force. To
speak peace then to the nations means, that they will calmly hear,
though not terrified nor threatened. Some with more ingenuity make the
meaning to be that Christ, who reconciles the Father to us, will
proclaim this favor of reconciliation; but the Prophet, as I think, with
more simplicity, says, that Christ would be content with his own word,
inasmuch as the Gentiles would become obedient, and quietly submit to
his authority.  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) The import of
the whole is, that Christ would so rule far and wide, that the farthest
would live contentedly under his protection, and not cast off the yoke
laid on them.

<span id="iii.x.xii-p10"></span>He states in the last place, that his
dominion would be *from sea to sea*, that is, from the Red sea to the
Syrian sea, towards Cilicia, *and from the river*, that is, Euphrates,
*to the extreme borders of the earth*. By the earth we are not to
understand the whole world, as some interpreters have unwisely said; for
the Prophet no doubt mentioned those places already known to the Jews.
For we know that remarkable oracle —

<span id="iii.x.xii-p11"></span>“He shall reign from sea to sea.” (<span
id="iii.x.xii-p11.1"></span>[Ps
72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.x.xii-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.x.xii-p12"></span>But God speaks of David only, and the
words are the same as here; and there was no oracle more commonly known
among the Jews.  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) The Prophet,
then, who adduces here nothing new, only reminds the Jews of what they
had long ago heard, and repeats, as it were, word for word, what was
familiar to them all. For we must bear in mind what I said at the
beginning — that the Prophet here strengthens the minds of the godly,
and on this account, because the Messiah, on whose coming was founded
the gratuitous adoption of the people, as well as their hope of
salvation, had not yet appeared. We now then understand the real meaning
of this passage. He then adds —

<span id="iii.x.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.x.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** As for thee also, by the blood
of thy covenant I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein
*is* no water.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Etiam tu**,** in sanguine
foederis**,** tui emisi vinctos tuos e puteo**,** in quo non erat aqua.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p6"></span>Here he applies his former doctrine to
its right use, so that the faithful might emerge from their sorrow, and
come to that joy which he had before encouraged them to entertain. He
then addresses Jerusalem, as though he had said, “There is no reason for
thee to torment thyself with perplexed and anxious thoughts, for I will
accomplish what I have promised — that I would become a deliverer to my
people.” For this doubt might have occurred to them — “Why does he
exhort us to rejoice, while the Church of God is still in part captive,
and while those who have returned to their country are miserably and
cruelly harassed by their enemies?” To this objection Zechariah answers
in the person of God — that God would be able to deliver them, though
they were sunk in the deepest gulf. We hence see how this verse
harmonises with the other verses: he had before spoken of the happy
state of the Church under Christ as its king; but as the condition of
the people then was very hard and miserable, he adds, that deliverance
was to be expected from God.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p7"></span>But we must observe, that a pronoun
feminine is here used, when he says, *even thou*, or, thou also. Both
the Latins and Greeks have been deceived by the ambiguity of the
language used,  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) and have thought
that the words are addressed to Christ, as though he was to draw his
captives from a deep pit; but God here addresses his Church, as though
he had said, “Hear thou.” And the particle <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p8.3"></span>גם, *gam*, is emphatical, meaning this — “I
see that I do not prevail much with you, for ye are in a manner
overwhelmed by your calamities, and no hope refreshes you, as you think
yourselves visited, as it were, with a thousand deaths; but still,
though a mass of evils disheartens you, or at least so far oppresses you
as to render inefficacious what I say — though, in short, ye be of all
men the most miserable, I will yet redeem your captives.” But God
addresses the whole Church, as in many other places under the character
of a wife.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p9"></span>He says, *By the blood of thy covenant*.
This seems not to belong properly to the Church, for there is no other
author of the covenant but God himself; but the relation, we know,
between God and his people, as to the covenant, is mutual. It is God’s
covenant, because it flows from him; it is the covenant of the Church,
because it is made for its sake, and laid up as it were in its bosom.
And the truth penetrated more fully into the hearts of the godly, when
they heard that it was not only a divine covenant, but that it was also
the covenant of the people themselves: *Then by the blood of thy
covenant*, etc. Some refer this, but very unwisely, to circumcision, for
the Prophet no doubt had regard to the sacrifices. It was then the same
as though he had said — “Why do ye offer victims daily in the temple? If
ye think that you thus worship God, it is a very gross and insane
superstition. Call then to mind the end designed, or the model given you
from above; for God has already promised that he will be propitious to
you, by expiating your sins by the only true sacrifice: And for this end
offer your sacrifices, and that blood will bring expiation with it. Now
since God has not in vain appointed your sacrifices, and ye observe them
not in vain, no doubt the benefit will come at length to light, for *I
have sent forth thy captives*. For God does not reconcile himself to
men, that he may destroy or reduce them to nothing, or that he may
suffer them to pine away and die; for why does God pardon men, but that
he may deliver them from destruction?”  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md)

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p13"></span>We now perceive why the Prophet thus
speaks of the blood of the covenant in connection with the salvation of
the whole people. “Ye daily offer victims,” he says, “and the blood is
poured on the altar: God has not appointed this in vain.” Now since God
receives you into favor, that ye may be safe, he will therefore deliver
the captives of his Church; *I will send forth*, he says, or, have sent
forth *thy captives*: for he expresses here in the past tense what he
would do in future.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p14"></span>*I will send forth thy captives from
the pit in which there* is *no water*. He means a deep gulf, where
thirst itself would destroy miserable men without being drawn forth by a
power from above. In short, he means, first, that the Jews were sunk in
the deep; and secondly, that thirst would consume them, so that death
was nigh at hand, except they were miraculously delivered by God: but he
reminds them, that no impediment would prevent God from raising them to
light from the deepest darkness. We then see that this was added, that
the Jews might learn to struggle against all things that might
strengthen unbelief, and feel assured that they would be preserved safe,
for it is God’s peculiar work to raise the dead. This is the meaning. He
now adds —

<span id="iii.x.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.x.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** Turn you to the strong hold, ye
prisoners of hope: even to day do I declare *that* I will render double
unto thee;

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Convertimini ad munitionem vincti
spei; etiam hodie annuntio duplicia**,** rependam tibi (*vel***,**
duplicia rependam tibi; *uterque sensus non male convenit*.)

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p6"></span>Zechariah proceeds with the same subject.
He bids the Jews suddenly to retake themselves to their fortress. There
is no doubt but that he means by that term the holy land; nor do I
oppose the opinion of those who think the temple to be intended: for
Jerusalem and the whole of Judea is called a fortress, and for this
reason, because God had chosen his sanctuary there. It is then the same,
as though one wishing to collect a dispersed and straggling band of
soldiers were to say, “To the standard, to the standard;” or, “To the
troop, to the troop.” For though Judea was not then fortified, nay,
Jerusalem itself had no high wall or strong towers, yet they had God as
their stronghold, and this was impregnable; for he had promised that the
Jews would be safe under the shadow of his wings, though exposed to the
caprices of all around them. Nor does he here address them only who had
returned, or the exiles who still remained scattered in the East; but by
this declaration he encourages the whole Church, that they might be
fully persuaded that when assembled under the protection of God, they
were as fortified as though they were on every side surrounded by the
strongest citadels, and that there would be no access open to enemies.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p7"></span>*Return ye* then *to the stronghold*.
This could not have appeared unreasonable; for we know that when they
were building the city their work was often interrupted; and we know
also that the temple was not then fortified by a wall. But Zechariah
teaches them, that in that state of things there was sufficient defense
in God alone. Though then the Jews were not made safe by moats, or by
walls, or by mounds, he yet reminds them, that God would be sufficient
to defend them, and that he would be to them, as it is said in another
place, a wall and a rampart. (<span id="iii.x.xiv-p7.1"></span>[Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.x.xiv-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p8"></span>But it is not without reason that he
calls them *the captives of hope*; for many had wholly alienated
themselves from God and altogether fallen away, so as to be unworthy of
any promise. By this mark then he distinguishes between the faithful
captives and those who had wholly degenerated and separated themselves
from the family of God, so as no more to be counted among his people.
And this ought to be carefully noticed, which interpreters have coldly
passed by. They have indeed said, that they are called captives of hope,
because they hoped to be saved; but they have not observed the
distinction, by which Zechariah intended to convey reproof to the
unbelieving Jews. It was therefore not without meaning that he directed
his word to the faithful only, who were not only captives, but also
captives having hope. I cannot finish today.

<span id="iii.x.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.x.xv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we do not at
this day look for a Redeemer to deliver us from temporal miseries, but
only carry on a warfare under the banner of the cross, until he appear
to us from heaven to gather us into his blessed kingdom, — O grant, that
we may patiently bear all evils and all troubles: and as Christ once for
all poured forth the blood of the new and eternal covenant, and gave us
a symbol of it in the Holy Supper, may we, confiding in so sacred a
seal, never doubt but that he will be always propitious to us, and
render manifest to us the fruit of his reconciliation, when after having
supported us for a season under the burden of those miseries by which we
are now oppressed, thou gatherest us into that blessed and perfect
glory, which has been procured for us by the blood of Christ our Lord,
and which is daily set before us in the gospel, and laid up for us in
heaven, until we at length shall come to enjoy it through the same, our
Lord Jesus Christ. — Amen.

<span id="iii.x.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-fourth

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p2"></span>In yesterday’s lecture the Prophet
exhorted the Jews to assemble into that stronghold of which God was to
be the guardian. And we have said that Jerusalem was then to the godly
an impregnable fortress, though for the most part without walls, because
the place was as it were sacred to God, and as under his care and
protection. He now adds a confirmation of this truth, that they would be
doubly more blessed who had resorted to Jerusalem than their fathers
before their exile: for a comparison is no doubt made between them and
their fathers. From the reign of David until the exile, God had proved
by many tokens that he had a care for that people; he afterwards raised
up, as it were, a new Church, that is, when a liberty to return was
granted to the Jews. The meaning then here is, that if the fathers
before they were driven from their country had experienced God kind and
bountiful, those who had now returned to their country would find God
much more bountiful towards his new Church. We now then understand what
he means by double, even double happiness; for God would increase his
blessings to the Jews, though their condition was then by no means
desirable; nay, very hard according to the estimation of the world. But
he says, that he declared from that day, intimating, that though the
effect of this prophecy was not immediately apparent, yet he spoke with
confidence; for they would in course of time find that nothing had been
said to them in vain or rashly. The Prophet then shows — here, that he
spoke with perfect confidence, and this in order to gain credit to the
promise, lest the Jews should doubt that what they heard from the mouth
of Zechariah should at length be made evident to them.  <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md) Let us now proceed —

<span id="iii.x.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.x.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p2"></span>**13.** When I have bent Judah for me,
filled the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy
sons, O Greece, and made thee as the sword of a mighty man.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p3"></span>**13.** Quia tetendi mihi Iehudah
arcum**,** implevi Ephraim**,** et excitavi filios tuos**,** Sion**,**
contra filios tuos**,** Graecia; et posui te quasi gladium gigantis
(*vel***,** robusti.)

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p6"></span>God declares here that the Jews would be
the conquerors of all nations, though they were then despised. That
people, we know, were hated by all; and they were at the same time weak,
and had hardly any strength, so as to be able to resist the wrongs done
them on every side. As then this trial might have terrified weak minds,
the Prophet says that the Jews would be as it were the *bow* and *the
quiver* of God, so that they would be able to pierce all nations with
their arrow; and that they would also be like a *sword*, which would
wound and lay prostrate the strongest.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p7"></span>We now perceive the meaning of the
words, and see also the reason why the Prophet made this addition, even
because the Jews were filled with terror on seeing themselves surrounded
on every side by violent and strong enemies, to whom they were very
unequal in strength. Now, these similitudes we know occur elsewhere in
Scripture, and their meaning seems to be this — that the Jews would be
the conquerors of all nations, not by their own prowess, as they say,
but because the Lord would guide and direct them by his own hand. For
what is a bow except it be bent? and the bow itself is useless, except
the arrow be discharged. The Prophet then teaches us, that though the
Jews could do nothing of themselves, yet there was strength enough in
God’s hand alone.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p8"></span>*I have bent for me*, he says, *Judah as
a bow*. The Lord reminds the Jews of his own power, that they might not
regard their own strength, but acknowledge that they were made strong
from above, and that strength to overcome their enemies would be given
them. Hence he compares Ephraim to a quiver. But we have seen yesterday,
that Judah and Ephraim are to be taken as the same; for as it had been a
divided body, God intimates here, that when the Jews became again united
and joined together, and when the ten tribes showed brotherly kindness
towards the kingdom of Judah, then the people would be to him like a bow
well furnished, being fully supplied with arrows.  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md)

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *I will rouse thy
sons, O Sion, against thy sons, O Javan*. This apostrophe is more
emphatical than if the third person had been adopted; for by addressing
first Sion, and then Greece, he shows that he possesses power over all
nations, so that he raises up the one and casts down the other, as he
pleases.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p12"></span>As to the word <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p12.1"></span>יון, *Ivan*, we have elsewhere seen that it
is to be taken for Greece, and now for all the countries beyond sea. Yet
many think that the word Jonah is derived from this Hebrew word, and, as
it often happens, is corruptly pronounced. But we may gather from many
instances that <span id="iii.x.xvii-p12.2"></span>יון, *Ivan*, is put
for Greece, or for distant countries, and specifically for Macedonia. It
is then the same as though he had said — That the Jews would be superior
to all heathen nations, even were they to unite together and bring vast
forces from distant lands. For the Greeks could not have waged war in
Judea with a small force; they must have brought with them large armies,
to fight in a strange country and unknown to them. Nor could the Jews
have attacked the Grecians or other remote nations, except they were
favored with aid from heaven. For this reason also he adds, that they
would be *like a sword*, by which a strong man can destroy others of
less power. Let us now go on —

<span id="iii.x.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** And the LORD shall be seen over
them, and his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: and the Lord GOD
shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the south.

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Et Iehova super eos conspicuus
erit**,** et egredietur quasi fulgur sagitta ejus; et Dominus Iehova
tuba clanget**,** et procedet in turbinibus Theman. (*vel***,** Austri.)

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject, but
explains what I have said — that victory is promised to the Jews, not
that which they could gain by their own power, but that which should
happen to them beyond their expectation; for this is what is meant when
he says, that God would be *seen over them*. For though the events of
all wars depend on God, yet he is said to be seen where there is a
remarkable victory, which cannot be accounted for by men. When unequal
armies engage, it is no wonder when one becomes victorious; and it may
sometimes be that a less number overcomes a greater, even because it
exceeded the other in courage, in counsel, in skill, or in some other
way, or because the larger army fought from a disadvantageous position,
or trusting in its own strength rushed on inconsiderately. But when
consternation alone dejects one party and renders the other victorious,
in this case the power of God becomes evident. And even heathens have
thought that men are confounded from above when courage fails them; and
this is most true. We now then understand why the Prophet says, that God
would be *seen over* the Jews, even because they would conquer their
enemies, not by usual means, not after an earthly manner, but in a
wonderful way, so that it would appear evident to be the work of God.

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p7"></span>He then adds, *Go forth shall his arrow
as lightning*. He again repeats and confirms what we have already
observed that there would be no movement among the Jews, no celerity,
but what would be like the sword, which lies quiet on the ground, except
it be taken up by the hand of man, and what also would be like the
arrow, which can do no harm except it be thrown by some one. We then see
that the victory mentioned before is ascribed to God alone. And for the
same reason he adds what follows, that *Jehovah* would *come with the
shout of a trumpet*, and also, with *the whirlwind of the south*. In a
word, he means that the work of God would be evident when the Jews went
forth against the enemies by whom they had been oppressed and would
still be oppressed. That they might not then compare their own with
their enemies’ strength, the Prophet here brings God before them, by
whose authority, guidance, and power this war was to be carried on. And
then, that he might extol God’s power, he says, that he would come with
the *shout of a trumpet*, and with *the whirlwind of the south*

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p8"></span>Interpreters take the whirlwinds of the
south simply for violent storms; for we know that the most impetuous
whirlwinds arise from the south. But as the Prophet joins the whirlwinds
of the south to the shout of a trumpet, he seems to me to allude to
those miracles by which God showed to the Jews in a terrific manner his
power on Mount Sinai, for the desert of Teman and Mount Paran were in
that vicinity. We have seen a similar passage in the third chapter of
Habakkuk <span id="iii.x.xviii-p8.1"></span>[Hab
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p8.1"></span>, “God,” he said, “shall come from Teman,
the Holy One from Mount Paran.” The Prophet’s object was to encourage
the Jews to entertain hope; for God, who had long concealed himself and
refrained from helping them, would at length come forth to their aid.
How? He reminded them in that passage of the records of ancient history,
for God had made known his power on Mount Sinai, in the desert of Teman,
and it was the south region with regard to Judea; and we also know that
trumpets sounded in the air, and that all this was done that the Jews
might reverently receive the law, and also that they might feel certain
that they would be always safe under God’s hand, since he thus shook the
elements by his nod, and filled the air with lightnings and storms and
whirlwinds, and also made the air to ring with the shouts of trumpets.
It is for the same reason that the Prophet speaks in this passage, when
he says, that God would make himself known as formerly, when he
astonished the people by the shouts of trumpets, and also when he
appeared in whirlwinds on Mount Sinai.  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) He then adds —

<span id="iii.x.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xix-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.x.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p2"></span>**15.** The LORD of hosts shall defend
them; and they shall devour, and subdue with sling stones; and they
shall drink, *and* make a noise as through wine; and they shall be
filled like bowls, *and* as the corners of the altar.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p3"></span>**15.** Iehova exercituum proteget eos;
et comedent et subjicient lapidibus fundae**,** (*vel***,** lapides**,**
ut alii vertun**,**) tanquam a vino**,** et replebuntur quasi
phiala**,** quasi anguli altaris.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xix-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p6"></span>He expresses again the same thing in
other words — that God would be like a shadow to his people, so that he
would with an extended hand protect them from their enemies. Since the
Jews might have justly felt a distrust in their own strength, the
Prophet continually teaches them that their safety depended not on
earthly aids, but that God alone was sufficient, for he could easily
render them safe and secure. He also adds, that there would be to them
plenty of bread and wine to satisfy them. He seems here indeed to
promise too great an abundance, as by its abuse luxury came, for he
says, that they would be satiated and be like the drunken; *they shall
drink*, he says, *and shall make a noise as through wine*. Certainly
those who drink wine moderately, do not make noise, but they are as
composed and quiet after dinner as those who fast. Zechariah then seems
here to make an unreasonable promise, even that of excess in meat and
drink. But we have elsewhere seen that wherever the Holy Spirit promises
abundance of good things he does not give loose reigns to men’s lusts,
but his object is only to show that God will be so bountiful to his
children that they shall stand in need of nothing, that they shall labor
under no want. Nay, the affluence of blessings is to try our frugality,
for when God pours forth as it were with a liberal hand more than what
is needful, he thus tries the temperance of each of us; for when in the
enjoyment of great abundance, we of our own accord restrain ourselves,
we then really show that we are grateful to God.  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md)

<span id="iii.x.xix-p10"></span>It is indeed true, that cheerfulness for
abundance of blessings is allowed us, for it is often said in the law,
“Thou shalt rejoice before thy God,” (<span
id="iii.x.xix-p10.1"></span>[De
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.x.xix-p10.1"></span>;) but we must bear in mind, that frugal use
of blessings is required, in order that the gifts of God may not be
converted to a sinful purpose.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p11"></span>Then the Prophet does not here excite or
stimulate the Jews to intemperance, that they might fill themselves with
too much food, or inebriate themselves with too much wine; but he only
promises that there would be no want of either food or drink when God
blessed them as in former days. And this seems also to be specified at
the end of the verse, when he mentions the *horns of the altar*. He had
previously said, that they would be full as the bowls were; but when he
adds, “the horns of the altar,” he no doubt reminds them of temperance,
that they were to feast as though they were in God’s presence. They were
indeed accustomed to pour out the wine and the oil on the horns of the
altar; but, at the same time, since they professed that they offered
from their abundance of wine and oil some first-fruits to God, it
behaved them to remember that their wine was sacred, that their oil was
sacred, as both proceeded from God. The Prophet then declares, that the
Jews would be thus enriched and replenished with all good things, and
that they were yet to remember, that they were to live as in God’s
presence, lest they should by luxury pollute what he had consecrated to
a legitimate end. He then adds —

<span id="iii.x.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xx-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.xx-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.x.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xx-p2"></span>**16.** And the Lord their God shall save
them in that day as the flock of his people: for they *shall be as* the
stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p3"></span>**16.** Et servabit eos Iehova**,** Deus
ipsorum**,** in die illa quad gregem populum suum; quia lapides coronae
elevati super terram ejus.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xx-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xx-p6"></span>He continues the same subject, but uses
various figures, that he might more fully confirm what then was
incredible. He indeed reminds them that God would not save his people in
an ordinary way, such as is common to men. He compares them to sheep,
that they might know, as I have said already, that their salvation would
come from heaven, as they were themselves weak, and had no strength and
no power; for to show this was the object of this comparison. He
declares then that the Jews would be saved, because God would supply
them with every thing necessary to conquer their enemies; but that he
would in a wonderful manner help their weakness, even like a shepherd
when he rescues his sheep from the jaws of a wolf. For the sheep, which
escapes death by the coming of the shepherd, have no reason to boast of
victory, but all the praise is due to the shepherd. So also God says,
that it will be his work to deliver the Jews from their enemies.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p7"></span>By saying, *his own people*, he seems to
confine to his elect what appeared too general; for he had said *save
then will God*. It is however certain that the people who were then
small, had been cut off, so that the greater part had perished; but at
the same time it was true that God was a faithful guardian of his
people, for there were then many Israelites, naturally descended from
their common father Abraham, who were only in name Israelites.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p8"></span>He then adds another similitude, — that
they would be elevated high, like precious stones in a crown, which are
borne on the head of a king, as though he had said, that they would be a
royal priesthood according to what is said in the law. He had said
before, *They shall subdue the stones*, or, with the stones, *of a
sling*. More correct seems to be the opinion of those who read *with the
stones of a sling*,  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md) that is,
that the Jews would conquer their enemies, not with swords, nor with
arrows, but only with stones, in the same manner as Goliath was slain by
David. Though not given to warlike arts, nor exercised in the use of
arms, they would yet, as the Prophet shows, be conquerors; for their
slings would be sufficient for the purpose of slaying their enemies. But
some think that heathens and the unbelieving are compared to the stones
of the sling, because they are worthless and of no account; which at the
first sight seems ingenious, but it is a strained view. It is not at the
same time improper to consider that there is here an implied contrast
between the stones of the sling, and the stones of a crown; the Jews
would cast stones from their slings to destroy their enemies, and they
themselves would be precious stones. The Prophet seems here to represent
the holy land as the chief part of the whole world. *Elevated*, he says,
shall be *the stones of crown over the land* of God. Had he said over
Egypt or over Assyria, the connection of the clauses would not have been
so appropriate; but he names Judea, as the head of the world, and that
the Jews, when prosperous and happy in it, would be like the stones of a
crown, all the parts set in due order. In short, he shows, that the
favor of God alone and his blessing, would be sufficient to render the
Jews happy, as they would then excel in honor, enjoy the abundance of
all good things, and possess invisible courage to resist all their
adversaries.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p10"></span>Let us now enquire when all these things
were fulfilled. We have said that Zechariah, by promising fullness to
the Jews, gave them no unbridled license to indulge themselves in eating
and drinking, but only expressed and extolled, in hyperbolical terms,
the immense kindness and bounty of God to them. This is one thing.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p11"></span>But at the same time we must by the way
consider another question: He says, that they would be like *arrows and
swords*. Now as they were too much inclined to shed blood, he seems here
to excite them in a manner to take vengeance fully on their enemies,
which was by no means reasonable. The answer to this is plain — that the
Jews were not to forget what God prescribed in his law: for as when God
promised large abundance of wine, and a plentiful provision, he did not
recall what he had already commanded — that they were to practice
temperance in eating and drinking; so now when he promises victory over
their enemies, he is not inconsistent with himself, nor does he condemn
what he had once approved, nor abrogate the precept by which he
commanded them, not to exercise cruelty towards their enemies, but to
restrain themselves, and to show mercy and kindness. We hence see that
we are not to judge from these words what is right for us to do, or how
far we may go in taking revenge on enemies; nor to determine what
liberty we have in eating and drinking. Such things are not to be learnt
from this passage, or from similar passages; for the Prophet here does
only set forth the power of God and his bounty towards his people.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p12"></span>Now again it may be asked, when has God
fulfilled this, when has he made the Jews far and wide victorious and
the destroyers of their enemies? All Christian expositors give us an
allegorical explanation, — that God sent forth his armies when he sent
forth Apostles into all parts of the world, who pierced the hearts of
men, — and that he slew with his sword the wicked whom he destroyed. All
this is true; but a simpler meaning must in the first place be drawn
from the words of the Prophet, and that is, — that God will render his
Church victorious against the whole world. And most true is this; for
though the faithful are not furnished with swords or with any military
weapons, yet we see that they are kept safe in a wonderful manner under
the shadow of God’s hand. When adversaries exercise cruelty towards
them, we see how God returns their wicked devices on their own heads. In
this way is really fulfilled what we read here, — even that the children
of God are like arrows and swords, and that they are also preserved as a
flock; for they are too weak to stand their ground, were not the Lord to
put forth his power, when he sees them violently assailed by the wicked.
There is then no need to turn the Prophet’s words to an allegorical
meaning, when this fact is evident that God’s Church has been kept safe,
because God has ever blunted all the weapons of enemies; yea, he has
often by a strong hand discharged his arrows and vibrated his sword. For
when Alexander the Great had passed over the sea, when he had marched
through the whole circuit of the Mediterranean sea, when he had filled
all the country with blood, he came at length to Judea; how was it that
he left it without committing any slaughter, without exercising any
cruelty, except that God restrained him? It will not weary you, if I
relate what we read in Josephus; and it is true I have no doubt. He
says, that when Alexander came, he was full of wrath, and breathing
threats against those Jews by whom he had not been assisted, and who
seemed to have despised his authority: after having thus given vent to
his rage, he at length came into the presence of Jadeus the high-priest,
and seeing him adorned with a mitre, he fell down and humbly asked
pardon; and while all were amazed his answer was — that God had appeared
to him in that form while he was yet in Greece, and encouraged him to
undertake that expedition. When therefore he saw the image or figure of
the God of heaven in that sacerdotal dress, he was constrained to give
glory to God. Thus far Josephus, whose testimony in this instance has
never been suspected.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p13"></span>There is then no reason for any one to
weary himself in finding out the meaning of the Prophet, since this fact
is clear enough — that God’s elect have been victorious, because God has
ever sent forth his arrows and vibrated his sword. At the same time
there is another view of this victory; for alien and remote people were
subdued by the sword of the Spirit, even by the truth of the gospel: but
this is a sense deduced from the other; for when we apprehend the
literal meaning of the Prophet, an easy passage is then open to us, by
which we may come to the kingdom of Christ. These remarks refer to the
abundance of provisions, as well as to the victory over enemies. It now
follows —

<span id="iii.x.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.x.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p2"></span>**17.** For how great *is* his goodness,
and how great *is* his beauty! corn shall make the young men cheerful,
and new wine the maids.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p3"></span>**17.** Nam quanta beneficentia ejus? et
quanta pulchritudo ejus? Frumentum adolescentes**,** et mustum recreat
(*vel***,** corroborat) puellas.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.x.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p6"></span>The Prophet here exclaims at the
incredible kindness of God, that the Jews might learn to raise up their
thoughts above the world, as they were to look for that felicity which
he had before mentioned. We then see that by this exclamation a fuller
confirmation is given to what had been said by the Prophet, as though
his words were, — “No one ought to judge of God’s favor, of which I have
spoken, according to his own doings, or conduct, or experience; but on
the contrary, every one of you ought to be filled with amazement at
God’s incredible kindness, and at his incredible beauty.” But by the
last word he understands the brightness or splendor, which appears in
all God’s favors and gifts.  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md)

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p13"></span>He then concludes by saying, that the
abundance of corn and wine would be so great, that young men and young
women would eat and drink together, and be fully satisfied. Here a
frivolous question may be asked, whether Zechariah allowed the use of
wine to young women. But he speaks not here, as I have said before, of
God’s blessing, as though it were an incentive to luxury; but what he
means is, that the abundance of provisions would be so great as to be
fully sufficient, not only for the old, but also for young men and young
women. We know that when there is but a small supply of wine, it ought
by right of age to be reserved for the old, but when wine so overflows
that young men and young women may freely drink of it, it is a proof of
great abundance. This then is simply the meaning of the Prophet: but
something more shall be said tomorrow on the subject.

<span id="iii.x.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.x.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cannot
look for temporal or eternal happiness, except through Christ alone, and
as thou settest him forth to us as the only true fountain of all
blessings, — O grant, that we, being content with the favor offered to
us through him, may learn to renounce the whole world, and so strive
against all unbelief; that we may not doubt but that thou wilt ever be
one kind and gracious Father, and fully supply whatever is necessary for
our support: and may we at the same time live soberly and temperately,
so that we may not be under the power of earthly things; but with our
hearts raised above, aspire after that heavenly bliss to which thou
invites us, and to which thou also guides us by such helps as are
earthly, so that being really united to our head, we may at length reach
that glory which has been procured for us by his blood. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc30012.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p7"></span> There seems to be no good reason for
considering the two adjectives as describing the same thing. On the
contrary, the reverse is most probable. Their number as well as their
character is evidently here set forth; they were “many,” and “strong,”
or mighty or powerful. The *Septuagint* and *Jerome* render the word
“many,” and so do most interpreters. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc30012.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p12"></span> *Blayney* thinks it to be the name of a
Syrian king, and so does *Henderson*. The former quotes *Josephus*, who
calls Rehob, in <span id="iii.x.i-p12.1"></span>[2Sa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.x.i-p12.1"></span>,
\[<span id="iii.x.i-p12.2"></span>Λραχος\]. This prince reigned over a
part of Syria called Zobah. If this be admitted, then the three chief
kingdoms of Syria are here named — Zobah, Damascus, and Hamath. But
*Henderson* is disposed to think that it is a corruption of the word
\[<span id="iii.x.i-p12.3"></span>חרר\], the common name of the kings of
Syria. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc30012.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p17"></span> This sentence is one of some difficulty.
The *Septuagint*, the *Targum*, the *Syriac*, and the *Arabic* versions,
give this meaning, — that Jehovah sees, *i.e.*, observes, and therefore
judges, all men, as well as the ten tribes of Israel: and this is the
view taken by *Grotius*, *Piscator*, *Marckius*, *Dathius*, and
*Newcome*. The version of the last is, —

<span id="iii.x.i-p18"></span>*For the eye of Jehovah* over *man,  
And* over *all the tribes of Israel.*

<span id="iii.x.i-p19"></span>Literally it is,

<span id="iii.x.i-p20"></span>*For to Jehovah (belongs) the eye (*i.e.
*the seeing) of man  
And of all the tribes of Israel.*

<span id="iii.x.i-p21"></span>The “eye” here is supposed to be put for
the capacity of seeing, and is rendered by some “spectator — the
beholder,” or judge,—”For it belongs to Jehovah to be the beholder or
the eyer of man,” or of mankind, “and of all the tribes of Israel.”

<span id="iii.x.i-p22"></span>But *Kimchi*, *Blayney*, and *Henderson*
agree in the view of *Calvin* and of our version. The former meaning
seems most suitable to the context, as a reason is given for God’s
judgments on the surrounding Gentiles, for he observes the conduct of
man in general as well as of the tribes of Israel: it is a declaration
that his providence extends over all mankind. The paraphrase of
*Dathius* is, “For Jehovah by his providence governs all men as well as
the tribes of Israel.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc30012.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="iii.x.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p13"></span> And also *on* Hamath, *which* bordereth
thereby. — *Newcome*. The construction of the whole passage, as given in
our version by *Newcome* and *Henderson*, is not satisfactory. The
resting-place of the burdens was to be Damascus, Hamath, Tyre, and
Sidon. The following then would be its grammatical rendering —

<span id="iii.x.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.iv-p15"></span>**1.** The burden of the word of Jehovah
on the land of Hadrach; And Damascus *shall* be its resting-place, (For
Jehovah has an eye to see men And all the tribes of Israel,)

<span id="iii.x.iv-p16"></span>**2.** And also Hamath, *which* borders
on it, Tyre and Zidon *also*: for she is very wise;

<span id="iii.x.iv-p17"></span>**3.** And built hath Tyre a fortress for
herself, And has heaped up silver as dust, And fine gold as the mire of
the streets.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p18"></span>**4.** Behold, the Lord will disposess
her, And smite in the sea her strength, And with fire shall she be
devoured.

<span id="iii.x.iv-p19"></span>As to “Tyre and Zidon,” the expression
“very wise” belongs to the latter, and not to the former, as *Henderson*
suggests; and then the character or state of Tyre is described in the
following lines. This exactly corresponds with the usual style of the
Prophets; when two things are mentioned, the last is first explained,
and then the first. The boast of wisdom was the character of Zidon;
confidence in its strength and riches is what is ascribed to Tyre. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc30012.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="iii.x.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iv-p27"></span> This verb is here confounded with
\[<span id="iii.x.iv-p27.1"></span>רש\], which means to impoverish in
Hiphil. But the Hiphil of \[<span id="iii.x.iv-p27.2"></span>יוש\] has
the idea of expelling or driving out; it means literally to cause one to
be inherited or heired, that is, by making another to succeed in his
place. To dispossess, according to *Henderson*, rather than to cast out,
according to our version and *Newcome*, is the idea of the original. The
explanation here disapproved by *Calvin*, which is wholly inconsistent
with the whole passage, has been derived from the *Septuagint*, who have
rendered the verb as though it were in Kal, \[<span
id="iii.x.iv-p27.3"></span>κληρονομησει\]. The *Targum* gives it the
idea of driving or casting out. The Greek fathers, *Theodoret* and
*Cyril*, not knowing Hebrew, could give no other explanation. Similar
has been the source of not a few interpretations given by the fathers. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc30012.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="iii.x.vi-p6.5"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p7"></span> That this is its meaning is generally
admitted, as given by the *Septuagint*, the *Targum*, and the *Syriac*
version, and adopted by *Grotius*, *Newcome*, *Blayney*, and
*Henderson.* *Lee* accounts for the double \[<span
id="iii.x.vi-p7.1"></span>מ\] by deriving the word from \[<span
id="iii.x.vi-p7.2"></span>מן\], from, \[<span
id="iii.x.vi-p7.3"></span>עם\], people, and \[<span
id="iii.x.vi-p7.4"></span>זר\], a foreigner, or stranger. The poetical
singular is used for the plural, as is the case in the following verse.
The whole passage may be thus rendered —

<span id="iii.x.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.vi-p9"></span>**6.** And dwell shall a stranger in
Ashdod; (For I will cut off the pride of the Philistines;)

<span id="iii.x.vi-p10"></span>**7.** And I will remove his blood from
his mouth, And his abominations from between his teeth, And left shall
he be, even he, for our God; So that he shall be as a chief in Judah,
And Ekron as a Jebusite.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p11"></span>The “his” and “he” in this last verse is
the “stranger” in verse 6; and that is used in a collective sense,
properly rendered strangers, or foreigners, \[<span
id="iii.x.vi-p11.1"></span>ἀλλογενεις\] by the Septuagint; so that the
plural, in all these instances, might suitably be adopted in a
translation — The “pride of the Philistines” was cut off by introducing
strangers into their cities; and this line may be *considered* as
parenthetic. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc30012.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="iii.x.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p8"></span> *Kimchi*, *Drusius*, *Grotius*, and
others, have given the same view; but *Jerome*, *Marckius*, *Newcome*,
*Blayney*, *Henderson*, and *Hengstenberg*, regard idolatry as intended
here, the “blood” being that of the victims which the heathens drank,
and the “abominations” being the things sacrificed to idols. What seems
strongly to favor the view taken by *Calvin* is the phraseology; the
metaphor being that of a wild beast devouring his prey, and of the prey
being taken from him: this certainly ill comports with the notion of
putting an end to idolatrous practices. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc30012.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="iii.x.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p10"></span> The explanation of this clause, though
countenanced by some others, cannot yet be admitted. There is nothing in
the text to justify the translation from the “stranger” in verse 6, and
who is spoken of in this verse, to the Jewish nation. The foreigners or
strangers inhabiting Ashdod are no doubt intended. So thought
*Theodoret*, *Drusius*, *Grotius*, *Blayney*, and *Newcome*; and such is
the view of *Henderson*, only that he applies the passage to the
Philistines generally, and not to the strangers in Ashdod. To consider
the foreigner or stranger as a “ruler,” seems not right. This prophecy
was fulfilled, says *Grotius*, in the time of the Maccabees, and he
refers to *Josephus*, 12:12, and to <span
id="iii.x.vii-p10.1"></span>[1Ma
5:66](../../../bib/apo/ma1005.htm#066.md)<span
id="iii.x.vii-p10.1"></span>; and also in the time of Alexander, when
many of the cities of the Philistines, especially Ashdod and Gaza, were
conquered by the Jews, when many of them became proselytes to Judaism.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p11"></span>The explanation of *Blayney* as to the
latter part of the verse is as follows: that the stranger or strangers
in Ashdod should be on the same footing as a privileged citizen in
Judah, but that the Ekronite, the natural born Philistine should be as a
Jebusite in Jerusalem, deprived of the privileges which he had when the
country was his own. This would be to “cut off the pride of the
Philistines.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc30012.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="iii.x.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p9"></span> Perhaps this is too great a refinement.
*Marckius* gives this meaning, that the “army” is a marshalled force,
and that the passer through and the returner are individual enemies. But
our version is very literal, only that passing through and returning may
be applied to the army, —

<span id="iii.x.viii-p10"></span>And I will be a camp to mine house from
an host,  
From it when passing through and from it when returning.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p11"></span>Or literally,

<span id="iii.x.viii-p12"></span>*From the passing through and from the
returning (*i.e. *host.)*

<span id="iii.x.viii-p13"></span>*Newcome’s* version is,

<span id="iii.x.viii-p14"></span>*And I will encamp about mine house*
with *an army.  
So that none shall pass through or return.*

<span id="iii.x.viii-p15"></span>This is neither grammatically correct,
nor consistent with posterior facts; for armies did pass through the
land, though the house or temple of God was not invaded. *Henderson’s*
version is in substance the same with what I have given,

<span id="iii.x.viii-p16"></span>And I will encamp about my house
because of the army,  
Both when it passeth through and when it returneth.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p17"></span>The following line may be thus
rendered—

<span id="iii.x.viii-p18"></span>And come upon them shall no more the
oppressor.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p19"></span>The *Septuagint* give for oppressor
\[<span id="iii.x.viii-p19.1"></span>ἐξελαύνων\], the driver away or
banisher; the *Targum* has “tyrant,” which *Grotius* adopts. “Oppressor”
is the word used by *Drusius*, *Newcome*, and *Henderson*. It has been
said that no foreign oppressor, like the Babylonians, had invaded the
land from this time to the advent of Christ, though the Jews had
suffered much both from the Eygptian and Syrian kings; but the language
here is so strong, that the promise must be considered as conditional,
as all those promises were which were connected with their national
covenant. “No more” has no limit: hence the promise must be viewed as
conditional.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p20"></span>“This promise,” says *Dr. M‘Caul*, “is
of the same nature as most of the others made to Israel; that is,
conditional upon their obedience. Moses has repeatedly laid down this as
the general principle of God’s dealings with the Jews, especially in
reference to the possession of blessing and prosperity in the land.
(<span id="iii.x.viii-p20.1"></span>[De
30:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.x.viii-p20.1"></span>.)” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc30012.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="iii.x.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p11"></span> The *Septuagint*, the *Targum*, and the
*Vulgate*, render the word actively \[<span
id="iii.x.xi-p11.1"></span>σωζων\] — Savior. It is so taken by
*Bochart*, *Grotius*, *Marckius*, *Dathius*, *Newcome*, and *Henderson*.
The reason given is, that there are instances of several verbs in Niphal
having an active meaning. This is true; but this verb is found nineteen
times in Niphal besides here, and invariably in a passive sense. This is
quite sufficient to settle its meaning. *Kimchi*, *Glassius*, and
*Cocceius* take this view. The last says that the reference is to his
deliverance from his sufferings and his death. It is singular that this
verse, at least a part of it, is quoted, and applied to Christ shortly
before his crucifixion. <span id="iii.x.xi-p11.2"></span>[Matt.
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.x.xi-p11.2"></span>.
The two verses, 9th and 10th, are in a striking manner connected; there
is a contrast between the end of the 9th and the beginning of the 10th,
and a correspondence between the end of the 10th and the beginning of
the 9th. The king shall ride lowly on an ass, — and the chariot and the
horse shall be cut off; he shall be saved or preserved, — and the
battle-bow shall be destroyed; then the correspondence, — he is
righteous, *i.e.*, just and faithful to his gracious promises, — and he
shall speak peace to the nations; he is King, — and his dominion shall
be from sea to sea. The two first lines are not to be included in the
comparison, —

<span id="iii.x.xi-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xi-p13"></span>**9.** Exult thou greatly, daughter of
Zion; Shout thou daughter of Jerusalem: Behold thy King, he shall come
to thee; Just, and saved shall he be; Lowly, and he shall ride on an
ass, Even on a colt, the foal of an ass:

<span id="iii.x.xi-p14"></span>**10.** And cut off shall I the chariot
from Ephraim, And the horse from Jerusalem; And cut off shall be the bow
of war; And he will speak peace to the nations; And his dominion *shall
be* from sea to sea, And from the river to the extremities of the land.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p15"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc30012.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="iii.x.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p18"></span> *Pauper*, \[<span
id="iii.x.xi-p18.1"></span>עני\], rendered “\[<span
id="iii.x.xi-p18.2"></span>πραυς\], meek” by the *Septuagint*; “humble,”
by *Newcome*; and “lowly,” by *Blayney* and *Henderson*, and also by
*Kimchi*, and the *Targum*. It may either mean a depressed and poor
condition, or, as *Blayney* says, “the humility of his temper.” Both
were true as to the king mentioned here. He was poor in condition,
riding on a colt, and lowly also in mind, of which his procession was an
evidence. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc30012.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="iii.x.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p20"></span> Literally it is, “the foal of
she-asses,” which *Kimchi* explains, “the foal of one of the she-asses,”
and adduces <span id="iii.x.xi-p20.1"></span>[Jud
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.x.xi-p20.1"></span>,
as an instance, where “in the cities of Gilead” means “in one of the
cities of Gilead.” It is singular in the *Septuagint*, the *Targum*, and
the *Syriac*. Th word is regarded by *Grotius* as including both sexes,
“the foal of asses,” a pure foal, not a mule, its father and mother
being of the asinine kind. So *Newcome* renders the phrase, “the foal of
asses.” The probability is, that as the early versions give the
singular, and as there seems to be no reason for the plural, it is a
typographical mistake. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc30012.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="iii.x.xi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p21"></span> *Newcome* suggests another reason, “As
horses are used in war, Christ may be supposed by this action to have
shown the humble and peacable nature of his kingdom.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc30012.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="iii.x.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p9"></span> To “speak peace” is to anounce or
proclaim peace, and not to produce peace. It is not to render people
peaceable, but to declare the message of peace to them. It it the
promulgation of the gospel. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc30012.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="iii.x.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xii-p13"></span> The reference as to the “sea” may be
also made to <span id="iii.x.xii-p13.1"></span>[Ex
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#031.md)<span
id="iii.x.xii-p13.1"></span>; and as to the “river” to <span
id="iii.x.xii-p13.2"></span>[De
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.x.xii-p13.2"></span>. The land promised to the Israelites is no
doubt what is here described,” and *Newcome* renders the last clause “to
the uttermost part of the land.” Though *Henderson* admits that the
words are originally “descriptive of the utmost bound of the Hebrew
kingdom,” yet he thinks that they are to be taken here in their widest
meaning, as including the whole earth. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc30012.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p8"></span> Rather by following the *Septuagint*
who changed the person of the verb “\[<span
id="iii.x.xiii-p8.1"></span>ἐξαπέστειλας\], though hast sent forth.” The
pronoun “\[<span id="iii.x.xiii-p8.2"></span>συ\], thou,” in Greek, has
no gender, as in Hebrew. It was in this way that *Theodoret*, *Cyril*,
and *Augustine* were led astray as to the sense of this passage. The
*Targum* retains the reading of the Hebrew. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc30012.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p10"></span> “The words,” says *Newcome*, “allude
to the Jewish custom of ratifying covenants by the blood of victims.” It
was called “thy” covenant, because it was a covenant *made* with the
daughter of Sion. The meaning is, “the covenant ratified with thee by
blood,” that is, of victims. see <span id="iii.x.xiii-p10.1"></span>[Ex
24:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.x.xiii-p10.1"></span>. The \[<span
id="iii.x.xiii-p10.2"></span>ב\] here means *for*, or *on account of*.
The verse may be thus rendered —

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p11"></span>As to thee also, on account of the
blood of thy covenant  
Have I sent forth thy prisoners  
From a pit without water in it.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p12"></span>It was thought by *Drusius* and
*Newcome* that the deliverance of the people from *Babylon* is here
referred to, which is the most probable opinion, as the next verse seems
to have been addressed to them. But *Marckius* and *Henderson* agree
with *Calvin*, that the past tense is used for the future. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc30012.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="iii.x.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p3"></span> The words may with more propriety be
regarded as spoken by God. The construction of the last clause has been
differently given. *M‘Caul* in his observation on *Kimchi* has rendered
it thus — “The announcer of double will I cause to return to thee.” The
“announcer of double” in his view is the Messiah: but to cause the
Messiah to “return,” is a language that cannot be admitted; and his
remark on \[<span id="iii.x.xvi-p3.1"></span>נגד\] in Hiphil is not
correct: that is, that it has ever an accusative or a dative, or both,
after it. See <span id="iii.x.xvi-p3.2"></span>[1Sa
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.x.xvi-p3.2"></span>; <span id="iii.x.xvi-p3.3"></span>[2Sa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.x.xvi-p3.3"></span>.
It is better to connect “double,” or a double blessing, with the verb
“restore,” —

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p4"></span>*Even this day I declare,  
A double* blessing *will I restore to thee.*

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p5"></span>This is essentially the rendering of
*Drusius*, *Grotius*, *Newcome*, and *Henderson*. There is a
correspondence between the verb “restore,” or cause to return, and the
verb “return” at the beginning of the verse. “Return, etc., and I will
cause to return to thee a double blessing.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc30012.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p9"></span> *Kimchi* says that a remnant of the ten
tribes were among the Jews who returned from Babylon, being those who
had been left in the land by Shalmanezer, as it appears from <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p9.1"></span>[2 Chr.
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#006.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#009.md),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#033.md), [2 Chr.
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.x.xvii-p9.1"></span>. “These went,” he says, “into captivity
with the tribe of Judah and of Benjamin to Babylon, and returned with
them when they returned.” *Abarbanel* gives the same opinion, and also
*Cyril* and *Bochart*. The latter informs their return from <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p9.2"></span>[Ezr.
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#017.md), [Ezr.
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#035.md)<span
id="iii.x.xvii-p9.2"></span>.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p10"></span>This prophecy is viewed by *Henderson*
as having been fulfilled in the wars of the Maccabees. See <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p10.1"></span>[1 Macc.
1:62](../../../bib/apo/ma1001.htm#062.md), [1 Macc.
2:41](../../../bib/apo/ma1002.htm#041.md), [1 Macc.
3:33](../../../bib/apo/ma1003.htm#033.md)<span
id="iii.x.xvii-p10.1"></span>. This was also the view of *Theodoret*,
*Jerome*, *Grotius*, and *Marckius*. *Newcome* thought that “the
language of this prophecy is too strong for these events, and may remain
to be fulfilled against the present possessors of the countries called
Javan, which were Greec, Macedonia and part of Asia Minor.” With this
view *Adam Clarke* concurs, though *Scott* demurs. But there seems to be
nothing here, and especially in the following verses, that does not well
comport with the wars of the Maccabees. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc30012.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="iii.x.xviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p9"></span> The two preceding verses, the 13th and
14th, are capable of being rendered more correctly. *Junius* and
*Tremelius* render \[<span id="iii.x.xviii-p9.1"></span>כי\], at the
beginning of verse 13th, *when*, and connect it with the preceding
verse. But if the particle be so rendered, and \[<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p9.2"></span>ו\], at the beginning of verse 14th, be
rendered *them*, the meaning will be more evident. All the verbs in
verse 13 are in the past tense, and may be rendered as future perfects
according to what is done by the preceding authors. Then the two verses
will be as follows—

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p11"></span>**13.** When I shall have bent Judah
for myself, *And* the bow filled with Ephraim, And roused up thy sons, O
Sion, Against thy sons, O Javan, And made thee as the sword of a mighty
man;

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p12"></span>**14.** Then Jehovah shall be seen (a
leader) over them, And go forth like lightning shall his arrow; Yes, the
Lord Jehovah with a trumpet shall blow, And march in (or, accompanied
with) the whirlwinds of the south.

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p13"></span>The “whirlwinds,” or storms, as
rendered by *Henderson*, “of the south,” were impetuous and violent. See
<span id="iii.x.xviii-p13.1"></span>[Job
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p13.1"></span>; <span id="iii.x.xviii-p13.2"></span>[Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p13.2"></span>. The images here, as *Newcome* justly
observes, are very sublime. The change of the person, as in verse 14th,
is very common in the Prophets and in other parts of Scripture. See
<span id="iii.x.xviii-p13.3"></span>[Gen.
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p13.3"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc30012.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="iii.x.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xix-p7"></span> Another view is taken of this view. The
destruction of enemies, and not abundance of blessings, is what is said
to be set forth in this verse, according to the rendering both of the
*Septuagint* and the *Targum*, followed by *Jerome*, *Kimchi*,
*Drusius*, *Grotius*, *Newcome*, *Blayney*, and *Henderson*. “The bowl
or basin,” says *Blayney*, “and the corners of the altar, all seem to
bespeak *blood*; for the blood of the sacrificed beasts was part of it
received in bowls for the purpose of sprinkling, and the rest poured out
at the foot of the altar, <span id="iii.x.xix-p7.1"></span>[Le
4:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.x.xix-p7.1"></span>.” *Henry* states this view as his own, and
also mentions that given by *Calvin*, which both *Scott* and *Adam
Clarke* have taken.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p8"></span>The latter part of the verse is rendered
by the *Septuagint* as though the meaning were, that the Jews would
offer abundant sacrifices to express their gratitude. “And they shall
fill the bowls as well as the altar.” *Junius* and *Tremelius*, and
*Piscator*, have rendered the Hebrew according to this meaning, taking
the two *caphs* as signifying *both* and *and*, or *as well as*, “And
they shall fill both the bowl and the corners of the altar,” that is, by
offering sacrifices in token of their gratitude for victory. But the
explanation of *Grotius* is, “They shall be filled with the blood of
their enemies as the corners of the altar are with the blood of victims.
<span id="iii.x.xix-p8.1"></span>[Lev.
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#025.md), [Lev.
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.x.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="iii.x.xix-p9"></span>It is difficult to know which view to
take. The authorities, and perhaps the context, are in favor of the
revenge that would be taken on the Grecians. In this case the metaphors,
as *Newcome* observes, are taken from beasts of prey, not an uncommon
thing in Scripture. See <span id="iii.x.xix-p9.1"></span>[Nu
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.x.xix-p9.1"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc30012.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="iii.x.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xx-p9"></span> This rendering is supported by the
*Septuagint*, the *Targum*, the *Vulgate*, and adopted by *Grotius*,
*Marckius*, and *Newcome*. But to “subdue” or tread down, “the
sling-stones” is the version of *Kimchi*, *Piscator*, *Dathius*, and
*Henderson*; who have thought that the Greeks are here called
“sling-stones,” by way of contempt, as the Jews are called
“crown-stones” in verse 16, by way of honor; the first were common and
worthless; the second rare and precious. What seems unfavorable to this
metaphor is the expression, “lifted up as ensign,” as applied to “the
stones of a crown.” The words \[<span id="iii.x.xx-p9.1"></span>אבני
נזר\], have been rendered, “stones of separation,” that is, stones
separated, set apart and consecrated to a particular use. See <span
id="iii.x.xx-p9.2"></span>[Ge
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.x.xx-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.x.xx-p9.3"></span>[Josh.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#005.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.x.xx-p9.3"></span>.
Hence *Blayney’s* version is, “consecrated stones,” in accordance with
the *Septuagint*, “\[<span id="iii.x.xx-p9.4"></span>λιθοι ἁγιοι\] —
sacred or holy stones,” and also with the *Syriac* and *Arabic*
versions. They were stones, as it seems, set up as memorials of victory.
Suitable then is the expression, that they were raised, erected or
lifted up as banners or ensigns over the land. “Crowned trophies” is the
rendering of *Newcome*, — stones encircled by a crown as monuments of
victory. But whether we render the words, consecrated or crowned stones,
the same thing is meant: and the propriety of the principle which
follows becomes evident. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc30012.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p7"></span> Goodness and beauty are said to be
God’s, because conferred by him. Some refer “his” to the people and
others to the land. The meaning is the same, though the form of the
expression would be different. As the future time is referred to, the
question here may be better expressed in the future tense, —

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p8"></span>*For what* will *be his goodness!  
And what* will be *his beauty!  
The corn shall cause the young men to thrive,  
And new wine the maids.*

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p9"></span>But were the \[<span
id="iii.x.xxi-p9.1"></span>ו\] after “land” in the preceding verse to be
referred to “people” in the same verse, the \[<span
id="iii.x.xxi-p9.2"></span>ו\] added here to “goodness” might be applied
to the same antecedent: and this would be the most natural rendering,—

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p11"></span>**16.** And save them will Jehovah their
God, In that day, *even* as sheep, his people: Therefore consecrated
stones Shall be raised as banners over their land. For how great *will*
be their good (or prosperity!) And how great their comeliness! Corn
shall cause the young men to thrive, And new wine the maids.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p12"></span>We use “they,” and “their,” when we
speak of “people,” though in Hebrew the singular pronoun is used. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc30013.md)
