[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc30000)  [Next](cc30002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>This Volume completes Calvin’s Commentaries on
the Twelve Minor Prophets, — a Work which, had he written no ether,
would have been sufficient to have rendered him illustrious as a
faithful, lucid, and practical expounder. In course of time, when his
Comments shall be carefully read, his high merits will no doubt be duly
acknowledged. The Translator can bear this testimony, that before he
read Calvin on the Minor Prophets, it was to him one of the least
interesting and the least instructive portions of the ancient
Scriptures; but that he finds it now one of the most interesting. It
practically exhibits to us especially two things, which it greatly
concerns us all to know, — what God is, and what man is. It sets before
us manifest facts which prove the wonderful mercy and forbearance of
God, and also the amazing tendency of man to superstition, and his
persistency in his course notwithstanding all the powerful means adopted
for his restoration.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>Zechariah began to prophesy two months after
Haggai, as we find by comparing <span id="ii-p3.1"></span>[Hag
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#015.md)<span id="ii-p3.1"></span>, with
<span id="ii-p3.2"></span>[Zec
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)<span id="ii-p3.2"></span>. Ezra
mentions them as the two Prophets who encouraged the rebuilding of the
Temple. <span id="ii-p3.3"></span>[Ezr.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001.md), [Ezr.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014.md)<span id="ii-p3.3"></span>.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>The greatest part of Zechariah was written,
according to *Lowth,* in prose; but he adds that “some parts about the
end of his Prophecy (<span id="ii-p4.1"></span>[Zech.
9:0](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#000.md), [Zech.
10:0](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#000.md)<span id="ii-p4.1"></span>. and
the beginning of 11.) are poetical and highly embellished, and that they
are sufficiently perspicuous, though written by a Prophet, who of all is
perhaps the most obscure.”  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) The
testimony of *Jerome,* as to his obscurity, is the same; he says that he
is “the most obscure as well as the longest of the Twelve Minor
Prophets.” *Marckius* concedes a majestic elegance to his diction, and
says, that “his enigmatical symbols may be fitly compared with those of
Amos, Ezekiel, Daniel, and of John, the Prophet of the New Testament.”
“His prose,” according to *Henderson,* “resembles most that of Ezekiel;
it is diffuse, uniform and repetitious. His prophetic poetry possesses
much of the elevation and dignity to be found in the earlier Prophets,
with whose writings he appears to have been familiar.”

<span id="ii-p6"></span>The Book contains *four* parts: the *first* is a
short message to the Jews, <span id="ii-p6.1"></span>[Zec
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)<span id="ii-p6.1"></span>; the
*second* includes the rest of the first six chapters, which record a
series of eight visions confined to one single night, and vouchsafed to
the Prophet three months after the first message; the *third* contains
two chapters, the seventh and the eighth; and the *fourth,* the six
remaining chapters.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>Since the days of Calvin a dispute has arisen,
originated by *Mede,* respecting this last portion. Owing especially to
a quotation in <span id="ii-p7.2"></span>[Matt.
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010.md)<span id="ii-p7.2"></span>, where
Jeremiah, and not Zechariah, is mentioned, many since the time of
*Mede,* such as *Hammond, Newcome,* and several German divines, have
adopted the notion, that these chapters have somehow been misplaced, and
that they belong to the book of Jeremiah. This view has been strongly
opposed by *Blayney* and others, who, together with *Scott, Adam
Clarke,* and *Henderson,* consider that there is no sufficient ground
for such a supposition, and who for various reasons think that there is
a typographical mistake in Matthew.  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md)

<span id="ii-p10"></span>*“It* is alleged,” observes *Blayney,* “that
the Evangelist St. Matthew, <span id="ii-p10.1"></span>[Mt
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009.md)<span id="ii-p10.1"></span>, cites
a passage found in <span id="ii-p10.2"></span>[Zec
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013.md)<span id="ii-p10.2"></span>, as
spoken, not by Zechariah, but by the Prophet Jeremiah. But is it not
possible, nay, is it not much more probable, that the word Ιερεμιου may
have been written by mistake by some transcribers of Matthew’s Gospel,
than that those of the Jewish Church, who settled the Canon of
Scripture, of whom Zechariah himself is supposed to have been one,
should have been so grossly ignorant of the right author of those
chapters as to place them under a wrong name? It is not, I think,
pretended that these chapters have been found in any copy of the Old
Testament otherwise placed than as they now stand. But in the New
Testament there are not wanting authorities for omitting the word
Ιερεμιου*.”*

<span id="ii-p11"></span>The other arguments urged by *Mede* and others
are successfully combated by *Blayney* as well as by *Henderson.*

<span id="ii-p12"></span>The first is, that many things are mentioned in
these chapters which correspond not with Zechariah’s time; the second,
that the prophecy in <span id="ii-p12.1"></span>[Zechariah
11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#000.md)<span id="ii-p12.1"></span>,
concerning the destruction of the Temple and of the people, is not
suitable to the scope of Zechariah’s commission, which was to encourage
the people to build the Temple; and the third, that the style of these
chapters is different from that of the preceding ones. These reasons,
especially the two last, are justly said to be easily accounted for by
the supposition that Zechariah wrote the former portions while he was
young, (<span id="ii-p12.2"></span>[Zec
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004)<span id="ii-p12.2"></span>,.md) and
these chapters in his advanced years. And *Blayney* thinks that he is
the Zechariah mentioned by our Savior in <span id="ii-p12.3"></span>[Mt
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035.md)<span id="ii-p12.3"></span>, and
that he was slain by the Jews on account of these prophecies which he
announced in his old age.  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md)

<span id="ii-p14"></span>The last of the Old Testament Prophets, as
admitted by all, was Malachi. Who and what he was, we are left without
any knowledge. Some have supposed him to have been Ezra under another
name, or under the name of his office, as Malachi means a messenger. But
most think that he lived near a century after Haggai and Zechariah
*Usher* places him in the year 416 before Christ, and *Blair* in 436. It
appears certain from <span id="ii-p14.1"></span>[Mal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010.md)<span id="ii-p14.1"></span>, that
his time was after the building of the Temple. It is most probable that
he was contemporary with Nehemiah, especially after his second return
from Persia, as the same things are condemned by both, — foreign
marriages and the neglect of paying tythes. The Jews are wont to call
him the seal (<span id="ii-p14.2"></span>חותם) of the Prophets.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>It is observed by *Lowth* that Malachi wrote
“in a middle sort of style, and evidently in such a style as seems to
prove that Hebrew poetry had declined since the Babylonian exile, and
that being now in advanced age it was somewhat verging towards
senility.”  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) But *Henderson* speaks in
a higher strain, “Considering the late age in which he lived, the
language of Malachi is pure; his style possesses much in common with the
old Prophets, but is distinguished more by its animation than by its
rhythmus or grandeur.”

<span id="ii-p17"></span>The interesting character of the Commentary
will be found to be in no degree diminished in this Volume, but on the
contrary increased, though some of the subjects had been before
discussed. The same thoughts, no doubt, sometimes occur, but their
different connections ever introduce some variety. The Commentator
follows his text, and very seldom deviates from what it strictly
requires, and the application of it to present circumstances is
generally natural and obvious, and for the most part confined to a few
sentences; so the reader’s attention is not diverted from the passage
that is explained. The main object throughout seems to be to interpret
God’s Word and to impress it on the mind and heart, and so to apply it
as to render it the rule of our life and the support of our hopes.

<span id="ii-p18"></span>The curious reader, fond of novelties, and
enamoured with speculative and fanciful notions, or one whose chief
delight is in dry criticisms, will not find much in Calvin to gratify
him: but those who possess a taste for Divine Truth, who seek to
understand what they read, and desire to be fed by “the sincere milk of
the Word,” will, through a blessing from above, be abundantly
compensated by a careful perusal of his Comments. This is not said
merely as a matter of inference from the character of their contents,
but as the result of personal experience. The testimony which the
Translator can fully bear is similar to that of Bishop Horne, when he
finished his Commentary on the Psalms, that the labor has been attended
with so much pleasure and enjoyment, that the completion of his work
occasions regret as well as joy; for the time during which he has been
engaged in translating Calvin has been the happiest period of his life.

<span id="ii-p19"></span>As to the Indices, added to this Volume, the
most important is that to the subjects: and it is more useful than
general readers may perhaps consider it to be. The very reading of it
may convey no small measure of information. The variety of subjects
handled in these Volumes is very great, so that they include almost
everything in the wide range of Theology, not indeed discussed at large,
but briefly touched upon and explained.

<span id="ii-p20"></span>But as an illustration of the usefulness of
this Index, let the word *Faith* be taken; and almost everything
connected with it will be found mentioned and referred to. Turn again to
the word *Faithful, (Fideles,)* which some of my co-workers have
rendered *Believers,* and perhaps in some instances more appropriately;
and hardly anything belonging to the character, spirit, life, and trials
of God’s people, will be found wanting. If there be a wish to know what
Popery is, what is found under the word *Papists* will disclose almost
the whole character of the system; and by referring to the Comment all
its main lineaments will be found clearly exhibited in the character of
the superstitions and idolatries of the Jews. The real features of
errors are the same in every age, only somewhat modified by a change of
circumstances: but an enlightened observer can read Popery in the
history of the ancient Jews as clearly as in its own history. This of
course cannot be done by the spiritually blind and the deluded; and yet
so striking and palpable is the likeness in not a few instances, that it
is impossible for any not to see it, except they be totally blind, and
their judgment wholly perverted.

<span id="ii-p21"></span>There have been many Commentators before and
after the time of Calvin, but it may be doubted whether any of them
possessed his combined excellencies, especially the capacity of being so
plain as to be understood by common readers, and of being at the same
time so profound as to be interesting and instructive to the most
learned; so that his Comments do in this respect retain, in a measure,
the character of the book he interprets and explains. Of his superiority
over his predecessors we have the striking testimony of the learned
*Arminius, who,* as he differed from him on several points of no small
importance, may justly be considered to have been an impartial witness.
His words are remarkable, — “Next to the reading of Scripture, which I
strongly recommend, I advise you to read the Commentaries of Calvin, on
whom I bestow higher eulogies than Helmichius did; for I consider that
he is *incomparable* in interpreting Scripture, and that his
Commentaries are of more value than all that the library of the Fathers
transmits to us; so that I concede to him even a spirit of prophecy
superior to that of most, yea, of all others.  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md)

<span id="ii-p23"></span>As to posterior Commentators, his comparative
merits cannot indeed be rated so high, as there have been in later years
Writers in this department of no ordinary character. Not to mention
Foreign Divines, our own might with advantage be referred *to,* such as
*Henry, Lowth, Whitby, Doddridge, Scott,* and *Adam Clarke.* And yet
none of these can be regarded as in all respects equal to Calvin as a
Commentator. Some of them excel him as Critics, and others in the number
of their practical deductions; but he surpasses them all in pointing out
and illustrating the main drift of a passage, in catching as it were its
very spirit, and in the power he possessed of impressing on the mind in
a few words both its meaning and its practical lessons. The Comment
never diverts us from the Text, it never occupies as it were its place;
but the Text itself, expounded and illustrated, is left fixed and
riveted on the mind.

<span id="ii-p24"></span>Thrussington, July 1849.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc30001.htm#fr_0.md) <span id="ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p5"></span> <span id="ii-p5.1"></span>Sunt aliqua sub ejus
Vaticinii finem (vide cap. 9, 10. et init. 11.) et poetica et valde
ornata, et, ut in Vate omnium fortasse obscurissimo, satis perspicua. —
*Proel*. 21.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc30001.htm#fr_1.md) <span id="ii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii-p8"></span> Augustine mentions that in his time some MSS.
omitted the name of <span id="ii-p8.1"></span>Ἰερεμίου. It is also
omitted in the MS. 33, 157; in the Syriac, which is the most ancient of
all the versions ... The Greek MS. 22, reads <span
id="ii-p8.2"></span>Ζαχαρίου, as also do the Philoxenian Syriac in the
margin, and the Arabic MS. quoted by Bengel Origen and Eusebius, were in
favor of this reading. I think it very probable that Matthew did not
insert either name, but simply wrote in his Hebrew gospel <span
id="ii-p8.3"></span>ביד הנביא, *by the Prophet,* just as in <span
id="ii-p8.4"></span>[Matt. 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022.md),
[Matt. 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015.md), [Matt.
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#035.md), [Matt.
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#004.md), [Matt.
27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035.md)<span id="ii-p8.4"></span>; and
that his Greek Translator, mistaking <span id="ii-p8.5"></span>ד in
<span id="ii-p8.6"></span>ביד for <span id="ii-p8.7"></span>ר read <span
id="ii-p8.8"></span>ביר, which he considered to be a contraction for
<span id="ii-p8.9"></span>בירמיהו, and so rendered it <span
id="ii-p8.10"></span>δια Ἱερεμίου του προφήτου.. This reading having
found its way into the first Greek MS. will account for its all but
universal propagation. Another conjecture supposes <span
id="ii-p8.11"></span>Ἰριου, to have been written by some early copyist
instead of <span id="ii-p8.12"></span>Ζριου*."* — *Henderson.*

<span id="ii-p9"></span>The notion of Hengstenberg, derived from a hint
by Grotius, is too subtle and refined. He supposes that Matthew
intentionally ascribed the words to Jeremiah, in order to show that
Zechariah's prediction was but a repetition of what Jeremiah had
foretold in <span id="ii-p9.1"></span>[Jeremiah
18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#000.md)<span id="ii-p9.1"></span>, and 19.,
and to intimate that it would be followed by a similar judgment. But
this sort of reasoning is too abstruse and artificial to be admitted.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc30001.htm#fr_2.md) <span id="ii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ii-p13"></span> What seems to strengthen this supposition is,
that in this case the *first* and the *last* martyr, previous to his
time, are mentioned by our Savior.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc30001.htm#fr_3.md) <span id="ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p16"></span> <span id="ii-p16.1"></span>Prophetarum ultimus
Malachius medio quodam dicendi genere utitur, atque ejusmodi plane, quod
arguere videatur poesin Hebraeam inde a cap-tivitate Babylonica
deflorescentem, et inclinata jam aetate in senium quodammodo vergentem.
— *Proel*, 21.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc30001.htm#fr_4.md) <span id="ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p22"></span> <span id="ii-p22.1"></span>Post Scripturae
lectionem, quam vehementer inculco, ad Calvini Commentarios legendos
adhortor, quem laudibus majoribus extollo quam ipse Helmichius; dico
enim incomparabilem esse in interpretatione Scripturae, et majoris
faciendos ipsius Commentarios, quam quicquid Patrum Biblio-theca nobis
tradit; adeo ut et spiritum aliquem prophetiae eximium illi prae aliis
plerisque, imo et omnibus, concedam. See *Merits of Calvin,* p. 51.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Zechariah](cc30002.md)
