[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc30004)  [Next](cc30006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span>Chapter 2

<span id="iii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** I lifted up mine eyes again, and
looked, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et sustuli oculos meos et vidi; et
ecce vir in ejus manu funiculus mensurae.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Then said I, Whither goest thou?
And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what *is* the breadth
thereof, and what *is* the length thereof.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixi**,** Quo tu vadis? et
dixit mihi**,** Ad metiendum Ierusalem**,** ut videam quanta latitudo
ejus**,** et quanta longitudo ejus.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And, behold, the angel that talked
with me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him,

<span id="iii.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et ecce angelus qui loquebatur
mecum egressus est**,** et alter angelus egressus est in occursum ejus;

<span id="iii.iii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And said unto him, Run, speak to
this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited *as* towns without
walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein:

<span id="iii.iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et dixit ad eum**,** Curre**,**
dic puero huic**,** dicendo**,** In villis (vel**,** pagis) habitabitur
Ierusalem prae multitudine hominis et pecoris (id est**,** honinum et
pecorum) in medio ejus.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.i-p11"></span><span id="iii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p12"></span>Added now is another vision for the same
end; not that the former was difficult to be understood, but because
there was need of confirmation in a state of things so disturbed; for
though the return of the people was no common evidence of the goodness
and favor of God yet as Jerusalem was not flourishing as formerly, as
the temple was like a cottage as there was no form of a kingdom and no
grandeur, it was difficult to believe what had been already exhibited.
This is the reason why God confirms by many proofs the same thing; for
we know how difficult the contest is, owing to the infirmity of the
flesh, when grievous and sharp trials assail us.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p13"></span>Hence Zechariah says, that he *saw in
the hand of a man a measuring line*. He calls him a man, who appeared in
the form of man; and it is well known, and a common thing, that angels
are called men. For though they put on a human form only for a time, yet
as it was the Lord’s will that they should be seen in that form, they
are called men, though with no propriety. If it be asked, whether angels
did really put on human nature? the obvious answer is, that they never,
strictly speaking, became really men. But we know that God treats us as
children; and there is the same reason for the expression as for the
thing itself. How was it that angels appeared in human form? even that
their access to men might be easier. Hence God calls them men as in this
place. Zechariah then says, that an angel appeared to him in the form of
a man, having in his hand a measuring line.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p14"></span><span id="iii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p15"></span>He then asks him where he was going; the
answer given is, *to measure Jerusalem, to see what was its breadth and
its length*. The design of the prophecy is then stated, *Behold,
inhabited shall be Jerusalem throughout all its villages*,  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) as it could not contain within its walls
so large a multitude of men. God then would so increase his people, that
they could not be contained within its walls, but that the limits of the
Church would be spacious. *Inhabited* then *shall be Jerusalem
throughout all its villages*, that is, through the whole country around.
This is the meaning.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p17"></span>We now see the design of the Holy
Spirit. As a small portion only had returned from exile, the faithful
might have become disheartened when they found that the restoration of
the Church was very far from being so splendid as what had been so often
predicted and promised. It was therefore necessary that they should be
encouraged, in order that they might patiently wait while God was
performing by degrees, and step by step, what he had testified. That
they might not then confine God’s favor to a short period, or to a few
days, the Prophet says here, that the measure of Jerusalem was different
in the sight of God from what it was in the sight of men. With regard to
the “line”, it was according to the ancient custom; for we know that
they did not then use a ten foot pole or some such measure, but a line.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p18"></span>The Prophet, by saying that he *raised
up his eyes and saw* this man, reminds us that Jerusalem was to be
regarded prospectively: for they could hardly be induced then to build
the city as a small and obscure town. We hence see that a difference is
to be here noticed between the external aspect of Jerusalem, such as it
was then, and its future condition, for which they were to look though
not then visible. This then is the design of the prophecy, when it is
said, that when Zechariah raised up his eyes, he saw a measure or a line
in the hand of a man. He further reminds us that he was attentive to
these visions, for by asking he proves that he was not asleep or
indifferent, as many are who extinguish every light by their sloth; and
I wish there was no such torpor prevailing among us in the present day!
for we justly suffer punishment for our contempt, whenever we heedlessly
and negligently attend to what God sets before us. Let us then learn
greater attention and diligence from the Prophet’s example.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p19"></span>He asks where he was going, the answer
given is, *to measure*: and then he shows what would be the measure of
Jerusalem, that it would hereafter extend beyond the walls, as that
compass would not contain the vast number of the people. “God will
extend,” he says, “far and wide the holy city; it will no longer be
confined as before to its own walls, but will be inhabited through all
its villages.” There is then no doubt but that God intended here to bear
witness respecting the propagation of his Church, which was to follow a
long time afterwards, even after the coming of Christ. For though
Jerusalem became wealthy and also large in its compass, and, as it is
well known, a triple city, and heathen writers say that it was among the
first of the cities of the East when Babylon was still existing, yet
this prophecy was not verified in the state of Jerusalem, for it was not
inhabited without its walls, nor did it spread through the whole of
Judea. We hence conclude, that the spiritual Jerusalem is here
described, which differs from all earthly cities.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p20"></span><span id="iii.iii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p21"></span>It is said, that the angel *went forth*,
and that *another angel met* him. It hence appears as from the whole of
what the Prophet says, how carefully God provides for the safety of his
Church; for he has ever angels as his emissaries, who hasten at his nod,
and aid the Church in its necessities. Since then angels thus unite to
secure the well-being of the Church, we hence perceive how dear to God
are the faithful, in whose favor he thus employs all his angels; and we
also see, that it was the Lord’s will that this prophecy should be clear
and manifest to all the godly: go, and *run to that young man*, he says,
and tell him. Zechariah had indeed asked for an explanation of the
measure in the man’s hand, but from the fact that another angel met him,
it appears, as I have already said, that God does not neglect the
request and prayers of his people, provided only that they are desirous
of learning; he will then perform the part of a true and faithful
teacher towards them. But the word “run,” ought especially to be
noticed: “go,” he says, “and even hasten, lest the youth should longer
doubt, and explain the purpose of this prophecy.” He calls the Prophet a
youth, because he was then among angels. He would not call him a man of
full age, because he had before called an angel man. What rank could the
Prophet hold among angels except that of a youth? This circumstance
ought therefore to be observed as the reason why Zechariah spoke
disparagingly or humbly of himself.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p22"></span>Now as to the import of the prophecy, we
have already said, that here is described the heavenly Jerusalem, which
is surrounded by no walls, but is open to the whole world, and which
depends not on its own strength, but dwells safely though exposed on all
sides to enemies; for the Prophet says not without reason, “through the
villages shall Jerusalem be inhabited;” that is, it shall everywhere be
inhabited, so that it will have no need of defense to restrain or hinder
enemies to come near; for a safe rest shall be given to it, when every
one shall quietly occupy his own place. It follows —

<span id="iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** For I, saith the LORD, will be
unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst
of her.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Et ego illi**,** dicit
Iehova**,** murus ignis (*vel***,** igneus) in circuitu**,** et in
gloriam ero in medio ejus.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p6"></span>He confirms in this verse what I have
just mentioned — that Jerusalem would be safe, though without any
fortifications; for God alone would be sufficient for walls, for towers,
for fortresses, according to what is said by other Prophets: “God will
be to thee a wall and a fortress”, (<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>[Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>), again, “he will be to thee a stronghold”.
It is, therefore, a sentence in accordance with other prophecies when
Jehovah testifies, that he would be a *wall of fire*. We indeed know,
that though walls may be high and thick, they may be scaled by enemies;
but who will dare to throw himself into the fire? It is then the same as
though God had spoken thus — “Though there will be no watchmen to defend
Jerusalem, no soldiers to protect it, in short, no guardians whatever,
yet I alone shall be sufficient; for I shall not only be a wall to keep
off enemies, but I shall be also a fire to fill them with terror.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p7"></span>He then adds, *I will be for glory in
the midst of her*: as though he had said, “the real happiness of
Jerusalem, within and without, will be in me alone and in my favor:
within, in the midst of her I will be for glory; I will adorn her with
every thing praiseworthy; and when there shall be any fear from the
assault of enemies, I will be to her a wall of fire. For though she will
not excel in strongholds and towers, and be without walls and
fortresses, and shall be thus exposed to many evils, I shall yet strike
all enemies with terror, so that they shall be kept afar off; and my
Church shall be thus preserved safe, though destitute of all human aids,
and without any defense.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p8"></span>We now then perceive the meaning of the
Prophet to be this — that though the Jews saw that they were but few in
number, weak in strength, wretched and despised, they had yet reason to
entertain hope; for though few returned from exile God was yet able to
increase the Church and to make it a vast multitude, and that this was
certain and decreed, for it was shown by the vision, that however
unequal they were to their enemies, God was still sufficiently strong
and powerful to defend them; and that however destitute they were of all
blessings, God was still rich enough to enrich them, provided they
relied on the blessing which he had promised; for he had engaged to
render them happy and blessed within, and safe from enemies from
without.

<span id="iii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are on
every side surrounded by many enemies, and as Satan never ceases to
kindle the fury of many, not only to be hostile to us, but also to
destroy and consume us, — O grant that we may learn to raise up our eyes
to heaven, and trusting in thy protection may boldly fight in patience,
until that shall appear which thou hast once testified in this
remarkable prophesy, that there are many smiths in thine hall, and many
hammers, by which thou breakest in pieces those horns which rise up to
scatter us, and until at length, after having overcome all the devices
of Satan, we shall reach that blessed rest which has been provided for
us by the blood of thine only begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirty-eighth

<span id="iii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#006)<span id="iii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p2"></span>**6.** Ho, ho, *come forth,* and flee
from the land of the north, saith the LORD: for I have spread you abroad
as the four winds of the heaven, saith the LORD.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p3"></span>**6.** Heus! Heus! et fugite e terra
Aquilonis**,** dicit Iehova; quia in quatuor ventos coelorum dispersi
vos**,** dicit Iehova.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p6"></span>That the design of the Prophet may be
more clear, we must especially bear in mind the history of the case.
When it was allowed the Jews, by the edict of Cyrus and of Darius, to
return to their own land, that kindness was suspected by many, as though
the two kings had a wish suddenly to oppress them when they had pained
their object in their return. Some who dwelt comfortably among the
Chaldeans and in other places, preferred to enjoy their rest rather than
to return with so much trouble to their own country, where there were no
houses prepared, and where there were only dreary desolations. As then
the greater part of the people thus slighted the singular favor of God,
of which the Prophets had so often spoken, it was necessary that this
sloth, connected as it was with great impiety, should be reproved. For
if any religion had touched their hearts, they must have preferred
Jerusalem to the whole world, and the service of God to all earthly
advantages and pleasures. Hence the self-indulgence in which the Jews
had become torpid, deserved a sharp and severe reproof. This is the
reason why the Prophet treats them here with so much sharpness, for
otherwise they could not have been roused.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p7"></span>*Ho! Ho!* he says, as though he had said,
“What means this delay? for when God has opened the door for you, ye
still take your rest, as though Judea were not your inheritance, as
though there were no difference between you and the profane heathens.”
We now understand the object of the Prophet.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p8"></span>The particle <span
id="iii.iii.v-p8.1"></span>הוי, *eui*, is used for stimulating them; and
by it the Prophet reprehends their indifference, which was a proof, as I
have said, of ingratitude; for the Jews in this way showed their
contempt of that favor, which ought to have been preferred far before
all the wealth and the pleasures of the world.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p9"></span>But the reason which is added seems
far-fetched, or even unsuitable — *For to the four winds of heaven have
I scattered you*; for this could not have served to rouse the Jews to
leave Babylon, and to return to the holy land promised to them by God.
Yet it was very efficacious towards producing an impression on their
minds; for the Lord shows, in these words, that it was in his power to
restore them in safety, inasmuch as they had not been scattered here and
there, except through his just vengeance. Had their enemies prevailed
against them, or had they without reason been expelled from their
country, a doubt might have crept in whether the promise could be relied
on; but when it appeared evident that their exile was a punishment
inflicted by God, they might safely conclude that he would become the
author of their restoration; for he who had inflicted the wound was able
to heal it.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p10"></span>We now then see what the Prophet had in
view: he intimates that the Jews had hitherto suffered punishment from
God, because they obeyed not his word, but provoked by their obstinacy
his extreme vengeance; they ought then now to entertain hope, because
God was pacified towards them and ready to forgive them. As then their
exile was from God, the Prophet intimates that their return would not be
difficult when God became reconciled to them, because the Jews had to do
only with the heavenly Judge himself. In short, the Prophet designs to
show that the Jews acted foolishly by continuing in exile, when liberty
was given them to return; and therefore he exhorts them to hasten in
time, lest the season of God’s favor should pass away, and thus the door
be again closed against them. That they might not hesitate whether this
was possible, he shows that it was in God’s power, for he had driven
them from their country; it would not therefore be difficult for him to
open a way for their return whenever he pleased.  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) He now adds —

<span id="iii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#007)<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p2"></span>**7.** Deliver thyself, O Zion, that
dwellest *with* the daughter of Babylon.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p3"></span>**7.** Heus Sion! Servare**,** quae
habitas apud filiam Babylonis.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p6"></span>The Prophet repeats the same thing,
though briefly, and in other words: but while he briefly touches on what
he meant to say, he confirms and renders more plain the contents of the
former verse. He shows that it was a very great disgrace that Babylon
should become as it were the grave of Sion; for God had chosen that
mount as the place where he was to be worshipped. Babylon, we know, was
a filthy cavern, accursed by God. It was therefore to subvert, as it
were, the order of nature, for the Jews to bury, so to speak, the holy
mount of God in that infernal region. This mode of speaking appears on
the first view somewhat harsh, but it is yet most suitable; for by Sion
the Prophet means the Jews, who were still dispersed in Chaldea. The
temple had not indeed been moved from its place, but only burnt and
destroyed by the Chaldeans, and there was no other temple built among
the Babylonians. What then does the Prophet mean by saying, *O Sion, who
dwellest with the daughter of Babylon*, return to thine own place? He
even reminds the Jews that they were bound, as it were, to the temple;
for it was a sacred and an indissoluble bond of mutual union between God
and them. (<span id="iii.iii.vi-p6.1"></span>[1Ki
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p6.1"></span>.) For when God proposed that a temple
should be built for him on mount Sion, he at the same time added,

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p7"></span>“I will dwell among you; this is my
rest.” (<span id="iii.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p8"></span>Since the Jews, then, became united to
their God, the temple ass introduced as a pledge of this sacred union.
Thus justly and fitly does the Prophet give the name of Sion to the
Jews; for they were, as it has been said, tied as it were to the temple,
except they meant to deny God. Hence he says, “Is it right that you
should dwell among the Chaldeans? for ye are as it were the stones of
God’s temple. There is therefore for you no fixed and permanent abode
except on mount Sion, as you are in a sense that very mount itself.”
Therefore he says, “Sion, hasten and return to thine own place; for it
is strange and preposterous that thou shouldest dwell with the daughter
of Babylon.”

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p9"></span>In short, the Prophet shows that God’s
favor ought not to have been rejected, when he stretched forth his hand,
and gave them a free liberty to return. As then God thus appeared as the
deliverer of his people, the Jews ought not to have remained exiles, but
immediately to ascend to Jerusalem, that they might again worship God.
And why did the Prophet mention this? that the Jews might know that they
had nothing to fear, though surrounded with dangers; that though Satan
suggested many perils, many difficulties, many troubles, yet the grace
of God would not be defective, or evanescent, or fallacious, but that he
would complete his work, and not disappoint those to whom he had once
testified, that there would be to them again a quiet habitation in the
land of Judah. It now follows —

<span id="iii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)<span id="iii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p2"></span>**8.** For thus saith the LORD of
hosts; After the glory hath he sent me unto the nations which spoiled
you: for he that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eye.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p3"></span>**8.** Quia sic dicit Iehova
excercituum**,** Post gloriam misit me ad gentes quae spoliant vos; quia
qui tangit vos tangit pupillam oculi sui (*vel***,** ejus.)

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet pursues the same subject;
for he shows that the way was not opened to the Jews that they might
soon after repent of their return, but that the Lord might be with them,
as their deliverance was a signal proof of his kindness, and an evidence
that he would commence what he had begun. He then says, that by God’s
order the Gentiles would be restrained from effecting any thing in
opposition to the Jews; as though he had said, “Your liberty has been
granted by Cyrus and by Darius; many rise up to hinder your return, but
whatever they may attempt they shall effect nothing; for God shall check
all their efforts, and frustrate all their attempts.” But God’s herald
does here publicly testify, that he was commissioned to prevent the
nations from doing any injury, and to declare that the people brought
back to Judea were holy to the Lord, and that it was not permitted that
they should be injured by any. This is the import of the whole.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p7"></span>But a difficulty occurs here, for the
context seems not consistent: *Thus saith Jehovah*, Jehovah *sent me*;
for it is not the Prophet who receives here the office of a herald; but
it seems to be ascribed to God, which appears inconsistent; for whose
herald can God be? and by whose order or command could he promulgate
what the Prophet here relates? It seems not then suitable to ascribe
this to God, though the words seem to do so — *Thus saith Jehovah, After
the glory he sent me to the nations*: Who is the sender? or who is he
who orders or commands God? We hence conclude that Christ is here
introduced, who is Jehovah, and yet the Angel or the messenger of the
Father. Though then the being of God is one, expressed by the word
Jehovah, it is not improper to apply it both to the Father and to the
Son. Hence God is one eternal being; but God in the person of the Father
commands the Son, who also is Jehovah, to restrain the nations from
injuring the Jews by any unjust violence. The rabbis give this
explanation — that the Prophet says that he himself was God’s herald,
and thus recites his words; but this is forced and unnatural. I indeed
wish not on this point to contend with them; for being inclined to be
contentious, they are disposed to think that we insist on proofs which
are not conclusive. But there are other passages of Scripture which more
clearly prove the divinity and the eternal existence of Christ, and also
the distinction of persons. If however any one closely examines the
words of the Prophet, he will find that this passage must be forcibly
wrested, except it be understood of Christ. We then consider that Christ
is here set forth as the Father’s herald; and he says that he was sent
to the nations.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p8"></span>What he adds — *After the glory*, is
understood by some to mean, that after the glory had ceased, in which
the Jews had hitherto boasted, the message of Christ would then be
directed to the Gentiles. The meaning, then, according to them is this —
that shortly after the glory of the chosen people should depart, Christ,
by the Father’s command, would pass over to the nations to gather a
Church among them. But this passage may be also applied to the nations,
who had cruelly distressed the Church of God; as though he had said —
“Though your enemies have had for a time their triumphs, yet their glory
being brought to an end, God will send his messenger, so that they who
have spoiled you may become your prey.” It still seems probable to me
that the Prophet speaks of the glory which he had shortly before
mentioned. We may then view him as saying, that as God had begun to
exercise his power, and had in a wonderful manner restored his people,
there would be no intermission until he had fully established his
Church, so as to make the priesthood and the kingdom to flourish again.
Then *after the glory*, imports as much as this — “Ye see the beginning
of God’s favor, by which his power shines forth.” For doubtless it was
no common instance of the Lord’s glory, which he had manifested in
restoring his people; and thus the Prophet encourages their confidence,
inasmuch as God had already in part dealt in a glorious manner with
them. He then takes an argument from what had been commenced, that the
Jews might hope to the end, and fully expect the completion of their
deliverance. “The Lord,” as it is said elsewhere, “will not forsake the
work of his own hands.” (<span id="iii.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>.) So the Prophet says now, *After the
glory*, that is, “since God has once shone upon you in no common manner,
ought you not to entertain hope; for he intended not to disappoint you
of a full return to your country, but to fulfill what he had promised by
his Prophets?”

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p9"></span>As God had spoken of the restoration of
his Church, and also of its perpetual condition, the Prophet here
indirectly reproves the ingratitude of those who were not convinced that
God would be faithful to the end, by seeing performed the commencement
of his work. For as God had included both the return of his people and
their continued preservation, so also his people ought to have included
both favors: “The Lord, who has already begun to restore his people,
will defend to the end those whom he has gathered, until their full and
perfect redemption will be secured.” As then the Jews did not look for
the end, though God led them as it were by the hand to the land of hope,
the Prophet says to them, *After the glory*

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p10"></span>We may farther observe, that the glory
mentioned here was not as yet fully conspicuous; it had begun, so to
speak, to glimmer, but it did not shine forth in full splendor until
Christ came. It is then the same as though the Prophet had said, “God
has already emitted some sparks of his glory, it will increase until it
attains a perfect brightness. The Lord in the meantime will cause, not
only that the nations may restrain themselves from doing and wrong, but
also that they may become a prey to you”.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p16"></span>The reason for the order follows,
*Whosoever touches you, touches the apple of his own eye*, or, of his
eye; for the pronoun may be applied to any one of the heathen nations as
well as to God himself; and the greater part of interpreters prefer
taking it as referring to any one of the nations. *Whosoever touches you
touches the apple of his own eye*; we say in French, *Ils se donnent en
l’oeil*; that is, “Whosoever will assail my people will strike out his
own eyes; for whatever your enemies may devise against you, shall fall
on their own heads”. It will be the same as though one by his own sword
should pierce his own heart. When therefore the nations shall consider
you to be in their poser, the Lord shall cause that they shall pierce
their own eyes, or wound their own breasts, for the import is the same.
*Whosoever* then *touches you, touches the apple of his own eye*; there
is no reason why you should fear, for however powerful your enemies may
be, yet their fury shall not be allowed to rage against you; for God
shall cause them to kill themselves by their own swords, or to pull out
their eyes by their own fingers. This is the meaning, if we understand
the passage of the enemies of the Church.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p17"></span>But it may also be suitably applied to
God: *Whosoever touches you, touches the apple of his eye*; and to this
view I certainly am more inclined; for this idea once occurs in
Scripture,

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p18"></span>“He will protect us as the apple of
his eye.” (<span id="iii.iii.vii-p18.1"></span>[Ps
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iii.vii-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p19"></span>As then the Holy Spirit has elsewhere
used this similitude, so I am disposed to regard this passage as
intimating, that the love of God towards the faithful is so tender that
when they are hurt he burns with so much displeasure, as though one
attempted to pierce his eyes. For God cannot otherwise set forth how
much and how ardently he loves us, and how careful he is of our
salvation, than by comparing us to the apple of his eye. There is
nothing, as we know, more delicate, or more tender, then this is in the
body of man; for were one to bite my finger, or prick my arm or my legs,
or even severely to would me, I should feel no such pain as by having my
eye or the pupil of my eye injured. God then by this solemn message
declares, that the Church is to him like the apple of his eye, so that
he can by no means bear it to be hurt or touched. It afterwards follows:
—

<span id="iii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p2"></span>**9.** For, behold, I will shake mine
hand upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants: and ye
shall know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Quia ecce ego agitans
(*vel***,** agito) manum meam super eos; et erunt praeda servis suis; et
scietis quod Iehova exercituum miserit me.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p6"></span>Christ continues to relate the
commands of the Father: for he speaks in his person, when he says,
*Behold, I shake my hand over them*, that is, enemies; *and they shall
be a prey to their own servants*. He means, that however numerous and
strong the enemies would be who would seek to injure the Jews, they
would yet be safe; for they would be protected by the hand of God, and
not only so, but that whatever their enemies would attempt to do would
be in vain, for the Lord would degrade them, and render them a prey to
the Jews themselves: for by *servants*  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) he doubtless means the Jews, who, for a
time, had been oppressed by the tyranny of their enemies.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p8"></span>It is certain that this prophecy was
not fulfilled at the time when the Jews thought that they were in a
flourishing state, and enjoying prosperity; for their condition was even
then very wretched and degrading. For whence had they their kings?
Certainly not from the tribe of Judah; and we all know how tyrannically
they were governed, and also that the kingdom was filled with many
abominable sins and cruelties. They were become parricides almost all;
and whosoever will read their history will find, that brethren were
oppressed by brethren, and that even parents were cruelly and wickedly
treated. In short, not to say of other things, nothing could have been
more abominable than the family of Herod. We cannot then apply this
prophecy to that time which intervened between the return from the
Babylonian exile, and the coming of Christ. It is then only under the
kingdom of Christ that God accomplished what is here said, — that
enemies became a prey to his spiritual people, that is, when they were
subdued and brought under the yoke of Christ, for as we have said
elsewhere, the government of the Church is vested in its Head. Hence
where Christ shines, there the Church, which is his body, is said to
reign; for Christ’s will is, that he should have nothing apart from his
members.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p9"></span>We now see the intention of the
Prophet: he wished to dispel the fear of the Jews, that they might not
hesitate to return to their country; for not only a way was opened for
them, but confirmed also and certain was their happiness under God’s
protection; as he had not in vain begun a glorious work, but fully
purposed to carry it on to the end.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p10"></span>He says, *Behold, I shake my hand*.
The shaking of the hand shows that God has no need of many forces to put
to flight his enemies, nor of a large expedition; for as soon as he
raises up his hand, he lays them all prostrate. In short, the Prophet
reminds us, that God has hands which extend far, for he can by mere
shaking conquer all enemies, however distant they may be. And then we
see that the facility with which God executes his purpose was mentioned,
in order that the Jews might feel assured, that as soon as it would
please God to put forth his strength, he would have no difficulty; for
by the single motion of his finger he could destroy all the enemies who
might rise up against them.

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *And ye shall
know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me*. To consider this as an address
to the faithful, may not seem suitable; for faith is connected with
knowledge, as we are taught by John,

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p12"></span>“We know that we are the children of
God,” (<span id="iii.iii.viii-p12.1"></span>[1Jo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iii.viii-p12.1"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p13"></span>for the certainty which rests on
God’s word exceeds all knowledge. Why then does the Prophet say, And we
shall know that Jehovah has sent me? for the faithful ought to have been
previously certain respecting the mission of Christ; otherwise an
approach to God was closed up; for an access, we know, to his favor is
opened by faith. The Jews must have then been assured from the beginning
respecting the mission of Christ. But it is to be observed, that there
are two kinds of knowledge, — the knowledge of faith, and what they call
experimental knowledge. The knowledge of faith is that by which the
godly feel assured that God is true — that what he has promised is
indubitable; and this knowledge at the same time penetrates beyond the
world, and goes far above the heavens, that it may know hidden things;
for our salvation is concealed; things seen, says the Apostle, are not
hoped for. (<span id="iii.iii.viii-p13.1"></span>[Ro
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iii.viii-p13.1"></span>.) It is then no wonder that the Prophet
says, that the faithful shall then know that Christ has been sent by the
Father, that is, by actual experience, or in reality: *Ye shall* then
*know that Jehovah has sent me*. He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010)<span id="iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p2"></span>**10.** Sing and rejoice, O daughter of
Zion: for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the
Lord.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p3"></span>**10.** Exulta et laetare filia
Sion**,** quia ecce ego venio**,** et habitabo in medio tui**,** dicit
Iehova.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p6"></span>He continues the same subject. The
meaning is, that God begins nothing which he does not determine to bring
to its end. Since then he had already begun to gather his people, that
they might dwell in the Holy Land, it was a work in progress, at length
to be completed; for the Lord’s will was not to be a half Redeemer. This
is the purport of what the Prophet says.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p7"></span>But he now exhorts Sion to *rejoice*, as
though the happiness which he predicts was already enjoyed. This mode of
speaking, as we have seen elsewhere, is common among the Prophets. When
they intended to animate God’s servants to a greater confidence, they
brought them as it were into the midst of what was promised, and
dictated a song of thanksgiving. We are not wont to congratulate
ourselves before the time. When, therefore, the Prophets bade the Church
to sing to God and to give thanks, they thus confirmed the promises made
to them; as though the Prophet had said, that as yet indeed the
brightness and glory of God was in a great measure laid, but that the
faithful were beyond the reach of danger, and that therefore they could
boldly join in a song of thanks to God, as though they were already
enjoying full redemption; for the Lord will perfect what he begins.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p8"></span>*Rejoice* then *and exult, thou daughter
of Sion*, — Why? *For I come*. God had already come; but here he
expresses the progress of his favor, by declaring that he would come; as
though he had said, “I have already given you obscure tokens of my
presence; but you shall find another coming which will be much more
effectual to confirm your faith.” Though then God had already appeared
to the Jews, yet he says that he would come, that is, when Christ would
come forth, in whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and in
whom God’s perfect glory and majesty shines forth. And hence also does
it more evidently appear what I have already said, that this address
cannot be applied without perversion to the Prophet, nor be suitably
applied to the person of the Father. It then follows that Christ speaks
here: but he does not speak as a man or an angel; he speaks as God the
Redeemer. We hence see that the name Jehovah is appropriated to Christ,
and that there is no difference between the Father and the Son as to
essence, but that they are only to be distinguished as to their persons.
Whenever then Christ announces his own divinity, he takes the name
Jehovah; but he also shows, that there is something peculiar and
distinct belonging to him as the messenger of the Father. For this
reason, and in this respect, he is inferior to the Father; that is,
because he is sent as a messenger, and executes what has been entrusted
to him. These things do not militate the one against the other, as many
unlearned and turbulent men think, who entangle themselves in many vain
imaginations, or rather in mere ravings, and say, “How can it be, that
there is one eternal God, and yet that Christ, who is distinct from the
Father, and is called his angel, is a true God?” So they imagine that
the origin of divinity is God the Father, as though the one true God had
begotten, and thus produced another God from himself, as by propagation.
But these are diabolical figments, by which the unity of the Divine
essence is destroyed. Let us then bear in mind what the Prophet teaches
here clearly and plainly, — that Christ is Jehovah, the only true God,
and yet that he is sent by God as a Mediator.

<span id="iii.iii.ix-p9"></span>*Behold I come, he says, and I will
dwell in the midst of thee*. God dwelt then among the Jews, for the
building of the temple had been begun, and sacrifices had been already
offered; but this dwelling was typical only. It hence follows, that some
new kind of presence is here pointed out, when God was to reveal himself
to his people, not under ceremonial figures and symbols, but by
dwelling, at the fullness of time, substantially among them; for Christ
is the temple of the Godhead, and so perfectly unites us to God the
Father, that we are one with him. And it ought further to be carefully
borne in mind, that the Prophet does here also make a distinction
between the ancient types of the law and the reality, which was at
length exhibited in Christ; for there is no need now of shadows, when we
enjoy the reality, and possess the completion of all those things which
God only shadowed forth under the law.

<span id="iii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.iii.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou sees
that we continually tremble in the midst of dangers, and often stumble
and fall through the infirmity of our flesh, — O grant, that we may
learn so to rely on the strength and help which thou promisest to us,
that we may not hesitate to pass through all kinds of dangers, and
boldly and firmly to fight under thy banner; and may we be thus gathered
more and more into the unity of thy Church, until having, finished all
our troubles and contests, we shall at length reach that blessed and
celestial rest which has been obtained for us by the blood of thine
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirty-ninth

<span id="iii.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p2"></span>**11.** And many nations shall be
joined to the LORD in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell
in the midst of thee, and thou shalt know that the LORD of hosts hath
sent me unto thee.

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p3"></span>**11.** Et adjungent se gentes
multae**,** (*vel***,** magnae) ad Iehovam in die illa; et erunt illi in
populum**,** et habitabo in medio tui; et scies quod Iehova exercituum
miserit me ad te.

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet describes here the
voluntary surrender of the nations, who would so join themselves to the
Church of God, as to disown their own name and to count themselves Jews:
and this is what the Prophet borrowed from those who had predicted the
same thing; but he confirms their testimony, that the Jews might know
that the propagation of the Church had not been promised to them in vain
by so many witnesses. That what is said here refers to the calling of
the nations who would willingly surrender themselves to God, is quite
evident; for it is said that they *would be a people to God*. This could
not be, except the nations surrendered their own name, so as to become
one body with the Jews. He then repeats what he had said, that God would
dwell in the midst of Judea. Of this dwelling something was said
yesterday; for as they had already begun to offer sacrifices in the
temple, it follows that God was already dwelling among them. We must
then necessarily come to another kind of dwelling, even that which God,
who had before testified by many proofs that he was nigh the Jews, had
at length accomplished through Christ; for Christ is really Emmanuel,
and in him God is present with us in the fullness of his power, justice,
goodness, and glory.

<span id="iii.iii.xii-p7"></span>He at last adds, *Thou shalt know that
Jehovah of hosts has sent me to thee*. Something has also been said on
this sentence: the Prophet means, that it would be evident by what would
really take place, that these things had not been in vain foretold, as
the prophecy would be openly fulfilled before the eyes of all. Then
shalt thou know, not by the assurance of faith, which is grounded on the
word, but by actual experience. But he expresses more than before, for
he says, “Thou shalt know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me to thee.”
The particle <span id="iii.iii.xii-p7.1"></span>אליך, *alik*, “to thee,”
is not superfluous; for he said a little while before, that he was sent
to the nations. As he now says, that he would be the guardian of the
chosen people, he also declares that his mission was to them; and he
gives to God the name of Jehovah of hosts, that the Jews might feel
assured that there would be no difficulty sufficient to hinder or delay
the word of God, as he possessed supreme power, so that he could easily
execute whatever he had decreed. I will not repeat now what I said
yesterday of Christ; but we ought nevertheless to remember this, that he
who declares that he was sent, is often called Jehovah. It hence appears
that one and the same divine eternal essence is in more persons than
one. Let us go on -

<span id="iii.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p2"></span>**12.** And the LORD shall inherit
Judah his portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p3"></span>**12.** Et haereditario accipiet
Iehova Iehudah partem suam in terra sancta; et eliget adhuc Ierusalem.

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms the former
doctrine, but removes offenses, which might have occurred to the Jews
and prevented them from believing this prophecy: for they had been for a
time rejected, so that there was no difference between them and other
nations. The land of Canaan had been given them as a pledge of their
heirship; but they had been thence expelled, and there had been no
temple, no public worship, no kingdom. The Jews then might have
concluded from all these reasons, that they were rejected by God. Hence
the Prophet here promises that they were to be restored again to their
former state and to their own place. *Jehovah*, he says, *will take
Judah as his hereditary portion*; that is, God will really show that he
has not forgotten the election by which he had separated the Jews for
himself; for he intended them to be to him a peculiar people. They were
now mixed with the nations; their dispersion seemed an evidence of
repudiation; but it was to be at length manifest that God was mindful of
that adoption, by which he once purposed to gather the Jews to himself,
that their condition might be different from that of other nations. When
therefore he says, that Judah would be to God for an heritage or for an
hereditary portion, he brings forward nothing new, but only reminds them
that the covenant by which God chose Judah as his people would not be
void, for it would be made evident in its time.

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p7"></span>And the following clause is to the
same purpose, *And he will again choose Jerusalem*; for it was not then
for the first time that Jerusalem became the city of God when
restoration took place, but the election, which existed before, was now
in a manner renewed conspicuously in the sight of men. It is then the
same as though the Prophet had said, “The course of God’s favor has
indeed been interrupted, yet he will again show that you have not been
in vain chosen as his people, and that Jerusalem, which was his
sanctuary, has not been chosen without purpose.” The renovation of the
Church, then, is what the Prophet means by these words.

<span id="iii.iii.xiii-p8"></span>What we have said elsewhere ought at
the same time to be noticed, that the word *choose* is not to be taken
here in its strict sense; for God does not repeatedly choose those whom
he regards as his Church. God’s election is one single act, for it is
eternal and immutable. But as Jerusalem had been apparently rejected,
the word choose imports here that God would make it evident, that the
first elections had ever been unchangeable, however hidden it may have
been to the eyes of men. He then adds —

<span id="iii.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p2"></span>**13.** Be silent, O all flesh, before
the LORD: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p3"></span>**13.** Sile (vel**,** sileat) omnis
caro a facie Iehovae; quia excitatus est ex habitaculo sanctitatis suae
(hoc est**,** ex loco suo sancto.)

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p6"></span>Here is a sealing of the whole
prophecy. The Prophet highly extols the power of God, that the Jews
might not still doubt or fear as with regard to things uncertain. He
says that whatever he had hitherto declared was indubitable; for God
would put forth his power to succor his Church and to remove whatever
hindrance there might be. We have seen similar expressions elsewhere,
that is, in the second chapter of Habakkuk and in the first of
Zephaniah; (<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>[Hab
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#001)<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>
<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p6.2"></span>[Zep
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p6.2"></span>) and these Prophets had nearly the same
object in view; for Habakkuk, after having spoken of the restoration of
the people, thus concludes, — that God was coming forth to bid silence
to all nations, that no one might dare to oppose when it was his will to
redeem his Church. So also Zephaniah, after having, described the
slaughter of God’s enemies, when God ordered sacrifices to be made to
him as it were from the whole world, uses the same mode of expression,
as though he had said, that there would be nothing to resist the power
of God. It is the same here, *Silent*, he says, *let all flesh be before
Jehovah*. It is, in short, the shout of triumph, by which Zechariah
exults over all the enemies of the Church, and shows that they would
rage in vain, as they could effect nothing, however clamorous they might
be.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p7"></span>By silence we are to understand, as
elsewhere observed, submission. The ungodly are not indeed silent before
God, so as willingly to obey his word, or reverently to receive what he
may bid or command, or humbly to submit under his powerful hand; for
these things are done only by the faithful. Silence, then, is what
especially belongs to the elect and the faithful; for they willingly
close their mouth to hear God speaking. But the ungodly are also said to
be silent, when God restrains their madness: and how much soever they
may inwardly murmur and rage, they yet cannot openly resist; so that he
completes his work, and they are at length made ashamed of the swelling,
words they have vomited forth, when they pass off in smoke. This is the
sense in which the Prophet says now, *silent be all flesh*. He means, in
short, by these words, That when God shall go forth to deliver his
Church, he will be terrible; so that all who had before furiously
assailed his chosen people, shall be constrained to tremble.

<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p8"></span>With regard to *the habitation of
holiness*, I explain it of the temple rather than of heaven. I indeed
allow that heaven is often thus called in Scripture: and it is called
the palace or temple of God, for we cannot think as we ought of God’s
infinite glory, except we are carried above the world. This is the
reason why God says that he dwells in heaven. But as the Church is
spoken of here, Zechariah, I doubt not, means the temple. It is indeed
certain that there was no temple when God began to rise as one awakened
from sleep, to restore his people: but as the faithful are said in <span
id="iii.iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>[Psalm
102](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>
to pity the dust of Sion, because the place continued sacred even in its
degradation and ruin; so also in this passage Zechariah says, that God
was roused — Whence? *from Sion*, from that despised place, exposed to
the derision of the ungodly: yet there God continued to dwell, that he
might build again the temple, where his name was to be invoked until
Christ appeared. We now see that the temple or Sion is intended rather
than heaven, when all circumstances are duly weighed. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc30005.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p16"></span> Literally it is, “villages shall
Jerusalem inhabit;” Jerusalem is to be taken, as “land” in <span
id="iii.iii.i-p16.1"></span>[Zec
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iii.i-p16.1"></span>, for its inhabitants. \[<span
id="iii.iii.i-p16.2"></span>פרזות\] were villages, open, unwalled, not
fortified. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc30005.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.iii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.v-p11"></span> Provided we adopt \[<span
id="iii.iii.v-p11.1"></span>ב\], countenanced by several MSS., and the
Syriac, instead of \[<span id="iii.iii.v-p11.2"></span>כ\] in the
received text, that is before the number “four,” this explanation is the
most satisfactory. But if we take the received text, countenanced by a
greater number of MSS., there will be another meaning to the sentence.
*Henderson’s* version is —

<span id="iii.iii.v-p12"></span>For as the four winds of heaven  
Have I spread you abroad, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p13"></span>But its connection with the foregoing he
does not clearly print. The view taken by *Drusius*, followed by
*Grotius* and *Marckius*, seems most satisfactory. They take the verb
\[<span id="iii.iii.v-p13.1"></span>פרש\] in the sense of expanding,
enlarging, setting at liberty, and that the reference is to the previous
liberty granted to the Jews; and thus the connection with the foregoing
line is obvious and natural —

<span id="iii.iii.v-p14"></span>He! He!  
Flee now from the land of the north, saith Jehovah;  
For as the four winds of heaven  
Have I expounded you, (or set you free,) saith Jehovah.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p15"></span>They had been allowed liberty to go to
any part of the world, which is signified by the four winds. The next
verse is —

<span id="iii.iii.v-p16"></span>He! Sion, escape,  
Thou who dwellest with the daughter of Babylon.

<span id="iii.iii.v-p17"></span>The two nations are compared to two
women, dwelling one with another. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc30005.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p11"></span> It would be almost endless to give
the expositions which have been offered on the phrase. “After the
glory,” \[<span id="iii.iii.vii-p11.1"></span>אחר כבוד\]. *Henderson*
very justly rejects what has been proposed by *Newcome*, *Blayney*, and
*Gesenius*, and other German divines, who, following *Castalio* and
*Cocceius*, render the line — After glory (*i.e.* to obtain glory) hath
he sent me.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p12"></span>Some of the fathers, such as
*Eusebius*, *Jerome*, *Cyril*, and *Theodoret*, viewed the “glory” here
as that which the Son enjoyed with the Father before he became
incarnate; but this view in no degree comports with the context, though
most divines, ancient and modern, consider that Christ is the Jehovah of
hosts in this area. The paraphrase of the Targum is the following —
“After the glory which he has said he would bring to you;” and this is
substantially the meaning given by *Calvin*, and adopted by *Henderson*.
Without altering the general meaning, another construction may be given
—

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p13"></span>*For thus saith Jehovah of hosts,  
“Another glory!”* — *he has sent me to the nations,  
Who have plundered you;  
For he who touched you  
Touched the apple of his eye.*

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p14"></span>“Another glory” is an allusion to the
glory mentioned in verse 5: he would not only be a glory in the midst of
them, but would confer on them another glory by destroying their
enemies.

<span id="iii.iii.vii-p15"></span>*Blayney* seemed “certain” that the
*eye* refers to every enemy of the Jews, and not to God; but the greater
certainty seems to be on the other side; it is the most natural and
obvious construction of the passage. See <span
id="iii.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>[De
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>. Not only *Calvin* give the preference to
this view, but also *Grotius*, *Marckius*, and *Henderson*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc30005.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.viii-p7"></span> \[<span
id="iii.iii.viii-p7.1"></span>עבדיהם\], “their slaves,” *Henderson*. The
Jews had been held in a state of slavery by the nations. *Newcome*
considers that the nations who oppressed the Jews are meant, that they
were to be reduced by other nations to the condition of slaves, as the
Babylonians were to the Meds and Persians, and he refers to <span
id="iii.iii.viii-p7.2"></span>[Hag
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iii.viii-p7.2"></span>. But as the Jews are especially addressed
in the next line, it is obvious to consider them as here intended. And
*Grotius* refer the *literal* fulfillment of what is here said to the
time of the Maccabees. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc30006)
