[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc30013)  [Next](cc30015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p1"></span>Chapter 11

<span id="iii.xii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-seventh

<span id="iii.xii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that
the fire may devour thy cedars.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Aperi**,** Libane**,** protas
tuas**,** et vorabit ignis cedros tuas:

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p4"></span>**2.** Howl, fir tree; for the cedar is
fallen; because the mighty are spoiled: howl, O ye oaks of Bashan; for
the forest of the vintage is come down.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Ulula abies**,** quia cecidit
cedrus**,** quia fortes (*vel***,** praestantes) vastati sunt; ululate
quercus Bashan**,** quia descendit (*hoc est***,** excisa est**,**
*vel***,** prostrate) sylva munita.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p6"></span>**3.** *There is* a voice of the howling
of the shepherds; for their glory is spoiled: a voice of the roaring of
young lions; for the pride of Jordan is spoiled.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p7"></span>**3.** Vox ululatus pastorum**,** quia
vastata est praestantia eorum (*vel***,** fortitudo;) vox rugitus
leonum**,** quia vastata est superbia Iordanis.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p9"></span><span id="iii.xii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p10"></span>This Chapter contains severe
threatenings, by which God designed in time to warn the Jews, that if
there was any hope of repentance, they might be restored by fear to the
right way, and that others, the wicked and the reprobate, might be
rendered inexcusable, and also that the faithful might fortify
themselves against the strong temptation to despond on seeing so
dreadful a calamity awaiting that nation.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p11"></span>This prophecy does not indeed seem
consistent with the preceding prophecies; for the Prophet has been
hitherto not only encouraging the people to entertain hope, but has also
declared that their condition would be so happy that nothing would be
wanting to render them really blessed: but now he denounces ruin, and
begins with reprobation; for he says, that God had been long the
shepherd of that nation, but that now he renounced all care of them; for
being wearied he would no longer bear with that perverse wickedness,
which he had found in them all. These things seem to be inconsistent:
but we may observe, that it was needful in the first place to set before
the Jews the benefits of God, that they might with more alacrity proceed
with the work of building the temple, and know that their labor would
not be in vain; and now it was necessary to change the strain, lest
hypocrites, vainly confiding in these promises, should become hardened,
as it is commonly the case; and also, lest the faithful should not
entertain due fear, and thus go heedlessly before God; for nothing is
more ruinous than security, inasmuch as when a license is taken to sin,
God’s judgment impends over us. We hence see how useful and reasonable
was this warnings of the Prophet, as he made the Jews to understand,
that God would not be propitious to his people without punishing their
wickedness and obstinacy.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p12"></span>In order to render his prophecy
impressive, Zechariah addresses *Libanon*; as though he was God’s
herald, he bids it to open its gates, for the whole wood was now given
up to the fire. Had he spoken without a figure, his denunciation would
not have had so much force: he therefore denounces near ruin on Lebanon
and on other places. Almost all think that by Lebanon is to be
understood the temple, because it was built with timber from that
mountain; but this view seems to me frigid, though it is approved by the
common consent of interpreters. For why should we think the temple to be
metaphorically called Lebanon rather than Bashan? And they think so such
thing of Bashan, though there is equally the same reason. I therefore
regard it simply as the Mount Lebanon; and I shall merely refer to what
Joseph us declares, that the temple was opened before the city was
destroyed by Titus. But though that history may be true, and it seems to
me probable, it does not hence follow that this prophecy was then
fulfilled, according to what is said of Rabbi Jonathan, who then
exclaimed, “Lo! the prophecy of Zechariah; for he foretold that the
temple would be burnt, and that the gates would be previously opened.”
These things seem plausible, and at the first view gain our approbation.
But I think that we must understand something more solid, and less
refined: for I doubt not but that the Prophet denounces complete ruin on
Mount Lebanon, and on Bashan and other places.  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md)

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p14"></span>But why does he bid Lebanon to open its
gates? The reason is given, for shortly after he calls it a fortified
forest, which was yet without walls and gates. Lebanon, we know, was
nigh to Jerusalem, though far enough to be free from any hostile attack.
As then the place was by nature sufficiently safe from being assailed,
the Prophet speaks, as though Lebanon was surrounded by fortresses; for
it was not exposed to the attacks of enemies. The meaning is, — that
though on account of its situation the Jews thought that Lebanon was not
exposed to any evils, yet the wantonness of enemies would lead them even
there. We have already said why the Prophet bids Lebanon to open its
gates, even because he puts on the character of a herald, who threatens
and declares, that God’s extreme vengeance was already nigh at hand.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p15"></span><span id="iii.xii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p16"></span>He then adds, *Howl thou, fir-tree, for
the cedar has fallen*. No doubt the Prophet by naming Lebanon,
mentioning a part for the whole, meant the whole of Judea: and it
appears evident from the context that the most remarkable places are
here mentioned; but yet the Prophet’s design was to show, that God would
punish the whole people, so as not to spare Jerusalem or any other
place. And then by the fir-trees and cedars he meant whatever then
excelled in Judea or in other places; and for this reason he compares
them to the cedars of Lebanon, as though he had said, “There is no
reason for the fir-trees to regard themselves as beyond the reach of
danger; for if he spares not the cedars what will become of the
fir-trees, which possess no such stateliness and grandeur?”

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p17"></span>We now then perceive the Prophet’s
meaning as to the trees: but he includes, as I have said, under one
kind, whatever was valuable in Judea; and this we learn more clearly
from what follows: for he adds, *Fallen have*, or laid waste have been,
*the strong*  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md) Some read in the
neuter gender, “Laid waste have been splendid things;” but I am inclined
to regard persons as intended. The Prophet then now simply declares,
that the vengeance of God was nigh all the great ones, whom dignity
sheltered, so that they thought themselves in no danger. And for the
same purpose he adds, *Howl, ye oaks of Bashan*. He joins, as we see,
Bashan to Lebanon; there is then no reason for allegorising only one of
the words, when they are both connected. And he says, *For fallen has
the fortified forest*. Either this may be applied to Lebanon, or the
Prophet may be viewed as saying in general, that there was no place so
difficult of access, which would not be penetrated into, when the Lord
should give liberty to enemies to destroy all things. Though then the
density of trees protected these mountains, yet the Prophet says that
nothing would obstruct God’s vengeance from penetrating into the inmost
recesses of strongholds.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p19"></span><span id="iii.xii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p20"></span>He then adds, *The voice of the howling
of shepherds; for their excellency*, or their courage, is laid waste.
Here he has <span id="iii.xii.ii-p20.1"></span>אדר, *ader*, and before
<span id="iii.xii.ii-p20.2"></span>אדירים, *adirim*, in the masculine
gender. We see then that the Prophet confirms the same thing in other
words, “Howl now,” he says, “shall the shepherds.” He intimates that the
beginning of this dreadful judgment would be with the chief men, as they
were especially the cause of the public ruin. He then says, that the
dignity of the great was now approaching its fall, and hence he bids
them to howl. He does not in these words exhort them to repentance, but
follows the same strain of doctrine. By God’s command he here declares,
that the shepherds who took pride in their power, could not escape the
judgment which they had deserved: and as this is a mode of speaking
usually adopted by the Prophets, I shall no longer dwell on the subject.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p21"></span>He afterwards adds, *The voice of the
roaring of lions*. He no doubt gives here the name of lions, by way of
metaphor, to those who cruelly exercised their power over the people.
But he also alludes to the banks of Jordan, where there were lions, as
it is well known. Since then lions were found along the whole course of
Jordan, as it is evident from many passages, he compares shepherds to
lions, even the governors who had abused their authority by exercising
tyranny over the people: *Fallen* then *has the pride* or the excellency
*of Jordan*. In short, it is now sufficiently evident, that the Prophet
threatens final destruction both to the kingdom of Judah and to the
kingdom of Israel. Both *kingdoms* were indeed then abolished; but I
speak of the countries themselves. The meaning is — that neither Judea
nor the land of the ten tribes would be free from God’s vengeance.
 <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.xii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
11:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p2"></span>**4.** Thus saith the LORD my God; Feed
the flock of the slaughter;

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Sic dicit Iehova**,** Deus
meus**,** Pasce gregem occisionis.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p4"></span>**5.** Whose possessors slay them, and
hold themselves not guilty: and they that sell them say, Blessed *be*
the LORD; for I am rich: and their own shepherds pity them not.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p5"></span>**5.** Qui possident ipsum**,**
occident (*hoc est***,** occidunt) et non peccant; et qui vendit ipsum
(gregem**,** *vel***,** ipsas oves) dicit**,** Benedictus Iehova**,** et
ditatus sum; et qui pascit eas**,** non parcit illis.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p6"></span>**6.** For I will no more pity the
inhabitants of the land, saith the LORD: but, lo, I will deliver the men
every one into his neighbour’s hand, and into the hand of his king: and
they shall smite the land, and out of their hand I will not deliver
*them*

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p7"></span>**6.** Quia (*vel***,** certe) non
parcam amplius incolis terrae**,** dicit Iehova; et ecce ego tradam
(*vel***,** trado**,** *vel***,** venire faciens) hominem quemque in
manum proximi sui**,** et in manum Regis sui; et conterent terram**,**
et non eripiam e manu eorum.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iii.xii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p10"></span>Here is given a reason why God
purposed to deal so severely with his people — even because their
obstinacy deserved no pardon. As then in the beginning of the chapter
the Prophet threatened ruin to the Jews, so now he reminds them that
their punishment was nigh, and that they could not be more gently
treated, because their wickedness was wholly incurable. We now perceive
the design of the Prophet; but he charges the Jews especially with
ingratitude, because they responded so basely and shamefully to the
singular benefits of God.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p11"></span>He says first, that he was bidden to
*feed the flock* destined to the *slaughter*  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) Now the Prophet does not here relate
simply what command he had received from God, but teaches us in general
that God had ever performed the office of a good and faithful shepherd
towards the Jews. The Prophet then assumes the character of all the
shepherds, as though he had said, “There is no reason why this people
should plead their ignorance, or attempt to disguise their own fault by
other names and various pretences; for God has ever offered them a
shepherd, and sent also ministers to guide and rule them: it is not to
be ascribed to God that this people has not enjoyed prosperity and
happiness.” There is now no need of spending much labor about this
verse, as interpreters have done who confine what is here said to Christ
alone, as one who had received this office from the Father; for we shall
see from the passage itself that the Prophet’s words are by them
forcibly wrested from their meaning.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p13"></span>Let it then be borne in mind, that his
special object is to show — that God had ever been ready to rule this
people, so that he could not have been accused by them of not having
done what could have been possibly looked for or expected from a good
shepherd. If any one objects and says, that this could have been said in
other words, the plain answer is — that God’s perpetual care in his
government had been fully shown; for he had not only himself performed
the duties and office of a shepherd, but had also at all times set over
them ministers, who performed faithfully their work. Since God then had
so constantly and sedulously watched over the safety of the people, we
see that their ingratitude was wholly proved. And by calling it *the
flock of slaughter*, a reference is made to the time of the Prophet; for
the Jews were then as though they had been snatched from the jaws of
wolves, having been delivered from exile. They were then as dead sheep,
whom the Lord had rescued; and we also know to how many troubles and
dangers they had been constantly exposed. And hence appeared more
clearly the goodness of God; for he was pleased nevertheless to exercise
care over his flock. Then the Prophet enlarges here on God’s favor,
because he had not despised his sheep though given up to the slaughter.
The words might indeed be extended farther, as though the Prophet
referred to what had already taken place, and they might thus be applied
to many ages; but it seems to me more probable, that he mentions here
what belonged to that age. Zechariah then teaches us why God was
constrained to adopt extreme severity, even because he had tried all
things that might have healed the people, and yet lost all his labor:
when their wickedness became wholly incurable, despair as it were at
length constrained God to exercise the severity mentioned here. This is,
as I think, the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p14"></span><span id="iii.xii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p15"></span>He afterwards adds another
circumstance, which shows still further the wonderful and ineffable
goodness of God, — that he had been a shepherd of a flock, which had not
only been harassed by wolves and robbers, but also by its own shepherds.
In short, the import of the whole is, — that though wolves and robbers
had ranged with great barbarity among the people, yet God had always
been their shepherd.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p16"></span>He then enlarges on the subject and
says, that they who *possessed them* had *killed* them, so that they
spared not. By these words the Prophet shows that the safety of the
people had been deemed as nothing by their very leaders: they could not
then by any excellence of their own have induced God to show so much
kindness to them. But these words ought to be attentively noticed, —
that when the flock was slain, the executioners or butchers themselves
had no mercy, for they thought it was a spoil justly due to them. We see
how God extols here his own goodness; for he had condescended to defend
and rule and feed that people, who were not only despised in the world,
but counted as nothing, and the slaughtering of them deemed a lawful
prey: they *sin not*,  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) he says,
that is, they are not conscious of exercising any cruelty, — Why?
because they thought that they justly enriched themselves, while they
were plundering so wretched a flock. The more base, then, and
inexcusable was the ingratitude of the people, when after having been so
kindly received and so gently nourished by God, they yet rejected all
his favors and suffered not themselves to be governed by his hand. And
it is material to observe here, that these contrasts tend greatly to
exaggerate the sins of men, and ought to be considered, that God’s
severity may not be blamed; for we know that many complain when God
executes his judgments: they would measure all punishments by their own
ideas, and subject God to their own will. In order therefore to check
such complaints, the Prophet says, that though the flock was most
contemptible, it had not yet been despised by God, but that he undertook
the care of it.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p18"></span>The shepherds and masters said,
*Blessed be Jehovah*. We are wont to give thanks to God when we really
believe that the blessings we have come from him. The robber who kills
an innocent man will not say, “Blessed be God;” for he on the contrary
tries to extinguish every remembrance of God, because he has wounded his
own conscience. The same may be also said of thieves. Hypocrites often
profess the name of God; and they whose trade is cheating ever make a
speech of this kind, “By God’s grace I have gained so much this year;”
that is, after having acquired the property of others by deceit,
cheating, and plunder, they give thanks to God! and at the same time
they flatter themselves by self-deception, as though all were a lawful
prey; for, forsooth! they are not proved guilty before a human tribunal.
Now the Prophet here adopts this common mode of speaking, by which men,
not conscious of doing wrong, usually testify that their gain is just
and lawful.

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p19"></span><span id="iii.xii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p20"></span>He then adds, *And he who fed then has
not spared* them. The meaning is, that the people, according to the
opinions commonly entertained, were not worthy of mercy and kindness.
Hence, as I have said, the wonderful goodness of God shines forth more
clearly; for he condescended to take the care of a flock that was wholly
despised.  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) Then he says, *I will
not spare the inhabitants of the land; behold I will deliver*, *etc*. To
some it appears that there is here a reason given; for the Jews would
have never been thus stripped, had not God been angry with them; as
though he had said, that God’s vengeance was just, inasmuch as they were
thus exposed to such atrocious wrongs. But according to my judgment God
simply confirms what we have stated, — that his future vengeance on the
Jews would be most just, because he had in feeding them so carefully
labored wholly in vain. For though the Prophet has not as yet expressed
what we shall hereafter see respecting their ingratitude, he yet does
not break off his discourse without reason, for indignation has ever
some warmth in it; he then in the middle of his argument exclaims here,
*I will not spare*; for God had spared the Jews, when yet all men
exercised cruelty towards them with impunity; and when they were
contemptible in the sight of all, he still had regarded their safety. As
then they had been so ungrateful for so many acts of kindness, ought not
God to have been angry with them? This is then the reason why the
Prophet introduces here in God’s name this threatening, *Surely I will
not spare them*; that is, “I have hitherto deferred my vengeance, and
have surpassed all men in kindness and mercy; but I have misplaced my
goodness, and now there is no reason why I should longer suspend my
judgment.” *I will spare then no longer the inhabitants of this land*

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p22"></span>*I will give*, or deliver, he says,
*every man into the hand of his friend*; as though he had said, “They
are no longer sheep, for they will not bear to be ruled by my hand,
though they have found me to be the best of shepherds. They shall now
tear and devour one another; and thus a horrible dispersion will
follow.” Now the Jews ought to have dreaded nothing so much, as to be
given up to destroy themselves by mutual slaughter, and thus to rage
cruelly against one another and to perish without any external enemy:
but yet God declares that this would be the case, and for this reason,
because he could not succeed with them, though willing to feed them as
his sheep and ready to perform the office of shepherd in ruling them.
 <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md)

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p24"></span>He concludes by saying, *They shall
smite the land, and I will not deliver from their hand*. He intimates in
the last place that ruin without any remedy was nigh; for he alone was
the only deliverer of the people; but now he testifies that their safety
would not be the object of his care; for should he see them perishing a
hundred times, he would not be moved with pity, nor turn to bring them
help, inasmuch as they had precluded all compassion. It now follows —

<span id="iii.xii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p2"></span>**7.** And I will feed the flock of
slaughter, *even* you, O poor of the flock. And I took unto me two
staves; the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands; and I fed
the flock.

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p3"></span>**7.** Et pavi gregem occisionis**,**
nempe (*vel***,** ideoque) pauperes gregis: et sumpsi mihi duas
virgas**,** unam vocavi Elegantiam (*vel***,** Pulchritudinem;) et
alteram vocavi Funiculos (*alii vertunt***,** Perditores; *de hac* *voce
dicemus*;) et pavi gregem.

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p6"></span>He resumes here the thread of the
discourse, which he had shortly before broken off; for he sets forth
what had not yet been sufficiently expressed — that the ingratitude of
the people, with which obstinacy was especially united, deserved entire
ruin, and that now there was no hope of pardon; for the paternal care of
God had been most basely and most shamefully repudiated, as well as the
kind favor which he had manifested to the people.

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p7"></span>God then complains that he *fed the
flock*. Some apply this to Zechariah; but, as I have said, God relates
the acts of kindness which he had uniformly showed to the people, until
they became wholly unworthy of his favor. Let us however remember that
the Prophet speaks of the remnant; for he does not here recount the
benefits of God in ancient times, but describes the state of the people
after their return from their exile in Babylon. God seemed before to
have committed this office to Zechariah — to feed them; but as I have
already said, the design of that was no other than to make it evident
that the whole fault was in the people; for they had thrust from them
the kindness of God, and in a manner carried on war frowardly with God,
so as to prevent any access for his favor. There is therefore here an
expostulation in God’s name.

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p8"></span>*I have fed*, he says, *the flock of
slaughter, even the poor of the flock*. Some render <span
id="iii.xii.iv-p8.1"></span>לכן, on account of; but it may be taken in
an explanatory sense: or we may give this rendering — “therefore the
poor,” or, especially the poor. With regard to the meaning, God here
intimates that he had manifested his care for the whole people, for he
had hoped that there were a few sheep yet remaining worthy of having
mercy shown to them. As then some poor sheep might have been found among
the impure flock, God says, that having this hope, he did not deem it
grievous or burdensome to undertake the office of a shepherd in ruling
the people. *I have* then *fed the flock of slaughter*, even for this
reason, he says, because there were some miserable sheep among them: I
was therefore unwilling to forsake them, and preferred to try all means
rather than to cast away even one little sheep, provided a single one
were found in the whole flock.  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md)

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p10"></span>He says that he *took two rods*, that
he *called one* <span id="iii.xii.iv-p10.1"></span>נעם, *nom*, “Beauty,”
and that he called the other <span id="iii.xii.iv-p10.2"></span>חבלים,
*chebelim*, “Cords,” rendered “destroyers” by those who adhere to the
Hebrew points; but as <span id="iii.xii.iv-p10.3"></span>חבל, both in
the singular and plural, has the meaning of a rope or cord, the Prophet,
I have no doubt, means by <span id="iii.xii.iv-p10.4"></span>חבלים,
*chebelim*, ropes or bindings. Grammar, indeed, does not allow this; but
Zechariah did not set down the points, for they were not then in use. I
indeed know with how much care the old scribes contrived the points,
when the language had already ceased to be in common use. They then who
neglect, or wholly reject the points, are certainly void of all judgment
and reason; but yet some discrimination ought to be exercised;  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) for if we read here “destroyers,”
there is no meaning; if we read “cords,” there is no letter changed, but
only two points are altered. As then the subject itself necessarily
demands this meaning, I wonder that interpreters suffer themselves to be
servilely constrained, so as not to regard the design of the Prophet.

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p12"></span>The Prophet then says, that he had
taken two rods, that he might devote himself in a manner not common to
the office of a shepherd. Shepherds were satisfied with one crook; for
by rods he means here the crook used by shepherds. As then every
shepherd carried his own crook, the Prophet says here that he was
furnished with two crooks, or pastoral staffs, because the Lord
surpassed all men in his solicitude in the office of ruling his people.
But the remainder I must defer until tomorrow.

<span id="iii.xii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.v-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.xii.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
hitherto so kindly showed thyself to be our Shepherd, and even our
Father, and hast carefully provided for our safety, — O grant, that we
may not by our ingratitude deprive ourselves of thy favors, so as to
provoke thy extreme vengeance, but on the contrary suffer ourselves to
be gently ruled by thee, and render thee due obedience: and as thine
only-begotten Son has been by thee set over us as our only true
Shepherd, may we hear his voice, and willingly obey him, so that we may
be able to triumph with thy Prophet, that thy staff is sufficient for
us, so as to enable us to walk without fear through the valley of the
shadow of death, until we shall at length reach that blessed and eternal
rest, which has been obtained for us by the blood of thine only Son. —
Amen.

<span id="iii.xii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-eighth

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p2"></span>We said yesterday that the word <span
id="iii.xii.vi-p2.1"></span>חבלים, *chebelim*, the name given by
Zechariah to the second rod, could not be rendered “destroyers,” as all
the Hebrews do; for God teaches us that he had fully and faithfully
discharged the duties of a shepherd, so that the people perished through
their own fault; and since God undertook the office of a shepherd, it
could not have been said that he took a staff to destroy them: and there
is also no doubt but that he connects this word with the other, <span
id="iii.xii.vi-p2.2"></span>נעם, *nom*, “beauty.” And he says in the
last place, that this rod called <span
id="iii.xii.vi-p2.3"></span>חבלים, *chebelim*, was broken, in order to
show that the brotherhood between Judah and Israel was come to an end.
Now what affinity can there be between destroying and uniting? It is
then clear that the word <span id="iii.xii.vi-p2.4"></span>חבלים,
*chebelim*, is to be taken here for ropes, or cords.

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p3"></span>Let us now see why the Prophet calls one
“Beauty,” and the other “Ropes.” Some think that the law of nature is
designated by <span id="iii.xii.vi-p3.1"></span>נעם, *nom*, and by <span
id="iii.xii.vi-p3.2"></span>חבלים, *chebelim*, the law of Moses, and
those who render the word “Lines,” such as Jerome, who gives here the
right version, think that as the law was a hard yoke on the ancients,
the rod was so called because it bound them fast. Others, as Jerome also
does, refer to this passage of Moses, “When the Lord cast his line, he
chose a place for Israel, and when the Highest divided the nations,”
etc. They then think that a line is taken for an inheritance. But the
first interpretation is too remote and distorted; with regard to the
second, as the Prophet puts the word in the plural number, it cannot be
suitably taken for an inheritance, and, as we said yesterday, the
following clause shows that the idea of union is included in it.

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p4"></span>The meaning of the Prophet then is, that
God had so performed his office of a shepherd towards his people, as to
rule them in the best manner; this I understand by the word <span
id="iii.xii.vi-p4.1"></span>נעם, *nom*, beauty, for nothing could have
been more perfect in beauty than the government which God had exercised
over the Israelites; and hence he compares here his pastoral staff to
beauty, as though he had said, “The order of things was so arranged that
nothing could be imagined better.” He then mentions unity or concord,
and it was the highest favor that God gathered again the scattered
Israelites so as to make them one body. It is indeed true, that few of
the kingdom of Israel had returned to their own country, but it is yet
evident that the remnant was not only from the tribe of Judah, from the
half tribe of Benjamin, and from the Levites, but that there were others
mingled with them. It was therefore a most appropriate representation,
that not only a most beautiful order was established by God, but that
was also added a brotherly concord, so that the children of Abraham were
joined together in one spirit and in one soul. Since then they had so
good a shepherd, the baser and less excusable was their ingratitude in
shaking off his yoke, and in not suffering themselves to be ruled by his
staff.

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p5"></span>We now then see what the words of the
Prophet mean, when he introduces God as furnished with two rods, even
beauty and gathering. He then repeats what he had said before, *I have
fed*, he says, *the sheep*, intimating, that it was not owing to him
that he should not continue to rule them. It now follows —

<span id="iii.xii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.xii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p2"></span>**8.** Three shepherds also I cut off
in one month; and my soul lothed them, and their soul also abhorred me.

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p3"></span>**8.** Et rejeci tres pastores mense
uno; et taedio affecta est (*ad verbum* coarctata est) anima mea in
ipsis; atque etiam anima eorum me abominata est.

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p6"></span>At the beginning of the verse the
Prophet continues the same subject, that God spared no pains in ruling
the people, but patiently bore with many grievances; for it is the duty
of every good and careful husband man to inspect often his flock, and to
change his shepherd, when he finds him idle and inattentive to his
duties. God then shows that he had exercised the greatest vigilance, for
*in one month he had rejected three shepherds*, that is, he had within a
short space of time often made choice of new shepherds, and substituted
them for others, for *one month* is to be taken here for a short time,
and the *three shepherds* signify many, indefinitely. When a husband man
neglects his own flock, he may be deceived all the year round, should he
meet with a thief or an inactive and worthless man. Since then God says,
that he had changed his shepherds often in one month, he intimates what
I have already said, that he took the greatest care of his flock, for he
loved it, and omitted nothing necessary to defend it.  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) And this circumstance especially
aggravated the sin of the Jews, for they did not respond to so great a
care on God’s part; no, not when they saw that he watched night and day
for their safety.

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p8"></span>Now the latter part of the verse is a
complaint, for God begins to set forth how base had been the wickedness
and ingratitude of the people, *With weariness*, he says, *has my soul
been affected by them*, and *their soul has hated me*  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) He speaks not now of the shepherds,
and they are mistaken who so read the passage, as though God had
repudiated the shepherds, because his soul w as wearied with them: on
the contrary, he turns his discourse to the whole people, and begins to
show how wicked they had been, who having been favored with so many
benefits, could not yet endure the best of shepherds. Hence he says,
that his *soul had been straitened by them*, for he found no room made
for his favors. Paul also, treating on this subject, expostulates with
the Corinthians, and says, that he was ready to pour forth his heart and
to open widely his mouth, but they themselves were straitened, and he
felt himself these straitenings in his own heart. (<span
id="iii.xii.vii-p11.5"></span>[2Co
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.xii.vii-p11.5"></span>.) So also God complains here and says,
that he was straitened by the Jews; for he found that his blessings were
not rightly received, but as it were hindered, so great was the
wickedness of the people.

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p12"></span>He expresses more clearly at the end
that he was despised by them, *They also have hated me*. Now it was a
contempt in no way excusable, when the Jews would not acknowledge how
kindly and bountifully God had treated them. We now perceive the
Prophet’s design: after having related how kindly God had condescended
to rule the people, he now says that this labor had produced no fruit,
for the door for God’s favors had been closed up. It afterwards follows-

<span id="iii.xii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.xii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p2"></span>**9.** Then said I, I will not feed
you: that that dieth, let it die; and that that is to be cut off, let it
be cut off; and let the rest eat every one the flesh of another.

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Et dixi**,** Non pascan vos;
quod morti devotum est**,** moriatur; et quod succisioni devotum
est**,** succidatur; et quae residuae erunt**,** devorent unaquaeque
carnem sociae suae.

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p6"></span>God now declares what had been briefly
mentioned before, — that his judgment could not be deemed cruel, for the
people had been extremely wicked, and their wickedness deserved extreme
punishment. It seems indeed to be a simple narrative; but God here
defends his own cause, for he had tried all means in ruling the people,
before he had recourse to extreme rigor. Who indeed could now murmur
against God? for he had been ever ready to undertake the office of a
shepherd, and had so humbled himself as to take care of that people as
his own flock, and had, in short, omitted no kind of attention; and yet
he had been despised by that people, and even treated with derision. It
was therefore an extreme indignity when they hated God, who had yet
dealt with them with so much kindness. We hence see that God’s judgment
is here vindicated from every calumny; for the wickedness of the people
was altogether inexcusable before God had renounced his care of them.

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p7"></span>*I said*: the time must be noticed,
for he intimates that he had not been too hasty in taking vengeance; but
that as there was no longer any remedy, he had been constrained, as it
were by necessity, to give up his office of a shepherd. *I said* then,
*I will not feed you; what is to die, let it die; what is to be cut off,
let it be cut off*  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) He here
resigns his office of a shepherd, and intimates that he was innocent and
free from all blame, whatever might happen. A shepherd is set over a
flock for this purpose, — that he may defend it, even every sheep, both
against the depredations of robbers, and the rapacity of wolves: but
when he gives up his office, he is exempt from all blame, though
afterwards the flock may be stolen or devoured by wolves and wild
beasts. God then here openly declares, that it was not to be imputed to
him, if the Jews perished a hundred times, for they refused to be ruled
by him, and thus he was freed from the pastoral charge. *What then is to
perish, let it perish*; that is, “Since they are not healable, and allow
no remedy to be applied to their evils, I leave them; they shall find
out what it is to be without a good shepherd.”

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p12"></span>We now see more clearly what I before
stated, — that the wickedness and ingratitude of the people are here
reproved, because they had rejected God, who was ready to be their
shepherd, — and that the cause of the ruin which was nigh at hand, was
in the Jews themselves, though they anxiously tried, but in vain, to
transfer it to another.

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p13"></span>He concludes with these words, *And
those which remain*, even those who shall escape external attacks, *let
them eat one another*, since they are not now sheep, but savage wild
beasts. And this we know has been fulfilled; for the Jews at length
perished through mutual discords, and no one spared his own brother;
nay, the nearer the relationship, the more cruelly each raged against
the other. Hence God’s judgment, denounced by the Prophet, then appeared
most openly, when the Jews perished through intestine broils and even
slaughters. It then follows —

<span id="iii.xii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.xii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p2"></span>**10.** And I took my staff, *even*
Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had
made with all the people.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p3"></span>**10.** Et accepi virgam meam**,** nempe
Pulchritudinem**,** et confregi eam**,** ut irritum facerem foedus quod
pepigeram cum omnibus gentibus (vel**,** populis.)

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p4"></span>**11.** And it was broken in that day:
and so the poor of the flock that waited upon me knew that it *was* the
word of the LORD.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p5"></span>**11.** Et irritum fuit die illo; et
cognoverunt sic paupers gregis qui me observabant**,** quod sermo
Iehovae hic esset.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p7"></span><span id="iii.xii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p8"></span>He confirms the same truth, but a
metaphor is introduced: for he says, that when he freed himself from the
office of a shepherd, he broke the two rods, even *Beauty* and
*Gathering*. He speaks of the first staff, because things were in a
confusion in Judea, before the people were wholly cut off; for the
dispersion did not immediately take place, so that there was no sort of
social state among the Jews; but social order was so deranged, that it
was sufficiently evident that they were not ruled by God. By degrees the
purity of doctrine was corrupted, and a flood of errors crept in;
superstition gained great strength. When things were in this state of
confusion, the pastoral staff was broken, which is called, Beauty. This
verse then contains no more than an explanation of the last: and hence
also he says, *That broken might be the covenant which I had made*, that
is, that it might be now quite evident that this people are not ruled by
my hand and authority.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p9"></span>Some interpreters extend to the whole
world what is here said of nations, and think that the same thing is
meant by Zechariah as that which is said in <span
id="iii.xii.ix-p9.1"></span>[Ho
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xii.ix-p9.1"></span>,
-that the Lord made a covenant with the beasts of the earth and the
birds of heaven, that no harm should happen to his people; but the
comparison is not suitable. It is then probable, that God here speaks
only of the posterity of Abraham; nor is it to be wondered at that they
are called nations, for even so Moses says,

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p10"></span>“Nations from thee shall be born,”
(<span id="iii.xii.ix-p10.1"></span>[Ge
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.xii.ix-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p11"></span>and this was done for the purpose of
setting forth the greatness of God’s favor; for the ten tribes were as
so many nations among whom God reigned. It seemed incredible, that from
one man, not only a numerous family, but many nations should proceed.
The real meaning then seems to be, that God testified that he would no
longer be the leader of that people; for when order was trodden under
foot, the covenant of God was made void. Why indeed was that covenant
continued, and what was its design, except to keep things aright, in a
fit and suitable condition? Thus in the church, God regards order, so
that nothing should be done rashly, according to every man’s humor. This
then was the beginning of that dispersion, which at length followed when
the people had fallen off from the order which God had appointed.  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md)

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p13"></span><span id="iii.xii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p14"></span>He concludes by saying, that *in that
day the covenant was broken*. By which words he intimates that it was
not by chance that the law was destroyed, and that the Jews departed
from the just government of God, but that it was through the dreadful
vengeance of God. In that day then: this is emphatical, as though the
Prophet had said, “It ought not to be ascribed to chance that things
have changed for the worse, for God has thus executed his judgment,
after having with extreme patience borne with the wickedness of the
people.” And hence he adds, that *the poor of the flock saw that this
was the word of Jehovah*. Here the Prophet briefly points out two things
— that this was not commonly known as God’s judgment, but that almost
all with closed eyes overlooked what had happened; for the world
contracts as it were hardness, and becomes wilfully obdurate under the
scourges of God. All cry out that they are miserable, but no one regards
the hand of the striker, as it is said elsewhere. (<span
id="iii.xii.ix-p14.1"></span>[Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xii.ix-p14.1"></span>.) So also Zechariah charges here the Jews
with stupidity; for though the greater part saw all things in confusion,
yet they did not consider, but regarded almost as nothing the dreadful
judgment of God. It must then be that men are extremely refractory, when
they perceive not that they are chastised by God; yet the Prophet
charges the Jews with this sottishness; for they regarded not this as
the word of Jehovah, they did not believe that this was God’s hand. But
he says further, that the *poor of the flock* perceived this: and thus
he shows, that while the body of the people followed the way to ruin, a
few derived benefit from God’s scourges; and thus it never happens, that
God chastises without some advantage. Though then the reprobate
obstinately resist God, and hesitate not to tread under foot his
judgments, and as far as they can, render them void, there are yet some
few who receive benefit and acknowledge God’s hand so as to humble
themselves and repent.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p15"></span>The Prophet, then, after having
complained that the chief men, even those who were in honor and in
wealth among the Jews, heedlessly despised God’s dreadful judgment,
makes this addition, that there were a few very poor and humble men, who
regarded this judgment as not having come by chance, but through God,
who became a just avenger, because his favor had been wantonly despised:
*The poor then of the flock knew this to be the word of Jehovah*

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p16"></span>As this happened in the time of the
Prophet, it is no wonder that at this day, even when God thunders from
heaven and makes known his judgments by manifest proofs, the world
should yet rush headlong into perdition, and become as it were stupefied
in their calamities. In the meantime we ought to strive to connect
ourselves with the miserable poor, who are deemed as the offscourings of
the world, and so attentively to consider God’s vengeance, that we may
seriously fear and not provoke his extreme judgments, and thus perish
with the wicked.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p17"></span>We must observe also the expression
which Zechariah introduced before the last words, *Who attend to me*. He
mentions it as a singular and a rare thing, that even a few deigned to
consider the works of God. The chief wisdom of men, we know, is
attentively to consider the hand of God; but almost all seem to be
immersed in a state of stupor: when the Lord smites them, they stand as
it were amazed, and never, as we have already said, regard the hand of
the smiter; and when the Lord freely and kindly cherishes them, they
exult in their own wantonness. Thus under every kind of treatment, they
are untractable; for they attend not to God, but close their eyes,
harden their hearts, and cover themselves with many veils; in short, we
find the blindness of the world ever connected with perverseness, so
that they in vain pretend ignorance, for they *attend* not to God, but
on the contrary turn their backs on him and darken the clear light by
their wickedness.

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p18"></span>We now then see why this sentence is
introduced, that the *poor of the flock* understand, because they apply
their minds and devote their attention for the purpose of considering
the works of God. It hence follows that the bulls, who with their horns
fearlessly assail God, and that he-goats, who by their stench fill the
air, continue in their brutishness, and derive no benefit from God’s
judgments, because they are wilfully and through their own wickedness
wholly blind. It follows —

<span id="iii.xii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.xii.x-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p2"></span>**12.** And I said unto them, If ye think
good, give *me* my price; and if not, forbear. So they weighed for my
price thirty *pieces* of silver.

<span id="iii.xii.x-p3"></span>**12.** Et dixi illis**,** Si bonum est
in oculis vestris (hoc esst**,** si vobis placet**,**) date mercedem
meam; quod si non**,** desistite: et appenderunt mercedem meam triginta
argenteos.

<span id="iii.xii.x-p4"></span>**13.** And the Lord said unto me, Cast
it unto the potter: a goodly price that I was prised at of them. And I
took the thirty *pieces* of silver, and cast them to the potter in the
house of the Lord

<span id="iii.xii.x-p5"></span>**13.** Et dixit Iehova ad me**,**
Projice hoc ad figulum**,** magnificentiam pretii quo aestimatus sum ab
illis: et sumpsi triginta argenteos**,** et projeci hoc ad templum
Iehovae**,** ad figulum.

<span id="iii.xii.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.x-p7"></span><span id="iii.xii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p8"></span>God now adds another crime, by which he
discovers the wickedness of the people; for they estimated all the labor
he had bestowed at a cry insignificant price. He had before complained
of ingratitude; but more fully detected was the iniquity and baseness of
the people, when they thus regarded as of no value the inestimable favor
of God towards them. What the Prophet then says now is — that God at
last tried them so as to know whether his benefits were of any account
among the Jews, and that it had been fully found out, that all the labor
and toil employed in their behalf, had been ill-spent and wholly lost.
That Zechariah now speaks in his own person, and then introduces God as
the speaker, makes no difference, as we said yesterday, as to the main
subject; for his object is to set forth how shamefully the Jews had
abused the favor of God, and how unjustly they had despised it. And yet
he speaks as God’s minister; for God not only governed that people
himself, but also endued with the power of his Spirit many ministers,
who undertook the office of shepherds.

<span id="iii.xii.x-p9"></span>He then says, that he came (and what is
said properly belongs to God) to the people and demanded a reward, *Give
me*, he says, *a reward; if not, forbear*  <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) He expresses here the highest
indignation, as though one upbraided the wickedness and ingratitude of
his neighbor and said, “Own my kindness, if you please; if not, let it
perish: I care not; I see that you are wholly worthless and altogether
unworthy of being so liberally treated: I therefore make no account of
thy compensations; but at the same time it behaves thee to consider how
much thou art indebted to me.” So now does God in high displeasure speak
here: “*Give* me at least *a reward*, that I may not have served you for
nothing: you have misused my labor, I have borne with many wrongs and
annoyances in ruling you; what is to be the compensation for my
solicitude and care? I indeed make no account of a reward, for I am not
a mercenary.” He then adds, that they *gave him thirty silverings*
 <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) He mentions this no doubt as a
mean price, intimating, that they wished by such a small sum to
compensate for the many and inestimable favors of God; as when one hires
a swineherd or a clown, he gives a paltry sum as his wages; so the Jews,
as the Prophet says, acted towards God. At the same time by the mean
price, a suitable reward only to a clown, he means those frivolous
things by which the Jews thought to satisfy God: for we know how
diligent they were in performing their ceremonies, as though indeed
these were a compensation that was of any value with God! He requires
integrity of heart, and he gives himself to us, that he may in return
have us as his own.  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) This then
was the price of labor which the Lord had deserved. It would have been a
suitable reward had the Jews devoted themselves wholly to him in
obedience to his word. But what did they do? They sedulously performed
ceremonies and other frivolous things. This then was a sordid reward, as
though they sought to put him off with the reward of a swineherd.

<span id="iii.xii.x-p13"></span><span id="iii.xii.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p14"></span>Hence he adds, *Jehovah said to me,
throw it to the potter*. “This truly is my reward! Cast it to the
potter, that he may get some bricks or coverings to repair the temple;
if there are any parts of the temple dilapidated, let the potter get
thereby some bricks, or let any humble artisan have such a price for
himself.” But he afterwards speaks ironically when he says, *the
magnificence* and the glory of *the price at which he had been
estimated!* “This is, forsooth! the magnificence of my price, though I
had endured many toils! they now deal with me as with some mean
swineherd, though I was their Lord and Shepherd: since then they seek
thus craftily to satisfy me, and reproachfully offer me a paltry reward,
and as it were degrade my glory and spit in my face, Cast, *cast it*, he
says, *to the potter*;” that is, let them repair the temple, in which
they delight so much as if they were in heaven: for the temple is their
idol; but God will be never nigh them while they act thus hypocritically
with him. “Let them then repair the breaches of the temple and pay the
price to the potter, for I will not suffer a price so unworthy of my
majesty to be obtruded so disgracefully on me.”

<span id="iii.xii.x-p15"></span>We now then apprehend the meaning of the
Prophet: and first we must bear in mind what I have stated, that here is
described how irreclaimable had been the wickedness of the people:
though rejected by God, when he had broken his rod, they yet esteemed as
nothing the favors which they had experienced. How so? because they
thought that they performed an abundant service to God, when they
worshipped him by external frivolities; for ceremonies without a real
sense of religion are frivolous puerilities in God’s presence. What then
the Prophet now urges is, that the Jews wilfully buried God’s benefits,
by which he had nevertheless so bound them to himself that they could
not be released. And to the same purpose is what follows, *Cast it to
the potter*: for he testifies that the price was of no value, nay, that
he abominated such a reward as men paid hint when they dealt with him in
such a reproachful manner; for as he says in Isaiah, it was a weariness
to him —

<span id="iii.xii.x-p16"></span>“I am disgusted with your festal days;
why do you daily tread the pavement of my temple?” (<span
id="iii.xii.x-p16.1"></span>[Isa.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xii.x-p16.1"></span>;)

<span id="iii.xii.x-p17"></span>and again he says,

<span id="iii.xii.x-p18"></span>“He who slays an ox is the same as he
who kills a man.”  
(<span id="iii.xii.x-p18.2"></span>[Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.xii.x-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xii.x-p19"></span>God in these places shows, as here by
Zechariah, that these sacrifices which ungodly men and hypocrites offer
to him, without a right feeling of religion, are the greatest
abominations to him, — why? Because it is the highest indignity which
the wicked call offer, which is as it were to spit in his face, when
they compare him to a potter or a swineherd, and think nothing of the
reward which he deserves, and that is, to consecrate and really to
devote themselves wholly to him without any dissimulation. When
therefore men trifle with God and think that he is delighted with
frivolous puerilities, they compare him, as I have said, to a swineherd,
or to some low or common workman; and this is an indignity which he
cannot bear, and for which he manifests hero by his Prophet his high
displeasure.  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou ceases
not, though provoked by our many sins, to discharge the office of a good
and most faithful shepherd, and as thou continues in various ways to
testify that Christ watches over us as one who has undertaken the care
of our safety, — O grant, that we may be touched with the feeling of
true repentance, and so profit under thy scourges, that by considering
thy judgments, we may be really humbled under and mighty hand, and so
submit to thee, that finding us teachable and obedient, thou mayest
continue to rule us to the end, until after having been protected from
all harms by the pastoral staff of thine only-begotten Son, we shall at
length reach that blessed rest, which has been procured for us by his
blood. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xii.xi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-ninth

<span id="iii.xii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p2"></span>**14.** Then I cut asunder mine other
staff, *even* Bands, that I might break the brotherhood between Judah
and Israel.

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p3"></span>**14.** Et fregi virgam meam
alteram**,** nempe collectionis**,** ad dissipandam fraternitatem in ter
Iehudah et inter Israel.

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p6"></span>There is here set before us the
extreme vengeance of God in scattering his people, so that there would
be no longer any union between the children of Abraham. We have seen
that the Prophet took two staves or crooks to execute the office of a
shepherd in ruling the people. The first staff he said was Beauty,
because God had omitted nothing necessary to produce the best order of
things. Now when this blessed mode of ruling was trodden under foot,
then soon after followed the scattering of the people: and this is the
reason why the Prophet says, that he broke the other rod, or his crook.
We then see that this people by their ingratitude at length justly
deserved to be left without any regular form of government, and also
without any union.

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p7"></span>As to the word <span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p7.1"></span>חבלים, *chebelim*, we have before said
that what the Rabbis teach us, that it means “destroyers,” does not
comport with the passage. But why should Zechariah say here that the rod
was broken, that there should be no more union or fraternity between the
kingdom of Judah and the ten tribes? We have already said, that this
word by changing the points may have the meaning which has been
mentioned; for <span id="iii.xii.xiii-p7.2"></span>חבל, *chebel*,
signifies a rope or binding. We must also bear in mind, that this is an
instance of “last first” (ὕστερον πρότερον;) for he told us before that
God, bidding adieu to the people, demanded his reward; this then ought
to have been first mentioned: but this inversion of order is common in
Hebrew. This verse then we are to read, as though it was placed before
the last mission, by which God laid aside the office of a shepherd.
 <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p9"></span>I will come now to the passage in
Matthew; for after having told us that the thirty pieces of silver were
cast away by Judah, and that by them the Potter’s Field was bought, he
adds, that this prediction of the Prophet was fulfilled. He does not
indeed repeat the same words, but it is quite clear, that this passage
was quoted,

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p10"></span>“They gave,” he says, “the thirty
silvering, the price of the valued, whom they of the children of Israel
have valued.”  
(<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p10.2"></span>[Mt
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p11"></span>In substance then there is no doubt
an agreement between the words of Matthew and those of the Prophet. But
we must hold this principle, — that Christ was the true Jehovah from the
beginning. As then the Son of God is the same in essence with the
Father, and is with him the only true God, it is no wonder that what the
Prophet figuratively expressed as having been done under the law by the
ancient people, has been done to him literally in his own person: for as
they had given to God thirty pieces of silver, a sordid price, as his
just reward, so he complained that the labor he undertook in ruling
them, was unjustly valued; and when Christ was sold for thirty pieces of
silver, it was a visible specimen of this prophecy exhibited in his own
person.

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p12"></span>When Matthew says, that Christ was
valued by the children of Israel, he charges the chosen people with
impiety. The article ὁι, is to be here understood. The expression is
indeed, ἀπὸ ὑιων Ισραὴλ; but the sentence is to be taken in this sense,
— that he was valued at so low a price, not by barbarous nations, but by
the very people who were of the children of Israel and of the seed of
Abraham, as though he had said, “This wrong has been offered to God, not
by strangers, but by a people whom he had chosen and adopted as his
peculiar possession; and this wickedness is therefore less excusable.”

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p13"></span>Then Matthew adds,

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p14"></span>“They gave it for the Potter’s
Field,  
as the Lord had commanded me.” <span id="iii.xii.xiii-p14.2"></span>[Mt
27:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p14.2"></span>.

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p15"></span>This part also well agrees with the
prophecy. It is indeed certain that this money was not designedly given
to buy a field, that the Jews might obey God; but we know that God
executes his purposes by means of the wicked, though they neither think
nor wish to do such a thing. But what does Zechariah say? *Cast it*, he
says, *to the potter*; he does not say “To the field of the potter.” But
we have explained for what purpose God commanded the thirty silvering to
be cast to the potter; it was, that he might get bricks or tiles to
repair the temple; and this was said in contempt, or by way of ridicule.
Such also was the visible symbol of this as to the purchase of the
field; for the potter, the seller of the field, knew not what he was
doing; the Scribes and Pharisees thought nothing of fulfilling what had
been predicted. But that it might be made evident that Christ was the
true God who had from the beginning spoken by the Prophet, God, by
setting the thing before their eyes, intended that there should be a
visible fact or transaction, that he might as it were draw the attention
of the Jews to what is here said. The Prophet proceeds, -

<span id="iii.xii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p2"></span>**15.** And the LORD said unto me, Take
unto thee yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p3"></span>**15.** Et dixit Iehova mihi**,** Adhuc
sume tibi vas patoris stulti.  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p5"></span>**16.** For, lo, I will raise up a
shepherd in the land, *which* shall not visit those that be cut off,
neither shall seek the young one, nor heal that that is broken, nor feed
that that standeth still: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and
tear their claws in pieces.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p6"></span>**16.** Quia ecce ego constituo
pastorem in terra; quod excisum est no visitabit**,** quod juvenile est
no requieret**,** quod confractum est non sanabit**,** quod stat non
pascet; et carnem pinguis comedet**,** et ungulas eorum confringet.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p8"></span><span id="iii.xii.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p9"></span>Here the Prophet teaches us, that when
God shall renounce the care of his people there will be some weak form
of government; but it is evident that God would no longer perform the
office of a shepherd; as though he had said, that the people would be so
deserted, that they would yet think themselves to be still under the
protection of God, as we see to be the case among the Papists, who
proudly make a boasting of this kind — “The Church is never forsaken by
God.” Though the truth of God has been long ago completely buried, they
yet hold that it is still the true Church, a Church filled with impious
superstitions! As then the Papists glory in the title only, and are
content with it, so the Jews, we know, boasted of their privileges; and
these were their weapons when they sought to oppose and contend with the
Apostles — “What! are not we the heritage of God? has he not promised
that his sanctuary would be perpetual among us? is not the sacerdotal
unction a sure and infallible proof of his favor?” As then the Jews made
use of these foolish boastings against the Apostles, so also at this day
the Papists hide all infamy under the title of Church. The same thing
Zechariah here means by saying that he by God’s command *took the
instrument of a foolish shepherd*  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p13"></span>The word <span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p13.1"></span>כלי, *cali*, means in Hebrew any kind of
instrument. Some regard it to be a bag with holes, but this is an
unsuitable interpretation. By instrument, Zechariah, I have no doubt,
means the implements of a shepherds by which he proves himself to be in
that office. But he calls him at the same time a *foolish shepherd*,
that we may allow that he was a shepherd only in disguise. The term
shepherd is given here by way of concession, according to the usual
manner of scripture; and we also at this day concede sometimes the name
of Church to the Papists; and we farther concede the name of pastors to
their milted bishops, but improperly. So also does Zechariah in this
place; though he speaks of a shadow and thing of nought, yet he says
that there would be shepherds in Judea; and he adds the reason — Because
God would thus punish that wicked and ungrateful people: —

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p14"></span><span id="iii.xii.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p15"></span>*Behold*, he says, *I will set a
shepherd in the land*. God had now, as we have said, renounced the
office of a shepherd; but he afterwards set over them wolves, and
thieves, and robbers, instead of shepherds, that is, when he executed
his dreadful judgment on the Jews: and he shows at the same time what
sort of shepherds they would be who in future should possess power over
them.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p16"></span>They were to be such as would *not
look after what had been cut off*. Some consider the word <span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p16.1"></span>הנכחדות, *enecachedut*, as signifying the
sick sheep; but they are in my judgment mistaken; for careful shepherds
seek what is lost, or what has disappeared from the flock; and this is
what Zechariah means, for he says, he will not visit, that is, he will
look after what has been cut off from the flock. Then he says, *he will
not seek* <span id="iii.xii.xiv-p16.2"></span>הנער, *enor*, the young.
Some explain this of fat lambs; but others more correctly of those which
are tender, not as yet accustomed to follow the shepherd; for sheep by
long use keep from going astray, but lambs are more apt to wander from
the flock, and are easily scattered here and there. This is the reason
why Zechariah makes it one of the duties of a good shepherd *to seek
what is yet young*. He adds in the third place, the sick, *What is
wounded*, he says, *he will not heal*: and lastly, *he will not feed
what stands*, that is, what is sound. The word literally is, to stand;
but it means full vigor or strength. What then is vigorous and sound he
will not feed. He then says, *The flesh, of the fat he will devour, yea,
he will break their hoofs*. By these words he amplifies the cruelty of
the shepherd; for he will not be satisfied with the fat flesh, without
breaking also the bones and the hoofs, as though his barbarity would
exceed that of wolves and wild beasts.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p17"></span>We now then see the import of this
prophecy: and it seems to have been added, that the Jews might not
flatter themselves with an external and evanescent form of government,
after having departed from God, and after the covenant which he had made
with that nation, having been also renounced by him, so that he should
be no longer their Father, or Guardian, or Shepherd. Hypocrites, we
know, do not easily put off their obstinacy; though God’s vengeance
should be manifest, yet we see how they harden themselves, especially
when they can cover their wickedness under some false pretense, a
striking example of which we observe among the Papists. We now then
perceive the design of the Holy Spirit, when the Prophet is bid to
assume the character, and take the implements, of a foolish shepherd.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p18"></span>If any one objects, and says that this
was not suitable to a true Prophet of God, the answer is plain — the
Prophet deviated not from the right course of his calling, though he
assumed the character of a foolish shepherd, an instance of which we
have already seen in Hosea, who was commanded to take a harlot, and to
beget spurious children from one who had been infamous in her character.
(<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p18.1"></span>[Ho
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p18.1"></span>.) As this was a vision presented to
Hosea, it does not follow that he did anything disgraceful, so as to
prevent him from exercising the office of a holy teacher. So also now,
God simply shows to us what would be the fixture condition of that
reprobate people.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p19"></span>It must further be noticed, that when
anything of a right and good government remains in the external form,
there is no reason to conclude from this that God is the ruler, for, as
we have already said, it is a ridiculous and senseless glorying when men
are inflated and take pride in mere titles or names of distinction. Let
us then take heed, that those who bear rule be rightly called by God,
and let them afterwards discharge their office faithfully, otherwise
they may be a hundred times called pastors, after having attained this
degree of honor, and be after all no better than wolves and robbers; for
no one is a true pastor whom the Lord does not rule by his Spirit, and
who is not his minister, and no ungodly pastors, however they may assume
the title, can be called the ministers of God, when he has already, as
we see here, forsaken the people.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p20"></span>It must at the same time be observed,
that it happens not except through the just judgment of God, that things
grow worse and worse, and at length become wholly degenerated; and those
who loudly boast and seek to be esteemed by all as pastors, are
altogether senseless, for God has not appointed them, and the whole
filth of the Papal clergy is at this day a manifest evidence of God’s
wrath and indignation, for he thus justly punishes the contempt of his
word, and that perverseness by which the world thus awfully provoked
him. Though God has been graciously calling the whole world to himself,
we yet see how his favor has been rejected, and we also see how almost
all have gone on in their obstinacy. God had indeed in his great
goodness borne for some ages with this great wickedness, and when he
began to punish the ungrateful, he did not break out to extreme
vengeance, for he added to scourges heavier scourges, but at length he
was constrained to make his wrath to flow like a deluge. Hence has
arisen that dreadful confusion which is seen under the Papacy; and this
is what the words of the Prophet mean when God declares here that
foolish pastors would be set up by his command and through his power, as
he would thus execute his judgment on the ungodly.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p21"></span>Now as the Prophet enumerates here
those things which are inconsistent with the duty of a good shepherd, we
may hence learn, on the other hand, what it is to rule the Church
rightly and according to God’s will, and also what are the attributes or
marks of a good pastor. Whosoever then would be owned as a good pastor
in the Church, must visit those who have been cut off, seek the young,
strive to heal the wounded, and feed well the sound and the vigorous;
and he must also abstain from every kind of cruelty, and he must not be
given to the indulgence of his appetite, nor regard gain, nor exercise
any tyranny. Whosoever will thus conduct himself, will prove that he is
really a true pastor. But what can be more preposterous than for those
to be called pastors who have no flock under their care? who plunder,
and gather, and accumulate what they afterward spend in dissipation?

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p22"></span>As then it is quite evident, that all
those under the Papacy who are called bishops, seek the office for no
other end but that they may live sumptuously, without any care or labor,
and indulge in pleasures, and also spend in the gratification of their
lust what is unjustly got, — as then they are known to be idlers and
cruel tyrants, such as the Prophet here describes, do we not clearly see
how childishly they boast of their hierarchy, and at the same time
declare that they derive their origin from the Apostles? For what sort
of successor to Peter or to Paul, is he who exercises the most barbarous
tyranny, and who thinks himself not bound to take care of the flock? We
then see that there is at this day under the Papacy a striking
representation of what the Prophet says here; there is a certain form of
government, but God is wholly separated from such a mask or phantom. But
we must also bear in mind, that the world suffers merited punishment on
account of its ingratitude, when it is thus cruelly and shamefully
treated; for it is but just that they who will not bear the easy yoke of
Christ, should be made subject to the power of the Devil, and be trodden
under foot and disgracefully oppressed by tyrants. This is God’s
righteous judgment. The Church, we know, would not have been turned
upside down had not the greater part rejected the doctrine of salvation,
and shaken off all religion; hence God is in a manner constrained by so
great and by such unbridled wantonness to renounce his office of a
shepherd. It then follows —

<span id="iii.xii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p2"></span>**17.** Woe to the idol shepherd that
leaveth the flock! the sword *shall be* upon his arm, and upon his right
eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly
darkened.

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p3"></span>**17.** Heus pastor inutilis! deserens
gregem! gladius super brachium ejus**,** et super oculum dextrum ejus;
brachium ejus arescendo arescet**,** et oculus dexter ejus contrahendo
contrahetur**,** (*alii* obscurando obscurabitur.)

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p6"></span>In this verse the Prophet teaches us,
that though God would inflict a deserved punishment on the Jews, yet the
shepherds themselves would not escape his vengeance; and thus he reminds
them, that even in such a confused and depressed state of things, he
would still in some degree remember his covenant. He addresses the
Shepherds themselves, for he speaks not of one, but of the whole number,
as it has already been stated.

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p7"></span>*Woe to the baseless shepherd*, he says;
the word <span id="iii.xii.xv-p7.1"></span>אליל, *alil*, means in Hebrew
a thing of nought, and hence idols were called <span
id="iii.xii.xv-p7.2"></span>אלילים, *alilim*, nothings; “Those useless
shepherds,”  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) he says, “who
forsake the flock.” He again shows by an explicit term, that those whom
he called shepherds were not worthy of so honorable a title. He then
only concedes the name, for a shepherd who is not solicitous for the
safety of his flock, clearly proves that he is really no shepherd. He
then denounces on him a punishment, *A sword*, he says, *on his right
arm and on his right eye!* By the sword he means any kind of punishment,
by the arm is to be understood strength, and by the eye prudence. He
means, “God will punish thee both in soul and body, for his curse shall
be on thy strength and on thine understanding.” Hence he says, *Dry up
shall his arm*. This seems not indeed to correspond with the metaphor of
the sword, but it matters not, for the Prophet, as we have said,
includes under that word every kind of punishment. *Dry up* then *shall
his arm*, that is, all its vigor shall cease, so as to become like a
piece of decayed wood; and *his right eye*, the soundness of his mind or
his right understanding, *shall by contracting be contracted*; some
read, shall be darkened; but the verb properly signifies, to wrinkle, as
it appears from other places, and I can find no better way of expressing
its meaning than by saying that the eye would be contracted.  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md)

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p13"></span>I have briefly explained the object of
the Prophet, even that God would so punish the wickedness of the people,
as not to allow those shepherds to escape whom he would employ as
instruments in executing his vengeance. For though they were under the
direction of divine power, we must yet hold this principle, that they
had nothing in common with God; for mere ambition, avarice, and cruelty
instigated them; and nothing was farther from their purpose than to obey
God: but he extorted service from the unwilling and even the ignorant —
for what end? that he might render to the ungrateful, the wicked, and
the perverse, in their own sinful ways, the reward which they deserved.
We then see that the design of God’s vengeance is just; and we also see
that the instruments he employs are ungodly: there is therefore no
reason for them to think that they shall be unpunished, because they
accomplish God’s purpose, for they do not intend any such thing.

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p14"></span>We must also bear in mind, that when
the extreme rigour of God prevails, there still remains some evidence of
his favor, for some seed, though few in number, is still perpetuated;
for the Church is never so completely abolished as not to leave any
remnants, for whose safety God is pleased to provide when he executes
his vengeance, inasmuch as he stretches forth his hand at the same time
against the ministers he has employed, because they had cruelly abused
their power. So also at this day the milted bishops shall be made to
know how precious to God is the safety of his Church; for though almost
all the people and almost every individual are worthy of the most
tyrannical cruelty, yet we know that some are found in that labyrinth
for whom God has a care. Though then they who at this day possess power
under the Papacy think themselves innocent, while they are robbers and
wolves, they shall yet find that God is a righteous judge, who will
visit their abominable cruelty: for the disorder of the Church is not
its destruction, as God ever preserves some remnant.

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p15"></span>We also see that the whole strength of
men depends on the grace of God; and farther, that a sound mind proceeds
from his Spirit: for since it is he who takes away from men both their
strength and a right judgment, we hence conclude that to give these
things is also in his power. Let men then know that in order to possess
due courage and strength, they are to rely on the hidden power of God;
and let them also know that in order to discern what is useful and
profitable, they must be governed by his Spirit; and let those
especially who bear rule be assured of this, that when they exercise
power in peace, it is God’s singular gift, and that when they rightly
govern their subjects, and are endued with sound discretion, it is
wholly to be ascribed to an influence from above.

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p16"></span>But it may be asked, how can this
harmonise — that those who were before useless are deprived of
understanding and strength? To this I answer — that it is the same as
though the Prophet had said, that the baseness of him who was previously
an useless shepherd would be made conspicuous to all. For however
deficient they might have been in their office, they yet for a time
deceived the simple multitude; nay, we see at this day how the milted
bishops and abbots and their whole company by their delusive splendor,
dazzle the eyes of most men: they believe that the Pope is the vicar of
God, and the rest the successors of the apostles! But the Prophet here
testifies, that when the ripened time shall come, their shameful conduct
shall be made evident, so that all shall treat them with contempt, and
that they shall become an abomination to all. Though then they may be
counted wise and held in admiration, or at least in honor, yet Zechariah
threatens them with the loss of both; for God’s curse lies on them, on
their arms, and on their right eyes. This is the import of the passage.
I shall begin the next chapter tomorrow.

<span id="iii.xii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.xii.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
hitherto so patiently endured, not only our sloth and folly, but also
our ingratitude and perverseness, — O grant, that we may hereafter
render ourselves submissive and obedient to thee; and as thou hast been
pleased to set over us the best of shepherds, even thine only-begotten
Son, cause us willingly to attend to him, and to suffer ourselves to be
gently ruled by him; and though thou mayest find in us what may justly
provoke thy wrath, yet restrain extreme severity, and so correct what is
sinful in us, as to continue to the end our Shepherd, until we shall at
length, under thy guidance, reach thy heavenly kingdom; and thus do thou
keep us in thy fold and under the guidance of thy pastoral staff, that
at length being separated from the goats, we may enjoy that blessed
inheritance which has been obtained for us by the blood of thy beloved
Son. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc30014.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="iii.xii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p13"></span> Both to Jewish and Christian
expounders for the most part have regarded the temple as meant by
Libanon; with whom *Blayney* and *Henderson* agree. But the whole
context clearly favors the opinion of *Calvin*, which has been followed
by *Marckius* and *Henry*. There is in what follows no allusion to the
temple, but the “land,” verse 6, is expressly mentioned. The “cedars”
evidently represented the chief men in the state, not in the temple,
called in the second verse “the might” ones. Indeed the whole of what
follows countenances this idea, that the Jewish state or land is what is
intended. What has chiefly led to the notion, that the temple is
intended, is the fact that it was built by cedars from Libanon: but the
burning of the cedars mentioned here does not represent the burning of
the temple, but the destruction of the chief men in the land of Judah;
and this consideration alone is fatal to the notion. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc30014.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="iii.xii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p18"></span> The word means illustrious, stately,
magnificent, glorious. It may apply to the cedars, or to the rulers or
chief men, represented by the cedars, which is most probable: they are
afterwards called shepherds and lions. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc30014.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="iii.xii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p22"></span> The whole passage, including the three
first verses, is remarkably concise, striking, and poetical,—

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p23"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p24"></span>**1.** Open, Lebanon, thy doors, That
consume may the fire thy cedars:

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p25"></span>**2.** Howl thou the fir-tree; For
fallen is the cedar, Because the magnificent are wasted. Howl, ye oaks
of Bashan; For come down is the forest, the fenced one.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p26"></span>**3.** The voice of the howling of
shepherds! Because wasted is their magnificence; The voice of the
roaring of lions! For wasted is the pride of Jordan.

<span id="iii.xii.ii-p27"></span>There is a correspondence between
“consume” and “wasted.” The Jewish rulers were called “shepherds” with
regard to their office, and “lions” on account of their rapidity. Their
“magnificence” was wasted, like that of the cedars when consumed by
fire. The “pride of Jordan” were the trees growing on its borders, which
afforded shelter for lions. These became wasted or destroyed, so that
the lions could find there no receptacle. All these things intimate the
entire destruction of the Jewish state. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc30014.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="iii.xii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p12"></span> This “slaughter” has reference to the
ruin and destruction denounced in the previous verses, or to what was
done by “the possessors” who slew them, verse 5. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc30014.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="iii.xii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p17"></span> More correct is our version, “and
held not themselves guilty.” The *Targum* gives the idea, “and say,
there is no sin upon us.” The *Septuagint* have departed from the
meaning of the verb, though the general import is retained, “and they
repented not;” and the same may be said of *Jerome*, “and they grieved
not.” The version of *Henderson* is not right, “And are not held
guilty.” It is not what others thought of them, but what they thought of
themselves, is evidently intended. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc30014.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="iii.xii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p21"></span> There are in this verse, the fifth,
several anomalies. The verbs, except one, are in the singular, and the
nouns, “possessors,” “sellers,” and “shepherds,” are in the plural
number, and the pronoun affixed to “shepherds” is masculine, while that
which is affixed to each of the two preceding words is feminine,
referring to the antecedent, “sheep.” There are MSS. and early versions
in which these anomalies are rectified; and it is but reasonable to
adopt such corrections. The meaning of the verse is evident; and it may
be that some of these anomalies are idiomatic. A plural noun in Welsh
has commonly a verb in the singular number when placed *after* it, which
is often the case. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc30014.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="iii.xii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iii-p23"></span> There is one phrase omitted, “and
unto the hand of his king;” that is “Antiochus,” says
*Grotius*,—”Herod,” says *Drusius*,—”Caesar,” says *Henderson.* But no
particular king seems intended, but a state of things is set forth,
signifying the tyranny and oppression of the ruling power, which was
verified in the condition of the Jews during a considerable period,
until at last they were destroyed by one of the Caesars, the emperor of
Rome. Inward discord, and the tyranny of those who ruled over them,
characterised their history from the time of Antiochus Epiphanes until
they were demolished as a nation by Titus and Vespasian. This seems to
be the import of this prophecy. The singular number is used poetically:
and this appears evident from the words which follow, “And they shall
smite,” or rather pound to pieces, “the land.” The “king” is spoken of
here as many — “they,” so that a succession of tyrants is meant. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc30014.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="iii.xii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p9"></span> This sentence has puzzled many, but
needlessly. \[<span id="iii.xii.iv-p9.1"></span>לכז\] has sometimes the
meaning of \[<span id="iii.xii.iv-p9.2"></span>כז\], certainly, surely,
in truth, <span id="iii.xii.iv-p9.3"></span>[Jer
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xii.iv-p9.3"></span>;
and it may be rendered here “especially,” as Calvin does. The simple
\[<span id="iii.xii.iv-p9.4"></span>כז\] is used in a similar sense in
verse 11, in connection with the same words in part, as here: them, to
consider them as “the poor of the flock,” and not “the miserable sheep,”
as rendered by *Henderson*. The rendering of *Newcome* gives the same
meaning—”because of the poor of the flock.” He considers that \[<span
id="iii.xii.iv-p9.5"></span>לכז\] here signifies the same with \[<span
id="iii.xii.iv-p9.6"></span>למעז\], which is given in one MS., and
agrees with the Syriac. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc30014.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="iii.xii.iv-p10.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.iv-p11"></span> *Grotius* speaks in a similar strain
of the Punctuists, and agrees with *Jerome* and others in regarding the
word of a similar import with that stated by *Calvin*. The 14th verse is
a sufficient confirmation. It is rendered “\[<span
id="iii.xii.iv-p11.1"></span>σχοινισμα\], bond,” by the *Septuagint*,
*Agg*. and *Sym*. — “<span id="iii.xii.iv-p11.2"></span>funiculi, ropes
or cords,” by the *Vulgate*. — “<span
id="iii.xii.iv-p11.3"></span>devincientes, binders,” by *Drusius* and
*Marckius*; and as in our version, “bands,” by *Newcome* and *Henderson*

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc30014.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="iii.xii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p7"></span> This is a more satisfactory
explanation than what has been by many offered; for most have made the
attempt to fix on some three shepherds, either before or after this
time. *Jerome* mentions Moses, Aaron, and Miriam; others have referred
to the three sons of Josiah, to the three Maccabean brethren, and to the
three last of the Asmonean princes. *Cyril* names the priests, civil
rulers, and lawyers or scribes; and this is the explanation which
*Henderson* prefers, and also *Scott* and *Adam Clarke*. *Newcome* has
given no option. *Blayney* prefers another rendering, “and I set aside
the authority of the shepherds,” but this cannot be admitted. The view
given by *Calvin* is the most reasonable, and comports with the
character of what was conveyed by vision. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc30014.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="iii.xii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p9"></span> My soul was grieved at them, and their
soul also loathed me.—*Newcome*.

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p10"></span>*My soul loathed them, and their soul
also rejected me.*—Henderson

<span id="iii.xii.vii-p11"></span>The first verb means grieved, vexed,
or wearied, and not loathed. See <span id="iii.xii.vii-p11.1"></span>[Nu
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.xii.vii-p11.1"></span>: <span
id="iii.xii.vii-p11.2"></span>[Judg.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016.md), [Judg.
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.xii.vii-p11.2"></span>. “Wearied was my soul with them.” The
verb in the next clause is only found here, and rendered “roared,”
\[<span id="iii.xii.vii-p11.3"></span>επωροντο\], by the *Septuagint*,
(see <span id="iii.xii.vii-p11.4"></span>[Jer
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.xii.vii-p11.4"></span>,) and “despised,” by the *Targum*. It is
said, that the word in the *Talmud* is used in the sense of despising
and hating, and this idea suits this place, “and their soul also hast
despised me.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc30014.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="iii.xii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p8"></span> The *Targum* renders the verbs in the
future tense, “shall die — shall be cut off;” but the *Septuagint* and
*Jerome*, in the imperative mood, as here. The verse may be thus
rendered, —

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p10"></span>**9.** And I said,—I will not feed
you; She that is to die, shall die; And she that is to be cut off, shall
be cut off; And the remainder shall devour, Each one the flesh of its
(or her) fellow.

<span id="iii.xii.viii-p11"></span>“The dying,” or “the dead,” and “the
cut off,” the literal rendering, clearly mean what was destined to die
and to be cut off. Hence to render “cut off” here “missing,” as done by
*Blayney*, is not at all necessary. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc30014.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="iii.xii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.ix-p12"></span> “All the nations” are considered to be
the heathen nations by *Michaelis*, *Newcome*, and *Henderson*; but the
meaning in this case is very obscure. Though the word here used,
“peoples,” or nations, commonly designates the Gentile world, yet there
are instances in which it is applied to the tribes of Israel. See <span
id="iii.xii.ix-p12.1"></span>[1Ki
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#028.md)<span
id="iii.xii.ix-p12.1"></span>; <span id="iii.xii.ix-p12.2"></span>[Joe
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xii.ix-p12.2"></span>
*Blayney* proposes to connect “all nations” with “cut asunder,” and
renders \[<span id="iii.xii.ix-p12.3"></span>אם\], “before,” “and cut it
asunder, to break the covenant which I had made, before all the
nations:” but interviewing clauses of this kind are quite foreign to the
character of the Hebrew language. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc30014.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="iii.xii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p10"></span> *Drusius* gives the sense, “<span
id="iii.xii.x-p10.1"></span>Nihil date — give nothing;” and *Jerome*,
“<span id="iii.xii.x-p10.2"></span>Aperte renute — openly refuse.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc30014.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="iii.xii.x-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p11"></span> “Rate my labors as a true shepherd. And
they rated it contemptuously; thirty pieces of silver being the price of
a slave. <span id="iii.xii.x-p11.1"></span>[Ex
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032.md)<span
id="iii.xii.x-p11.1"></span>.” — *Newcome*.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc30014.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="iii.xii.x-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p12"></span> So *Grotius* says, “<span
id="iii.xii.x-p12.1"></span>Villa haec merces significat victimas et
ritus sine pietate solida, — This means reward signifies victims and
ceremonies without real piety.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc30014.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="iii.xii.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.x-p20"></span> These two verses are quoted in <span
id="iii.xii.x-p20.1"></span>[Matt.
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xii.x-p20.1"></span>.
On this subject see the Translator’s Preface prefixed to this Volume.
*Blayney* needlessly labors to reconcile the wording of the two
passages. The quotation is clearly, like many others, one of
accommodation, or of likeness. The “price” here is evidently that for
labor; but the “price” in Matthew is for blood. There is a similarity,
and not identity, in the two cases: and the general meaning, and not the
words are to be regarded. For “Prophesies,” as *Marckius* observes, are
often quoted in the New Testament, not according to the expressions,
\[<span id="iii.xii.x-p20.3"></span>κατὰ το ῥητὸν\], but according to
the sense or meaning, \[<span id="iii.xii.x-p20.4"></span>κατὰ τὴν
διάνοιαν\], accompanied with some illustration of the meaning derived
from the event.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc30014.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p8"></span> There seems to be no necessity for
this. The order is consistent as it is. The breaking of the first rod
was the relinquishing of the ruling office; and the breaking of the
second, which happened after the contemptuous price or reward had been
offered, was the sending of an awful judgment — universal discord,
instead of the union before preserved. The breaking of the brotherhood
between Judah and Israel has been variously understood. *Grotius* and
*Newcome* refer to past history, the separation of the ten tribes from
that of Judah; but this cannot be understood here. *Marckius*, *Henry*,
*Scott*, and *Henderson* agree in the main with *Calvin*, and consider
that the interal discords are meant which prevailed among the Jews, who
became united after their return from Babylon under one government,
though many of them were descendants of the ten tribes. “When the staff
of beauty,” says *Henry*, “is broken, the staff of bands will not hold
long. An unchurched people will be soon an undone people.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc30014.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p4"></span> Rendered “\[<span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p4.1"></span>ἄπειρος\], inexperienced,” by *Septuagint*,
“\[<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p4.2"></span>ἄφρονος\], unwise,” by *Aq*.,
*Sym*., and *Theod*., and “stupid,” or “stolid,” by the *Targum*. The
word means gross, stupid, foolish; but as *Henderson* justly observes,
foolish often means wicked in Scripture; and what is said of this
shepherd, proves that his folly was his wickedness. *Dathius* renders it
“mali, evil,” or wicked. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc30014.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p10"></span> This part determines the character of
the whole vision; for the whole chapter is a vision, the first part
being a denunciation of judgment executed in the final overthrow of the
nation, and the remainder, from verse 4th to the end, being a
*symbolical* vision, representing the dealings of God with the Jews in
the interval, from the time referred to in the last chapter to the
coming of the Messiah, or to the destruction of the Jewish polity by the
Romans. *Henderson* seems disposed to regard Herod as “the foolish
shepherd;” in that case the vision extends only to the advent of Christ;
but if we regard this shepherd, as *Blayney* does, as denoting a
succession of tyrannical rulers, then the vision extends to the very
overthrow predicted in the three first verses of the chapter.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p11"></span>This view, which is that of *Calvin*,
removes all difficulties, and affords a proof of the falsity of the
opinion advanced by *Mede* — that this portion of Zechariah belongs to
Jeremiah. That the Prophet personates God here, or the Messiah, as the
ruler of the Jewish nation, previous to his appearance in the flesh, is
evident from the fact that God identifies, as it were, himself with the
Prophet. (verse 8 and 10.) God’s dealings with the Jews are symbolized
in this vision in a way similar to what is done, as to the history of
the Church, in the visions granted to John; the sticks, the breaking of
them, the cutting off of three shepherds, the price or reward, and the
foolish shepherd, are symbolical, setting forth the various dealings of
God with their people, and their conduct towards him. As to the price,
the very symbol was afterwards strikingly exemplified in the history of
the Messiah. The Prohet is made to represent God in his two characters —
as a beneficial ruler, producing order and unity, and as a judicial
ruler, employing wicked and cruel tyrants to punish a refractory and
rebellious people.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p12"></span>“God commanded him (the Prophet) to
perform a real action, and in a waking state, which was to be an
intimation and a sign of that which was to happen in God’s dealings with
Israel.” *Abarbanel*, quoted by *M‘Caul*, in his translation of *Kimchi*
on Zechariah.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc30014.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p8"></span> “Worthless shepherd,” is the version of
*Newcome*, and *Henderson*, and also of *Drusius*, *Bochart*,
*Piscator*, and *Marckius*. Our version follows *Jerome*, who renders it
“<span id="iii.xii.xv-p8.1"></span>idolum — idol.” *Parkhurst* considers
it in the sense of nought, nothing, vain, nothing-worth, and refers to
<span id="iii.xii.xv-p8.2"></span>[Job
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xv-p8.2"></span>, and <span id="iii.xii.xv-p8.3"></span>[Jer
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xv-p8.3"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc30014.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p9"></span> To render the metaphor consistent,
*Dathius* has rendered \[<span id="iii.xii.xv-p9.1"></span>חרב\], not
sword, but drought or dryness, which it sometimes means. Then the verse
would be —

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p11"></span>**17.** Woe to the worthless shepherd,
Who forsakes the flock! A drought shall be on his arm, And on the eye of
his right hand: (*i* *e*. on his right eye:) His arm, withering it shall
wither; And his right eye, shrinking it shall shrink.

<span id="iii.xii.xv-p12"></span>Both *Newcome* and *Henderson* render
the last line as in our version; but restraint, or contraction, or
shrinking is the idea included in the verb. When there are no humors
sufficient for the eye, it contracts, it shrinks, and this corresponds
with the drought. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc30015.md)
