[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc30010)  [Next](cc30012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span>Chapter 8

<span id="iii.ix.i"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and forty-eighth

<span id="iii.ix.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#002)<span id="iii.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Again the word of the Lord of
hosts came *to me*, saying,

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Et fuit sermo Jehovae
exercituum**,** dicendo**,** —

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p4"></span>**2.** Thus saith the Lord of hosts; I
was jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I was jealous for her with
great fury.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Sic dicit Iehova exercitumm**,**
Zelatus sum pro Sion zelo magno (vel**,** aemulatione magna**,**) et
indignatione magna aemulatus sum pro ea (vel**,** zelatus sum.)

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p7"></span><span id="iii.ix.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p8"></span>Some think that at the beginning of this
chapter the people are reproved for their unfaithfulness, because they
conducted themselves towards God in a way they ought not to have done,
as they had violated that sacred marriage which God had been pleased to
contract with them; for it is a common mode of speaking for God to
compare himself to jealous husbands, when he sees his Church dealing
with him unfaithfully. But this meaning is inadmissible: for the verb
<span id="iii.ix.ii-p8.1"></span>קנא, *kona*, connected as it is here,
is to be taken in a good sense, as signifying concern or affection,
inasmuch as <span id="iii.ix.ii-p8.2"></span>ל, *lamed*, means, “on
account of,” or “for;” and we have in the first chapter a similar
sentence; <span id="iii.ix.ii-p8.3"></span>[Zec
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)<span id="iii.ix.ii-p8.3"></span>
and it is evident that in many other places the meaning is no other, but
that God burned with wrath against all the enemies of his Church, as he
regarded his Church with singular love. Emulation then here does not
mean jealousy, but is to be taken in a different sense, as signifying
that concern which God had for the protection of his Church. The whole
then of this chapter proves that God would be the defender of his
people, and that such was his care for the safety of all the godly, that
he resolved to oppose the whole world, if necessary, for their
protection. This is the sum of the whole.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p9"></span><span id="iii.ix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p10"></span>He then says, that *the word of Jehovah
came to him*;  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) we hence learn, that
this was a distinct prophecy. He adds, *I have been zealous for Sion*
(for as we have said, the letter <span id="iii.ix.ii-p11.2"></span>ל,
*lamed*, is to be thus taken) *with great zeal*  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) This was indeed an incredible change, for
God had for a time restrained himself, while the ungodly at their
pleasure harassed the Church, so that they thought that they could do so
with impunity. As God then had for some time remained at rest, what the
Prophet says here could not have been easily believed, that is, that God
would, through a sudden jealousy, undertake the cause of the Church.
Hence the indignation, immediately subjoined, must be regarded with
reference to enemies, as though he had said, that all the ungodly would
now perceive what they had by no means expected, — that God was the
protector of Jerusalem. It now follows —

<span id="iii.ix.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#003)<span id="iii.ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p2"></span>**3.** Thus saith the Lord; I am
returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and
Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth; and the mountain of the Lord
of hosts, the holy mountain.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Sic dicit Iehova exercituum**,**
Reversus sum ad Sion**,** et habitabo in medio Ierusalem; et vocabitur
Ierusaelm urbs vertiatis; et mons Iehovae exercituum**,** mons
sanctitatis.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet now more clearly explains
what he intended; but it was necessary to preserve this order — that
enemies were to be by force ejected from their possession, and the
Church delivered, before God could dwell in the midst of it; for how
could God have proved that Jerusalem was under his guardianship and
protection without having first subdued its enemies? It was not then
without reason that the Prophet commenced with this promise — that God
was prepared for war, and was burning with wrath, that he might deliver
his Church from the hands of enemies. Then follows the fruit of the
victory; for it would not have been enough for God to avenge the wrongs
done to his chosen people, without gathering the dispersed and restoring
the Church to its ancient condition. For it often happens that those who
have been cruelly treated find an avenger; but no comfort, or very
little comfort, comes to them, as they are made nothing better; but the
Lord here refers to these two things — that he would take up arms to
defend his chosen people, and also that he would become, as the case
was, the defender and protector of the holy city.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p7"></span>The repetition of the sentence, *Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts*, almost in every verse, was no doubt intended
for the purpose of strengthening their faith; for it was, as I have
already said a thing incredible. It was then necessary to bring forward
often the name of God, that the faithful might more readily give assent
to the prophecy which they knew proceeded from God, even the God of
hosts, whose power is infinite, and to whom nothing is difficult, as we
shall find it presently stated.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p8"></span>And he says that he had *returned*; not
that the accomplishment of this prophecy was then visible, but the
decree is put for the reality. God had been, as it were, for a long time
silent, while his people were exposed as a sport to their enemies; and
he seemed then to be far away from Jerusalem, for the place was desolate
and waste, yea, it was a scene of dreadful vengeance. God, then, during
the whole of that time, seemed to have forsaken the place, according to
the testimony of Ezekiel, who says, that God had removed from the
temple, and that it was an empty place, and as it were profane. On this
account he says now that he had returned; for he intended openly to show
that it had not in vain been made the seat of his glory, when he had
commanded his name to be there invoked. It is indeed true that mount
Sion had never been forsaken by God; but no other opinion could have
been formed, when there were there no altar, no sacrifices, and no
people to worship God; for this is said with reference to divine
worship; and the holiness of the mount was also nothing, except as far
as God had consecrated it to himself. Hence these two things were
connected — the holiness of the mount and the presence of God. It
therefore follows that God, according to the judgment of men, was
absent, when no religion appeared there, and the Jews offered there no
sacrifices.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p9"></span>He further says, that he had *returned,
that he might dwell in the midst of Jerusalem*  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) It was necessary to add this, that the
Jews might be convinced that his return was not in vain; for many said
that they foolishly made too much haste, and that though the
commencement had been favorable, yet many troubles would come upon them
in future, and that their building would be only for a short time, and
that though they spent much toil and labor in rebuilding the city, it
would yet be only for a season, as their enemies would shortly come and
destroy their new edifices. Since then reports of this kind were
spreading, it was necessary to support the minds of the godly, that they
might be fully persuaded that God had returned to his people, and had
become the restorer of his exiles for this end — that he might as before
dwell at Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p11"></span>We now apprehend the Prophet’s object;
it was as though he had said, that the people had not returned in vain
to their country, but that they had been delivered by the authority of
God, and that his dwelling at Jerusalem would be fixed and perpetual, as
it had before been his habitation. We indeed know that the stability of
the Church is not otherwise secured than by the presence of God, as it
is said in <span id="iii.ix.iii-p11.1"></span>[Ps
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p11.1"></span>, “God is in the midst of her, she shall
not be moved;” for the Church would not be less exposed to sudden and
frequent destruction than other things, were it not that God, her
support, dwells in her. And this is what our Prophet means here when he
says, that *God would dwell* there.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p12"></span>He adds, *And called shall be Jerusalem
the city of truth, and the mount of Jehovah the mount of holiness*
 <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) By the first clause the Prophet
reminds us why God had for a time forsaken Jerusalem, even because it
was a city given to falsehoods, wicked devices, deceits, and perverse
counsels. As then the Jews had wholly degenerated from true religion,
the Prophet intimates that the city became destitute of its guardian and
protector, even of God himself. And for the same purpose are added the
words, the mount of Jehovah shall be called the mount of holiness. For
however proudly the Jews boasted that they worshipped God, they yet had
profaned both the temple and the altar by their sins, as we have seen it
proved by the Prophet Haggai. (<span id="iii.ix.iii-p13.1"></span>[Hag
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#015)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p13.1"></span>.) Here then Zechariah indirectly reproves
the Jews for having corrupted all purity by their frauds, and also for
having, by the defilements of their sins, polluted Sion and the temple
of God. At the same time he teaches us that God dwells in his Church
where he sanctifies it.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p14"></span>Hence God is never idle while he dwells
in his people; for he cleanses away every kind of impurity, every kind
of deceit, that where he dwells may ever be a holy place. Therefore the
Prophet not only promises here an external blessing to the Jews, but
also shows that God performs what is far more excellent — that he
cleanses the place where he intends to dwell, and the habitation which
he chooses, and casts out every kind of filth. And since God promises to
do this, we hence see that it is his own peculiar work and gift to
cleanse all our impurities, and also to dissipate everything false and
deceitful. The import of the whole is, that when God reconciles his
people to himself, he not only brings an outward blessing of an earthly
kind, but also something better and far more excellent, even the renewal
of the heart and mind, and that when all things are polluted and filthy,
he restores true and perfect cleanness and integrity.

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p15"></span>We must further bear also in mind what
I have already stated — that their sins are here intimated to the Jews,
that they might be touched with shame, and seek repentance; for we have
seen that they were very slow and tardy in this respect. It was then
necessary to stimulate them that they might repent. For what the Prophet
says clearly intimates that mount Sion had been profaned, though God had
consecrated it to himself; for God’s worship had been there vitiated,
and there was there no integrity; and that the faithful city, such at
least as it ought to have been, had become full of falsehood and
treachery; for truth is not to be confined to that fidelity which men
ought to observe one towards another, but is to be extended to that
sincerity which the faithful ought to possess as to the pure and sincere
worship of God. This is the sum of the whole. It now follows —

<span id="iii.ix.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#004)<span id="iii.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p2"></span>**4.** Thus saith the LORD of hosts;
There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem,
and every man with his staff in his hand for very age.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Sic dicit Iehova exercituum**,**
Adhuc habitabunt vetuli et vetulae (*vel***,** senes et anus**,** *sed*
est idem nomen) in plateis Ierosolymae**,** et viro baculus ejus in manu
sua prae multitudine dierum.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p6"></span>He confirms what we have already stated,
that the Jews would be safe under the hand and protection of God, as he
would dwell among them. The cause of a safe and quiet state he made to
be the presence of God. For when we have peace with the whole world, we
may yet disturb one another, except the God of peace restrains us;
inasmuch as mutual and intestine discord may harass us, though we may be
spared by external enemies. It is then necessary in the first place,
that the God of peace and salvation should dwell in the midst of us. But
when we have the presence of God, then comes full security. Suitably
then does the Prophet now say, that *yet dwell* would *old men and old
women the midst of Jerusalem*: for since the time the Jews had returned,
they had been harassed, we know, by continual wars; and it could hardly
be expected that they could live long in a state of incessant troubles,
while new fears were daily disturbing them. Since then they were thus in
incessant and endless dangers, the Prophet gives them relief, and
promises that there would be to them yet a quiet habitation, so that
both men and women would live to extreme old age. Hence he says, *There
shall yet dwell*, *etc*

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p7"></span>Then he adds, *a staff shall be to man
for his age*, or on account of multitude of days. This seems indeed to
have been said with no great propriety; for it would have been much
better had vigor been given them, so that men failed not through old
age. Hence the weakness mentioned here seems to have been a sign of
God’s curse rather than of his favor; and on this account the Lord
promises by Isaiah, that old men would be vigorous and strong, (<span
id="iii.ix.iv-p7.1"></span>[Isa
65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020)<span
id="iii.ix.iv-p7.1"></span>;) so that they felt not the disadvantage of
age. But the design of Zechariah, as we have already reminded you, was
here different; for many by their daily complaints depressed the minds
of the godly, declaring that they were deceived, and saying that
Jerusalem would not long stand, as they were surrounded by so many
enemies. Hence Zechariah shows, that the Jews would be in no danger of
falling by the hand of enemies, as they would live securely without any
external disturbances; for we know that many old men, half alive through
age and supporting themselves by a staff, cannot be anywhere seen,
except in a state of peace and quietness, undisturbed by enemies.  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81)

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p9"></span>We now then perceive the design of the
Prophet, which was to show, that Jerusalem would be tranquil and in
peace, and that this would be the fruit of God’s presence; for its
citizens would die through years, and not through the violence of
eternal enemies. To the same purpose is what follows —

<span id="iii.ix.v"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix.v-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.v-p2"></span>**5.** And the streets of the city shall
be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.

<span id="iii.ix.v-p3"></span>**5.** Et plateae urbis plenae erunt
pueris et puellis**,** ludentibus in plateis ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.v-p6"></span>He repeats and confirms the same thing by
another representation — that boys and girls would play in the streets
and on the public roads, which could not be during the troublous time of
war; for when arms clatter, the sound of trumpets is heard, and assaults
of enemies are dreaded, every one keeps his children at home, and in
public there is sad confusion, and few are found abroad; in short there
is no cheerfulness even in children when fear is hanging over them. We
hence see, that what is here promised is a state of quietness to
Jerusalem; for God would keep off the onsets of enemies — not that
Jerusalem was ever exempt from all evils, but that God’s defense was so
effectual as to render them safe amidst many and various dangers.

<span id="iii.ix.v-p7"></span>It is not needful here anxiously to raise
the questions — Whether it is lawful to play during times of peace? for
the Prophet here took his language from the common habits of men, and
even from the very nature of things; for we know that men give way to
cheerfulness when no fear lays hold on their minds, and that play and
sport are allowed to children. The Prophet meant only this, that though
the Jews might then have something to do with various enemies, they
would yet be in a state of peace and safety. He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p2"></span>**6.** Thus saith the Lord of hosts; If
it be marvellous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these
days, should it also be marvellous in mine eyes? saith the Lord of
hosts.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Sic dicit Iehovae exercituum**,**
Si mirabile est hoc in oculis reliquiarum populi hujus in diebus
illis**,** etiam in oculis meis mirabile erit? dicit Iehova exercituum.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p6"></span>He sharply reproves here the lack of
faith in the people; for as men are wont to measure whatever is promised
by their own understanding, the door of entrance for these prophecies
was nearly closed up when they saw that the fury of their enemies could
by no means be pacified. They had indeed tried in various ways to check
them, or at least to conciliate them; and we know that many edicts had
been proclaimed in favor of the Jews by the kings of Persia; but such
was the common hatred to them, that new enemies arose continually. On
this account it is that the Prophet now blames their want of faith; and
he points out, as by the finger, the source of their unbelief when he
says, that they had no faith in God who spoke to them, because he
promised more then what they could conceive to be possible. And this
deserves notice, for if we wish to pull up unbelief by the roots from
our hearts, we must begin at this point — to raise up our thoughts above
the world; yea, to bid adieu to our own judgment, and simply to embrace
what God promises; for his power ought to carry us up to such a height
that we may entertain no doubt but that what seems to us impossible will
surely be accomplished. What the Prophet calls “wonderful” is the same
as impossible; for men often wonder at God’s worlds without believing
them, and even under the false pretense of wonder deny his power. Hence
when God promises anything, doubts immediately creep in — “Can this be
done?” If a reason does not appear, as the thing surpasses our
comprehension, we instantly conclude that it cannot be. We thus see how
men pretending to wonder at God’s power entirely obliterate it.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p7"></span>When therefore the Prophet now says, *If
this be wonderful in your eyes, shall it be so in mine?* it is the same
as though he had said, “If you reject what I promise to you, because it
is not in accordance with your judgment, is it right that my power
should be confined to what you can comprehend?” We hence see that
nothing is more preposterous than to seek to measure God’s power by our
own understanding. But he seems to say at the same time, that it is
useful for us to raise upwards our minds, and to be so filled with
wonder, while contemplating God’s infinite power, that nothing
afterwards may appear wonderful to us. We now perceive how it behaves us
to wonder at God’s works, and yet not to regard anything wonderful in
them. There is no work of God so minute, but that it contains something
wonderful, when it is considered as it ought to be; but yet when raised
up by faith we apprehend the infinite power of God, which seems
incredible to the understanding of the flesh, we look down as it were on
the things below; for our faith ascends far above this world.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p8"></span>We now see the true source of unbelief
and also of faith. The source of unbelief is this — when men confine
God’s power to their own understanding; and the source of faith is —
when they ascribe to God the praise due to his infinite power, when they
regard not what is easy, but being satisfied with his word alone they
are fully persuaded that God is true, and that what he promises is
certain, because he is able to fulfill it. So Paul teaches us, who says,
that Abraham’s faith was founded on this assurance — that he doubted not
but that he who had spoken was able really to accomplish his word.
(<span id="iii.ix.vi-p8.1"></span>[Ro
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#020)<span
id="iii.ix.vi-p8.1"></span>.) Hence, that the promises of God may
penetrate into our hearts and there strike deep roots, we must bid adieu
to our own judgment; for while we are wise in ourselves and rely on
earthly means, the power of God vanishes as it were from our sight, and
his truth also at the same time disappears. In a word, we must regard,
not what is probable, not what nature brings, not what is usual, but
what God can do, what his infinite power can effect. We ought then to
emerge from the confined compass of our flesh, and by faith, as we have
said, ascend above the world.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p9"></span>And he says, *In the eyes of the remnant
of this people*, *etc*. By this sentence he seems to touch the Jews to
the quick, who had already in a measure experienced the power of God in
their restoration; for thirty years before their freedom had been given
them by Cyrus and Darius, they regarded as a fable what God had promised
them; they said that they were in a grave from which no exit could have
been expected: they had experienced how great and incredible was God’s
power; and yet as people astonished, they despaired of their future
safety. This ingratitude then is what Zechariah now indirectly reproves
by calling them the remnant of his people. They were a small number,
they had not raised their banner to go forth against the will of their
enemies; but a way had been suddenly opened to them beyond all
expectation. Since then they had been taught by experience to know that
God was able to do more than they could have imagined, the Prophet here
justly condemns them for having formed so unworthy an idea of that power
of God which had been found by experience to have been more than
sufficient. He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.ix.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p2"></span>**7.** Thus saith the Lord of hosts;
Behold, I will save my people from the east country, and from the west
country;

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Sic dicit Iehova exercituum**,**
Ecce ergo servans populum meum e terra orientis et e terra occasus
solis;

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p4"></span>**8.** And I will bring them, and they
shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shall be my people, and
I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p5"></span>**8.** Et reducam eos**,** et habitabunt
in medio Ierosolymae; et erunt mihi in populum**,** et ego ero illis in
Deum**,** in veritate et justitia.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p7"></span><span id="iii.ix.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p8"></span>He pursues the same subject, and
introduces a preface, very necessary in so confused a state of things;
for it was very difficult to raise up desponding minds and to inspire
them with confidence, when pressed down with fear and trembling. This is
the reason why Zechariah repeats so often, that he declared nothing but
God’s commands only.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p9"></span>*Behold*, he says, *I will save*, or
deliver *my people*. As dispersion took away hope, the Prophet restores
it, and says, that it would not be difficult to gather the people from
all parts of the world, when God stretched forth his hand; and
emphatical is the expression, *I will deliver my people*. God then does
here exalt himself, that we may learn to exalt his power, and not to
judge of it according to our own comprehension. *I will deliver my
people*, he says, *from the rising as well as from the setting of the
sun*. This sentence then is connected with the preceding, in which the
Prophet briefly shows that the Jews erred and acted perversely, when
they ascribed no more to God than what the judgment of their own flesh
dictated, or what seemed probable according to the course of nature. As
then he had taught them that great wrong is done to God except he is
separated from men, and shines eminent above the whole world, he now
adds, that God, with whom nothing is wonderful or difficult, had
resolved to gather his people, and from their dispersion to restore them
again to Jerusalem. The Prophet then says here nothing new, but rightly
applies what he had just said of God’s infinite and incomprehensible
power, which men absurdly attempt to inclose in their own brains, and to
attach to earthly instrumentalities.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p10"></span><span id="iii.ix.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p11"></span>He then adds, *I will restore them, and
they shall dwell, he says, in the midst of Jerusalem*. He again confirms
what I have already stated, — that their return would not be in vain,
though many said, that the Jews had done foolishly in having returned so
quickly into their own country; and they condemned their determination,
as though they had been suddenly carried away by extreme ardor. Hence
the Prophet, in order to show that God had dealt faithfully with his
people, promises them here a safe and a perpetual habitation at
Jerusalem. *They shall dwell*, he says; that is, “As you now see that
you have been gathered, so expect that God will be your protector, so as
to render you safe, and to make Jerusalem to be again inhabited, as it
had been formerly.”

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, *They shall be to
me for a people, and I shall be to them for a God*. By these words the
Prophet confirms what he has hitherto taught, when he now speaks of the
renewal of the covenant; for the whole hope of the people depended on
this one thing, — that God remembered the covenant which he had made
with them. This covenant had indeed been broken, according to the usual
language of Scripture; for the people, when removed into exile, thought
that they were cast away and forsaken by God. As then the memory of this
covenant had been buried as to the effect, or as they say, apparently,
the Prophet, in order to confirm what he has already said, expressly
declares, that they would be God’s people, and that he would be their
God. We now then understand why he adds, “I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a people”.

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p13"></span>In the last place he says, *in truths
and righteousness*; that is, “settled and permanent shall be this
felicity”: for when God shows that he cares for his people, then follow
outward blessings, which are evidences of his favor. The Prophet adds,
that this shall be in truth and righteousness; for God will not be
propitious and kind to his people only for a short time, but will
continue his favor to them to the end. As then God intended to establish
the safety of the city, he testifies that he would be its God in
*righteousness*, even in sincerity, in good faith, and without
dissimulation, and also without any danger of changing.  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) And how this was to be fulfilled we shall
hereafter see.

<span id="iii.ix.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.viii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.ix.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that though we
daily depart from thee by our sins, we may not yet be wholly removed
from the foundation on which our salvation depends; but do thou so
sustain us, or even raise us up when fallen, that we may ever continue
in our degree, and also return to thee in true repentance, and whatever
may happen to us, may we learn ever to look to thee, that we may never
despair of thy goodness, which thou hast promised to be firm and
perpetual, and that especially while relying on thy only-begotten Son
our Mediator, we may be able to call on thee as our Father, until we
shall at length come to that eternal inheritance, which has been
obtained for us by the blood of thine only Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.ix.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ix-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Forty-ninth

<span id="iii.ix.x"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix.x-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
8:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p2"></span>**9.** Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Let
your hands be strong, ye that hear in these days these words by the
mouth of the prophets, which *were* in the day *that* the foundation of
the house of the LORD of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p3"></span>**9.** Sic dicit Iehova exercituum**,**
Roborentur manus vestrae**,** qui auditis in diebus his verba haec ex
ore Prophetarum**,** qui (*fuerunt*) in die quo fundata est domus
Iehovae exercituum**,** et templum extrueretur.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p4"></span>**10.** For before these days there was no
hire for man, nor any hire for beast; neither *was there any* peace to
him that went out or came in because of the affliction: for I set all
men every one against his neighbour.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p5"></span>**10.** Quia ante dies istos merces
hominis non fuit**,** et merces jumenti nulla**,** et egredienti et
venienti nulla pax ab angusta (vel**,** prae afflictione**,**) et emisi
cunctos homines**,** quemque in socium suum.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p6"></span>**11.** But now I *will* not *be* unto the
residue of this people as in the former days, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p7"></span>**11.** At nunc non secundum dies
superiores ego (agam) cum reliquiis populi hujus (agam non est in
contextu**,** sed supplendum est**,**) dicit Iehova exercituum.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.x-p9"></span><span id="iii.ix.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p10"></span>The Prophet having taught us that God was
reconciled to his people, does now seasonably exhort the Jews to prepare
themselves for work and strenuously to exert themselves in erecting the
temple, and also in building the city: for as we have stated, many were
then become slothful, as they thought that they were soon to be
destroyed by their enemies, and that what they built with great labor,
toil, and expense, would be presently demolished. Hence it was that
sloth had crept in, so that many had left off the building both of the
temple and of the city: and we have also seen elsewhere, that they were
too intent on building their own houses, and at the same time neglected
the temple; for each looked to his own private advantage, and also to
his own pleasures. The Prophet Haggai sharply reproved this
indifference, (<span id="iii.ix.x-p10.1"></span>[Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004)<span id="iii.ix.x-p10.1"></span>;)
and the Lord clearly showed that he had punished this their sloth; for
they preferred their own houses to the temple, and through want of faith
trembled, as though their restoration was a mockery. As then the people
by their ingratitude had almost wiped away the recollection of their
deliverance, the Prophet Haggai severely reproved them; and Zechariah
now touches on the same subject.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p11"></span>Hence he says, that before they had begun
the work of building the temple, the land was sterile, as though it was
cursed by God, and that they were deprived of their hope, and that
whatever they attempted proved useless; but that after they had begun,
through the encouragement given them by the Prophets, to take courage to
build the temple, things changed for the better, and that openly, so
that it was easy to conclude, that God had been previously displeased
with them, but that now he was favorable, as all things went on
prosperously. This change then was a clear token both of God’s
displeasure and of God’s favor; for he had justly chastised his people
as long as they were under the influence of unbelief, so as not to
proceed with the work of building the temple; and afterwards the favor
of God had begun to shine on them, as God gave them abundance of
provisions, and proved in various ways that he was now favorable to
them. Zechariah therefore mentions these things, that they might proceed
more cheerfully with their work, and not provoke God’s wrath, which they
had previously found to have been so much to their loss, and that they
might seek to enjoy his blessing, which was now so manifest before their
eyes. This is the import of the whole.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p12"></span>He says, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
*Strengthened let be your hands*. He exhorts them to perseverance: but
as men become weak, and many things occur which enfeeble or break down
their courage, he uses the word, strengthen; for it is often necessary
to gather new strength, and to confirm a pious resolution. Let us now
then learn to apply this doctrine to our own benefit, and let us
understand what experience sufficiently teaches us, even this — that our
hands, though at first well prepared, are yet soon relaxed, and as it
were loosed, and even entirely fail, unless new strength be now and then
attained; and that this is effected when we are animated by God’s word,
and rise superior to the trials which enfeeble us. And Zechariah will
presently inform us whence this strength was to be sought, even from the
promises which they had already heard from the Prophets; for he would
have in vain exhorted them to persevere, had not the ground of
confidence been mentioned. For when God is silent, our minds, though
before abundantly ready and willing, must languish, and at length wholly
fail.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p13"></span>We then see that there can be no courage
in men, unless God supports them by his word, so that they may recover
their lost strength and regain their alacrity. Had the Prophet only
bidden them to take courage, they might have replied, that there was
nothing in their circumstances to encourage them; but when the word of
God was set before them, every excuse was taken away; and they were now
to gird up the loins, and boldly to fight, inasmuch as God supplied them
with weapons.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p14"></span>Be strong, he says, *ye who hear in these
days these words from the mouth of the Prophets*. Though Zechariah is
not often concise in his words, but in many parts diffuse, yet he is so
here, and the whole verse is very emphatical; for after having said that
they were not destitute of God’s promises, he adds, “in these days,” and
also “these words.” He intimates that they were not only taught a
general truth, that they were to render obedience, but that God himself
would be their leader to direct their steps and to show them the way: in
a word, he omits nothing to enable them to proceed without difficulty
with the work which they had begun. There is then an emphasis intended
by the demonstrative, “these,” “these;” for the Prophet intimates that
God was continually speaking to them, and that he announced not only a
general truth, but specific words, by which they might guide their feet
and their hands in every action. And he says, that those words were
heard from the mouth of the Prophets, for God intended honor to be done
to his servants; and it is, as it has been often stated, a true test of
faith, when God descends not himself from heaven, or does not appear to
us in a visible form, but makes use of men as his ministers. Yet
Zechariah briefly intimates, that the Prophets are not the authors of
the promises, which are necessary to raise up, support, and stimulate
our minds; for the Lord only employs their service; and this is what he
means by the word *mouth*

<span id="iii.ix.x-p15"></span>He now adds, *Who were in that day in
which was founded the house of Jehovah, in order to build the temple*.
Not much time had elapsed since they had begun again to build the
temple, and the foundations had been laid; but the work had been
discontinued through the unbelief of them all, and also through the
private regard of each to his own interest. For as they were in suspense
and doubtful, there arose sloth and indifference, and avarice possessed
them, so that they despised the temple of God. But he says now that
during that short time God often spoke to them by his Prophets with the
view of correcting their delay and tardiness, for the Prophet mentions
here as it were but one day, for the purpose of expressing how short the
time had been. Less excusable then was their sloth, since God daily
spoke to them and confirmed by new Prophets what the former ones had
said.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)

<span id="iii.ix.x-p19"></span><span id="iii.ix.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p20"></span>It follows, *For before these days there
was no hire for man, and no hire for beast, no peace to passengers,
because I had sent forth all men, each one against his friend*. The
Prophet mentions here, as I have already said, evidences of God’s curse,
by which the Jews might have learnt that he was displeased with their
neglect in disregarding the building of the temple, for while omitting
that they paid attention to their domestic affairs. He therefore reminds
them of what might have made them to fear, lest they should go on still
to provoke God; for they had been taught, to their great loss, not to
excite in this manner his displeasure: and Zechariah, no doubt, as well
as Haggai and Malachi, had often addressed the people on this subject;
for we see how prone is the disposition of us all to relapse into
forgetfulness when God in any measure relaxes in his discipline. We
presently shake off every fear when exempt from evils. This is the
reason why it is needful for us to be often reminded of those judgments
of God which we have experienced, according to what is done here by
Zechariah.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p21"></span>*Before these days*, he says, *there was
no hire for man, and no hire for beast*; that is, there was no profit
from the labor of men or of beasts. He takes it as granted, that men
were not tardy in their work, and that beasts performed their labors,
but that no fruit appeared. And whence was it the labor of men and of
beasts was unprofitable, except from God’s curse, as the law testifies?
(<span id="iii.ix.x-p21.1"></span>[De
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#008)<span
id="iii.ix.x-p21.1"></span>.) For when the Prophets speak of God’s curse
they refer to the law, and only apply to their present purpose what is
stated generally in the law. As then God declares in the law that he
will bless the work of the hands, Zechariah draws this inference that
God was displeased when men and beasts toiled laboriously without any
advantage.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p22"></span>He then adds, *There was no peace*. When
men labor in vain, thirst and want of all things must follow; for though
the labor of man, we know, is of itself of no value, yet when blessed by
God it is the means of promoting fertility, so that the earth may supply
us with food. On the other hand, when the labor of man is barren, even
the earth itself refuses to bring forth fruit. It was then no light
calamity when God visited the people with poverty and famine. But
another evil is added, no less dreadful and even more grievous that the
land was so harassed by enemies that no travelling was safe. Hence he
says, that *there was no peace to him who went out or to him who came
in*; that is, there was no free or peaceable travelling, but they were
exposed to pillage and plunder. In a word, Zechariah teaches us here,
that the Jews were under a curse both within and without, for the land
disappointed those who cultivated it, as it yielded no fruit, and then
they were exposed to hostile assaults.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p23"></span>With regard to the words, <span
id="iii.ix.x-p23.1"></span>מן הצר, *men etsar*, some render them, on
account of distress, “there was no peace on account of distress.” But we
may retain the proper meaning of the preposition <span
id="iii.ix.x-p23.2"></span>מן, *mem*, “there was no peace from
distress;” that is, there were none safe from inconvenience and
molestation.  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84)

<span id="iii.ix.x-p28"></span>The reason is added, *Because God had
sent forth all men, each one against his neighbor*. The Prophet
designedly subjoined this, that the Jews might know that these evils
could not be ascribed to fortune, as though men did rise up
thoughtlessly one against another. Hence he reminds them that their
quietness was disturbed by the just and hidden judgment of God, for he
can turn as he pleases the hearts of men; he now inclines them to
humanity or to mercy, and then he turns them to madness and ferocity.
That the Jews might know that they had to do with God, the Prophet
declares here that men had been sent forth, that they might mutually
rage and assault one another.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p29"></span>Hence they who use the word permit, not
only take away from what the Prophet means, but wholly pervert his
doctrine and extinguish its light altogether: for God does not say here
that he was still when the Jews ill-treated one another; but he meant to
have this attributed to his judgment. For when almost the whole world
was hostile to a few men, and those related to one another, they ought
surely to have been united among themselves; for necessity conciliates
even the most alienated, and even pacifies those who have been
previously the most violent enemies. Since, then, the Jews were assailed
by foreign enemies, they ought to have been friends among themselves, or
at least to have been so softened as not to be so hostile towards one
another. As then they raged against their own bowels, so that no one
spared his own friends, God more fully shows by this circumstance that
he was the author of these confusions. And how God kindles the hearts of
men to ferocity, and is yet free from all blame, has been explained
elsewhere. God indeed executes his righteous judgments, when he sets men
one against the other; and if we inquire into the cause and the end, we
shall find that men are in this way justly punished. As then in God’s
judgments there ever shines forth the highest equity, there is no reason
for men to try to implicate him in their own perdition, or to devolve on
him a part of the blame. God then justly excites the hearts of men into
madness, and yet men themselves bear the whole blame, though God draws
them here and there against their will, and makes use of them as his
instruments; for the hidden purpose of God does not excuse them, while
nothing is less their object than to obey his word, though they are
guided by his hidden operation. We know that no work pleases God, but
when there is a willing obedience, which none of the reprobate ever
render; and we also know that all works are to be judged according to
the end designed. We must therefore consider what was the reason that
God thus set men against one another, and what end he had in view. But
we have elsewhere discussed this subject at large.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p30"></span>Let us then now, in short, bear this in
mind, that the Jews mutually harassed and distressed one another, not by
chance, but because the Lord, who was their enemy and whose wrath they
had provoked, had sent them forth as enemies among themselves.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p31"></span><span id="iii.ix.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p32"></span>He afterwards adds, *But now, not
according to former days, shall I be to the remnant of this people,
saith Jehovah of hosts*. Zechariah now reminds them that things had
changed for the better, as it was evident that God was propitious to
them. And if the cause of this change be asked, the answer is, the
building of the temple. If nothing had been said by the Prophets, the
Jews might have only conjectured, but every doubt had been removed; for
God had threatened then with punishment which he afterwards inflicted,
and then he exhorted them to repentance, and said that he would be
reconciled to them: when the Jews rightly considered these things, they
had no need of having recourse to conjectures. It was indeed fully
evident that God regarded them with favor, and that the fruits of his
favor were before their eyes; and they were thus encouraged to proceed
with the work of building the temple. It now follows —

<span id="iii.ix.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ix.xi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p2"></span>**12.** For the seed *shall be*
prosperous; the vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her
increase, and the heavens shall give their dew; and I will cause the
remnant of this people to possess all these *things*

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p3"></span>**12.** Quia semen pacis**,** vitis
proferet fructum suum**,** et terra proferet fructum suum (*est quidem
aliud nomen*<span id="iii.ix.xi-p3.1"></span>, *sed idem
significat***,**) et coeli dabunt rorem suum; et possidere faciam
reliquias populi hujus omnia haec.

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p6"></span>Here Zechariah promises the continuance
of God’s favor, which the Jews had now begun to taste. God then had in
part openly showed that he was a Father to the Jews, by dealing
liberally with them: but in order more fully to strengthen them in their
perseverance, Zechariah says that this favor would be continued.

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p7"></span>And he says first, that there would be
*the seed of peace*. Some think that it is called the seed of peace
because the cultivation of the fields, while the assaults of enemies
were dreaded, was deserted; no one dared to bring out his oxen or his
horses, and then even when the husbandmen sowed their fields, it was not
done as in seasons of quietness and security. As then the fields, when
badly cultivated in times of war, do not produce a full crop, so they
think that it is called the seed of peace, when husbandmen are permitted
to employ necessary labor, when they are free from every fear, and
devote securely their toils on the cultivation and the sowing of their
fields. Others explain the seed of peace to be this — that it is so when
neither storms, nor tempests, nor mildew, nor any other evils do any
harm to the corn and fruit. But as <span
id="iii.ix.xi-p7.1"></span>שלום, *shelum*, means often in Hebrew
prosperity, we may so take it here, that it would be *the seed of
peace*, that is, that the seed would be prosperous; and this
interpretation seems to me less strained. *It shall* then *be the seed
of peace*, that is, it shall prosper according to your labor; what is
sown shall produce its proper fruit.  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p15"></span>There is added an explanation — *The
vine shall yield its fruit, and the earth shall yield its increase, and
the heaven shall yield its dew*. We hence conclude that it was called
the seed of peace, because the husbandmen gained their object when the
earth, irrigated by the dew of heaven, was not sterile, and when the
produce was abundant, when there was plenty of corn and wine, and of
other things. There is then peace or prosperity as to the seed, when the
corn grows according to our wishes, and comes to maturity, and when
heaven responds to the earth, and withholds not its dew, as we have seen
in another place. In short, God testifies that the remnant of his people
should abound in all good things, for the heaven would not withhold from
them its rain, nor the earth shut up its bowels.

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p16"></span>But God ever recalls his people to
himself, that they may depend on his blessing; for it would be a cold
doctrine were we not persuaded of this — that the earth is not otherwise
fruitful than as God gives it the power of generating and of bringing
forth. We ought therefore ever to regard the blessing of God, and to ask
of him to supply us with food, and to pray him every day, as we are
taught, to give us our daily bread. But few do this from the heart, and
hardly one in a hundred so turns his thoughts to God’s hand as firmly to
believe that he daily receives from him his daily food. We now
understand what the Prophet means in these words. It now follows —

<span id="iii.ix.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ix.xii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#013)<span id="iii.ix.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p2"></span>**13.** And it shall come to pass,
*that* as ye were a curse among the heathen, O house of Judah, and house
of Israel; so will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing: fear not,
*but* let your hands be strong.

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p3"></span>**13.** Et erit**,** quemadmodum fuistis
maledictio inter gentes**,** domus Iehudah**,** et domus Israel; sic
servabo vos et eritis benedictio: ne timeatis**,** roborentur manus
vestrae.

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject, and in
this verse he states two contrary things, in order to render more clear
what he teaches here — that while God was angry the earth was barren,
and all things went on unhappily with the Jews; but that when God had
begun to be reconciled, the earth had as it were changed its nature, and
brought forth plentifully, and that they were in every way made blessed.

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p7"></span>Hence he says, *As ye have been a
curse*, *etc*. Here again he mentions and reminds them how miserable
they were while they minded only their private interest, and by
neglecting the temple manifested their impiety and ingratitude; for what
ought they to have been more ready to do when they returned to their
country than to build the temple, and to offer there sacrifices to God,
in order to avow him as the author of their deliverance? But the temple
was neglected; and the Prophet concludes that they must have been
extremely forgetful, if they did not consider what their condition was
as long as they had no care for the temple; and he says that they had
been a *curse among the nations*; that is, that they were an example of
a curse, according to the threatening of the law. For it is a mode of
speaking frequent in Scripture, that the people were a curse; and the
common formula of cursing was — “Let the Lord curse thee as he does the
Jews.” Zechariah then says that the Jews had been a curse, that they had
not only been smitten by God’s hand, but that they had been given up to
calamities, in order that they might become to all detestable, and bear
in a manner signs of God’s wrath imprinted on them. Whoever then at that
time looked on a Jew, he might see that he had the appearance of bearing
a curse. In short, Zechariah means that the Jews had been punished in a
manner not common or usual, but that God had executed on them dreadful
judgments, which made it evident to all that he was grievously offended
with them. *Ye have been then a curse among all nations*  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p9"></span>He then adds, *So I will save you, as ye
shall be a blessing*. The word *save* is introduced that God might more
clearly set forth his favor, lest the Jews should think that the change
had been effected by fortuitous change; for we know that men’s thoughts
soon change, and they feign this or that cause that they may obscure
God’s providence. God then, before he promises that they should be a
blessing, says that he would save them. What it is to be a blessing may
be easily learnt from the opposite clause. They are then said to be a
blessing who bear evident tokens of God’s favor and kindness. So the
Prophet means, that when people wished to be prayed for, or when they
wished well to one another, this would be the common form of their
requests — “May God bless us as he blesses his chosen people: as the
Jews are dear to God, so may he favor us with the same or similar
kindness.” Thus then we see that the Jews were a curse, when exposed to
extreme reproaches; and that they became a blessing when God manifested
towards them tokens of favor, and showed in reality, or by the effect,
that he was pacified towards them.

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p10"></span>He says, in the last place, *Fear ye
not; strengthened be your hands*. He exhorts them to entertain hope, for
fear stands opposed to confidence; and fear, proceeding from unbelief,
cannot be otherwise dissipated but by God’s promises made to us, which
chase away all doubts. Rightly then does the Prophet teach us that the
Jews had no reason to fear, for he declares that God was propitious to
them. We indeed know that all fear cannot be wholly driven away from the
hearts of men; for it would be necessary to deprive us of every feeling
before we could regard dangers without fears. But though fear is natural
to us, and occasions of fear ever occur to us, yet the fear of unbelief
may be dispelled by faith; and hence it is no wonder that God condemns
fear, when he promises salvation to his elect. But as I have said, we
ought to observe that there is here a contrast between condemnable fear
and that confidence which relies on God’s word. We must also add, that
the confidence of God’s children is never so complete that they are free
from all fear, even the fear of unbelief; but still we ought to struggle
against it, so as not to be hindered in the course of our calling. And
this we learn more fully from the end of the verse.

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p11"></span>*Strengthened be your hands*. But why
does the Prophet forbid the Jews to fear? even for this purpose, — that
they might arouse themselves for the work which the Lord had allotted to
them, and not allow fear to retard them or to prevent them to persevere.

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p12"></span>We now then perceive how the faithful
become prepared and ready to render service to God: sloth must first be
shaken off — but how? even by having fear removed. What is the remedy
for healing fear? even to recomb on the promises of God; for when our
minds are composed, the hands and the feet and all the members will be
ready to do their office. Alacrity both of mind and heart and of all the
members follows, when fear is shaken off, and when men begin so to rely
on God’s word, as to know that his help is enough for them against all
dangers, and to dread nothing, being convinced that the Lord will by his
power remove all hindrances.

<span id="iii.ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou sees
us to be cold and frigid, when all our actions ought to be consecrated
to thee, and all our members to be devoted to thy service in obedience
to thy word, — O grant, that we may every day courageously strive
against our natural indifference, and contend with all hindrances, and
boldly repel all assaults which Satan may make, so that though our
fervor may not be such as it ought to be, we may yet with sincere desire
and genuine affection of heart ever advance in the course of our
calling, until we reach the goal and be gathered into thy kingdom to
enjoy the victory which thou hast promised to us, and with which thou
also daily favourest us, until at length it be fully enjoyed, when we
shall be gathered into thy celestial kingdom, through Christ our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fiftieth

<span id="iii.ix.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix.xv-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p2"></span>**14.** For thus saith the LORD of hosts;
As I thought to punish you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath,
saith the LORD of hosts, and I repented not:

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p3"></span>**14.** Quia sic dicit Iehovah
exercituum**,** Quemadmodum cogitavi malum inferre vobis dum me
inflammarunt (aut**,** provocarunt) patres vestri**,** dicit Iehova
exercituum; et non poenituit me;

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p4"></span>**15.** So again have I thought in these
days to do well unto Jerusalem and to the house of Judah: fear ye not.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p5"></span>**15.** Sic conversus sum**,** cogitavi
diebus istis benefacere Ierosolymae et domui Iehudah**,** ne timeatis.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p7"></span><span id="iii.ix.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p8"></span>The Prophet confirms the truth in the
preceding verse, when he said that there would be a wholly different lot
to the Jews, as they would in every way be blessed. He shows the cause
of the change; for God would begin to favor them, who had been before
displeased with them. We indeed know that the Holy Spirit everywhere
calls men before God’s tribunal, that they may know that no adversity
happens to them, except through their sins. So also in this place
Zechariah reminds us, that God had been angry with the Jews, because
they had provoked his wrath. But now a promise is added, that God had
*turned*; not that he had changed his mind, but he meant to show that he
was pacified.  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) We indeed know that
we are to judge of God’s love or hatred to us by outward things; for
when God treats us severely, manifest tokens of his wrath appear; but
when he deals kindly with us, then the fruit of reconciliation seems
evident. According to this view does he now say, that God was of another
mind than formerly towards the Jews; for he designed to show them
kindness, having before sharply and severely chastised them. But we must
more particularly consider each part.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p14"></span>He says, that as God had previously
resolved to punish the Jews, he was now inclined to show mercy, and that
they would find him as it were changed and different from what he had
been. These verses, as I have said, are explanatory; for the Prophet had
briefly promised that the Jews would be a remarkable example of being a
blessed people, but he now shows why God had previously inflicted on
them so many evils and calamities, even because their fathers had
provoked his wrath. And when he says that he had visited them on account
of the crimes or sins of their fathers, we must understand this of the
body of the people. Superfluous then is the question which some
interpreters moot, Whether God punished the children for the sins of
their fathers, when yet he declares in another place, that the soul that
sins shall die: for in this place the Prophet does not distinguish the
fathers from the children, but intimates that God had not been
propitious to the Jews, because they had before greatly provoked his
wrath. There is yet no doubt, but that every one justly suffered the
punishment of his iniquity. The import of the whole is, that the Jews
gained nothing by evasion, for God had not without reason visited them,
but had rendered a just reward for their sins. This is one thing.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p15"></span>What he adds, that God *repented not*
for being thus angry, means the same as though he had said, that the
Jews through their perverseness had only rendered God’s rigour
inflexible. Zechariah then reminds us, that when men cease not to add
evils to evils, and obstinately rush on as though they would make war
with God, he then becomes as it were obstinate too, and according to
what is said in the eighteenth Psalm, “deals perversely with the
perverse.” The reason then why God declares that he had been implacable
to his people, is, because the wickedness of those whom he had spared
and long tolerated was become unhealable; for when he saw that they were
wholly perverse, he armed himself for vengeance.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p16"></span>And hence we may gather a general truth,
— that God cannot be intreated by us, except when we begin to repent;
not that our repentance anticipates God’s mercy, for the question here
is not, what man of himself and of his own inclination can do; as the
object of Zechariah is only to teach us, that when God designs to
forgive us, he changes our hearts and turns us to obedience by his
Spirit; for when he leaves us in our hardness, we must necessarily be
ever afflicted by his hand until we at last perish.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p17"></span>We must at the same time notice what I
have also referred to, — that God here closes the mouths of the Jews,
that they might not murmur against his severity, as though he had dealt
cruelly with them. He then shows that these punishments were just which
the Jews had endured; for it had not been for one day only, but for a
continued succession of time, that the fathers had excited his wrath.
The reason why he speaks of the fathers rather than of themselves is,
because they had for a long series of years hardened themselves in their
wickedness, and corruption had become in them as it were hereditary. He
now says that he had turned; not that he was of another mind, as we have
already said, but this is to be understood of what the people
experienced; for God seemed to be in a manner different, when he became
kind to them and showed them favor, having before manifested many tokens
of vengeance.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p18"></span><span id="iii.ix.xv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p19"></span>Now at the end of the verse the Prophet
reminds us of the application of his doctrine, even to encourage the
Jews, that they might go on with alacrity in the work of building the
temple. But we have said that we ought to be armed with God’s promises,
so that we may with courageous hearts follow wherever he may call us;
for we shall all presently faint except we find that the hand of God is
present with us. Since then we are by nature slothful and tender, and
since inconstancy often creeps in, this is our only remedy, — that when
we seek to go on in the course of our calling to the end, we know that
God will be ever a help to us; and this is what the Prophet now teaches
us. He then applies what he had before promised to its legitimate
purpose, — to encourage the Jews to lay aside their fear, courageously
to undertake their work, and to expect what was not yet evident, even a
complete restoration. It follows —

<span id="iii.ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p2"></span>**16.** These *are* the things that ye
shall do; Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the
judgment of truth and peace in your gates:

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p3"></span>**16.** Haec verba quae facieties (Haec
sunt**,** *nam nomen* \[<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p3.1"></span>דברים\] *est
supervacuum***,** Haec sunt *igitur* quae facietis**,**) Loquimini
veritatem**,** quisque cum socio suo; veritatem et judicium pacis
judicate in portis vestris;

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p4"></span>**17.** And let none of you imagine evil
in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath: for all
these *are things* that I hate, saith the Lord

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p5"></span>**17.** Et vir (et quisque) malum socio
suo ne cogitetis in cordibus vestris; et jusjurandum mendacii ne
diligatis; quia omnia haec sunt quae odio habeo**,** dicit Iehova.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p7"></span><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p8"></span>Zechariah exhorts them here to true
repentance, by showing that more things were to be hoped for than what
they saw with their eyes; and at the same time he shows that it was not
enough for them assiduously to build the city and the temple; but he
requires other things, even that they should observe integrity and
justice towards one another. We indeed know that the Jews were so given
to their own ceremonies, that they thought that holiness existed in
them: and this error Zechariah had before condemned, and now he
inculcates the same truth, — that if they wished to have God propitious
to them, and also wished to enjoy continually that goodness which they
had already tasted, they were to strive to secure it not only by
sacrifices and other ceremonies, but especially by attention to justice
and equity.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p9"></span>But the Prophet does not here mention
every part of an upright life, but only refers to some things. This mode
of speaking is quite common, as we have already often noticed. The
Prophet then states a part for the whole; but still he includes
generally the whole of the second table, when he says that these things
were to be observed,  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) even that
they should *speak the truth*; that is, deal faithfully with one
another, abstain from every falsehood and deceit, and from every kind of
craftiness, — and also that they should *execute justice in their
gates*. And because he names *neighbors* here, it would be very absurd
for anyone hence to conclude, that it is lawful to defraud strangers, or
those with whom we have no near connection: but the Prophet by this term
meant only to set forth the atrocious conduct of the Jews, who spared
not even their friends and their brethren. Though then it is a wicked
thing to deceive any one, even the farthest from us, it is yet a greater
crime when one lies in wait for his near neighbor and brother: and we
know that this mode of speaking occurs everywhere in the law; for God,
in order to restrain us from evil deeds, has set before us that kind of
sin which we are constrained by the impulse of nature to detest. Thus he
speaks of secret hatred as being murder. Then the Prophet in this place
meant more sharply to reprove the Jews, because such barbarity had
prevailed among them, that no one regarded his neighbor, but raged as it
were against his own bowels.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p14"></span>As to the words, *truth* and the
*judgment of peace*, he intimates by them, that not only individuals
were privately given to evil deeds, but that also the court of justice
was full of frauds and wrong acts, while it ought to have been the
sanctuary of justice. Though many may be perversely wicked among the
people, yet their audacity and wickedness are always restrained, when
the laws are put in force, and incorrupt judges rule. But the Prophet
shows that the judges had become like robbers, for there was no
integrity in the gates. He mentions *truth* first, for the judges
craftily perverted all truth by misrepresentations, as it is commonly
the case. For even the worst of men do not openly say that they approve
of a wicked deed; but they find out disguises by which they cover their
own baseness, and that of those who do wrong, whom they favor, when
bribed with money. It is then necessary that *truth* should have the
first place in courts of justice. By the *judgment of peace* he
understands, when his own is given to every one. Some think that what is
right is called the *judgment of peace*, because when mercenary judges
condemn and oppress the innocent, and for gain’s sake patronise what is
wrong, many tumults often arise, and then open war ensues: but as the
word peace has a wide meaning in Hebrew, we may take the judgment of
peace as meaning only a calm and a rightly formed judgment. The Jews, we
know, administered justice in the gates.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p15"></span><span id="iii.ix.xvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p16"></span>He afterwards adds, *And think not evil
every one against his friend*. Here the Prophet not only condemns open
wrongs, but also the hidden purposes of evil. We hence learn, that the
law was not only given to restrain men as it were by a bridle, and that
it not only contains a rule of life as to outward duties, but that it
also rules their hearts before God and angels. The law is indeed really
spiritual; and extremely gross and foolish are they who think that they
satisfy the law of Moses, when they abstain from murder and theft and
other evil deeds; for we see that the Prophets everywhere required a
right feeling in the hearts as Zechariah does in this place, who reminds
the Jews, that they were not to devise evil against their friends, no,
not in their hearts. He might have omitted the last words; but he meant
to condemn those frauds which were wont to be covered by many and
various disguises. Though then men may not bring forth their wickedness,
yet Zechariah shows that God will punish it; for whatever dwells within,
however concealed it may be from the eyes of men, however hidden it may
be in the depth of the heart, it must yet come to an account before God.

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p17"></span>He adds another kind of evil, even
perjury, *And love not the oath of falsehood*. He might have said, swear
not to the injury of thy neighbor; but there is to be observed here a
contrast between the perverted love of men and the hatred of God. As
then God hates a false oath as all other frauds and falsehoods, so he
forbids us to desire it: for if we wish to please God, we must see what
he requires from us, inasmuch as we designedly provoke his wrath when we
desire or covet what he declares that he hates. In a word, Zechariah
shows that God would be propitious and kind to the Jews, provided they
truly and from the heart repented, and attended to what was right and
just — not only to build the temple, to offer sacrifices, and to observe
other rites, but also to form their life according to what integrity
required; to labor not only by external acts to discharge their duties
towards their neighbors; but also to cleanse their hearts from all
hatred, all cruelty, and all depraved affections. It now follows —

<span id="iii.ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p2"></span>**18.** And the word of the Lord of
hosts came unto me, saying,

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p3"></span>**18.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae
exercituum ad me**,** dicendo**,**

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p4"></span>**19.** Thus saith the Lord of hosts;
The fast of the fourth *month*, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast
of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of
Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts; therefore love the truth
and peace.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p5"></span>**19.** Sic dicit Iehova
exercituum**,** Iejunium quarti et jenunium quinti**,** et jejunium
septimi**,** et jejunium decimi (mensis**,**) erit domui Iehudah in
gaudium et laetitiam et dies festos bonos; ergo veritatem et pacem
diligite.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p7"></span><span id="iii.ix.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p8"></span>He confirms the same truth, that such
would be the restoration of the Church that all the memory of their
sorrows would be obliterated. We have already said, that some fasts were
observed by the Jews after the destruction of their city. Before two
only were mentioned, but now the Prophet names four. In the fourth month
the city was taken, and in the fifth the temple was destroyed and burnt
down; in the seventh was Gedaliah slain, who had remained with the
residue of the people who had been gathered by him; and the fast of the
tenth month, as some think, was appointed when the city was besieged. If
so, the fast of the tenth month preceded the rest, then followed the
fast of the fourth month, in the third place the fast of the fifth
month, and, lastly, the fast of the seventh month, on account of the
death of Gedaliah.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p9"></span>These then were tokens of mourning to
the time of the restoration; for when the city was besieged, God raised
up, as it were, a sign of dreadful vengeance; and when Nebuchadnezzar
broke through the wall of the city, it was then openly forsaken by God;
after the burning of the temple there remained no hope, except that some
of the common people continued in the land under the protection of
Gedaliah. The root, as it were, of the people was cut off, but some thin
fibres were remaining; and when even these were torn asunder, when all
who could be found were led into exile, the favor of God had wholly
disappeared as to the outward appearance. It behaved then the Jews to be
in mourning and humiliation, that they might seek pardon from God. We
shall not then say, that these fasts were without reason, and foolishly
appointed by them, for they were at liberty to testify their sorrow;
nay, it was an act of piety humbly in their guilt to deprecate the wrath
of the celestial Judge, when they perceived that he was displeased with
them. But God now promises joy, which was to extinguish all sorrow, as
the rising of the sun drives away all the darkness of the night.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p10"></span>But the Prophet seems to allude to
what he had before taught when he indirectly taunted the Jews, because
they were too anxious about keeping fasts, while they neglected the main
things. But the simple meaning is, that if the Jews really repented and
sincerely sought to return to God’s favor, there would be an end to all
their miseries, so that there would be no need of fasting.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p11"></span>We must also remember that the design
of fasting is this, that those who have sinned may humble themselves
before God, and go as suppliants before his throne, that they may
confess their sins and condemn themselves. Fasting then is, as it were,
the habit of criminals when they desire to obtain pardon from God; for
Christ says, that there is no fasting at marriages and during festal
days. (<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p11.1"></span>[Mt
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015)<span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p11.1"></span>.) We then see that there is here promised
a restoration which was to put an end to every former cause of sorrow
among the people; not that these fasts of themselves displeased God, for
they were appointed, as we have said, for a good purpose — that the
people might thus exercise themselves in acts of piety, and also
stimulate and support their hope till the time of their deliverance; but
Zechariah pursues what he had begun — that God was now plainly
reconciled, for he favored his people, and proved this by the blessings
he bestowed.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p12"></span>With regard to *festal days*, we know
that among other things they are expressly mentioned by Moses, “Thou
shalt rejoice before thy God.” (<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p12.1"></span>[De
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018)<span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p12.1"></span>.) When therefore the Jews celebrated
their festal meetings, it was the same as though they stood before God,
and were thus fully persuaded that they were in his presence. Forasmuch
then as God thus designed to exhilarate his people by festivals, the
Prophet does not without reason say, that the fasts, which had been
signs of mourning, would be turned into joy and into festal days.
Moreover, the Prophet thus speaks, because the observance of the law,
which prevailed while the people were in a state of security, had been
interrupted in their exile — as though he had said, “As food expelled
you to a foreign land, and made you while exiles from your country to
grieve and mourn, so now being restored you shall have joy, and
religiously keep your festal days.” And thus he indirectly reproves the
Jews for having deprived themselves of their festal days, in which the
law invited them to rejoice, for they had profaned them. God would not
have suffered to be discontinued what he had commanded, had not religion
been corrupted; for on this account it was that things changed for the
worse, and that sorrow succeeded, which is here designated by fastings.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p13"></span>At length he concludes by saying,
*Love ye then truth and peace*. By truth he means integrity, as we have
said before; and Zechariah includes in this word the whole of what is
just and right: for when our hearts are cleansed, then the rule of
justice and equity is observed. When then we deal sincerely with our
neighbors, all the duties of love freely flow from within as from a
fountain. As to the word peace, it may be explained in two ways: either
as in the former instance when he mentioned the judgment of peace in the
sense of judgment rightly formed, and thus to love peace is to love good
order; or it may be taken for God’s blessing, as though the Prophet
said, “If ye wish to be in a good and prosperous state, observe
integrity towards one another; for God will ever be present by his
blessing, provided ye be sincere and faithful.  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) Ye have in a manner sought a curse for
yourselves, and dried up as it were the fountain of God’s blessings by
your wickedness and your frauds. If then truth reign among you, all
felicity shall accompany it; for the Lord will bless you.” I shall not
proceed farther now.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
invites us so kindly and graciously to thyself, we may not be
refractory, but with every evil affection subdued, offer ourselves to
thy service; and since thou requires nothing else from us but to observe
what is right towards one another, — O grant that we may be mindful of
that brotherhood which thine only-begotten Son has consecrated by his
own blood, and call on thee as our Father, and prove by the whole of our
conduct that we are thy children; and may every one of us so labor for
one another, that being united in heart and affection, we may with one
consent aspire after that blessed life, where we shall enjoy that
inheritance which has been prepared and obtained by the blood of thy
Son, and through him laid up for us in heaven. — Amen.

<span id="iii.ix.xviii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xix-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-first

<span id="iii.ix.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ix.xx-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#020)<span
id="iii.ix.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p2"></span>**20.** Thus saith the Lord of hosts; *It
shall* yet *come to pass*, that there shall come people, and the
inhabitants of many cities:

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p3"></span>**20.** Sic dicit Iehova exercituum**,**
Adhuc quando venient populi et incolae urbium magnarum (*vel***,**
multarum;)

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p4"></span>**21.** And the inhabitants of one *city*
shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord,
and to seek the Lord of hosts: I will go also.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p5"></span>**21.** Et venient incolae unius ad
alteram**,** dicendo**,** Eamus eundo ad deprecandam faciem Iehovae**,**
et quaerendum Iehovam exercituum; ibo etiam ego.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p6"></span>**22.** Yea, many people and strong
nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray
before the Lord.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p7"></span>**22.** Et venient populi magni et gentes
robustae ad quaerendum Iehovam exercituum Ierosolymae**,** et
depreceandam faciem Iehovae.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p9"></span><span id="iii.ix.xx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p10"></span>The Prophet here extends his discourse
still farther; for he promises not only the complete restoration of his
chosen people, but also the propagation of the Church; for God, he says,
will gather a Church for himself from many and remote nations, and unite
many nations in one body. And this ought to have availed especially to
animate the Jews, as they were thus taught that the temple was built,
not only that God might be worshipped by one nation, but by all nations.
Moreover, as before this time some had come from distant lands to
worship God, the Prophet may seem here to have this in view by using
<span id="iii.ix.xx-p10.1"></span>עוד, *oud*, the adverb of time.  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) But he not only declares that some would
come, as in the time of Solomon, but as I have already said, he promises
here something more remarkable — that the temple would not belong
peculiarly to the Jews, but would be common to all nations; for there is
to be no language and no nation which is not to unite in the true
worship of God. But let us consider the words of the Prophet.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p14"></span>He begins by saying, that God was the
author of this prophecy; and this was said to secure credit. There was
need, as we have said, of no common authority, since he was here
speaking of what was incredible. There was only a handful of people
returned to their country, and many dangers surrounded them almost every
day; so that many, wearied with their present condition, preferred
exile, and regret for their return had now crept into the minds of many,
for they thought that they had been deceived. Since then the state of
the people was such, there was need of something more than ordinary to
confirm what is here said — that the glory of the second temple would be
greater and more eminent than that of the first: *It shall yet be*, he
says. Though a comparison is implied, there is yet no equality
expressed, as though some few only would come. But as there had been no
temple for seventy years, and as the temple, now begun to be built, was
in no high esteem, but mean and insignificant, the Prophet says, that
the time would yet come, when *nations and inhabitants of great cities*
would *ascend into Jerusalem*. We may indeed render <span
id="iii.ix.xx-p14.1"></span>רבות, *rebut*, many or great, for it means
both; but the Prophet, I think, speaks of great cities; and the reason
will presently appear.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p15"></span><span id="iii.ix.xx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p16"></span>It follows, *Come shall the inhabitants
of one to one*, that is, the inhabitants of one city to another;
*saying, going let us go*, *etc*. He means by these words, that there
will be a mutual consent among all nations, so that they will stimulate
one another, and thus unite together their exertions. We here see that
the Prophet’s object was to encourage the Jews to entertain good hope,
and thus to cause them to persevere, so that they might not doubt but
that success would attend their work and labor, because the Lord would
have himself worshipped at Jerusalem, not only by themselves but also by
all nations. But as the Jews could not believe that nations could by
force be drawn there, he teaches them, that their assembling would be
voluntary; he says that those who had been before extremely refractory
would be disposed to come of their own accord, so that there would be no
need of external force to constrain them; for they would willingly come,
nay, would excite one another, and by mutual exhortations stimulate
themselves so as to come together to worship God at Jerusalem.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p17"></span>The ardor and vehemence of their zeal is
to be noticed; for the Prophet says, that they would come of their own
accord, and also encourage one another, according to what we have seen
in the second chapter <span id="iii.ix.xx-p17.1"></span>[Zec
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001)<span id="iii.ix.xx-p17.1"></span>,
Lay hold will each on the hand of his brother, and say, let us go to the
mount of the God of Jacob. But more is expressed in this place, for not
only shall each one encourage his brother whenever met and an
opportunity be offered, but he says that they will come from all
quarters. We now then see the design of the Prophet in these words. And
we hence learn, that faith then only produces its legitimate fruit when
zeal is kindled, so that every one strives to increase the kingdom of
God, and to gather the straying, that the Church may be filled. For when
any one consults his own private benefit and has no care for others, he
first betrays most clearly his own inhumanity, and where there is no
love the Spirit of God does not rule there. Besides, true godliness
brings with it a concern for the glory of God. It is no wonder then that
the Prophet, when describing true and real conversion, says, that each
would be solicitous about his brethren, so as to stimulate one another,
and also that the hearts of all would be so kindled with zeal for God,
that they would hasten together to celebrate his glory.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p18"></span>Then he adds, *Let us go to entreat the
face of Jehovah*. The phrase is common in Scripture. But we must
observe, that the Prophet in speaking of God’s worship, sets prayer in
the first rank, for prayer to God is the chief part, yea, the main thing
in religion. It is, indeed, immediately added, *and to seek Jehovah*: he
explains the particular by the general; and in the next verse he inverts
the order, beginning with the general. However, the meaning continues
the same, for God seeks nothing else but that we should be teachable and
obedient, so as to be prepared to follow wherever he may call us, and at
the same time carefully to enquire respecting his will, as we have need
of him as our leader and teacher, so that we may not foolishly go astray
through winding and circuitous courses; for if we deem it enough to take
presumptuously our own way, the endeavor to seek God will be
superfluous. It must then be observed, that God is then only really
sought when men desire to learn from his word how he is to be
worshipped. But, as I have already said, the Prophet adds prayer here,
for the design of the whole truth respecting salvation is to teach us,
that our life depends on God, and that whatever belongs to eternal life
must be hoped for and expected from him.  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) We now then understand the import of the
whole.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p26"></span><span id="iii.ix.xx-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p27"></span>But we must enquire also why he says,
that the nations would come to seek God at *Jerusalem*, and there to
call on him. The Jews foolishly imagine that God cannot be otherwise
worshipped than by offering sacrifices still in the temple. But the
Prophet had something very different in view, that the light of truth
would arise from that city, which would diffuse itself far and wide: and
this prophecy ought to be connected with that of Isaiah,

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p28"></span>“A law shall go forth from Sion,  
and the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.” (<span
id="iii.ix.xx-p28.2"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span
id="iii.ix.xx-p28.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p29"></span>As then the doctrine of salvation which
has filled the whole world flowed from that city, the Prophet says, that
nations would come to Jerusalem, not that it would be necessary for them
to assemble there, but because all were to seek there what could not be
obtained elsewhere. Since then none could be accounted the children of
God except they were brought up in that school and acknowledged that
alone to be true religion which had its first habitation at Jerusalem,
we hence see why the Prophet expressly mentions that city.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p30"></span>We must further bear in mind, that the
temple was built for this end and purpose, — that the doctrine of
salvation might continue there, and have there its seat until the coming
of Christ; for then was fulfilled that prophecy in the hundred and tenth
Psalm, “The scepter of thy power shall God send forth from Sion.” The
Prophet here teaches us, that Christ would not be the king of one people
only, whose power was to be confined to narrow limits, but that he would
rule through the whole world, for God would extend his scepter to every
quarter of the globe. As tell it behaved the Jews to have this end in
view, the Prophet, in order to animate them that they might not fail in
the middle of their work, says, that that place was sacred to God, so
that salvation might thence be sought by the whole world, for all were
to be the disciples of that Church who wished to be deemed the children
of God.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p31"></span>But we ought carefully to notice what I
have already referred to, the two things required in God’s worship — to
seek him, and also to pray to him. For the superstitious, though they
pretend great ardor in seeking God, yet amuse themselves with many
delusions; for they hurry on presumptuously, and as it were at random,
so that they seek not God, but leave him, and weary themselves without
thought and without any judgment. As then the superstitious have no
reason for what they do, they can not be said properly to seek God. But
the faithful seek God, for they acknowledge that he is not to be
worshipped according to the fancy of any one, but that there is a
certain prescript and rule to be observed. To us then this is the
beginning of religion — not to allow to ourselves liberty to attempt
anything we please, but humbly and soberly to submit to God’s word; for
when any one seeks and chooses an unfit teacher, he will not advance as
he ought to do. But the Prophet shows, that all the godly succeed when
they strive to be approved of God by confining themselves to his word,
and by attempting nothing through their own promptings, but when they
have such a discernment as not to blend, as it is said, profane with
sacred things. The second chief thing is, to pray to God: and the
Prophet thus reminds us why it is that God would have us especially to
seek him. Nothing indeed results to his advantage and benefit from our
efforts, but he would have us to seek him that we may learn to expect
from him everything connected with our salvation. This seeking is also
defined by the term prayer, and not useless is the word *face*, for
though God is invisible, we yet ought not to wander with uncertainty, as
it were through the air, when our purpose is to flee to him, but to go
to him with full confidence. Unless then we are fully persuaded of what
the Scripture teaches us — that God is ever nigh those who truly call on
him, the door will be closed against our prayers, for God’s name will be
profaned though we may express what we wish. As then the nearness of God
ought to be impressed on our hearts when we prepare ourselves for
prayer, the Scripture usually adopts this form, *to entreat the face of
God*. But this is not to be understood of an ocular sight, but, on the
contrary, of the conviction of the heart. Let us now proceed -

<span id="iii.ix.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023)<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p2"></span>**23.** Thus saith the Lord of hosts; In
those days *it shall come to pass*, that ten men shall take hold out of
all languages of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him
that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you: for we have heard *that* God
*is* with you.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p3"></span>**23.** Sic dicit Iehova exercituum**,**
In diebus isitis *fiet* ut apprehendant decem homines ex cunctis linguis
gentium**,** apprehendant alam viri Judaei**,** dicendo**,** Ambulabimus
(*vel***,** ambulemus) vobiscum**,** quia audivimus quod Deus sit
vobiscum.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p6"></span>He pursues the same subject in this
verse; for as he had before said, that the nations would willingly come
to worship God, and that each would encourage his brother to undertake
this pious and holy expedition, so he now adds, that ten men would lay
hold on the border of a Jew’s garment: *Ten men shall then take hold of
the skirt of a Jew*. He shows here more clearly what I have briefly
referred to — that there would be no need of arms, or of any compulsion,
in order to draw or compel the nations to engage in God’s service; for
even ten would of themselves accompany one Jew; and it is a proof of a
very great readiness when ten surrender themselves to be ruled by one.
As one Jew could not be sufficient to draw so many nations, the Prophet
declares that there would be everywhere a union of faith, so that those,
before wholly alienated from God, would desire to join themselves as
friends, or rather as companions to the Jews.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p7"></span>He says, *From all languages*. By these
words he amplifies the miracle; for there cannot be a union between men
far distant, especially when they are of different languages, as they
are barbarians to one another. When the Prophet then says that they
would *come from all languages*, and unite together, it more fully
appears to be God’s work; for there is nothing here to be ascribed to
human contrivances. It must then be that the hearts of those who cannot
express their minds, and can hardly give a sign, are united together by
the hidden power of the Spirit. We now perceive the Prophet’s object in
this verse.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p8"></span>But he uses in the last clause a phrase
different from the one he employed before — *Let us go with you, for we
have heard that with you is God*. He had said, “Let us go to seek
Jehovah, and to entreat his face;” but now he says “Let us go with you.”
But yet he handles and confirms the same thing; for the nations could
not have sought God without following the Jews going before them. For
when any one separates himself from others, it so happens that he is led
astray, and feeds on much that is very absurd, as we see to be the case
with proud and morose men, who invent strange and monstrous things; for
they shun society, and seem not to themselves to be wise, until they put
off every feeling of humanity. The character then of faith has also this
in it — that the elect, while they themselves obey God, desire to have
many associates in this obedience, and many fellow-disciples in true
religion. The Prophet thus intended to point out two things: be had said
before — “Let us go to seek God;” and now — “We will go with you.” What
else is this but to seek God? But he expresses more now — that the
nations declare that they would come to seek God for this end — that
they might learn from others, like rude beginners, who have their
fellow-scholars as their teachers; so that every one who had made some
progress, was to preside over others, and those as yet commencing, and
still in the first elements of knowledge, were humbly to connect
themselves with others better informed. Shame prevents many from making
in this manner any advancement, and so they ever remain sunk in
ignorance.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p9"></span>The Prophet at the same time not only
commends humility, but also exhorts all God’s children to cultivate
unity and concord. For whosoever tears asunder the Church of God,
disunites himself from Christ, who is the head, and who would have all
his members to be united together.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p10"></span>We now then understand that God ought
to be sought in order to be rightly worshipped by us; and also, that he
ought to be thus sought, not that each may have his own peculiar
religion, but that we may be united together, and that every one who
sees his brethren going before, and excelling in gifts, may be prepared
to follow them, and to seek benefit from their labors. It is indeed true
that we ought to disregard the whole world; and to embrace only the
truth of God; for it is a hundred times better to renounce the society
of all mortals, and union with them, then to withdraw ourselves from
God; but when God shows himself as our leader, the Prophet teaches us
that we ought mutually to stretch forth our hand and unitedly to follow
him.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p11"></span>We have again to notice at the end of
the verse what I have already referred to — that the nations would come,
not compelled by force of arms or by violence, but drawn by hearing
alone. *We have heard*. By hearing the Prophet means here the doctrine
of salvation everywhere diffused; for there would be no care nor concern
for worshipping were we not taught; for faith, as Paul says, is by
hearing; and so prayer proceeds from faith. (<span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p11.1"></span>[Ro
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span
id="iii.ix.xxi-p11.1"></span>.) In short, the Prophet means that the
knowledge of religion would be through the preaching of the truth, which
would rouse all nations to the duty of worshipping God.

<span id="iii.ix.xxi-p12"></span>He now again confirms what we have also
mentioned — that the Jews would have the precedence of all nations; for
it appears that God would be among them. We hence see that primacy is
not ascribed to the Jews in being leaders to others, because they
excelled others by their own virtue or dignity, but because God presided
over them. Then God is ever to be sought, though we may avail ourselves
of the labors of men, and follow them when they show us the right way.
We must ever bear this in mind — that those only exhort truly and
honestly, who not only do so by word, but who really prove what they
feel by their conduct; according to what the Prophet has said — *Go will
I also*; and he says the same now — *Let us go*, or, we shall go *with
you*. For many there are who are strenuous enough in stimulating others;
but their vain garrulity appears evident; for while they bid others to
run, they are standing still; and while they vehemently encourage
others, they themselves delay and take their rest. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc30011.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iii.ix.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p11"></span> Many MSS. have \[<span
id="iii.ix.ii-p11.1"></span>אלי\], “to me,” after “hosts,” a reading
confirmed by the *Targum*, *Syriac*, and the *Septuagint*. Barb. MS.;
and it is no doubt the true one.—*Ed.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc30011.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iii.ix.ii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p12"></span> *Newcome* has followed our version. The
rendering of *Henderson* is the same with that of *Calvin*, —

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p13"></span>I have been zealous for Zion with great
zeal.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p14"></span>The comparison is evidently what
*Calvin* refers to above; it is the jealousy of a husband for the honor
of his wife. *Blayney* has no good reason for saying that this verse
refers to what was past, and the following to the state of things at
that time; for the verbs in both instances are in the same tense, the
perfect, which often includes the present, that is, the perfect up to
the present time; as the future in Hebrew, and also in Welsh, includes
the present as well as what is to come. If we say, “I have been
jealous,” etc., we must add in the next verse, “I have returned,” etc.
But it would be better in our language to use in both instances the
present tense, “I am jealous,” etc., and, “I am retained,” etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc30011.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p10"></span> “The walls of the city were not
dedicated, <span id="iii.ix.iii-p10.1"></span>[Ne
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027)<span
id="iii.ix.iii-p10.1"></span>, till above sixty years after this
prophecy.”—*Newcome.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc30011.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iii.ix.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iii-p13"></span> This verse presents an example of an
inverted order in the words, often met with in Scripture. Zion and
Jerusalem are first mentioned, then Jerusalem and Zion. “Truth” here
seems especially to mean faithfulness, as opposed to perfidy; for
Jerusalem had become unfaithful and broken her covenant with God.
“Holiness” included what was moral and ceremonial. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc30011.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iii.ix.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p8"></span> “Longevity and a numerous offspring were
especially promised under the old dispensation, but uniformly in
connection with obedience to the law. <span
id="iii.ix.iv-p8.1"></span>[Deut.
4:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#040), [Deut.
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#016),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#033), [Deut.
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#002), [Deut.
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix.iv-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.ix.iv-p8.2"></span>[Isa
65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020)<span
id="iii.ix.iv-p8.2"></span>.” — *Henderson*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc30011.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iii.ix.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vii-p14"></span> *Blayney* and *Henderson* consider
these words, “truth” and “righteousness,” as belonging as equally to the
two foregoing sentences, as applying to the people as well as to God.
But they seem more properly as applying to God, as truth connected with
righteousness refers to his faithfulness, confirmed by his justice in
the performance of his promise. God is true or faithful, and further, he
is righteous or just, so that what he has promised will surely be
fulfilled. See <span id="iii.ix.vii-p14.1"></span>[1Jo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009)<span
id="iii.ix.vii-p14.1"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc30011.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p16"></span> The verse may be thus rendered—

<span id="iii.ix.x-p17"></span>*Thus saith Jehovah of hosts,  
Strengthened be your hands,  
Who hear in these days  
Those very words from the mouth of the Prophets,  
Which* ye heard *in the day of founding the house  
Of Jehovah of Hosts, the temple, that it might be built.*

<span id="iii.ix.x-p18"></span>As in a former instance, chapter 2:4,
\[<span id="iii.ix.x-p18.1"></span>אלה\], repeated, should be rendered
“these” and “those.” *Blayney* borrows after “which” the verb “ye
heard,” from the former line; but *Henderson* considers \[<span
id="iii.ix.x-p18.2"></span>דברו\] to be understood, “which were spoken.”
The former is the most obvious. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc30011.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p24"></span> *Calvin* has in this instance followed
the *Septuagint*, and so has *Newcome*; but the *Targum* has “<span
id="iii.ix.x-p24.1"></span>propter hostem — on account of the enemy;”
and the same is the most common meaning of the Hebrew; and such is the
rendering of *Drusius*, *Marckius*, *Dathius*, and *Henderson*. We may
give this literal version of the whole verse,—

<span id="iii.ix.x-p25"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.x-p26"></span>**10.** For before those days, The hire
of man, it was nothing; And the hire of beast, not any; And to the goer
and the comer, No peace from the enemy; And I sent forth every man, Each
one against his neighbor.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p27"></span>The word \[<span
id="iii.ix.x-p27.1"></span>צר\] is perhaps more strictly an oppressor
than an enemy, though it be often rendered by the latter word. The verb
means to straiten, to confine, and thus to distress, to afflict, or to
oppress. Not a foreign but a domestic enemy is here meant, as intimated
in the two last lines. The “sending forth” shows that these enemies were
robbers; and this is also evident from the statement that “goers” and
“comers” were not safe. Hence our version and that of *Newcome* are
wrong, in which “I set” is found instead of “I sent forth,” the proper
meaning of the verb used here. “I sent” of *Henderson* is not quite
correct, for the idea is not fully expressed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc30011.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iii.ix.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p8"></span> It is not easy to know the precise
meaning of this phrase, capable as it is of various explanations.
*Jerome*, *Grotius*, and *Marckius* consider “the remnant,” mentioned in
the preceding verse, as meant by the seed, “For the seed *shall* be
peace,” or peacable, instead of being rebellious as before. The verse,
as stated by *Marckius*, may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p9"></span>*For* to *the seed of peace  
Shall the vine yield its fruit, etc.*

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p10"></span>But what seems most consonant with the
whole passage, is to regard \[<span id="iii.ix.xi-p10.1"></span>זרע\] as
meaning seed-time or sowing, (<span id="iii.ix.xi-p10.2"></span>[Ge
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022)<span
id="iii.ix.xi-p10.2"></span>,) and to consider \[<span
id="iii.ix.xi-p10.3"></span>שלום\] to be, in its ordinary sense, as
signifying peace or peacable. It was said before, in verse 10, that
there was no peace to goers and comers, such as went forth to labor in
the field: but now there was to be a different state of things. Then the
version would be, —

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p12"></span>**12.** For the sowing-time *will* be
peacable; The vine shall give its fruit, And the land shall give its
increase, And the heavens shall give their dew: Yea, I will cause the
remnant of this people To inherit all these things.

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p13"></span>But most follow *Calvin’s* view: so do
*Newcome* and *Henderson*.

<span id="iii.ix.xi-p14"></span>*Blayney* considers \[<span
id="iii.ix.xi-p14.1"></span>זרע\] a participle, and construes the words
in connection with the former verse, “I will not be to the residue of
this people such as I was in former days,” (that is, a sower of discord,
as verse 10,) “but a sower of peace.” This certainly makes the
construction easier. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc30011.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iii.ix.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xii-p8"></span> *Calvin* takes no notice of the words
“House of Judah, and house of Israel.” This has occasioned difficulty to
some interpreters. But *Newcome* thinks that “many of the ten tribes”
returned with “the house of Judah” from captivity, and are here
addressed. *Henderson* is of the same opinion, and adds these remarks —
“They also (that is the house of Israel) returned to Palestine, \[<span
id="iii.ix.xii-p8.1"></span>בימים האלה\], in the very days (verse 15) to
which it (the prophecy) refers. All attempts to discover them at more
recent periods have proved utterly fruitless; and the idea that they
must still exist somewhere in the world, and are still to be restored in
their tribal state, has arisen from misconstruction of those prophecies
which refer to the return from Babylon.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc30011.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iii.ix.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p9"></span> Some, as *Drusius*, *Newcome*, and
*Henderson*, as well as our own translators, have regarded this verb
“turned” as used here adverbially, as it is evidently in some places,
“So again have I thought,” or purposed: but the construction here is not
the same as when it occurs in that sense; and it is to be taken here in
contrast to the not repenting in the preceding verse. God in the former
instance did not turn, or change, or repent; but now he is said to have
turned. I render the two verse thus,—

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p11"></span>**14.** For thus saith Jehovah of
hosts,— As I fully purposed to render evil to you, Because your fathers
made me extremely angry, Saith Jehovah of hosts, And I did not repent;

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p12"></span>**15.** So have I turned, *and* fully
purposed in these days To do good to Jerusalem, And to the house of
Judah; fear not.

<span id="iii.ix.xv-p13"></span>The verb \[<span
id="iii.ix.xv-p13.1"></span>זמם\] is more than to think or to purpose;
it being a reduplicate verb, it signifies to purpose firmly or fully.
The Septuagint and the Syriac version supply *and* before it in verse
15. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc30011.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iii.ix.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p10"></span> Literally it is, “These the words
which ye shall do.” The term “words” means here what the words contain,
and may therefore be rendered, “commands,” or “do” may be translated
“observe:” —

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p11"></span>*These* are *the commands which ye
shall do,* —*  
Speak the truth, each one to his neighbor;  
The truth and the judgment of peace  
Pronounce in your gates.*

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p12"></span>Instead of “Pronounce,” *Newcome* has
“Determine,” and *Henderson*, as in our version, “Execute;” the more
literal rendering is “Judge:” but the verb often means to decide, to
determine, to declare a thing as a judge, or to pronounce sentence in a
cause. What they were required here was to pronounce what was true and
right according to the law, an dto give such a judgment as was
calculated to promote peace and concord, “by deterring the litigious,”
as *Newcome* observes, “and punishing the evil doer.” *Jerome*,
*Drusius*, *Pemble*, *Henry*, and *Grotius*, give the same view of “the
judgment of peace;” but *Henderson* agrees with Calvin, and renders it
“sound judgment.” The former view is most to be approved, as the latter
is less distinct, for “true” and “sound” are nearly the same. “Let the
judges,” observes *Henry*, “that sit in the gates, in all their judicial
proceedings have regard both to truth and to peace; let them take care
to do justice, and to accommodate differences, and prevent vexatious
suits. It must be a judgment of truth in order to peace; and a judgment
of peace as far as is consistent with truth, and no further.”

<span id="iii.ix.xvi-p13"></span>The words, “speak the truth,” *Kimchi*
very beautifully explains thus, — “Speak not with one thing in your
mouth and another thing in your heart.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc30011.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p14"></span> It is better to regard “peace” here
in its ordinary meaning, as opposed to strife and contention, as “truth”
is to falsehood an deceit. They were to “love truth” and not falsehood,
and also “peace” and concord, and not discord and contention.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p15"></span>The \[<span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p15.1"></span>ו\], *vau*, at the beginning of this
sentence has been variously rendered: “only” by *Jerome* and *Drusius*;
“therefore” by *Calvin* and *Blayney*; “but” by *Newcome* and
*Henderson*. But there is no need of all this. Let the whole passage be
rendered in a perceptive form, and it may have its usual meaning as a
copulative, as in the following manner,—

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p16"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p17"></span>Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — Let the
fast of the fourth, and the fast of the fifth, And the fast of the
seventh, and the fast of the tenth *month*, Be to the house of Judah For
exultation and joy, And for cheerful seasons; And love ye truth and
peace.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p18"></span>“Exultation,” \[<span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p18.1"></span>ששוז\], is the outward expression of joy;
the most obvious thing is mentioned first, as often is the case in
Scripture, and then the source from which it proceeds, even joy.
“Cheerful” is literally “good,” — good seasons, or festivals, or
solemnities. “The Hebrews,” says *Grotius*, “were wont to call those
days *good* which were appointed for rejoicing.” This passage contains
the answer to the inquiry mentioned in chapter 7:3; but the answer
refers not only to one fast but to all the fasts which the Jews had
instituted. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc30011.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iii.ix.xx-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p11"></span> There is a difficulty in the
construction here. The best solution is that of our version, followed by
*Grotius*, *Newcome*, and others; there is understood the auxiliary
verb, “it shall be:” so the rendering would be,

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p12"></span>*Yet* it shall be *that come shall
people  
And the inhabitants of many cities.*

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p13"></span>There is a similar instance in verse 23,
where the auxiliary verb is to be understood, and \[<span
id="iii.ix.xx-p13.1"></span>אשר\] must be rendered *that*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc30011.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iii.ix.xx-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p19"></span> The 20th and 21st I render thus—

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p20"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p21"></span>**20.** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts Yet
*it shall be* that come shall people And the inhabitants of many cities;
Yea, the inhabitants of one shall go to another, saying, “Going let us
go to implore the favor of Jehovah; And to seek Jehovah of hosts, go
also will I.”

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p22"></span>The verb rendered “implore,” means to
solicit with importunity, or earnestness. “To conciliate the regard of
Jehovah,” as rendered by *Henderson*, is too much in the style of modern
phraseology; nor is the meaning conveyed. *Blayney’s* version is better,
“To supplicate the favor of Jehovah.” It seems more suitable to connect
the words “to seek Jehovah,” with the last sentence. We find the two
clauses in the next verse, but in an inverted order—

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p23"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p24"></span>**22.** Yea, come shall many people and
mighty nations To seek Jehovah of hosts in Jerusalem, And to implore the
favor of Jehovah.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p25"></span> — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc30012)
