[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc30016)  [Next](cc30018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p1"></span>chapter 14

<span id="iii.xv.i"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixty-fifth

<span id="iii.xv.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Behold, the day of the Lord
cometh, and thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Ecce dies venit Iehovae**,** et
dividentur spolia tua in medio tui.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p4"></span>**2.** For I will gather all nations
against Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses
rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into
captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the
city.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Et congregabo omnes gentes contra
Ierusalem in proelium**,** et capietur urbs**,** et diripientur domus;
mulieres stuprabuntur; et exibit dimidia pars urbis in exilium**,** et
residuum populi non excidetur ex urbe.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p7"></span><span id="iii.xv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p8"></span>Zechariah pursues the same subject as in
the preceding chapter: for having promised a joyful and happy state to
the faithful, who despising their indulgences in Chaldea had returned to
their own country, he now reminds them that their peaceful condition in
Judea would not be without many trials and troubles; and therefore he
exhorts them to patience, lest they should faint in their adversities,
and repent of their return.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p9"></span>Some apply this chapter to the time of
Antichrist, some refer it to the last day, others explain it of the
destruction of the city which happened in the reign of Vespasian; but I
doubt not but that the Prophet meant here to include the calamities
which were near at hand, for the city had not yet been built,  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md) the Jews having been much harassed by
their neighbors; and we also know how atrocious was the tyranny which
Antiochus exercised: in short, there was a continued series of evils
from the time the city and the temple began to be built till the coming
of Christ. As then the Jews, who had preferred foreign countries to
their own, might have boasted of their lot and despised their brethren,
as though they had foolishly and thoughtlessly removed from foreign
lands, and had been too precipitate in returning, God designed to
declare by the mouth of Zechariah what evils were at hand, that the
faithful might with a courageous mind be prepared to undergo their
trials, and that they might never succumb under any evils, for the Lord
had promised more to them than what they could have attained in Chaldea
and other countries. Having now explained the meaning of the Prophet, I
shall come to the words.  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p14"></span>*Behold*, he says, *the day shall come
to Jehovah, and divided shall be thy spoils in the midst* of the city.
By the demonstrative particle *Behold*, the certainty of the prophecy,
as it has been elsewhere said, is intimated; for the Prophet points out
as by the finger what could not yet be comprehended by human minds. And
he says, that *the day would come to Jehovah*, that they might know that
they would suffer a just punishment when the Lord treated them in this
manner; for men, we know, indulge themselves and seek pleasures, and
when God seems not to deal kindly with them, they raise a clamor as
though he were too severe. Hence the Prophet reminds them, that so great
a calamity would not come without a cause, for God would then execute
his judgment. He does not expressly describe it, but he speaks as though
he summoned them before God’s tribunal. Now when we understand that we
have to do with God, it avails us nothing to murmur. It is then better
to be silent when God is set forth as being in the midst of us, for it
is certain that he will not in chastising us exceed what is just.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p15"></span>But here is described a hard affliction;
for Zechariah intimates that the city would be exposed to the will of
enemies, so that they would divide at pleasure their spoils in the very
midst of it. What conquerors snatch away, they afterwards in private
divide among themselves; and we know that many cities have been
plundered, when yet the conquerors have not dared to expose to view
their spoils. But the Prophet means here that there would be no strength
in the Jews to prevent their enemies from dividing the spoils at their
leisure in the midst of the city.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p16"></span><span id="iii.xv.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p17"></span>He afterwards adds, *I will gather all
nations against Jerusalem*. He confirms what I have already said, that
God would be the author of those calamities, and thus he puts a
restraint on the Jews, that they might not expostulate with him
respecting the severity of their punishment. He then shortly intimates,
that the nations would not come by chance to attack Jerusalem; and that
whatever commotions would arise, they could not be ascribed to chance or
to fortune, or to the purposes of men, but to the decree of heaven. He
then bids them to look to God, that they might humble themselves umber
his mighty hand, according to what Peter also does. (<span
id="iii.xv.ii-p17.1"></span>[1Pe
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ii-p17.1"></span>.) He might have said in a briefer manner,
“All the nations shall conspire;” but he ascribes this to God, and says,
that he will bring them, like a prince, who collects an army, which he
commands to fight under his banner. And by naming *all nations*, he
reminds them that their trials would not be light; for such would be the
union of enemies, and so large would be their number, that Jerusalem
would be brought nigh to utter ruin. But afterwards he subjoins a
consolation to moderate the grievousness of that calamity: yet he says
first -

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p18"></span>*Taken shall be the city, plundered
shall be the houses, and the women shall be ravished*. What usually
happens to a city taken by storm, the citizens of Jerusalem, the Prophet
says, would have to endure. It is indeed an extreme outrage, when women
are ravished by enemies; and then, poverty is often more grievous than
death; and yet he says, that when deprived of their substance they would
have to witness an outrage more hard to be borne than death itself,
because their women would be subjected to such a disgrace.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p19"></span>He adds, *that half part of the city
would depart*. He had said before that a third part only would be saved;
but he now seems to be inconsistent with himself. But as to number we
need not anxiously enquire, as I have elsewhere reminded you; for the
Prophets often mention half part and then the third, when yet they mean
the same thing. It is the same as though he had said, that the
destruction would be so great, that hardly half of them would remain
alive.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p20"></span>Now follows the consolation which I have
mentioned, — that the *residue of the people would not be exterminated
from the city*. By these words the Prophet teaches them, that though
hard would be the condition of the city, as it would be reduced nearly
to a waste, yet they who having returned to their country sincerely
worshipped God, would be blessed; for the Church would ever remain safe,
and that how much soever God might lessen the number, yet a part of the
Church, however small, would be kept safe. The object then of the
Prophet is to comfort the faithful, that they might sustain whatever
evils might be at hand, and look for what God promises, even that a
Church would again emerge, and that God would really prove that
Jerusalem was not in vain his sanctuary, where he would bless the
remnant which escaped, and escaped through his wonderful favor. He
afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.xv.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p2"></span>**3.** Then shall the LORD go forth, and
fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Et egredietur Iehova**,**
pugnabit contra gentes istas**,** sicut die quo proeliatus est in die
proeli.

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p6"></span>Zechariah here amplifies the favor of
God, — that he will go forth openly, and avowedly carry on war against
all the enemies of Jerusalem. It was not indeed a small mitigation of
their evils, that a part of the Church would be saved. But the Prophet
declares here what is still far better, — that when God afflicted his
Church, and suffered it to be violently assailed by enemies, he would
become at length the avenger of all the wrongs they might have done. We
know how we are wounded and tried, when God gives loose reins to the
ungodly, and when they grow wanton in their wickedness and triumph,
insult God, and almost spit as it were at the very clouds. When
therefore the ungodly thus petulantly exult, and God in the meantime
hides himself and is still, it is difficult to wait patiently for the
issue. Hence the Prophet promises that God will become the avenger,
after having allowed his Church to be for a time chastised by ungodly
and wicked enemies.

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p7"></span>*Go forth*, he says, *shall Jehovah*. We
know the meaning of this metaphorical expression. The Prophets sometimes
extend the phrase, “Go forth shall God from his holy place,” as though
they said — that the Jews would find by experience that God’s name is
not invoked in vain in his temple, and that it has not been said in
vain, that God is seated between the cherubim. But the Prophet seems
here to speak of God generally, as going forth armed from his recesses
to resist the enemies of his Church. *Go forth* then *shall God*; for he
had for a time concealed his power. In a like manner, we know that God
hides his face from us when he brings us no help, and when we also think
that we are neglected by him. As then God, as long as he hides his
power, seems to be without power, hence the Prophet says here, *Go forth
shall Jehovah, and he will fight against these nations*

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p8"></span>By these words he intimates, that there
is no reason for the faithful to envy their enemies, even when all
things go on prosperously with them; for they will at length find that
they cannot injure the Church without God undertaking its cause,
according to what he has promised,

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p9"></span>“I will be an enemy to thine enemies.”
(<span id="iii.xv.iii-p9.1"></span>[Ex
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.xv.iii-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p10"></span>But as this is a thing difficult to be
believed, he calls to mind ancient history, —

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p11"></span>*As in the day*, he says, *in which he
fought in the day of battle*. Some confine this part to the passage
through the Red Sea; but I think that Zechariah includes all the
instances which God had given to the Jews to prove that they were the
objects of his care. God then, not only once, not at one time, nor in
one manner, had put forth his power, that the Jews might plainly see
that they became conquerors through his aid. This is what Zechariah
means. He in effect says, “Both you and your fathers have long ago found
that God is wont to fight for his Church; for he has honored you with
innumerable victories; you have been often overwhelmed with despair, and
his favor unexpectedly shone upon you, and delivered you beyond all that
you hoped for: you had often to contend with the strongest enemies; they
were put to flight, even when ye were wholly unequal to them in number,
and yet God bestowed upon you easy victories. Since then God has so
often and in such divers ways cast down your enemies, why should you not
hope for the same aid still from him?”

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p12"></span>We hence see why the Prophet now refers
to the ancient battles of God, even that he might by facts confirm the
Jews in their hope, and that they might not doubt but that God was
endued with power sufficiently strong to subdue all the ungodly, for he
loses none.

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p13"></span>And he adds, *in the day of battle*,
even when there is need of help from heaven. He indeed calls it the day
of engagement or contest, for so the word <span
id="iii.xv.iii-p13.1"></span>קרב, *koreb*, properly means. When
therefore it was necessary for God to engage with enemies, then his
power appeared: “There is hence no reason for you hereafter to doubt,
but that he will still prevail against your enemies.” We know that this
mode of speaking is frequently and commonly used by the Prophets, that
is, when they adduce examples of God’s favor and power, by which he has
proved that there is in him alone sufficient help for the deliverance of
his Church.

<span id="iii.xv.iii-p14"></span>It behaves us now to apply to ourselves
what is here said, for Zechariah did not only speak for the men of his
age, or for those of the next generation, but he intended to furnish the
Church with confidence till the end of the world, so that the faithful
might not faint under any trials. Whenever then the ungodly prevail, and
no hope shines on us, let us remember how often and by what various
means God has wonderfully delivered his Church as it were from death;
for it was not his purpose only once to help and aid his own people, but
also to animate us, that we at this day may not despond, when we endure
evils with which the fathers formerly struggled. He then adds —

<span id="iii.xv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p2"></span>**4.** And his feet shall stand in that
day upon the mount of Olives, which *is* before Jerusalem on the east,
and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof toward the
east and toward the west, *and there shall be* a very great valley; and
half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it
toward the south.

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Et stabunt pedes ejus in die illa
super montem Olivarum**,** qui est e regione Ierusalem ab Oriente; et
scindetur mons Olivarum a dimidia parte sui ab Oriente ad Occidentem
(*vel***,** versus Orientem et Occidentem) vallis magna valde; et
discedet dimidia pars montis ad Aquilonem**,** et dimidia pars ejus ad
Meridiem.

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p6"></span>He continues the same subject, that God’s
power would be then conspicuous in putting enemies to flight. He indeed
illustrates here his discourse by figurative expressions, as though he
wished to bring the Jews to see the scene itself; for the object of the
personification is no other but that the faithful might set God before
them as it were in a visible form; and thus he confirms their faith, as
indeed it was necessary; for as we are dull and entangled in earthly
thoughts, our minds can hardly rise up to heaven, though the Lord with a
clear voice invites us to himself. The Prophet then, in order to aid our
weakness, adds a vivid representation, as though God stood before their
eyes.

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p7"></span>*Stand*, he says, *shall his feet on the
mount of Olives*. He does not here promise a miracle, such as even the
ignorant might conceive to be literal; nor does he do this in what
follows, when he says, *The mount shall be rent, and half of it shall
thorn to the east and half to the west*  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) This has never happened, that mount
has never been rent: but as the Prophet could not, under those grievous
trials, which might have overwhelmed the minds of the godly a hundred
times, have extolled the power of God as much as the exigency of the
case required without employing a highly figurative language, he
therefore accommodates himself, as I have said, to the capacity of our
flesh.

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p11"></span>The import of the whole is, — that God’s
power would be so remarkable in the deliverance of his Church, as though
God manifested himself in a visible form and reviewed the battle from
the top of the mountain, and gave orders how everything was to be done.

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p12"></span>He says first, *Stand shall his feet on
the mount of Olives*. Why does he not rather say, “In the city itself?”
Even because he meant by this mode of speaking to show, that God would
watch, that he might see what would be necessary for the deliverance of
his Church. All these things, I know, are explained allegorically, —
that Christ appeared on the mount of Olives, when he ascended into
heaven, and also, that the mount was divided, that it might be passable,
and that the apostles might proceed into the various parts of the world,
in order that they might assail all the nations: but these are
refinements, which, though they please many, have yet nothing solid in
them, when they are by any one properly considered. I then take a
simpler view of what the Prophet says, — that God’s hand would be
sufficiently conspicuous, whenever his purpose was to aid his miserable
and afflicted Church.

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p13"></span>The same view is to be taken of what
follows, that a *great valley* would be in the middle, for the rent
would be one half *towards the north* and the other half *towards the
south*. It is the same thing as though he had said, that Jerusalem was
as it were concealed under that mountain, so that it was hid, but that
afterwards it would be on an elevated place, as it is said elsewhere,
“Elevated shall be the mountain of the Lord,” say both Isaiah and Micah,
“above all mountains.” (<span id="iii.xv.iv-p13.1"></span>[Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xv.iv-p13.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.xv.iv-p13.2"></span>[Mic
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xv.iv-p13.2"></span>.) That hill, we know, was small; and yet
Isaiah and Micah promise such a height as will surpass almost the very
clouds. What does this mean? Even that the glory of the God of Jerusalem
will be so great, that his temple will be visible above all other
heights. So also in this place, *Rent*, he says, *shall be the mount of
Olives*, so that Jerusalem may not be as before in a shaded valley, and
have only a small hill on one side, but that it may be seen far and
wide, so that all nations may behold it. This, as I think, is what the
Prophet simply means. But those who delight in allegories must seek them
from others. It now follows —

<span id="iii.xv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.xv.v-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.v-p2"></span>**5.** And ye shall flee *to* the valley
of the mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall reach unto Azal:
yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the
days of Uzziah king of Judah: and the LORD my God shall come, *and* all
the saints with thee.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p3"></span>**5.** Et fugietis in vallem montium
(vel**,** per vallem**,**) quia pertinget vallis montium ad Azal (alii
vertunt**,** ad proximum; alii ad excelsum;) et fugietis sicuti fugistis
a facie motus diebus Uziae regis Iehudah; et veniet Iehova**,** Deus
meus; omnes sancti tecum.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.v-p6"></span>The Prophet says again, that God’s
presence would be terrible, so that it would put to flight all the Jews;
for though God promises to be the deliverer of his chosen people, yet as
there were still mixed with them hypocrites, his language varies. But we
must further observe, that though the Lord may appear for our
deliverance, it yet cannot be but that his majesty will strike us with
fear; for the flesh must be humbled before God. What the Prophet then
says is the same as though he had said, that the coming of God, which he
had just mentioned, would be fearful to all, not only to open enemies
whom he would come to destroy, but also to the faithful, though they
knew that he would put forth his power to save them. And thus the
Prophet seems to reason from the less to the greater; for if the
faithful, who look anxiously for God, yet tremble and quake at his
presence, what must happen to his enemies, who know that he is against
them? As then the Prophet bids here the faithful to be prepared
reverently to look for God, so also he shows that he will be dreadful to
all the ungodly, in order that the elect might not hesitate to flee to
his aid and to rely on him.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p7"></span>*Flee*, he says, *shall ye through the
valley of the mountains*. Some imagine this to have been a valley so
called, because it was of long extent, stretching through chains of
mountains; but we read nothing of this in scripture. It seems to me
probable, that valleys of *the mountains* were all those places called,
which were rough, impassable, and intricate. Since then there was much
wood, and no easy passage through these countries, the Prophet says that
there would be a long valley, which never was before, but which the
rending, of which he had spoken, would produce. And for the same purpose
he adds, *Reach shall the valley of the mountains to Azal*. This I think
is a proper name of a place;  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md)
yet some render it, next; but I see not for what reason. The meaning
then is, — that where there were previously many hills which were not
passable, or even mountains through which it was difficult to penetrate,
there would be one continuous and even valley to a place very remote.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p12"></span>And he says, that *flight* would be
hasty, *as in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah*; for it appears from
sacred history that Judah was then shaken with a terrible earthquake.
The Jews, as they are bold in their conjectures, suppose that this
happened when Uzziah approached the altar to burn incense to God; and
*Jerome* has followed them. But at what time that earthquake happened is
not certain. Amos says that he began to prophecy two years after an
earthquake, (<span id="iii.xv.v-p12.1"></span>[Am
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)<span id="iii.xv.v-p12.1"></span>;.md)
but for what cause the earth was then shaken we nowhere read: and yet we
learn from this as well as from other passages, that it was an awful
sign and presage of God’s vengeance. God then intended to announce to
the Jews a dreadful calamity, when he thus shook the earth. And for the
same purpose also does Zechariah now say, that the flight would be
precipitous, as when the Jews retook themselves to flight, as it were in
extreme despair, in the time of Uzziah. *As* then *ye fled from the
earthquake, so shall ye flee now*. A long time had indeed intervened
from the death of Uzziah to the return of the people; hence the Prophet
intimates that it would be an unusual calamity, for the like had not
happened which had caused so much terror to the Jews for many ages.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p13"></span>But we must remember what I have said —
that this coming of God is not described as fearful for the purpose of
threatening the Jews; but rather in order to show that the ungodly would
not be able to stand in the presence of God, as he would terrify even
those for whose aid he would come forth. And we must also observe what
has been stated that God varies his address by his Prophets; for now he
speaks to the whole Church, in which hypocrites are mingled with the
sincere, and so threatening must be blended with promises, and then, he
directs his words especially to the elect alone, to whom he manifests
his favor.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p14"></span>He says at length, *And come shall
Jehovah, my God*. The Prophet repeats what he had said shortly before —
that God’s power would be made evident to the Jews, as though they saw
it with their eyes. There is indeed no necessity to suppose that God
would actually descend from heaven; but he teaches us, as I have said,
that though God’s power would be for a time hidden, it would at length
appear in the deliverance of his elect, as though God descended for the
purpose from heaven. He calls him his God, in order to gain more credit
to his prophecy. He no doubt thus courageously assailed all the ungodly,
to whom promises as well as threatening were a mockery; and he also
intended to support the minds of the godly, that they might not doubt
but that this was promised them from above, though they heard but the
voice of a mortal man. The Prophet then with great confidence claims God
here as his God, as though he had said — that there was no reason for
them to judge of what he said by any worldly circumstance or by his
person; in short, he declares here that he was sent from above, that he
did not rashly intrude himself, so as to promise anything which he
himself had invented, but that he was favored with a divine mission, so
that he represented God himself.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p15"></span>And this also is the object of the
conclusion, which has been overlooked by some. *All the saints with
thee*. There seems to be here a kind of indignation, as though the
Prophet turned himself away from his hearers, whom he observed to be in
a measure prepared obstinately to reject his heavenly doctrine; for he
turns his discourse to God. The sentence seems indeed to lose a portion
of its gracefulness, when the Prophet speaks so abruptly, *Come shall
Jehovah my God, all the saints with thee*  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) He might have said “all the saints
with him:” but as I have said, he addresses God, as though he could not,
on account of disgust, speak to malignant and perverse men, and this
serves much to confirm the authority of his prophecy; for he not only
declares boldly to men what was to be, but also appeals to God as his
witness; nay, he seems as though he had derived by a secret and familiar
colloquy what he certainly knew was committed to him by God. But by
saints, as I think, he understands the angels; for to include the holy
patriarchs and kings, would seem unnatural and far-fetched: and angels,
we know, are called saints or holy in other places, as we have seen in
the third chapter of Habakkuk (<span id="iii.xv.v-p20.1"></span>[Hab
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001)<span id="iii.xv.v-p20.1"></span>.md);
and they are called sometimes elect angels. In short, the Prophet shows,
that the coming of God would be magnificent; he would descend, as it
were, in a visible manner together with his angels, that men’s minds
might be roused into admiration and wonder. This is the meaning.

<span id="iii.xv.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vi-p2"></span>**6.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, *that* the light shall not be clear, *nor* dark:

<span id="iii.xv.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Et erit**,** die illo non erit
lumen pretiosum et coagulatum (ad verbum est**,** non erit lumen
pretiositatum et coagulationum.)

<span id="iii.xv.vi-p4"></span>**7.** But it shall be one day which
shall be known to the LORD, not day, nor night: but it shall come to
pass, *that* at evening time it shall be light.

<span id="iii.xv.vi-p5"></span>**7.** Et erit**,** die uno (ille notus
est Iehovae) non dies**,** neque nox; et erit (aut**,** accidet) ad
tempus vespertinum**,** ut sit lumen.

<span id="iii.xv.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.vi-p7"></span><span id="iii.xv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vi-p8"></span>The Prophet confirms what we have already
observed that the Church would be subject to many troubles and
commotions, so that the faithful should not enjoy the common light, but
be more miserable than men in general. And he has ever the same object
in view, to prepare the faithful to exercise patience, and to remind
them that they are not to promise themselves such enjoyments in the holy
land, as though they were to be free from the trials of the cross. Lest
then they should deceive themselves with vain hopes, he sets before them
many evils and many calamities, that they might confidently wait for the
aid, of which he had spoken, while immersed in thick darkness, and
hardly able to distinguish between day and night. But the rest shall be
considered tomorrow.

<span id="iii.xv.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.xv.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
hast deigned to separate us to be thy peculiar treasure, and leadest us
daily under thy banner, and invites us so kindly and gently by the voice
of thy gospel, — O grant, that we may not reject so great a kindness,
nor render ourselves unworthy of our holy calling; and whatever evils
must be borne by us, may we sustain them with resigned minds, until
having at length finished the contests by which thou wouldst now
exercise and prove our faith, we shall be received into that blessed
rest, which is laid up for us in heaven, and has been purchased for us
by the blood of thine only-begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="iii.xv.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixty-sixth

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p2"></span>We explained shortly yesterday why the
Prophet says, that there would be for some time no difference between
day and night; it was to prepare the faithful for all changes, and to
show that they are not to promise themselves anything certain or sure in
this world. Days and nights revolve throughout all seasons of the year,
but the Prophet shows that there would be an uncertain time, as though
it were twilight, or that there would not be constant light, but light
mixed with darkness. The two verses ought to be connected together, when
he says, *In that day* there *shall not be precious light and mingled
light*, or, on the contrary, thick darkness. What he says afterwards,
*In that day there shall not be day or night*, is disjoined by some, but
not rightly, as we shall presently see.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p3"></span>But with regard to the words, *light of
preciousnesses*, it is agreed among all writers that the word <span
id="iii.xv.viii-p3.1"></span>יקרות, *ikarut*, means what is excellent.
As to this word then there is no ambiguity; for the Prophet means that
it shall not be a light day, such as is wont to be during a clear sky.
But as to the second word, interpreters differ. It is written <span
id="iii.xv.viii-p3.2"></span>יקפאון, *ikophaun*: <span
id="iii.xv.viii-p3.3"></span>קפא, *kopha*, means to coagulate, to become
thick: hence <span id="iii.xv.viii-p3.4"></span>יקפאון, *ikophaun*,
signifies density or dense darkness. Some think it to be in
construction; and others, that <span id="iii.xv.viii-p3.5"></span>ו,
*vau*, is to be put in; and this is probable, as we may see from the
context, though yet it may have a twofold meaning. If indeed we join
these two words, the Prophet may understand that the light would not be
very clear, and that there would not be thick darkness. But we may take
the light of densities for that which is steady and fixed, which gains
such strength, that it cannot be darkened. But I prefer a different
view: we know that the copulative in Hebrew is often taken
adversatively; and this exposition is the most suitable, — that there
would not be clear light, but on the contrary, a density, that is, thick
darkness, which would obscure the light of the sun, or hinder the eyes
of men from enjoying clear light. This seems to be the meaning of our
Prophet, *In that day there shall not be light*, that is, that day shall
not be clear, that is, so far that it can be numbered among fair and
bright, or clear days; but on the contrary, there will be densities,
that is, it will be a cloudy time, for much darkness will fill the sky,
and prevent men to see the sun.  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md)

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p9"></span>As to the subject itself, it is
sufficiently apparent what the Prophet meant; for as I said yesterday,
and have again reminded you, it was to be a perilous time, so that the
miserable Jews would hourly and every moment be filled with fear, as
they should see many dangers around them; and there would ever be some
appearance of a sudden change. As when we find the south wind blowing,
and the heavens covered with clouds, a shower is expected, and every one
keeps within floors, and they who travel dare not proceed lest a storm
overtakes them; so also the Prophet says, that this time would be like
cloudy and dark days.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p10"></span>The same is the meaning of what he
adds, *It shall be one day, when it shall not be day and night*; as
though he had said, that there would not be any settled state of
weather. Interpreters have given a very different view — that it would
be neither day nor night. Some give this reason, because the Lord will
rule his Church by faith; and we indeed know that our salvation is hid
under the safe keeping of faith. Others give an entirely different
meaning, — that the Lord will so fill heaven and earth by his own
brightness, that there will be no need for the sun and the moon,
according to what is said by Isaiah,

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p11"></span>“Shine to thee shall not the sun by
day nor the moon by night; but to thee shall Jehovah be an eternal
light.” (<span id="iii.xv.viii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.xv.viii-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p12"></span>But these are mere refinements. The
real meaning of the Prophet, I doubt not, is, — that men would be in
continual trepidation, as wile the air is in various ways agitated, when
clouds arise, when the thunder is heard, and when the light of the sun
disappears. When such is the state of the sky, men we know fear, for
there is hardly a distinction between day and night. Thus our Prophet
warns the faithful as to future events, and prepares them for patience,
lest any storm should overwhelm them, and they should despond when
overtaken by it, but that they might look for what had been foretold,
even for darkness mixed with light, which would be a continual twilight:
and the word, twilight, the ancients have said, is derived from one
signifying what is doubtful (*crepusculum a crepero*.)

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p13"></span>But we must also notice what he
afterwards says, that *this day would towards evening be light*. He here
intimates, that there will ever be a joyful end to the troubles of the
faithful. Though then they were tossed by many cares, and troubled with
various kinds of fear, as though they were in darkness, yet he says,
that the *evening* would be clear. And this ought to be carefully
observed, for with this solace alone is the Spirit wont to ease the
sorrows of the godly, that is, that after God has for a while tried
them, there will come shortly an end, and that a joyful one, to all
their evils, so that God will shine on them like the sun in its meridian
splendor. He calls, in short, the attention of the faithful to this end,
because God makes thus a distinction between the elect and the
reprobate; for though he afflicts both alike, and overwhelms them as
with darkness, there is yet light prepared for his elect; and after
having suffered them for a time to lie in darkness, he will make them at
length to emerge into clear light; but he deprives the reprobate of
every hope.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p14"></span>This is the subject which the Prophet
now handles; as though he had said, — “There is no reason for the
faithful to be disheartened by adversities, when darkness on all sides
surrounds them; for the Lord will at length restore light to them, of
which it was needful for them to be deprived for a time.” But Zechariah
speaks not here of one day, but of a period which would be like a dark
day, even until Christ by his coming restored the full light, as the Sun
of Righteousness, according to what he is called by Malachi.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p15"></span><span id="iii.xv.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p16"></span>Then he says, that *this day is known
to Jehovah*, in order that the faithful night depend on his good
pleasure, and not too anxiously enquire about an event hidden from them
and the whole world. *The day* then *is known*, says Zechariah, only to
God, though he speaks of things well known, and which the Jews had at
length to know by experience. But his object must be regarded, for his
purpose was to restrain the godly, that they might not unnecessarily
torment themselves, for we are wont to be too curious to know things:
when God’s design is to calm us, and to make us rely on his providence,
then many thoughts come across our minds, and toss us here and there,
and thus we torment ourselves with anxiety. As then it is disease is
innate in human nature, the Prophet supplies a seasonable remedy, — that
the faithful are to allow themselves to be ruled by God, and to follow
the example of their father Abraham, “The Lord will provide:” when he
was in extremity and no escape was open he committed himself to God’s
providence. So also Zechariah says, that it would be entirely dependent
on the will of God alone, now to cover the heavens with darkness, and
then to restore the sun, and also to blend darkness with light; and
nothing is better for men than to check themselves, and not to enquire
more than what is right, nor take away anything from God’s power, for
whenever men murmur against God’s judgments, it is the same thing as
though they wished to penetrate into heaven, and concede nothing to him
except what they themselves think right. Then, in order to check this
presumption, the Prophet says, that this day is known to Jehovah, so
that the faithful might patiently wait until the ripened end should
come, for our curiosity drives us here and there, so that we always wish
to be certain about the end, “How long is this to endure?” and thus we
complain against God; but when we are not able to subordinate our minds
to his will, then we break forth as it were into a furious temper.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p17"></span>We hence see how useful a doctrine
this clause contains, where the Prophet sets God as the judge and the
arbitrator of all events, so that he afflicts the Church as long as it
pleases him, sets bounds to adversities, and regulates all things as it
seemeth good to him; and he also covers the heavens with thick clouds,
and takes away the sight of the sun. All this then is what the Prophet
would have us to know is in God’s power, and directed by his counsel. It
now follows-

<span id="iii.xv.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p2"></span>**8.** And it shall be in that day,
*that* living waters shall go out from Jerusalem; half of them toward
the former sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea: in summer and in
winter shall it be.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p3"></span>**8.** Et accidet die illo**,** Exibunt
aquae vivae e Ierusalem; medium earum ad mare Orientale**,** et medium
earum ad mare novissimum**,** (*vel***,** posterius**,**) aestate et
hyeme erunt.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p6"></span>Here is subjoined a more cheering
prophecy, — that the grace of God would yet prevail. Whatever evils, and
troubles, and dangers, and fears, and diseases awaited the faithful, he
yet says that in such miseries they would still be made happy. And this
ought to be carefully observed, for nothing can be more suitably found
to alleviate our sorrows than to put in the balance God’s benefits on
one side, and on the other the punishments and chastisements which he
brings on us; for as God’s mercy and kindness always greatly
preponderate, it cannot be but that we shall be able to say with holy
Job,

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p7"></span>“If good things have we received from the
Lord’s hand,  
why should we refuse evil things?” (<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p7.2"></span>[Job
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p8"></span>This then is what Zechariah sets before
us, — that though the Church may be harassed by many cares, and subject
to many fears, and terrified by many dangers, and be as it were in
trepidation, yet the grace of God, if rightly viewed, is sufficient to
administer invaluable comfort, for *go forth shall living waters from
Jerusalem*  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p11"></span>This prophecy no doubt refers to the
kingdom of Christ, and this may be sufficiently proved by other
passages. The Prophet then has hitherto spoken of the many afflictions,
which were nigh at hand, in order that the Jews might not faint or
entirely fail; but he now directs their minds to the kingdom of Christ,
from whence they were to look for not only a deliverance from all evils,
but also the full restitution of the Church, and as it were the
renovation of the world.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p12"></span>There is here no doubt an implied
contrast between living waters and those which soon dry up: hence he
says, that they would flow continually summer and winter.  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) Judea, we know, was subject to want of
water, and there were no waters around Jerusalem, except the spring of
Siloam, which had waters in abundance, and supplied the wants of the
citizens. But the Prophet promises living waters, which would not be
like occasional streams, but flow continually. At the same time he seems
to regard something higher. As by living waters he understands those
which are spiritual, so he compares these waters with all those streams
which are earthly; as though he had said, “the fountain from which the
two streams arise is inexhaustible, so that its exuberance shall never
fail, but shall send forth streams from one sea to the opposite sea, and
shall water the farthest regions of the earth.”

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p14"></span>By the eastern sea many understand the
Lake Asphaltes, but it seems to me more probable that the Prophet speaks
of the Persian Sea;  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) for if he
had said that the waters would go forth to that lake, the distance would
be very short; but he meant on the contrary to show, that the
copiousness of the waters would be so large and abundant that though
they would pass through the whole earth, yet their flow would never
cease. By the hinder sea he no doubt meant the Mediterranean. The import
of the whole is, — that thong the earth were previously dry, yet such
would be the abundance of waters as to be sufficient for all, not only
as in former times to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, but also to all the
Jews in whatever part of the country they might dwell.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p16"></span>Now, since the language is metaphorical,
we must bear in mind what I have lately said, — that here is set forth
the spiritual grace of God; nor is it a new thing to apply the word
waters to the Spirit of God:

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p17"></span>“I will pour forth waters on the dry
land  
and rivers on the thirsty land” (<span id="iii.xv.ix-p17.2"></span>[Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p17.2"></span>;)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p18"></span>and again,

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p19"></span>“I will give clean waters.” (<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p19.1"></span>[Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p20"></span>There is a twofold reason why Scripture
gives the name of waters to the Holy Spirit, — because he performs the
two offices of cleansing and of watering: for we are like barren and dry
land, except the Lord by his Spirit from heaven gives us new vigor and
conveys moisture to us. As then the earth derives moisture from heaven,
that it may produce fruit, so also we must have conferred on us by the
hidden power of the Spirit whatever vigor we may possess. Since then
Zechariah promises a fountain of living waters, he understands that
God’s grace would be offered to all the Jews, so that they might drink
and be satisfied, and no more be exposed as formerly to the want of
water.

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p21"></span>If any one objects and says, that this
interpretation seems forced, the answer is ready at hand, which is this,
— that as it is certain that the prophet here speaks of the kingdom of
Christ, this rule is to be remembered, — That whatever is foretold of
Christ’s kingdom, must correspond with its nature and character. Since
then the kingdom of Christ is spiritual, there is no doubt but that when
Scripture, as we have seen, promises a large produce of corn and wine,
an abundance of all good things, tranquillity and peace, and bright
days, it intends by all these things to set forth the character of
Christ’s kingdom. We hence see what the prophet means by *living
waters*; and then, why he says that they would go forth to the east and
to the west; and lastly, why he adds, that they would flow in winter as
well as in summer. It now follows —

<span id="iii.xv.x"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.xv.x-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.x-p2"></span>**9.** And the Lord shall be king over all
the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name one.

<span id="iii.xv.x-p3"></span>**9.** Et erit Iehova in regem super totam
terram; die illo erit Iehova unus**,** et nomen ejus unum.

<span id="iii.xv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.x-p6"></span>Here the prophet shows more clearly, and
without using a figurative language, what might otherwise be more
obscure: he says, that *Jehovah would be king*. Here Zechariah compares
the kingdom of Christ with those periods of misery and calamities which
had preceded, and which had continued till the coming of Christ. We
indeed know that there had been the most dreadful scattering through the
whole land, since the time the ten tribes separated from the family of
David; for since the body of the people ceased to be one, they wilfully
contrived ruin for themselves. When therefore the Israelites fought
against Judah, the wrath of God appeared, the fruit of their defection.
We indeed know that David was not made king by the suffrages of men, but
was chosen by the decree of God. Hence when the kingdom of Israel
departed from the son of David, it was the same as though they had
refused to bear the authority of God himself, according to what he said
to Samuel,

<span id="iii.xv.x-p7"></span>“Thee have they not despised, but me,  
that I should not reign over them.” (<span
id="iii.xv.x-p7.2"></span>[1Sa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007)<span id="iii.xv.x-p7.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.xv.x-p8"></span>And yet Samuel was only a governor for a
time over the people; but when the people through a foolish zeal wished
a king to be given then, God complains that he was despised in not being
allowed to reign over them alone. This was more fully completed, when
the ten tribes separated themselves from the lawful kingdom which God
himself had established and had commanded to be inviolable. From that
time then God was not their king. This is one thing.

<span id="iii.xv.x-p9"></span>Afterwards we know that the kings of
Israel joined themselves with the kings of Syria to overthrow the
kingdom of Judah, and that the Jews also sent for aid to the Assyrians,
and afterwards had recourse to the Egyptians. At length the kingdom of
Israel was cut off; then the kingdom of Judah, and the city was
destroyed and the temple burnt, so that the worship of God for a time
ceased. They afterwards returned; but we know they were ever oppressed
by hard and cruel tyranny: when they perceived that they were
unprotected, because they had refused to take shelter under the wings of
God. Though he had so often told them that they would be safe and secure
under his protection, they yet refused that favor. Therefore the Jews
then found to their great loss that God was not their king.

<span id="iii.xv.x-p10"></span>Hence when Zechariah now speaks of the
restoration of the Church, he rightly says, that *Jehovah would be
king*;  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md) that is, though the Jews
had been torn asunder and pillaged by tyrants, though they had suffered
many reproaches and wrongs, yet God would become again their king, that
He might defend them against all unjust violence and keep them under His
protection. Nothing indeed can be more blessed than to live under the
reigns of God; and this highest happiness is ever promised to the
faithful.

<span id="iii.xv.x-p12"></span>We now understand the Prophet’s meaning
as to this part; but he shows immediately after that this cannot be
hoped for, except the Jews really attended to true religion and
worshipped God aright and cast away their superstitions. Hence he joins
together these two things, — that the condition of the people would be a
happy one, because God would undertake the care of them and perform the
office of a king, — and then, that God would be their king, in order
that he might be rightly and sincerely worshipped by them: *there shall
be*, he says, *one Jehovah*. Here the Prophet briefly shows that the
legitimate worship of God cannot be set up, unless superstition be
abolished. We indeed know that God is jealous, as he calls himself, so
that he cannot bear rivals: for when we devise for ourselves any sort of
deity, we instantly take from God what is his own. The Prophet then
teaches us, that God cannot be truly worshipped, except he shines alone
as the supreme, so that our religion may be pure and sound. In short, he
indirectly condemns here those superstitions by which the earth had been
corrupted and polluted, and also the superstitions by which true
religion had been adulterated and the worship under the law had been
violated. For this reason he says, that Jehovah would *be one*  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md)

<span id="iii.xv.x-p19"></span>He expresses this still clearer by
saying, that *his name would be one*. This second clause may indeed
appear useless; for whatever can be said of God is comprehended in his
oneness. But as we are wont by various artifices to cover superstitions,
and ever devise new excuses and new disguises, by which our impiety may
seem specious and plausible, the Prophet expressly adds here, that God’s
*name is one*; as though he had said, “It is not enough for men to
declare that they acknowledge one true God or one supreme deity, except
also they agree in some true and simple faith, so that the name of this
one true God may be celebrated on the earth.” But the idea of the
Prophet will become more clear if we notice the difference between the
one true God and the name of the only true God, or the one name of God.
All the philosophers with one mouth teach, that there are not many gods,
but some supreme deity, who is the source of divinity: and this is what
has been believed by all heathen nations. But in course of time they
began to imagine that from this source many gods have emanated; and
hence has come a multitude of false gods, so that some worshipped
Jupiter, others Mercury, others Apollo; not because they thought that
there are many gods partaking of original divinity; but because they
imagined that gods have proceeded from the supreme fountain. As then the
Jews might have sought subterfuges, and excused themselves by saying
that they did not in heart worship many gods, the Prophet adds the
second clause, — that the name of God is one; which means, that there is
a certain way in which God is to be worshipped, that there is a certain
fixed rule, so that no one is to follow what he himself may imagine to
be right, and that the majesty of God ought not to be profaned by
various errors, nor should men be lost each in his own notion, but that
all ought to attend to the voice of God, and to hear what he testifies
of himself.

<span id="iii.xv.x-p20"></span>We now then understand what the Prophet
means: he says first, that things would be in a happy state in Judea,
when God would be regarded as one, that is, when the whole land had been
cleansed from its defilements, and when true religion again prevailed:
but as this purity would not easily obtain footing in the world, and as
men easily decline from it, he adds, that the name of God would be one,
in order that the Jews might understand that God cannot be rightly
worshipped except he be alone worshipped; and that it cannot be one,
unless there be one faith, prescribed and certain, and not alternating
between diverse opinions, like that of the heathens, whose religion is
no other than to follow what they themselves imagine or what they have
derived from their ancestors.

<span id="iii.xv.x-p21"></span>Now this is a remarkable passage: God
distinguishes himself from all idols and his worship from all
superstitions; and the more attentively we ought to consider what the
Prophet teaches us, because our inclinations, as I have said, to vanity,
is so great, and this is what experience itself sufficiently shows, and
we also see how easily superstition, like a whirlwind, carries us away,
and not only one superstition, but innumerable kinds of superstition.
The more then it behaves us to notice this truth, so that the one name
of God may prevail among us, and that no one may allow himself the
liberty of imagining anything he pleases; but that we may know what God
ought to be worshipped by us. And Christ also condemns for this reason
all the forms of worship which prevailed in the world, by saying to the
woman of Samaria,

<span id="iii.xv.x-p22"></span>“Ye know not what ye worship, we Jews
alone,” he says,  
“know this.” (<span id="iii.xv.x-p22.2"></span>[Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.xv.x-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xv.x-p23"></span>We hence see that this one thing is
sufficient to condemn all superstitions, that is, when men follow their
own fancies, and observe not a fixed and unchangeable rule, which cannot
deceive. It follows —

<span id="iii.xv.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p2"></span>**10.** All the land shall be turned as a
plain from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted up,
and inhabited in her place, from Benjamin’s gate unto the place of the
first gate, unto the corner gate, and *from* the tower of Hananeel unto
the king’s winepresses.

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p3"></span>**10.** Vertetur tota terra quasi
planities a Geba ad Rimmon versus meridiem Ierusalem; exaltabitur et
habitabitur loco suo**,** (sub se**,** *ad verbum***,**) a porta
Ben-jamin ad locum portae primae**,** ad portam angulorum**,** et ab
arce Chananeel ad torcularia Regis.

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet in this verse promises two
things, — that the city would be in a very prominent place, so as to be
seen at a distance, and also, that it would be a secure and peaceable
habitation.

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p7"></span>With regard to the former part he says,
*Turned shall be the whole land into a plain*  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md) We indeed know that Jerusalem was
situated with mountains around it, its foundations, as it is said in
<span id="iii.xv.xi-p10.2"></span>[Ps
87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xi-p10.2"></span>, were on the holy mountains. As then the
country was uneven on account of its many hills, the Prophet says, that
it would become a wide plain, so that travelling would not be rough and
difficult as before; and further, that Jerusalem would not be low in a
deep place, but would be on a plain, which would not prevent it from
being seen from whatever quarter the visitants might come. The whole
land, he says, shall be a plain *from Geba to Rimmon*. As we do not
fully know what sort of country that was, nor where Geba and Rimmon
were, I shall not speak here particularly on every word; but it is
enough for us to understand the design of what is said, which was to
show — that steep places would become level ground, so that Jerusalem
might be seen from far, and that the surface being level there would be
no mountains to impede a distant view.  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189.md)

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p12"></span>Then follows the second clause,
*Inhabited shall be Jerusalem in its own place*; that is, though it was
formerly pulled down, and now lies as it were dilapidated, and the
buildings already begun are very imperfect, yet *it shall on itself be
inhabited*, it shall have the same limits, the same boundaries: in
short, the Prophet means, that the size of the city would be the same as
it was formerly.

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p13"></span>Zechariah, we know, performed the office
of a teacher, when the Jews began, not without great hindrances, to
build the city. They were not able at first to take in the whole
compass; indeed they thought this impracticable, until they were
encouraged by Ezra and Nehemiah, as we learn from the books of both.
Since then the city they began to build was confined in its limits,
Zechariah says, that there was no reason to despair, for in a short time
it would again attain its ancient splendor, and be extended to all its
gates, as it is afterwards stated. And a description of the ancient
city, when destroyed, is no doubt given here when he says,

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p14"></span>*From the gate of Benjamin to the place
of the first gate*, (he mentions the place of the gate, for there was
then no gate, as that part of the city remained as yet desolate,) *to
the gate of the corners, from the citadel of Hananeel to the wine-vats
of the king*. Though we know not fully now how far the ancient Jerusalem
extended, or what was its exact situation, it is yet certain that the
Prophet meant that such would be the greatness and magnificence of the
city, that its condition would fully equal its ancient splendor which
then had disappeared. The city, as it is well known, had been very
large; though writers do not agree on the subject, yet it is commonly
admitted, that it included 30 stadia. This was certainly no common size;
and hence the Prophet states what all thought to be incredible, that
though the extent of the city was small, it would yet become a new
Jerusalem, not inferior to the former either in largeness or in
magnificence, or in any other respect. But we must defer what remains
till tomorrow.

<span id="iii.xv.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.xv.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou
gatherest us for this end, that we may be to thee a peculiar people, and
as thou hast separated us from profane men, that thy legitimate worship
may prevail among us, — O grant, that we may all attend to thy word, and
surrender ourselves wholly to thee, and never thorn aside either to the
right hand or to the left, but continue to observe the rule which thou
hast prescribed, so that we may know by the continual flowing of thy
favor that thou rulest in the midst of us; and may we by this enjoyment
be stimulated more and more to love, worship, and fear thee, so that
consecrating ourselves, body and soul, truly and from the heart, to
thee, we may make continual advances in true religion, until having at
length put off all the filth of our flesh we shall come to that blessed
inheritance, which has been purchased for us by the blood of thy only
begotten Son — Amen.

<span id="iii.xv.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixty-seventh

<span id="iii.xv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p2"></span>**11.** And *men* shall dwell in it, and
there shall be no more utter destruction; but Jerusalem shall be safely
inhabited.

<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p3"></span>**11.** Et habitabunt in ea**,** et
excidium non erit amplius: et habitabitur Ierusalem confidenter.

<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p6"></span>Zechariah concludes what he said in the
last verse by saying, that Jerusalem when restored by God to its
pristine state would be a populous city, for the indefinite verb here
used means the same as though he had said, that the number of people
would be as great as it had been before, though a small portion only had
returned. We indeed know how difficult it is to fill a city with
inhabitants when once deserted, especially after a long interval of
time. But the Prophet here exhorts the Jews to entertain hope, for the
Lord would gather again a large number of men, so as to fill the city
with inhabitants.

<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p7"></span>He adds, *there shall be no more utter
destruction*  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md) By the word <span
id="iii.xv.xiv-p8.3"></span>חרם, *cherem*, I have no doubt, the Prophet
means all utter ruin, such as had happened when the people were driven
into exile. And for this reason and in the same sense, Isaiah says, that
God had sworn that the destruction of the city would be like the deluge
of Noah, (<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p8.4"></span>[Isa
54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xiv-p8.4"></span>;) for he should never again bring such a
grievous and dreadful vengeance on his people. But we learn from the
whole passage, that this prophecy extends to the kingdom of Christ; for
though Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus, it is yet true that God bad
been the perpetual guardian of that city, inasmuch as the fullness of
time had come when Christ was revealed. It is then the same as though
the Prophet had said, that such should be the moderation of God’s anger,
that the name of the city would wholly perish, nor the whole people be
forced to migrate. This then is what he understands by <span
id="iii.xv.xiv-p8.5"></span>חרם, *cherem*

<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p9"></span>He now adds, that those who returned
thither *shall dwell safely in Jerusalem*, for the Lord would protect
them, and by an extended hand defend them against all enemies. We have
elsewhere reminded you of the Prophet’s object; for he wished to goad
the tardiness and sloth of those who made so much of their pleasures in
Chaldea, that to return to the inheritance promised them from above was
unpleasant and grievous to them. Hence he shows of how great a benefit
of God they had deprived themselves; for being dispersed among the
heathen nation they knew not that God’s aid was provided for them. They
indeed deprived themselves of that promise which especially belonged to
the remnant who dwelt at Jerusalem. The Prophet had also a particular
regard to those miserable inhabitants of the land, who having been
stimulated by God’s promises, had despised all dangers and all
difficulties, and then had undergone, not grudgingly, vast troubles that
they might possess their own country. The Prophet then shows that they
had no reason to repent, for the Lord would bless them, and make them to
dwell safely in the midst of enemies, by whom we know they were on every
side surrounded, and further, that the city would become populous,
though they were not then many in number. It follows —

<span id="iii.xv.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p2"></span>**12.** And this shall be the plague
wherewith the LORD will smite all the people that have fought against
Jerusalem; Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their
feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue
shall consume away in their mouth.

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p3"></span>**12.** Et haec erit plaga qua percutiet
(*vel***,** plagabit) Iehova omnes populos**,** qui pugnaverint contra
Ierusalem**,** —liquescet (*alii vertunt***,** tabescet) caro ejus**,**
dum ipse stabit super pedes suos; et oculi ejus liquescent in
foraminibus suis; et lingua ejus liquescet in ore ipsorum.

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p6"></span>The Prophet adds, that though there would
not be wanting many ungodly men, who should distress the Church, and
attempt many things for its destruction, yet God would be a defender and
would inflict punishment, which would exhibit a clear and decided proof
of that paternal favor which he manifests towards his Church. But these
things do not seem to harmonise — that the people should dwell safely at
Jerusalem, and yet that there would be enemies violently disturbing the
city: but by saying, that they should dwell safely, he means not that
there would be none anxious to do them harm; but that trusting in God’s
protection they would continue safe in the greatest dangers, as they
would feel persuaded that God, who promised to stand on their side,
would be stronger than all. The habitation of the godly would then be
secure, not because they dreaded no attacks of enemies, but because they
firmly believed that they would be preserved by a power from above,
though the devil excited many people on all sides against them, and also
prepared and suborned many wicked men to contrive their ruin.

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p7"></span>And to this power it behaves us to raise
up our thoughts when various enemies rage against us, so that we may
dwell in safety and wait with quiet minds until God shall deliver us;
for our safety is concealed under the faithful protection of God, which
is only made known to us by the word and promises. Let us, however, bear
in mind what the Prophet teaches us here — that when God gives loose
reins to enemies, his vengeance is near, so that he will visit with
punishment all those wrongs and injuries which we patiently endure.

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p8"></span>*This*, he says, *shall be the plague
with which Jehovah shall smite all people*. He mentions *all people*
again, lest a multitude of enemies should terrify the faithful, when
they found themselves unequal to them, and almost overwhelmed by their
vast number; they were not to doubt but that the hand of God would
prevail. Then he adds, *His flesh shall consume away*, or melt away:
there is a change of number, but the sense is not obscured; for he says,
*This shall be the plague with which Jehovah shall smite all people; his
flesh shall melt away*, as though he was speaking of one man; and then
he immediately adds, *while he shall stand on his feet; and his eyes
shall melt away, and his tongue in their mouth*  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) We see how the Prophet changes the
number three times; but there is in the subject itself nothing
ambiguous. He means that it would be nothing to God, when resolved to
punish the adversaries of his Church, whether they were many or few; for
he can easily destroy them all, as though he had to do only with one
man. But it seems also that Zechariah had another thing in view — that
as God’s vengeance would regard each individual, no one of them would be
safe, and that thus the vengeance of God would be universal, without any
exception, and executed on all armies and on each individual.

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p10"></span>We must now notice the kind of
punishment which is here described — that God would destroy them all
without the hand or the aid of men: *his flesh*, he says, *shall melt
away*, or dissolve. In this case divine vengeance is more clearly seen,
that is, then enemies, though no one fights with them, yet of themselves
consume away: and then he adds, *when they shall stand on their feet*;
and yet their flesh shall melt away. The Prophet no doubt alludes to the
curses of the law, among which this is especially to be observed — that
God in various ways consumes the wicked, so that they melt away when no
cause appears. (<span id="iii.xv.xv-p10.1"></span>[Deut.
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xv-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p11"></span>The meaning then is, that God has
various means by which he can reduce to nothing our enemies, though they
may seek aid on every side. We are therefore taught by these words to
cast all our cares on God; for when our enemies seem to be placed beyond
the chance of danger, and confidently boast that nothing adverse can
happen to them, yet in God’s hand is their death and life, so that they
can be consumed by his breath only. There is then no reason for us to
depend on earthly means, when we seek to be certain respecting the
destruction of our enemies; for God can inwardly consume them; though
they may seem to stand whole and sound, yet they will be dissolved, so
that even their eyes shall melt away in their cavities, that is, they
shall fail without any external force. We indeed know that eyes are well
protected; being covered with their defences, they seem to be beyond the
reach of harm. But the Prophet intimates that the hidden vengeance of
God can penetrate into the bowels and marrow; in short, that there is
nothing so safe that it can escape the vengeance of God. *The tongue*
also, he says, *shall melt away*, or dissolve (it is the same verb) *in
their mouth*. He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.xv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p2"></span>**13.** And it shall come to pass in
that day, *that* a great tumult from the LORD shall be among them; and
they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand
shall rise up against the hand of his neighbour.

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p3"></span>**13.** Et accidet**,** die illo erit
tumultus Iehovae magnus in illis; et apprehendet quisque manum socii
sui; et ascendet manus ejus contra manum proximi sui (*vel***,**
evanescet; *alii vertunt*<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p3.1"></span>, excidetur
manus ejus**,** *quia* \[<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p3.2"></span>עלה\] *etiam
significat excidere*.)

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet seems again to be
inconsistent with himself; for after having declared that God would be
the defender of his people, so as to destroy and consume all people for
their sake, he now adds that there would be intestine discords, by which
the Jews would wilfully consume one another; while yet there is nothing
more improbable than that the people, who live under God’s protection,
should so divide themselves into factions, as to perish miserably
without any outward enemy. But these things do not ill accord, provided
we bear in mind what I have already said — that these things are to be
taken in a different sense; for the Prophet at one time warns the
faithful of the evils which were impending, lest being shaken by their
suddenness, they should despond; at another time he promises them a
happy condition, for they would ever be the objects of God’s care. So
then we may explain the matter thus — “Though enemies on every side
should unite and conspire against you, though they should hasten with
great fury and rage to destroy you, and though a vast member at home,
and domestic enemies from the bosom of your city, should rise up against
you, yet God will prevail against them, and all your enemies shall at
length be for your good and benefit.”

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p7"></span>This then is the reason why Zechariah
blends together what seems to be wholly inconsistent. It was necessary
to know both these things — that the faithful might be fully persuaded
that God watched over their safety, for it was his purpose to defend the
holy city, and to be its perpetual guardian — and then, that they might
also be prepared in their minds to bear many trials and troubles, lest
they should promise to themselves a joyful state, and thus indulge in
carnal security. Having now explained the Prophet’s intention, we must
briefly notice the words.

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p8"></span>He says that there would *be a great
tumult from Jehovah among them*. This no doubt refers to the Jews; for
the Prophet shows that they would be not only exposed to external
injuries, but also to another evil — that they would arm themselves
against one another, as though they would tear out their own bowels. *A
tumult*, he says, *shall be among them*, which is the extreme of evils
that can happen to a city or people; for no danger is nearer than when
they who ought as one man to unite strength and courage to repel an
enemy, rage internally against themselves.

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p9"></span>But this passage deserves special
notice, as here is described to us the condition of the Church, such as
it is to be until the end of the world; for though the Prophet speaks
here of the intermediate time between the return of the people and the
coming of Christ, yet he paints for us a living representation, by which
we can see that the Church is never to be free or exempt from this evil
— that it cannot drive away or put to flight domestic enemies. And we
must also observe, that this tumult, as he says, would be from *Jehovah*
 <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md) He means that whenever the
Church is rent, and sects burst forth, and many hypocrites and ungodly
men, who for a time pretend to be God’s true servants, furiously assail
true religion — whenever these things arise, the Prophet means that they
do not happen by chance, but that they are God’s judgments, in order to
prove the faith of his people, and to humble his Church, and also to
give to his people a victory and a crown. However this may be, though
their own ambition rouses heretics, and all the ungodly, to disturb the
Church, and though the devil excites them by his own fans, yet God sits
in the chief place, and whatever commotions rage in the Church proceed
from him. Hence Paul says that heresies must be, that those who are
approved may become manifest. (<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p14.1"></span>[1Co
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xvi-p14.1"></span>.) Certainly this is not the object of the
devil; but Paul shows that it is the high purpose of God, so that he may
distinguish by severe trial between his sincere servants and hypocrites;
for he not only permits tumults to arise, but even stirs them up. And
hence also we learn, that nothing is better than to flee to him when
ungodly men race and distort our peace; for he can easily by a nod
silence those commotions which he excites.

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p15"></span>He adds, *Every one shall lay hold on
the hand of his companion, and rise up* (or perish) *shall his hand
against the hand of his neighbor*. This passage may admit of a twofold
meaning. The first is, that every one for the sake of obtaining help
will lay hold on the hand of his neighbor, and yet without any
advantage, for his own hand would perish, that is, he who sought aid for
his friend could not support himself: and this is the meaning given by
many interpreters; as though the Prophet had said, that the state of
things would be so desperate, that every one would be constrained to
seek help from his friend, and yet could not obtain what he desired, for
while attempting to lay hold on the hand of his friend, he would find
that he could not grasp it. But a different meaning would better
correspond with the next verse, — that *every one would violently lay
hold on the hand of his neighbor, and his hand would rise up against the
hand of his neighbor*. I think then that this part is added as
explanatory, — that when God raised tumults among the Jews, every one
would start forward to act violently against his neighbor, and raise up
his hand to hurt him: for it follows —

<span id="iii.xv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p2"></span>**14.** And Judah also shall fight at
Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the heathen round about shall be
gathered together, gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p3"></span>**14.** Atque etiam Iehudah pugnabit
contra Ierusalem**,** et congregabitur exercitus (*alii vertunt***,**
opulentiam**,** *quod* etiam non male quadraret) omnium gentium in
circuitu aurum et argentum et vestes ad copiam multam (ad multitudinem
valde**,** *ad verbum*.)

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p6"></span>Zechariah speaks here no doubt on the
same subject; for he adds, that there would be an intestine war between
the country and the city, though they were but one body, and since their
return they were under the same Divine banner: God had indeed been their
leader in their journey, and was in short the only remaining glory of
the people. It was then something horribly monstrous, that Judah should
join himself to enemies in order to destroy the city: yet the Prophet
says that this evil, as well as other evils, would soon be witnessed; so
that they would have not only to sustain the assaults of enemies, who
would come from far, but would also find their brethren hostile and
hurtful to them: Fight then *shall Judah against Jerusalem*  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md)

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p8"></span>At what time this happened, it is well
known; for under Antiochus we know that both the city and the whole land
were full of traitors; inasmuch as hardly one in a hundred continued to
follow true religion. Thus it happened, that almost all were trodden
under foot. It was not then without reason foretold by Zechariah, that
the Jews would become cruel enemies to their own brethren.

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p9"></span>He then adds, *Collected shall be the
armies of all nations*. The word <span id="iii.xv.xvii-p9.1"></span>חיל,
*chil*, means forces, wealth and strength. I am disposed to follow what
I have already said, — that the army or strength of all nations around
would be collected to overthrow Jerusalem. The Prophet intimates in
these words that the Jews would apparently be the most miserable of men,
were their condition estimated by their state at that time; for there
would be harassing traitors within, so that they had to fear intrigues
and hidden dangers, and many people also from every part would unite to
destroy them. Nothing can be imagined more miserable than to be assailed
from within and from without by almost the whole of mankind. But there
will presently follow a consolation; and hence we must bear in mind what
I have said, that threatening are given by way of warning, that the
faithful might courageously bear those ruinous attacks, relying on the
hope of a better state of things, according to what God had promised.

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p10"></span>When afterwards he mentions *gold, and
silver, and garments*, he intimates that the enemies, whom he speaks of,
would not come, as though they were hungry, running to the prey; but
that they would be so savage as to seek nothing but blood; for they
would be furnished with necessaries, having an abundance of gold and
silver. For what purpose then would they come? Not to satiate their
avarice, but only to gorge human blood, and thus to extinguish the
memory of the chosen people. Even to hear this was terrible; but it was
necessary to warn the faithful, lest they should be surprised by any
sudden event. He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.xv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xviii-p2"></span>**15.** And so shall be the plague of
the horse, of the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, and of all the
beasts that shall be in these tents, as this plague.

<span id="iii.xv.xviii-p3"></span>**15.** Et talis erit plaga equi**,**
muli**,** cameli**,** et asini**,** et cujuslibet jumenti (*vel***,**
animalis**,**) quod erit in castris istis**,** sicuti plaga haec.

<span id="iii.xv.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xviii-p6"></span>Zechariah in this verse raises up the
minds of the godly, so that they might know that their energies would
effect nothing, but that after having tried every thing they would be
put to flight by the power of God. And hence appears more evident what
has been twice repeated, — that the Prophet does not simply denounce
calamities to terrify the Jews, but to animate them to constancy, that
they might boldly exult, even when nearly overwhelmed by a vast heap of
evils.

<span id="iii.xv.xviii-p7"></span>The meaning then is, — that after
Satan had tried every thing to effect the ruin of the Church, and the
ungodly had left nothing undone, there would yet be a successful issue
to the faithful; for God would execute his vengeance, not only on men,
but also on horses and camels, and on all cattle: and since God’s wrath
would burn against all animals, which are in themselves innocent, it may
with certainty be concluded, that those enemies who had provoked him by
their cruelty, could not escape his judgment, and the punishment
described here by the Prophet. He then subjoins -

<span id="iii.xv.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xix-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xix-p2"></span>**16.** And it shall come to pass,
*that* every one that is left of all the nations which came against
Jerusalem shall even go up from year to year to worship the King, the
LORD of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.

<span id="iii.xv.xix-p3"></span>**16.** Et erit**,** (*hoc est***,**
accidet**,**) ut quisque residuus fuerit ex cunctis gentibus quae
venerint contra Ierusalem**,** ascendat ab anno in annum ad
adorandum**,** (*vel***,** ad supplicandam**,**) Regem Iehovam
exercituum**,** et celebrandum celebritatem tabernaculorum.

<span id="iii.xv.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xix-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xix-p6"></span>Zechariah here advances farther, — that
those who shall have escaped the ruin of which he had spoken shall be so
humbled that they would of their own accord submit to God. He said
before, that God would take vengeance and destroy all the enemies of his
Church; but the promise here is still more valuable, — that he would
turn the hearts of those who escaped punishment, so that without any
constraint they would become obedient; for *come*, he says, *shall they
every year to worship God in his temple*. Then the sum of what is said
is this, that God would subdue all the enemies of his Church, and in two
ways, for some he would destroy, and he would humble others, so as to
make them willing servants and ready of themselves to obey his
authority. *It shall be* then *that every one who shall remain of all
the nations which came against Jerusalem, shall ascend to supplicate
God*, or humbly to worship God.

<span id="iii.xv.xix-p7"></span>If the time be inquired, I answer, that
whenever the Prophets speak of the conversion of the nations, they are
wont to speak always in general terms; but that this is an hyperbolical
language, and that still there is nothing unreasonable in this excess,
for surely it was a wonderful work of God when a great number from the
nations became subject to him. We indeed know, that the name of the
people of Israel was universally hated, so that their religion was
disliked by almost the whole world. It was then a thing incredible when
Zechariah said, that men from all countries would be so changed as to
worship the true God of Israel. But many Churches we know were
everywhere formed in the world, and men without number professed God’s
name, and undertook his yoke, and embraced that religion which before
had been despised by them, and which indeed they had persecuted with the
greatest hatred. It is therefore no wonder that the Prophet should say,
that the remnant who escaped the sword of vengeance would at length
become the willing servants of God. But we ought to notice, as I have
said, the mode of speaking commonly adopted by the Prophets, for, in
order to amplify the grace of God, they speak in general terms, though
what they say ought to be confined to the elect alone.

<span id="iii.xv.xix-p8"></span>*Ascend*, he says, *shall every one from
year to year*. Zechariah speaks here also according to the apprehensions
of the people. Festivals, we know, were appointed by God; the Israelites
ascended at least three times a year unto the temple, but as this was
too hard and difficult for the miserable exiles to do, who had been
scattered through all countries, those influenced by zeal for religion
were wont to descend unto Jerusalem once a year. To this custom of the
law the Prophet now alludes, as though he had said, “God indeed spares
some, yet they will at length come to his service without any
constraint, and submit to the God of Israel.” But he speaks, as I have
said, according to the rites of the law; and of this mode of speaking we
have often reminded you: I shall therefore pass by the subject, but some
additional remarks shall be made at the end of this chapter. *Ascend*
then *shall every one to supplicate the king, Jehovah of hosts*; that
is, that they might confess the only true God to be king: for he has
regard to the Prophecy which we considered yesterday, when he said that
the only true God would be king. So also in this place, confirming the
former truth he says, that they who had before furiously assailed the
Church would become the worshipers of God, for they would understand him
to be the king of the whole world. But the remainder shall be deferred
to another time.

<span id="iii.xv.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xx-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.xv.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou sees
that thy Church at this day is miserably torn by many discords, and that
there are so many traitorous ministers of Satan, who cease not to
disturb it, — O grant, that we may find by experience what thou hast
promised by thy Prophet, even that thou wilt be the perpetual guardian
of those whom thou hast been pleased once to choose as thine own, and
whom thou hast received into thine own embrace, so that they may
courageously proceed amidst all discords, and come forth at length as
conquerors: and may it please thee also to put forth thine hand, and to
execute that vengeance which thou hast denounced by the same Prophet, so
as to destroy and reduce to nothing not only those who openly oppose
thee and thy servants and children, but also those serpents, who by
intrigues and frauds and by other base means, harass and torment thy
Church, until we shall at length attain a full victory and triumph in
thy celestial kingdom, together with our head, even Christ Jesus our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xv.xx-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixty-eighth

<span id="iii.xv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p2"></span>**17.** And it shall be, *that* whoso
will not come up of *all* the families of the earth unto Jerusalem to
worship the King, the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p3"></span>**17.** Et erit**,** Qui non ascenderit
e familiis terrae in Ierusalem ad supplicandum Regi**,** Iehovae
exercituum**,** etiam non erit super eos pluvia.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p4"></span>**18.** And if the family of Egypt go
not up, and come not, that *have* no *rain*; there shall be the plague,
wherewith the Lord will smite the heathen that come not up to keep the
feast of tabernacles.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p5"></span>**18.** Et si familia Egypti non
ascenderit et non venerit**,** etiam non super eos; erit autem plaga qua
percutiet**,** (plagabit**,** ad verbum**,**) Iehova gentes quae non
ascenderint ad celebrandam festivitatem Tabernaculorum.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p7"></span><span id="iii.xv.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p8"></span>Zechariah goes on here with the same
subject, — that the name of the only true God would be known throughout
the whole world, so that all nations would unite in his worship, while
the whole earth was before polluted with various superstitions, and
every one followed his own god: but the more clearly expresses here than
in the last lecture, that vengeance was prepared for all the despisers
of the true God. He says then, that the curse of God is laid up for all
those who would not come to Jerusalem humbly to worship God to there.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p9"></span>We have said that in these words is set
forth the legitimate worship of God; for after the coming of Christ it
was not necessary to ascend into Jerusalem according to what John says
in <span id="iii.xv.xxii-p9.1"></span>[Joh
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p10"></span>“The time comes and now is, that the
true worshippers of God shall worship God, neither in this mountains nor
at Jerusalem;”

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p11"></span>but in every part of the world. But
the Prophets speak according to the state of things in their time, and
always describe the spiritual worship of God according to the types of
the law. To ascend then into Jerusalem amounts to the same thing as to
embrace true religion and cordially to engage in the worship of the only
true God, such as has been prescribed in his word. The meaning then is,
— that all who despised the God of Israel would be accursed.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p12"></span>Then what follows is mentioned by the
Prophet as a part for the whole; he declares that there would be no rain
on the despisers of God; as though he had said, that they would perceive
God’s vengeance, as he would take away from them all the necessaries of
life; for by rain the Prophet means whatever is needful for the support
of life. And we know that as to the blessings of God needful for the
present life, the chief thing is, when he renders the heavens and the
earth the servants as it were of his bounty to us: for how can we be
supplied with food, except the earth by his command open its bowels and
the heavens hear the earth, as it is said elsewhere, (<span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p12.1"></span>[Ho
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p12.1"></span>;) so that rain may irrigate it, and
render it fruitful, which must be otherwise barren?

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p13"></span>We now then understand the design of
the Prophet, — that in order to invite all nations to the pure worship
of God, he declares that all who refused to serve the only true God
would be accursed. He further intended by this prophecy to animate the
Jews, that they might firmly proceed in the course of true religion
until the coming of Christ, and never doubt but that the God whom they
worshipped would be the supreme king of the whole world, though before
hidden as it were in a corner of the world, while worshipped in Judea
alone. The Prophet then intimates that though God had been despised by
all nations, his name would yet be sanctified and adored; and also, that
if any deprived him of his legitimate worship they would be visited with
punishment, because they were destined to perish through famine and
want, inasmuch as the heavens would deny rain to them, and the earth
would not give them food.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p14"></span><span id="iii.xv.xxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p15"></span>But Zechariah speaks expressly of the
Egyptians: and we indeed know that they were most inveterate enemies to
true religion; and he might have also mentioned the Assyrians and the
Chaldeans; but as the Egyptians were nearer and more contiguous to the
holy land, their hatred towards the Jews was more virulent. This is the
reason why Zechariah speaks of them particularly. It may at the same
time appear strange that he threatens them with want of rain; for we
know that Egypt expects no rain from above, because of the peculiar
condition of the country; for according as the Nile overflows, do the
inhabitants look for a fruitful produce of corn and of all other things.
The Prophet then ought not to have thus threatened the Egyptians, for
they might have justly laughed at him for saying that there would be no
rain for them, the want of which is not much felt there. But the
Prophet’s intention was simply what I have already explained, — that God
would be a Father to the Jews, and also to others who joined in his
worship according to the law. Though then the Egyptians had no need of
rain, yet by this metaphor Zechariah denounced on them sterility as the
punishment of impiety.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p16"></span>And we may further observe, that
though the overflowing of the Nile irrigated the whole land and made it
fruitful, yet rain was by no means useless; and it is said in <span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p16.1"></span>[Ps
105:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#032.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p16.1"></span>, “He turned their rain into hail,” Egypt
being the place spoken of; for the Lord destroyed all its fruit, because
the rain was turned into hail. It appears also evident from history,
that rain is desirable in Egypt in order to render the produce more
abundant. But the Lord has favored that country with a peculiar benefit
by supplying the want of rain by the Nile.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p17"></span>There is then nothing doubtful in the
meaning of the Prophet, as his object was to show, that the Lord would
constrain all people to become obedient to true religion, not only those
Jews who were far removed from Judea, but even the Egyptians themselves,
who had been always most alienated from true and pure worship.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p18"></span>He adds, *There shall be upon them the
plague*. He now speaks more generally; and what he before specifically
mentioned, he now declares in general terms, — that God would execute
vengeance and destroy and reduce to nothing all those who took not on
them the yoke, so as to worship him sincerely, together with the Jews,
according to what the law prescribes. He again repeats the words, *who
ascended not into Jerusalem*; not that he intended to confine the
worship of God to ceremonies or rites under the law; but because it was
necessary, until Christ abrogated all the ancient rites, that the
worship of God should be thus described; nor could it then be separated
from these external exercises.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p19"></span>But here it may be rightly inquired,
why the Prophet speaks specifically of the feast of tabernacles, since
the passover was deemed first among the festivals. The reason seems to
me to have been this, — because it was difficult to believe that the
Jews would return to their own country, that God would become again
their redeemer. Many interpreters say, that the Prophet speaks of the
feast of tabernacles, because it behaved them to be sojourners in the
world: but a similar reason might be given for other days. We must then
inquire why he mentions the feast of tabernacles and not other feasts.
Now we know that when the Prophets speak of the second restoration of
the people, they often call attention to that wonderful deliverance from
Egypt by which God had proved that he possessed sufficient power to
redeem and save his own people. To this instance does Zechariah now
allude, as I think, and says, that God would restore his people by his
wonderful and inexpressibly great power, so that they might justly
celebrate the feast of tabernacles as their fathers formerly did: for we
know why God commanded the Jews to dwell every year under the branches
of trees; it was, that they might be mindful of that deliverance which
had been granted to their fathers; for they had continued forty years in
the desert, where they had no buildings, but huts only, made of branches
of trees. When therefore they went forth from their houses, and dwelt as
it were in the open air in tents, they thus revived the memory of the
wonderful manner by which their fathers were delivered. Hence God, in
order to show that their return from the Babylonian exile was worthy of
being remembered, says here that the *feast of tabernacles would be
celebrated*  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md)

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p21"></span>In short, the Prophet means that God
would be such a deliverer of his people, that all the nations, even from
the remotest parts, would acknowledge it as a remarkable miracle: it is
the sense then as though he had said, that the deliverance of the people
would be an evidence of divine power so manifest and illustrious, that
all nations would acknowledge that the God of Israel is the creator of
heaven and earth, and is so endued with supreme power, that he governs
the whole world; and, in a word, that he is the only true God who ought
to be worshipped.  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md) It afterwards
follows —

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p2"></span>**19.** This shall be the punishment
of Egypt, and the punishment of all nations that come not up to keep the
feast of tabernacles.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p3"></span>**19.** Haec erit poena Egypti et
poena omnium gentium**,** quae non ascenderint ad celebrandum
celebritatem tabernaculorum.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p6"></span>He repeats the same thing, and almost
in the same words; but yet it is not done without reason: for we ought
to consider how difficult it was to believe what is said, as the Jews
who had returned to their country were few in number, and unwarlike, and
on every side opposed by their enemies. Since then the Church was almost
every moment in danger, it was no wonder that the faithful had need of
being strengthened under their trials, which often disturbed and
harassed their minds. This then is the reason why the Prophet repeats
often the same thing.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p7"></span>*This*, he says, *shall be the sin of
Egypt and of all nations*, etc. The word <span
id="iii.xv.xxiii-p7.1"></span>חטאת, *chethat*, properly means
wickedness, sin; but as *piaculum* in Latin sometimes means sin, and
sometimes expiation, so <span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p7.2"></span>חטאת,
*chethat*, in Hebrew: it signifies at one time sin, at another the
sacrifice by which sin is atoned: and hence Christ is said to have been
made sin; for when he offered himself as an expiation, he sustained the
curse which belonged to us all, by having it transferred on himself
(<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p7.3"></span>[Ga
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxiii-p7.3"></span>.) As Christ then was an expiation, he was
on this account called sin. And the Greek translators did not change the
name, because they saw that <span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p7.4"></span>חטאת,
*chethat*, in Hebrew, is taken for a sacrifice or punishment as well as
for sin; hence they used the word hamartia indiscriminately.  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md)

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p9"></span>So then the Prophet says that this
would be the sin or *the punishment of Egypt and of all nations*, as
though he had said, “If they despise the God of Israel and condemn his
worship, such a contumacy shall not be unpunished; for God will show
himself to be the vindicator of his own glory.” And hence we conclude,
that nothing ought to be more desired by us than that God should reveal
himself to us, so that we may not presumptuously wander after
superstitions, but purely worship him; for no one rightly worships God,
except he who is taught by his word. It is then a singular favor, when
the Lord prescribes to us the rule by which we may rightly worship him:
but when we assent not to his true and legitimate worship, we here see
that our whole life is accursed. It now follows —

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p2"></span>**20.** In that day shall there be upon
the bells of the horses, Holiness Unto The Lord; and the pots in the
Lord’s house shall be like the bowls before the altar.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p3"></span>**20.** Die illo erit super fraena
(*aut***,** phaleras; *alii vertunt***,** frontalia; *alii***,**
collaria; *dicemus postea de hac voce*; *vel***,** stabula**,** *hoc
meum est*<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p3.1"></span>, *et postea dicam
rationem;* super stabula *ignitur*) equi (*hoc est***,** equorum**,**
*est mutatio* numeri) sanctitas Iehovae; et erit (*hoc est***,** erunt;
*iterum est mutatio numeri*) lebetes in domo Iehovae sicuti phialae
(*sic vertit Hieronymus*<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p3.2"></span>, *alii
vertunt***,** pelves) coram altari.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p6"></span>Zechariah teaches us in this verse,
that God would become the king of the world, so that all things would be
applied to his service, and that nothing would be so profane as not to
change its nature, so as to be sanctified for the service of God. This
is the import of the whole. There is some obscurity in the words; but
interpreters for the most part have been led astray, because they have
not sufficiently attended to the design of the Prophet; and thus they
have wrested the words to their own views, while they did not understand
the subject.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p7"></span>*There will be*, he says, *an
inscription on the shades* or head coverings *of horses, Holiness to
Jehovah*. No interpreters have perceived that there is here an implied
comparison between the mitre of the high priest and all profane things;
for since the high priest was a type of Christ, there was inscribed on
his tiara, Holiness to Jehovah, <span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p7.1"></span>קדש
ליהוה, *kodash la-Ieve*, and as the holiness of the temple, and of
everything belonging to the service under the law, depended on the
priesthood, this inscription must be viewed as extending to everything
in the temple, to the altar, to the sanctuary, to the sacrifices, to the
offerings, to the candlestick, to the incense, and in short, to all
sacred things.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p8"></span>What now does the Prophet mean? There
shall be, he says, that inscription which the high priest bears on his
head, *Holiness to Jehovah*; there shall be, he says, this inscription
*on the stables of the horses*

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p9"></span>As to the word <span
id="iii.xv.xxiv-p9.1"></span>מצלות, *metsalut*, it is only found here.
Some derive it from <span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p9.2"></span>צול, *tsul*, and
others from <span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p9.3"></span>צלע, *tsale*; but the
more received opinion is that it comes from <span
id="iii.xv.xxiv-p9.4"></span>צלל, *tsalal*, in which the <span
id="iii.xv.xxiv-p9.5"></span>ל, *lamed*, is doubled. And some render it
trappings; others, reins; others, bells; and all only conjecture, for
there is no certainty.  <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md) Some
also render it the deep; and this sense may be also suitable. But what I
have already stated seems to me more probable — that the shades or
blinkers of horses are meant, and are here metaphorically called
stables. Though then the stable of a horse is a mean and sordid place,
and often filthy, yet the Prophet says that it would become holy to the
Lord.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p11"></span>The meaning then is, that no place was
so profane which would not be made holy when God reigned through the
whole world. But if any one prefers trappings, or warlike harness, I do
not object; for this view also is not unsuitable. Nothing is less holy
than to shed human blood; and hence the Scripture says, that their hands
are polluted who justly slay an enemy in war; not because slaughter is
of itself sinful, but because the Lord intended to strike men with
terror, that they might not rashly commit slaughter. It would not then
ill suit this place to say, that the Lord would make holy the trappings
of horses, so that nothing disorderly would hereafter be done in war,
but that every one putting on arms would acknowledge God to be a judge
in heaven, and would not dare, without a just cause, to engage with his
enemy.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p12"></span>Ridiculous and puerile is what
Theodore says in the first book of his Ecclesiastical history. He quotes
this passage, and says that it was fulfilled when Helena, the mother of
Constantine, adorned the trappings of a horse with a nail of the cross;
for her purpose was to give this to her son as a sort of charm. One of
those nails by which she thought Christ was crucified, she put in the
royal diadem; of the other she caused the bit of a bridle to be made, or
according to Eusebius, to be partly made; but Theodore says that the
whole was made of it. These are indeed rank trifles; but yet I thought
proper to refer to them, that you might know how foolish that age was.
Jerome indeed rejects the fable; but as it was believed by many, we see
how shamefully deluded at that time were many of those who were
accounted the luminaries of the Church. I now return to the words of the
Prophet.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p13"></span>He says, that upon the stables, or
upon the trappings of the horses, there would be this inscription —
*Holiness to Jehovah* — <span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p13.1"></span>קדש ליהוה,
*kodash la-Ieve*: then he adds, *All the pots in the house of Jehovah
shall be as the vessels before the altar*; that is, whatever was before
only applied to profane uses, would be invested with holiness. I then
give this interpretation — that pots or kettles would be like the
vessels of the altar, as the whole apparatus for cooking would be
converted to the service of God; as though he had said that there would
be no profane luxuries, as before, but that common food would be made
holy, inasmuch as men themselves would become holy to the Lord, and
would be holy in their whole life and in all their actions.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p14"></span>But most go astray in supposing that
the trappings would be made into pots; for the Prophet meant another
things that holiness would exist among men in peace as well as in war,
so that whether they carried on war, or rested at home, whether they ate
or drank, they would still offer a pure sacrifice to God, both in eating
and drinking, and even in warfare. Such then is the view we ought to
take of the Prophet’s words — that *all the pots in the house of Jehovah
shall be like the vessels before the altar*; that is, “whatever has
hitherto been profaned by the intemperance and luxuries of men, shall
hereafter become holy, and be like the vessels of the temple itself.”

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p15"></span>Jerome philosophises here with great
acuteness, as the Prophet intimated that the sacrifices offered under
the law would be of no account, because God would no longer require the
fat of beasts, nor any of the ritual observations, but would desire only
prayers, which are the sacrifices approved by him; and hence he renders
<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p15.1"></span>מזרקים, *mesarekim*, bowls, and not
vessels, a word of wider meaning; but it signifies the latter.

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p16"></span>We now see that what Zechariah meant
was this — that God would so claim the whole world as his own, as to
consecrate men and all their possessions wholly to his own service, so
that there would be no longer any uncleanness, that whether they ate or
drank, or engaged in war, or undertook any other work, all things would
be pure and holy, for God would always be before their eyes. Let us
proceed -

<span id="iii.xv.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xv.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p2"></span>**21.** Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and
in Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord of hosts: and all they that
sacrifice shall come and take of them, and seethe therein: and in that
day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of
hosts.

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p3"></span>**21.** Et erit omnis lebes in Ierusalem
et Iehudah sanctitas Iehovae exercituum; et venient omnes qui
sacrificabunt et accipient ex ipsis et coquent in ipsis; et non erit
Chamanaeus (*alii vertunt* non erit mercator) amplius in domo Iehovae
exercituum die illo.

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p6"></span>The Prophet explains here more clearly
what we have already considered — that such would be the reverence for
God, and the fear of him through the whole world, that whatever men
undertook would be a sacrifice to him: he therefore says, that all the
kettles, or pots, or vessels, would be sacred to God. And this is
fulfilled when men regard this end — to glorify God through their whole
life, as Paul exhorts us to do. (<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p6.1"></span>[1Co
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxv-p6.1"></span>.) Our provisions and our beds, and all
other things, become then holy to God, when we really devote ourselves
to him, and regard in all the actions of our life the end which I have
mentioned, even to testify in truth that he is our God, and that we are
under his guidance. By such comparisons then does Zechariah teach us,
that men will be sacred to God; for nothing they touch shall be unclean,
but what was before profane shall be sanctified to his glory.  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md)

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p9"></span>*Come*, he says, *shall they who
sacrifice, and shall boil flesh in pots*; as though he had said, That
such would be the multitude of men who would ascend to offer sacrifices
to God, that the vessels of the temple before in use would not be
sufficient. It would hence be necessary to apply for that purpose what
was previously profane. The language of Isaiah is similar, for he says
that they who were Levites would become priests of the first order, and
that those of the common people would become Levites, so that they might
all come nigh to God. (<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p9.1"></span>[Isa.
66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxv-p9.1"></span>.) The meaning then of the Prophet is now
clear — that he wished to stir up the Jews to constancy and firmness,
who regarded their small number as their reproach and were almost
disheartened: as then they thought that they had in vain returned to
their own country, as the Lord did not gather the whole people, he says
that God’s worship would become more celebrated than at the time when
the state of things was most flourishing in Judea; for assemble they
would, from the whole world, to offer sacrifices to God at Jerusalem, so
that the whole city, with all its utensils, would be sacred to God, for
the pots and the sacred vessels of the temple, used before under the
law, would not be sufficient.

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p10"></span>And he adds, *And there shall be no
Canaanite in the land*: the meaning is, that the Church would become
pure from all defilements: and this change ought to have given no small
comfort to the Jews in their sad and calamitous state; for God had used
no small severity, when all were driven into exile; and many tokens of
this dreadful rigour still remained, since very few worshipped God, and
were despised by all, so that true religion was exposed to the contempt
and ridicule of all nations. This compensation then, that the Lord would
by this remedy cleanse his Church from its filth, must have greatly
allayed their sorrow: on this subject I have already said much.

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p11"></span>Zechariah now briefly promises that the
Church would become pure, so that all would from the heart and sincerely
worship God, and that there would be no mixture of hypocrites to pollute
the temple and holy things. But this seems strange, since the Church has
ever been contaminated by many pollutions: and hence John the Baptist
compares it to a floor, where the chaff is mixed with the wheat; and it
is also compared to a net, into which are gathered many fishes, some
good and some bad; and also at this day, in the kingdom of Christ, the
Church is subject to this evils that it cannot cast out all corruptions:
it seems then that the Prophet has spoken hyperbolically. But what we
have elsewhere said ought to be borne in mind — that a comparison is
made between the ancient state of the people and their second state,
when the Church was renewed. As the religion had been in the most
disgraceful manner corrupted, and as the Jews had impudently boasted
that they were the holy people of God, while they were the most wicked
of men, the Prophet justly says, that the Church when renewed would be
purer; for the Lord would cleanse it by the cross, as gold and silver
are cleansed, which are not only tried by the fire, but become also
brighter, because the dross is removed. This is simply what the Prophet
means when he says, *that there will be no Canaanite* among the people
of God; that is, there will be no foreign or profane men, mingled with
the faithful, to pollute the pure worship of God.

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p12"></span>Some have wrested the passage and
applied it to the last coming of Christ. But this is inconsistent with
the subject in hand. At the same time I allow that the kingdom of
Christ, according to the prophetic mode of writing, is here described
from its commencement to its end. When God therefore purposed to renew
his Church, he cleansed it from much filth, and still daily cleanses it,
nor will he cease to do so, until, after all the defilements of the
world having been removed, we shall be received into the celestial
kingdom. Whenever then the Prophets speak of perfection under the reign
of Christ, we ought not to confine what they say to one day or to a
short time, but we ought to include the whole time from the beginning to
the end. Hence when Christ appeared in the world, then began to shine
the splendor of which Zechariah now speaks: but the Lord will go on
until that shall be completed which now makes continual progress.

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p13"></span>Some read, *There shall be a merchant
no more*, etc.; and they have some reason for what they say, for the
word is sometimes rendered merchant: but as in this case, we must have
recourse to allegories, and take merchants for impious corrupters who
make a merchandise of God’s worship, or give this interpretation, that
there shall be no merchant any more, because all would freely bring
their offerings, — as these explanations are not appropriate, it is
better to take the passage simply as it is — that the Lord will gather
his elect, so that pure sacrifices will be offered by them all; and that
there will be no hypocrites any more to contaminate and corrupt the
Church, or to adulterate the worship of God.  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md)

<span id="iii.xv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxvi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.xv.xxvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
deigned to choose us as thy peculiar treasure, and to consecrate us to
thyself in the person of thy only-begotten Son, — O grant, that we may
so follow holiness through the whole course of our life, that thy glory
may shine forth in all our works: and may we never undertake anything
except for this end — that thy name may be more and more glorified, and
may we be holy both in body and soul, and free from all the pollutions
of the flesh and of the world, that we may be thus confirmed in the hope
of our calling, and be encouraged to proceed during the remainder of our
course, until we shall at length reach that glory which has been
procured for us by the blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xv.xxvi-p3"></span>End of Calvin’s Commentary on Zechariah

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc30017.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p10"></span> This was not done till the time of
Nehemiah, who returned to Judea about ninety years after the first
return under Zerubbabel, and several years, probably thirty or forty,
after the date of this prophecy. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc30017.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p11"></span> *Dathius* truly says, that interpreters
have toiled much in the explanation of this chapter, some taking the
words in a spiritual sense, others maintaining that what is here said
was fulfilled before the coming of Christ, and a third party holding
that all is as yet unfulfilled. He was disposed on the whole to assent
to the opinion of *Grotius*, the same in part with that of *Calvin* —
that this prophecy, as well as some in the preceding chapters, were
fulfilled in the times of the Maccabees. See <span
id="iii.xv.ii-p11.1"></span>[1Ma
6:26](../../../bib/apo/ma1006.htm#026.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ii-p11.1"></span>, etc. He indeed admits that this theory
does not remove all the difficulties, but leaves less than any other.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p12"></span>*Marckius* doubted not but that the
beginning of this chapter is a prophecy concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans, and he quotes *Jerome*, *Cyril*, and
*Theodoret* as having expressed the same opinion. *Lowth*, *Scott*,
*Adam Clarke*, and *Henderson* take the same view. But the sequel of
this chapter may be better explained by the events which followed the
attacks of the Greco-Syrian kings on Jerusalem, (see <span
id="iii.xv.ii-p12.1"></span>[2Ma
4](../../../bib/apo/ma2004.htm#000)<span id="iii.xv.ii-p12.1"></span>,.md)
than by the events which followed the ruin of that city by the Romans.
*Blayney* viewed the contents of this chapter, and much of what is found
in the preceding chapters, as yet unfulfilled: and so does *Newcome* in
part.

<span id="iii.xv.ii-p13"></span>*Henry* is doubtful whether this chapter
and the preceding are to be understood of the whole period from the
Prophet’s days to the days of the Messiah, or to some events during that
time, or to Christ’s coming and the setting up of his kingdom upon the
ruins of the Jewish polity. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc30017.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="iii.xv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p8"></span> “This sign,” \[God’s feet standing on
the mount,\] says *Kimchi*, “is a type of the clearing of the Gentiles
who came against Jerusalem, and who shall fall scattered about.” The
*Targum* gives this paraphrase, “He shall be revealed in his power.”
“The rending,” says *Drusius*, “signifies the flight of the nations,
who, on finding God fighting against them, shall flee away in all
directions: so that the mountain on which the besiegers fixed their camp
shall seem as though divided into parts.”

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p9"></span>*Theodoret’s* language is to the same
purpose; he regarded the mountain as symbolic of the enemies assembled
against the city — \[<span id="iii.xv.iv-p9.1"></span>ὄρος καλει τήν
φάλαγγα των πολεμίων\], etc.

<span id="iii.xv.iv-p10"></span>*Marckius’*s view of the text is as
follows: This mountain rendered access on the east to the city and
temple difficult, and intercepted the morning light and the flowing of
waters in that direction, both which are referred to afterwards in verse
7 and 8. God’s descent on this mountain was a sign of his great
displeasure with that nation, and the rending of the mountain was
emblematic of a way being made open for the gospel to spread throughout
the world. And he regarded the Lord’s coming in the next verse as his
coming in the ministration of the gospel to render it successful through
the world by means of his saints, his apostles, and ministers. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc30017.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="iii.xv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.v-p8"></span> So thought *Kimchi*, *Drusius*,
*Grotius*, *Newcome*, and also *Henderson* *Jerome* renders it “<span
id="iii.xv.v-p8.1"></span>proximum — nearest or next,” *i.e.,* the
temple. The verb \[<span id="iii.xv.v-p8.2"></span>נסתם\], with a
prefixed \[<span id="iii.xv.v-p8.3"></span>ו\], rendered, “Ye shall
flee,” occurs three times in this verse, and *may* be the Niphal of
\[<span id="iii.xv.v-p8.4"></span>סתם\], to stop or close up, as well as
the second person plural of \[<span id="iii.xv.v-p8.5"></span>נם\], to
flee. The *Septuagint*, the *Targum*, *Symmachus*, and the *Arabic*,
take the first meaning, which *Dathius* and *Blayney* have adopted: then
the verse would be as follows, —

<span id="iii.xv.v-p9"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.v-p10"></span>**5.** And closed up shall be the valley
of the mountains, Reach shall the valleys of the mountains to Azal; Yea,
closed up shall it be, as it was closed up At the earthquake, in the
days of Uzziah, king of Judah.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p11"></span>There are two objections to this version;
the one is, that \[<span id="iii.xv.v-p11.1"></span>מפני\], “from the
presence,” before “earthquake,” is not a suitable proposition to come
after “closed up:” but to “flee from the presence of,” or from, the
earthquake, is an appropriate language. Hence the verse itself clearly
shows that the right version is that which has been adopted by most of
modern critics. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc30017.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="iii.xv.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.v-p16"></span> The greatest number of MS. have “and”
before “all saints,” as well as the *Septuagint*, the *Targum*, the
*Syriac*, and the *Arabic*. The three last verses have also “his” before
“saints.” Very many MS., the *Septuagint*, the *Targum*, and the early
versions, have “with him,” instead of “with thee.” Then the best reading
would be, —

<span id="iii.xv.v-p17"></span>And come shall Jehovah my God,  
And all his saints with him.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p18"></span>*Blayney* proposes another version, —

<span id="iii.xv.v-p19"></span>And Jehovah shall come,  
The God of all holy ones with thee.

<span id="iii.xv.v-p20"></span>He considers that Jerusalem, addressed in
the second person in verse first, is addressed here, “with thee,” and
that what is meant is, that God, the protector of all holy ones, all
true believers, would march as it were with Jerusalem as its ally
against the nations beforementioned in verse third. Taking the text as
it is, the rendering is no doubt literal: but the best authorities are
in favor of the text as amended above. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc30017.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="iii.xv.viii-p3.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p4"></span> In favor of \[<span
id="iii.xv.viii-p4.1"></span>ו\] instead of \[<span
id="iii.xv.viii-p4.2"></span>י\] before \[<span
id="iii.xv.viii-p4.3"></span>קפאון\], there are *many* MS., the *Keri*
and all the early versions. The word means condensity, that is, of
darkness, as it answers to night in the next verse; it may then be
rendered “thick darkness.” The \[<span id="iii.xv.viii-p4.4"></span>ו\]
following a negative may often be rendered “nor.” The first idea of
\[<span id="iii.xv.viii-p4.5"></span>יקר\] is bright, splendid, clear;
and then, as what commonly belongs to what is bright, etc., — precious,
excellent. It is here in the plural, but has the meaning of an
adjective, — a mode of speaking common in Hebrew. It is evident that
this verse is more fully explained in the next; there can then be no
difficulty about the construction and the meaning, —

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p6"></span>**6.** And it shall be in that day,
*That* there will be no clear light nor thick darkness:

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p7"></span>**7.** But one day will that be, known
to Jehovah, No day, and no night; But it shall be, at the time of the
evening, *That* there will be light.

<span id="iii.xv.viii-p8"></span>By “one day” we are to understand a
peculiar day, distinguished from every other. To separate the two
verses, as is done by *Henderson*, seems not at all right: and his
rendering of the second line, “That there shall not be the light of the
precious orbs,” bears on it hardly any trace of the Original. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc30017.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p9"></span> “*Living*, that is, running waters. This
passage refers to the wide effusion of divine knowledge from Jerusalem
when restored.” — *Newcome.*

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p10"></span>The Gospel blessings are often mentioned
as waters. See <span id="iii.xv.ix-p10.1"></span>[Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p10.1"></span>; <span id="iii.xv.ix-p10.2"></span>[Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p10.2"></span>; <span id="iii.xv.ix-p10.3"></span>[Eze
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p10.3"></span>; <span id="iii.xv.ix-p10.4"></span>[Joh
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.xv.ix-p10.4"></span>. “Perennial waters” is the rendering of
*Dathius*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc30017.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p13"></span> “In those countries most springs failed
during summer.” — *Newcome*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc30017.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="iii.xv.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.ix-p15"></span> Both *Newcome* and *Henderson* consider
it to be the Lake Asphaltes or the Dead Sea. The land of Canaan is here
throughout contemplated, and not the whole world, as *Calvin* and many
others have thought. The land of Canaan was emblematic of the land of
the Church, the whole world; hence what is promised to extend to the
extremities of its borders is to be understood, when it appertains to
Christ’s kingdom, as extending to the utmost limits of the earth. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc30017.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="iii.xv.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.x-p11"></span> It is added, “over all the earth,”
according to our version and *Newcome* and *Henderson*; but it ought to
be, “over the whole land,” as it appears evident from the verses which
follow; and our version and *Newcome* render the same phrase, “all the
land” in the next verse, while *Henderson*, more consistent with
himself, but not with the meaning of the passage, retains the words,
“all the earth.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc30017.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="iii.xv.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.x-p13"></span> *Henderson* seems to have unnecessarily
introduced another version,

<span id="iii.xv.x-p14"></span>In that day Jehovah alone shall be,  
And his name alone.

<span id="iii.xv.x-p15"></span>The obvious meaning is, that there would
be but “one Jehovah” acknowledged, to the exclusion of all pretended
deities, and that his “name” would be one to the exclusion of every
other name. It is an announcement suitable to the previous state of
things, when many gods were acknowledged, and many names given to them,
under which they were worshipped. Much more emphatical and expressive is
the usual rendering, —

<span id="iii.xv.x-p16"></span>In that day there shall be one Jehovah,
and his name one.

<span id="iii.xv.x-p17"></span>\[<span id="iii.xv.x-p17.1"></span>Εσται
κύριος εἱς καὶ τὸ ὄνομα αὐτου ἕν\]. — *Septuagint*

<span id="iii.xv.x-p18"></span>“One name” is mentioned, because the
heathens pretended to worship the true God under various names. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc30017.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p8"></span> I would render the words, —

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p9"></span>All around shall the whole land be like a
plain.

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p10"></span>The verb \[<span
id="iii.xv.xi-p10.1"></span>סב\], means to turn or go round, to be in a
circuit. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc30017.htm#fr_189.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xi-p11"></span> “Geba” was in Benjamin, north of
Jerusalem, <span id="iii.xv.xi-p11.1"></span>[Jos
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xi-p11.1"></span>; and “Rimmon” was in Judah, south of
Jerusalem, <span id="iii.xv.xi-p11.2"></span>[Jos
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xi-p11.2"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc30017.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xiv-p8"></span> Rendered “a curse — \[<span
id="iii.xv.xiv-p8.1"></span>ἀνάθεμα\],” by the *Septuagint*, by
*Marckius*, *Newcome*, and *Henderson*,—”slaughter — <span
id="iii.xv.xiv-p8.2"></span>occisio,” by the *Targum*. The verb means
especially two things — to devote a thing to God — and to devote a thing
to death, or to entire ruin. From this latter meaning has come the idea
of a curse and destruction, which is evidently what is intended here.
The Jews were not to be a curse so as to be utterly destroyed, though
they were to be subject to many evils. They are not utterly cut off even
now according to the doctrine of St. Paul. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc30017.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xv-p9"></span> The way to account for this is, that the
words, \[<span id="iii.xv.xv-p9.1"></span>את-כל-העמים\], at the
beginning of the verse, are to be rendered, “every one of the peoples,”
or, “each of the nations.” Then the singular number here refers to
“every one,” or “each” nation of the nations. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc30017.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p10"></span> Literally it is “the tumult of
Jehovah,” that is, proceeding from him, occasioned or produced by him.
The arrangement of the words would lead us to make such a version as the
following—

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p12"></span>**13.** And it shall be in that day,
That there shall be a tumult from Jehovah, Great shall it be among them;
And they shall strengthen them; And raised up shall his hand be against
his neighbor.

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p13"></span>The two last lines describe the tumult
and confusion; some would strengthen the hands of their neighbors,
others would raise up their hands against them. The verbs “strengthen,”
with no preposition before “hand,” cannot mean to seize or lay hold on
in an unfriendly manner. See <span id="iii.xv.xvi-p13.1"></span>[Isa
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xvi-p13.1"></span>; <span id="iii.xv.xvi-p13.2"></span>[Jer
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xvi-p13.2"></span>; and see also <span
id="iii.xv.xvi-p13.3"></span>[Isa
41:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xvi-p13.3"></span>; <span id="iii.xv.xvi-p13.4"></span>[Eze
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xvi-p13.4"></span>.

<span id="iii.xv.xvi-p14"></span>The state of things described here
corresponds exactly with the account given by Josephus, and in the books
of the Maccabees, of the Jewish nation in those days; they were not only
assailed by outward enemies, but also by traitors among themselves. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc30017.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p7"></span> Most commentators render this line,
“And Judah shall fight *in* Jerusalem,” but contrary to Scripture usage.
The verb used here for “fight,” when followed by \[<span
id="iii.xv.xvii-p7.1"></span>ב\], almost invariably means to “fight
against.” The exception which *Henderson* makes as to *place*, is not
well founded. The very same form of words occurs in <span
id="iii.xv.xvii-p7.2"></span>[Ne
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xv.xvii-p7.2"></span>
and the rendering is, “against Jerusalem.” See also <span
id="iii.xv.xvii-p7.3"></span>[1Sa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xvii-p7.3"></span>. The history of the Jews, as detailed both
by Josephus and the Maccabees, fully bears out what is here said: and
this corresponds with what is said of Judah in chapter 12:2. Whatever
view may be taken of this and the preceding chapters, it cannot be
denied but that there is a striking coincidence between what they
contain, and the events connected with the Jews from the time of Ezra to
the coming of Christ. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc30017.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p20"></span> See <span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p20.1"></span>[Ne
8:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc30017.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p22"></span> The two verses, 17 and 18, I would
render thus, —

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p23"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p24"></span>**17.** And it shall be, that
whosoever shall not ascend, Of the families of the land, to Jerusalem,
To worship the King, Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p25"></span>**18.** Not on them shall be rain; And
if the family of Egypt Shall not ascend and shall not come,— On them
shall be the plague, Which Jehovah will bring on all the people Who will
not ascend to keep the feast of tabernacles.

<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p26"></span>The “land” of Judah, not earth or the
world, is what is meant, as it is evident from the contrast in the next
verse, “the family of Egypt.” The word \[<span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p26.1"></span>ארף\] means commonly in the Prophets the
land of Canaan. The words \[<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p26.2"></span>ולא\]
before “on them” in verse 18, are left out of four MS., in the
*Septuagint* and the *Syriac*; and they seem to be wholly misplaced
here. I render \[<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p26.3"></span>גוים\] “people,”
and supply \[<span id="iii.xv.xxii-p26.4"></span>כל\] before it, as in
verses 14 and 16, supported by very many MS., and by the *Septuagint*.
The word here and everywhere in this chapter, in verses 2,3,14,16, and
19, is in my view improperly rendered “nations,” viewed as heathen
nations. It has no doubt this meaning in many places, but it means also
people or peoples, *i.e.*, the people of Israel. See <span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p26.5"></span>[De
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p26.5"></span>; <span id="iii.xv.xxii-p26.6"></span>[Jos
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.xv.xxii-p26.6"></span>. It is a word of general import,
signifying the body of a nation; and her and elsewhere in this chapter
it means the whole community of the Jews, whether residing in the land
of Canaan or in other parts of the world, especially in Egypt. Intestine
broils, and not wars with heathens, are referred to in this chapter.
Hence we clearly see the reason why “the feast of tabernacles” is
mentioned, and why a curse is denounced on those who neglected it. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc30017.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xxiii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxiii-p8"></span> The *Targum* paraphrases it “the
punishment of sin,” and so do *Jun*., and *Trem*., and *Piscator*. The
word “sin” is retained by *Jerome*, *Cyril*, and *Marckius*. But
*Newcome* and *Henderson*, in accordance with our version and that of
*Calvin*, render it “punishment.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc30017.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xxiv-p9.6"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p10"></span> It is rendered “bridle — \[<span
id="iii.xv.xxiv-p10.1"></span>τὸν χαλινὸν\],” by the *Septuagint*, the
*Syriac*, and *Jerome*; “trappings,” by the *Targum*; “the deep —
\[<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p10.2"></span>βυθον\],” by *Aq.* and *Theod*;
“shady procession — \[<span id="iii.xv.xxiv-p10.3"></span>περίπατον
συσχιον\],” by *Sym*; and “bells,” by *Drusius*, *Grotius*, *Marckius*,
*Newcome*, and *Henderson*. The last says, that they “were small
metallic plates, suspended from the necks or heads of horses and camels
for the sake of ornament, and making a tinkling noise by striking
against each other like cymbals.” The notion of *Blayney*, that the
horses and their bells were trophies taken from enemies and dedicated to
God, seems not consistent with the tenor of the passage: for the things
employed by the Jews are here mentioned, which were to be used in a holy
manner, to the glory of God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc30017.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p7"></span> *Drusius*, *Grotius*, and some others,
take another view, thinking what the *number* of vessels required for
sacrifices would be very great, so that pots would be used, the bowls
belonging to the altar being not sufficient. *Grotius* says that
Antiochus the Great sent 20 thousand pieces of silver (20 mille nummos
argenteos) to be spent in sacrifices in the temple, and that Demetrius
sent 150 thousand annually; and he refers to Josephus, 12:3 and 13:5.
But *Marckius* justly says, that there is no reference here to number,
but to consecration, and agrees in the view given here by *Calvin*. The
same is also taken by *Henry*, *Newcome*, *Scott*, and *Henderson*.

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p8"></span>The literal accomplishment of what is
here said was at the time posterior to Nehemiah, the last reformer
recorded in Scripture, who lived many years — probably from fifty to
sixty — after Zechariah, and about ninety years after the first return
under Zerubbabel. After Nehemiah, and for nearly *three* centuries, the
state of the Jews was very flourishing and prosperous. Their calamities
chiefly commenced in the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes, and continued,
with some intermission, until their final overthrow by the Romans. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc30017.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="iii.xv.xxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p14"></span> The word is rendered “Canaanite —
\[<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p14.1"></span>χαναναιος\],” by the *Septuagint*,
— “merchant” by the *Targum* and *Aquila*, and is taken in this sense by
*Jerome*, *Newcome*, and *Henderson*: but *Theodoret* and *Cyril* take
the first sense, and the latter explains it by “stranger and idolater —
\[<span id="iii.xv.xxv-p14.2"></span>αλλογευνὴς και εἰδωλολάτρης\].” It
is justly observed by *Marckius*, that there is nothing in the passage
that can lead us to give the word its secondary meaning of a merchant. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Malachi](cc30018.md)
