[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc30012)  [Next](cc30014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span>Chapter 10

<span id="iii.xi.i"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-fifth

<span id="iii.xi.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Ask ye of the Lord rain in the
time of the latter rain; *so* the Lord shall make bright clouds, and
give them showers of rain, to every one grass in the field.

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Petite a Iehova pluviam tempore
serotino (*vertunt*;) Iehova faciet nubes**,** et pluvium imbrem dabit
illis**,** cuique herbam in agro.

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p6"></span>Zechariah, after having shown that God
would be bountiful towards the Jews, so that nothing necessary to render
life happy and blessed should be wanting, now reproves them for their
unbelief, because they did not expect from the Lord what he was ready
fully to bestow on them. As then it depended on them only, that they did
not enjoy abundance of all blessings, he charges them with ingratitude:
for though he exhorts them to prayer, there is yet an implied reproof.
One by merely reading over the words may think that a new subject is
here introduced, that the Jews are directed to ask of the Lord what he
had previously promised them; but he who will more minutely consider the
whole context, will easily find that what I have stated is true — that
the Jews are here condemned, and on this account, because they closed
the door against God’s favor; for they were straitened in themselves, as
all the unbelieving are, who cannot embrace the promises of God; nor is
it at all doubtful but that many made great complaints, when they found
themselves disappointed of their wishes. They had indeed hoped for a
most abundant supply of corn and wine, and had also promised to
themselves all kinds of blessings, yet the Lord, as we have seen in the
book of Haggai, had begun to withdraw his hand, so that they labored
under want of provisions; and when mine and thirst oppressed them, they
thought that they had been in a manlier deceived by God. On this ground
the Prophet expostulates with them; they thrust from themselves, by
their want of faith, the favor which had been prepared for them. We now
then understand the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p7"></span>He bids them to *ask rain of Jehovah*.
They ought indeed to have done this of themselves without being
reminded; for though Christ has delivered to his Church a form of
prayer, it ought yet to be as it were the dictate of nature to seek of
God our daily bread; and it is not without reason that he claims to
himself the name of a Father. The Prophet then does here reprove the
Jews for their brutal stupidity — that they did not ask rain of the
Lord. He adds, *at the late season*, that is, at spring time; for rains
at two seasons were necessary for the corn, after sowing and before
harvest, and whenever Scripture speaks of fruitfulness or of a large
produce, it mentions rain at these two seasons. Zechariah in this place
only refers to the vernal before harvest; for in that hot country the
earth wanted new moisture, Ask, he says, rain at the beginning of
summer.

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p8"></span>*Jehovah*, he adds, *will give* it; *he
will make clouds*, or storms, or boisterous winds, as some read; but it
is evident from other passages that <span
id="iii.xi.ii-p8.1"></span>חזיזים, *chezizim*, means clouds, which are
as it were preparations for rain.  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) He then says, that *a shower would
come with the rain*; for some take <span
id="iii.xi.ii-p11.2"></span>גשם, *gesham*, for a shower, that is, heavy
rain; but the Prophet introduces here the two words, as though he had
said, that the rains would be continued until the ground was saturated
and the dryness removed. Some translate, “the rain of a shower,” but
this would be too strained. I prefer then this rendering, *He will give
rain, a shower*, that is, abundant rain; *to every one grass in the
field*, that is, so that there may be moisture enough for the ground. In
short, he promises a plentiful irrigation, that drought might not
deprive them of the hope of food and support. What I have stated will
appear more clear from the following verse, for he adds —

<span id="iii.xi.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p2"></span>**2.** For the idols have spoken vanity,
and the diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams; they
comfort in vain: therefore they went their way as a flock, they were
troubled, because *there was* no shepherd.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p3"></span>**2.** Certe simulacra loquuta sunt
vanitatem**,** et divini viderunt mendacium**,** et somnia vanitatis
loquuti sunt**,** frustra consolati sunt; ideo transierunt (*vel***,**
migrarunt) sicut oves (*aut***,** grex**,**) humiliati sunt**,** quia
nullus fuit pastor.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet, as I have said,
confirms the truth, that the blame justly belonged to the Jews that God
did not deal more liberally with them; for he shows that they had fallen
into superstitions, and had thus turned away the favor of God, which was
already certain and nigh to them. Zechariah does not here condemn
foreign nations given to superstitions; but, on the contrary, he
reproves the Jews themselves for leaving the true God, and for retaking
themselves to idols, to soothsayers, and diviners, and for having thus
preferred to feed on their own delusions, rather than to open the door
to the favor of God, who had freely promised that he would suffer them
to want nothing. As then God had kindly invited the Jews to himself, as
he had showed himself ready to do them good, was it not the basest
ingratitude in them to turn away to idols and to attend to magical
delusions? for they might have safely acquiesced in God’s word. They
would not have been deprived of their hope, had they been firmly
persuaded that God had spoken the truth to them. As then they had done
so grievous a wrong to God, as to run after idols, and after the crafts
and impostures of Satan, the Prophet here deservedly condemns them for
this wickedness.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p7"></span>*Images*,  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) *he says, have spoken vanity, and
diviners have seen falsehood, and have told dreams of vanity*. He means,
in short, that whatever means unbelieving men may try, they can attain
nothing, and they will at length find that they have been miserably
deceived by Satan. They have recourse to various expedients, for
unbelief is full of bustle and fervor: “O! this will not succeed, I will
try something else.” Thus the unbelieving wander, and resort to many and
various expedients. But the Prophet teaches this general truth — that
when men turn away from God, they have recourse to vain things; for
there is no truth without God.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, that on account of
idols, as well as of diviners and magicians, *consolation was given in
vain*; and this he confirms by the event, and says, that they had
*wandered as sheep*, that they had been *distressed, because there was
no shepherd*. The Prophet no doubt refers here to the time of exile,
that the Jews might learn to be wise, at least by the teaching of
experience; for they had known to their great loss, that without God
there is no real and solid comfort: nor does he without reason upbraid
them with the punishment which their fathers had suffered, for he saw
that they were walking in their steps. Since then the Jews were
imitating the depraved inquisitiveness of their fathers, the Prophet
justly charges them, that they did not acknowledge what, by the event
itself, was well known to all; for the common proverb is, that
experience is the teacher of fools. Since they did not become wise even
when smitten, their stupidity was more than proved. We now then perceive
what the Prophet means.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p11"></span>But we must first notice, that when he
bids them to ask rain of the Lord, he speaks of the kingdom of Christ,
as all the Prophets are wont to do; for since the Redeemer, promised to
the Jews, was to be the author of all blessings, whenever the Prophets
speak of his coming, they also promise abundance of corn, and plentiful
provisions, and peace, and everything necessary for the well-being of
the present life. And Zechariah now follows the same course, when he
declares that it was not owing to anything in God that he did not kindly
supply the Jews with whatever they might have wished, but that the fault
was with themselves; for they had by their unbelief, as it has been
said, closed the door against his favor. We must yet ever remember what
we stated yesterday — that whatever the Prophets have said concerning a
blessed life, ought to be judged of according to the nature of the
kingdom of Christ. It is a strained interpretation to say that rain is
heavenly doctrine; and I do not say that Zechariah spoke allegorically,
but he describes under this common figure the kingdom of Christ — even
that God will fill his elect with all good things, so that they shall
not thirst, nor labor under any want.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p12"></span>But at the same time we must bear in
mind the exhortation of Christ —

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p13"></span>“Seek ye first the kingdom of God;
other things,” he says,  
“shall afterwards be added.” (<span id="iii.xi.iii-p13.2"></span>[Mt
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033.md)<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p14"></span>He then is strangely wrong who thinks
that abundance of food was alone promised to the Jews; for God intended
to lead them by degrees to things higher. The Prophet then no doubt
includes here, under one kind, all things necessary for a happy life;
for it is not the will of God to fill his faithful people in this world
as though they were swine; but his design is to give them, by means of
earthly things, a taste of the spiritual life. Hence the happiness of
which Zechariah now speaks is really spiritual; for as godliness has the
promises of the present as well as of the future life, (<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p14.1"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p14.1"></span>,) so the purpose of God was to consult the
weakness of his ancient people, and to set forth the felicity of the
spiritual life by means of earthly blessings.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p15"></span>It ought further to be carefully
noticed, that the Jews are here exposed to derision, because they
wandered after their own devices, when God was yet not far from them,
and ready to aid them. Since God then showed himself inclined to
kindness, it was a double wickedness in them that they chose to run
after idols, magical arts, and the illusions of Satan, rather than to
acquiesce in God’s word. And similar is the upbraiding we meet with in
Jeremiah, when God complains that he was forsaken, while yet he was the
fountain of living water, and that the people dug out for themselves
cisterns, dry and full of holes. (<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p15.1"></span>[Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p15.1"></span>.) But as this evil is very common, let us
know that we are here warned to plant our foot firm on God’s word, where
he promises that he will take care of us, provided we be satisfied with
his favor; nor let us thoughtlessly run after our own imaginations; for
however our own counsels may delight us, and though some success may
sometimes appear, yet the end will ever show us that most true is what
Zechariah teaches us here — that whatever we may attempt will be useless
and injurious too, for God will take vengeance on our ingratitude.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p16"></span>We must now also observe, that since
Zechariah adduces an example of God’s vengeance, by which the Jews had
found that they had foolishly sought vain consolations, we ought to take
heed, lest we forget those punishments with which God may have visited
us in order to restore us to himself: let us remember what we ourselves
have experienced, and what has happened to our fathers, even before we
were born. Thus then ought the faithful to apply their minds so as to
recount the judgments of God, that they may derive profit from his
scourges. He afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.xi.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p2"></span>**3.** Mine anger was kindled against the
shepherds, and I punished the goats: for the LORD of hosts hath visited
his flock the house of Judah, and hath made them as his goodly horse in
the battle.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Super pastores iratus est furor
meus; super hireos visitabo; quia visitabit Iehova exercituum gregem
suum**,** domum Iehudah; et posuit (*vel***,** ponet) eos**,** quasi
equum decoris sui in praelio.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p6"></span>He had said that the Jews had been driven
into exile, and had been oppressed by their enemies, because they had no
shepherd; not indeed to lessen their fault, for they were wholly
inexcusable, since they had wilfully renounced God, who would have been
otherwise their perpetual shepherd: but he now turns his discourse to
the false teachers, to the false prophets and to the wicked priests.
Though then they were all unworthy of pardon, yet God here justly
summons the shepherds first before his tribunal, who had been the cause
of making others to go astray: as when a blind man leads the blind into
a ditch, so ungodly pastors become the cause of ruin to others. We have
elsewhere observed similar passages, in which God threatened priests and
prophets with special punishment, because they had unfaithfully
discharged their office; but yet he did not absolve the common people,
for from the least to the greatest they were guilty; and it is also
certain that men are punished for their obstinacy and wickedness,
whenever God gives loose reins to the devil, and deceives them by
ungodly teachers.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p7"></span>We now then see the order observed by the
Prophet: At the beginning of the chapter he declares that the Jews were
without excuse, because they had turned aside again to their own
superstitions, though God had severely punished the sins of their
fathers, and that thus they had profited nothing; he also shows that
they were acting perversely, if they clamored against God, that he
scantily or badly supported them, for they did not look for any thing
from him, nor solicited by prayer what he was prepared willingly to
grant them. Having thus reproved generally the wickedness of the whole
people, the Prophet now assails the ungodly priests, and says that
judgment was nigh both the shepherd and the he-goats.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p8"></span>He gives the name of pastors to wolves,
which is a common thing. And here the Papists betray their folly, laying
hold of words only, and claiming to themselves all power, because they
are called pastors in the Church, and as though Antichrist was not to
reign in the temple of God. Does not Zechariah give an honorable name to
these wicked men who destroyed the Church of God? Yea, he brings a most
heavy charge against them, that they scattered and trampled under their
feet the whole kingdom of God, and yet he calls them pastors, even
because they held the office of pastors, though they were very far from
being faithful, and in no respect attended to their duties.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p9"></span>He then concedes the name of pastors to
those who had been called to rule the people, and to whom this office
had been divinely committed; and yet God declares that he would visit
them, because they had elicited his just displeasure. The same is said
of the he-goats, by which metaphorical name he means all those who were
governors, or were in rank above the common people. Those who injured
and cruelly treated the sheep had been called he-goats by other
Prophets, and especially by Ezekiel (<span
id="iii.xi.iv-p9.1"></span>[Eze
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.xi.iv-p9.1"></span>.) So then he adds the he-goats to the
pastors, because the poor and the lower orders had been led to ruin
through their misconduct. And it hence appears how dear to God is the
salvation of men; for he denounces vengeance on pastors, though they had
not exercised tyranny except on men worthy of such punishment; for it
was the just wages of their sins, that the Lord gave them wolves instead
of shepherds. But though the Jews had merited such a judgment, yet God
was angry with the pastors on account of his constant solicitude for his
Church.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p10"></span>And the reason is also added, *For visit
will God his flock, the house of Judah*; as though he had said, that he
would not regard what the Jews were, but would regard his own election;
for greatly valued by God is his own adoption; and as he had been
pleased to choose that people, he could not have allowed them to be
destroyed. When therefore he saw that his Church had been so much
exposed to destruction through the fault of the pastors, he alleges here
as a reason for his future vengeance, that he could not endure his favor
to be brought to nothing; nor is it to be doubted but that he mentions
here the house of Judah, because he had restored and consecrated that
people to himself, that he might be served by them. He then takes away
from the false pastors every pretense for an excuse, when he brings
forward his own election, as though he had said, “Though this people had
provoked me a hundred times, and deserved a hundred deaths, yet I
intended you to be pastors, because the house of Judah has been made
sacred to me.”

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p11"></span>But the visitation of the flock is
different from that of the shepherds; for God visits the reprobate,
being armed with vengeance, and he visits his own people by aiding them.
Now the visitation of the flock refers to the whole house of Judah: and
this was owing, as we have said, to their gratuitous adoption; yet the
Lord suffered many to rush headlong into ruin, because he delivered only
his own elect. It is indeed a mode of speaking that often occurs in the
Prophets — that God would help the children of Abraham, when he means
only those who were Israelites indeed, and not the degenerated.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p12"></span>He adds that they would be as *a
splendid horse in war*. A contrast is here no doubt implied between
splendid horses and asses or oxen; for these shepherds who had
tyrannically oppressed God’s people, are said to be like violent riders
who ride on asses and shamefully abuse them, or like herdsman, who treat
their own oxen inhumanely. God then says that he would ride his people
in another manner, even as the horseman, who sits splendidly on his
horse when going to battle: for even kings, after having ridden a horse
in battle, do afterwards wish it to be well taken care of; and they show
much solicitude for their horses, and even go to the stable that they
may see, if possible, with their own eyes, that they are properly
attended to. God then thus intimates, that he indeed required obedience
from his people, and intended to retain his own right, to ride as it
were on his own people; but yet that he would not oppress them, and that
on the contrary he would make them like a splendid horse. We now then
perceive why the Prophet turns his discourse here especially to the
false shepherds, not indeed to extenuate the fault of the whole people,
for none among them was worthy of pardon. It follows —

<span id="iii.xi.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.xi.v-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p2"></span>**4.** Out of him came forth the corner,
out of him the nail, out of him the battle bow, out of him every
oppressor together.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p3"></span>**4.** Ab eo angulus**,** ab eo
clavus**,** ab eo arcus belli**,** ab eo egredietur omnis exactor
pariter.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p6"></span>There is here a confirmation of the last
verse, but the metaphors are different; for he says, that the Jews would
be fortified by every defense necessary for their security; nor is he
inconsistent with himself. In the last chapter he indeed taught us, that
though exposed to all kinds of wrongs, they would yet be safe through
aid from heaven; but now he promises that there would come from them the
*corner-stone, the nail, the bow*, and *the exactor*; and this seems a
different doctrine; but it is the same as though he had promised, that
though they stood in need of many helps, they would yet be sufficiently
furnished, as God would be ready to aid them whenever there was need.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p7"></span>By the corner-stone he means the firmness
of the building; from the Jews then shall be the *corner-stone*; that
is, there shall ever be among that people those capable of carrying on
the public government: then, *from thee the nail*; beams, we know, and
other parts of the building, are fastened by nails, and we know also,
that the ceiling is thereby made secure. Zechariah then mentions here
all the supports which sustain a building from its very foundation. He
afterwards adds, *the bow of war*, that is, what is necessary to
overcome enemies; and, lastly, *the exactor*, one who has power over
bordering nations, and demands tribute or tax from them, as conquerors
are wont to do from their subjects.  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md)

<span id="iii.xi.v-p16"></span>We now see what the Prophet means — that
when God would manifest his care for his people and openly show his
favor, the Jews would be fortified by all kinds of help, so as to be
well established, and that they would possess so much public authority
as to have strength enough to resist all enemies; in short, that they
would gain the fruit of conquest, and constrain all nations to be
tributaries to them.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p17"></span>If any one asks when has this been
fulfilled, my answer is, that some preludes of this were given when God
raised up the Maccabees, and made the Jews again to live according to
their own laws, and to enjoy their own rights; but no doubt the Prophet
includes the whole course of redemption. As then God redeemed his people
only to a small extent until Christ appeared, it is no wonder that
Zechariah, in speaking of full and complete redemption, extends his
words to the kingdom of Christ, and this was necessary. We hence learn,
that the Church stands abundantly firm, and is also furnished with all
needful things, while it continues under the protection of God, and that
it is endued with sufficient power to resist all its enemies. It follows
—

<span id="iii.xi.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p2"></span>**5.** And they shall be as mighty *men*,
which tread down *their enemies* in the mire of the streets in the
battle: and they shall fight, because the LORD *is* with them, and the
riders on horses shall be confounded.

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Et erunt quasi fortes**,**
(*aut***,** gigantes**,**) calcantes in luto platearum in proelio; et
proeliabuntur**,** quia Iehova cum ipsis; et pudefient ascensores
equorum.

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p6"></span>He confirms what I have already said —
that the Jews would be victorious over all nations. Though the Church is
fighting under the cross, she yet triumphs over all the wicked, partly
by hope and partly by present success; for God wonderfully sustains it,
and makes the faithful to possess their souls in patience; and he also
protects them by his own power, and renders them safe amidst all the
roarings and insatiable rage of their enemies. Since then God thus
strengthens the minds of his people, and cherishes in them the hope of
salvation, and also defends them against raging assaults, it is no
wonder that the Prophet testifies that the church would be victorious,
treading down, as a giant or a strong man, her enemies in the mire.

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p7"></span>He gives the reason, *For Jehovah will be
with them*; and this he said, that they might know that nothing in this
case would be their own, but that they might, on the contrary, learn to
depend on God’s aid alone. And he explains this still more clearly at
the end of the verse, by saying, *Ashamed shall be the riders on
horses*;  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) that is, their
strength and velour, their use of arms and their skill in handling them,
shall avail them nothing, for the Lord will lay prostrate,
notwithstanding their arrogance and pride, all those wicked men who in
their cruelty devour the faithful, and think that they have strength
more than enough to destroy the Church: the Lord will cause all these
things to pass away like mist.

<span id="iii.xi.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since constant
fightings await us here, and our infirmities are so great that without
thy power supporting us we cannot but fall every moment, — O grant, that
we may learn to recumb on that help which thou hast promised, and which
thou hast also offered to us, and dost daily offer through the Gospel in
thine only-begotten Son; and may we distrust our own strength, yea, may
we be overwhelmed with despair as to ourselves, not indeed that we may
despond, but that we may look upward and seek the aid of thy Spirit, so
that we may not doubt but that we shall be equal to our enemies, and
even be victorious over them, until having at length finished our
warfare, we shall reach that blessed rest which has been obtained for us
by the blood of thine only Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xi.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-sixth

<span id="iii.xi.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.ix-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p2"></span>**6.** And I will strengthen the house of
Judah, and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again
to place them; for I have mercy upon them: and they shall be as though I
had not cast them off: for I *am* the LORD their God, and will hear
them.

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p3"></span>**6.** Et roborabo domum Iehudah**,** et
domum Ioseph servabo**,** et redire (habitare) eos faciam; quia misertus
sum eorum**,** et erunt ac si non abominatus fuissem eos; quia ego
Iehova Deus eorum**,** et exaudiam eos.

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p6"></span>Zechariah pursues the same subject, —
that the work of redemption, the beginning of which the Jews saw, would
not be incomplete, for the Lord would at length fulfill what he had
begun. The Jews themselves could not acquiesce in those beginnings,
which were not a hundredth part of what God had promised; it was hence
necessary for them to raise up their minds above, that they might hope
for much more than what was evident before their eyes.

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p7"></span>And this truth is very useful to us, for
we are wont to confine God’s promises to a short duration of time, and
when we thus include him within narrow limits, we prevent him as it were
to do what we stand in need of. Let then the example of the return of
the people of Israel ever come to our minds, for the Lord had promised
by his Prophets that they would become very eminent, and in every way
rich and happy; but when this did not take place after their return to
their country, many of the Jews thought that they had been deceived, as
they had expected God to fulfill his word immediately, but they ought to
have suspended their hope and expectation until Christ came to the
world. On this then the Prophet now insists — that the Jews were to rest
patiently, until the ripened time came, when the Lord would prove that
he is not only in part but a complete redeemer of his people.

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p8"></span>Now he says, *I will strengthen the house
of Judah, and the house of Joseph will I save*. The kingdom of Israel,
we know, had by degrees wholly fallen; for at first four tribes were
driven into exile, and afterwards the whole people perished, so that all
thought that the name of the ten tribes had become extinct. The Lord
afterwards visited the kingdom with dreadful ruin. But it must be
observed, that while the two kingdoms existed, they entertained grievous
enmities towards each other; for the defection which happened under
Jeroboam, ever made the Jews violently to hate their brethren, the
Israelites, as they indeed deserved; for they had in a manner rejected
God by rejecting the son of David, and became in a manner alienated from
the body of the Church. Now then Zechariah promises something uncommon,
when he says that the two peoples shall be united, so as to be again
one, as before the defection: for the house of Joseph means the same as
the house of Ephraim; and we know that by taking a part for the whole,
the house of Ephraim is taken for the whole kingdom of Israel. We now
then understand the Prophet’s meaning — that the state of the people
would be happier than it had been since the ten tribes separated from
the kingdom of Judah, or from the house of David; for God would gather
for himself a Church from all the children of Abraham.  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md)

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p10"></span>He then adds, *I will bring them back
and cause them to dwell*. The verb here, <span
id="iii.xi.ix-p10.1"></span>הושבותים, *eushebutim*, is supposed to be
derived from <span id="iii.xi.ix-p10.2"></span>שב, *sheb*, or from <span
id="iii.xi.ix-p10.3"></span>שוב, *shub*; but they are mistaken who think
these to be words of different meanings, because some refer to the one
root, and others to the other; nor can this be maintained: but those who
minutely consider the rules of grammar, say that the verb is a compound,
and means that God would not only restore the ten tribes, but also make
them to dwell, that is, give them a fixed habitation in their country.
 <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md)

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p12"></span>He then adds, *Because I have pitied
them*. Some read this in the future tense, but I retain the past, for
the Lord assigns here a reason for their future gathering, even because
he would deal mercifully with his people. He recalls then the attention
of the Jews to the fountains of his mercy, as if he had said, “Though
they have deserved perpetual ruin, He will yet hear their greenings,
because he will be propitious to them.” As their calamity was an
hindrance, which prevented the Jews from expecting any such thing, he
adds, *They shall be as though I had not cast them away*. By which words
he reminds them that the punishment which had been inflicted on the
people, would be only for a time. He then bids them to take courage,
though they were like the lost or the dead, for he would put an end to
their miseries. And when God says that he *had cast away* his people, it
ought to be taken according to the perceptions of men, as we have
observed elsewhere; for adoption was unchangeable, but external
appearance could have led to no other conclusion, but that the people
had been rejected by God. The meaning of the Prophet is, however,
clearly this — that though God had dealt severely with that people, and
inflicted on them the heaviest punishment on account of their perfidy,
yet his vengeance would not be for ever, for he would give place to
mercy.

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p13"></span>He adds another reason, *For I Jehovah
am their God*. He means by this sentence that adoption would not be
void, though he had for a time rejected the Jews: for by calling himself
their God, he reminds them of his covenant, as though he had said, that
he had not in vain made a covenant with Abraham, and promised that his
seed would be blessed. Since then God had pledged his faith to Abraham,
he says here that he would be the God of his people; not that they
deserved anything, but because he had gratuitously chosen both Abraham
and his seed.

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p14"></span>He in the last place says, *And I will
hear them*  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md) He seems here to
exhort them to prayer, that, relying on this promise, they might ask of
God what had been promised. Though this verb is often taken in a sense
not strictly correct, for God is said to hear those who do not flee to
him; but what I have stated is more suitable to this place — that the
people are stimulated to prayer, as God freely invites us to himself for
this end, that is, that our prayers may harmonise with his promises.
This is the meaning. It now follows —

<span id="iii.xi.x"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.xi.x-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.x-p2"></span>**7.** And *they of* Ephraim shall be like
a mighty *man*, and their heart shall rejoice as through wine: yea,
their children shall see *it*, and be glad; their heart shall rejoice in
the LORD.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p3"></span>**7.** Et erunt quasi gigas Ephraim**,**
et laetabitur cor eorum sicuti a vino**,** et filli eorum videbunt et
gaudebunt; exultabit core eorum in Iehova.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.x-p6"></span>He declares the same in other words: he
had said in the last verse, that he would strengthen both the house of
Judah and the house of Joseph, that is, the ten tribes; he now speaks of
Ephraim alone, but includes the kingdom of Judah; and he names Ephraim,
not because he deserved to be honored, or to be preferred to the Jews,
for Ephraim had become apostate; but because the return of the ten
tribes was an event more incredible: this is clearly the reason why the
Prophet expressly mentions Ephraim.  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) For even to the very destruction of
the city and of the temple, God had continued to promise restoration to
the Jews: the hope then of the Jews was certain and peculiar to
themselves; but as to the Israelites, they were like a putrid carcass,
for they had heard only something here and there, and received only some
portion of the prophecies, as a grain of seed that falls outside of the
field; for they were then as it were alienated from the people of God.
We now then understand what the Prophet means by saying, that the
Israelites would be like giants; for though they had been cast down by
their enemies, and then driven in great dishonor and disgrace into
exile, and had been exposed to all kinds of reproaches, and oppressed by
extreme bondage; yet God promises them the strength of giants.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p10"></span>Now we have said that the words contain a
part for the whole; for this promise no doubt belongs especially to the
Jews: there is yet no mention of them, though they were first in rank,
and had a better ground of hope as to their return, and the Lord had
already given them some proof.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p11"></span>He says, *Rejoice shall their hearts
through wine; and see shall their sons and be glad; exult shall their
heart in Jehovah*. It is certain that they had already a cause for joy,
as it is said in the book of Psalms,

<span id="iii.xi.x-p12"></span>“We became like those who dream,  
when the Lord restored his captives.” (<span
id="iii.xi.x-p12.2"></span>[Ps
126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xi.x-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.xi.x-p13"></span>But the Prophet speaks here of a greater
joy, that is, when they should see gathered all the tribes from their
miserable and grievous dispersion: hence it is said in the same Psalm,
“Gather, Lord, our captivity, like the stream in the south;” and then he
adds, “They who sow in tears, in joy shall reap.” In part then did the
faithful lament, and in part did they rejoice: the beginning of
redemptions had raised their minds to joy; but on seeing their brethren
still living under the tyranny of their enemies and having hardly a hope
of restoration, they could not but mourn. Now the Prophet here declares,
that their joy would be full, when their complete restoration came.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p14"></span>And he extends this joy to their *sons*;
for it was needful to restrain their armor in expecting a full favor, as
they ever closed up their way to God by their complaints, according to
what we do when we give loose reigns to our wishes, for we then in a
manner turn away from God. In order then to teach the people patience,
the Prophet says, “Though ye see not this today with your eyes, yet your
sons shall at length see it.” We now perceive that he here exhorts them
to patience, that they might not anticipate with too much haste the
promises of God.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p15"></span>Of the metaphor it is not needful to say
much: he compares to the drunken, or to such as become cheerful through
drinking, those who rejoice in the Lord, not that he expresses an
approval of drunkenness, but because he wished to show that it would be
no common joy, as though they were carried away beyond themselves. It
would be then superfluous to move here the question, whether it be right
to seek joy by drinking freely. It is indeed true that hilarity is
connected with the lawful use of wine (<span
id="iii.xi.x-p15.1"></span>[Ps
104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.xi.x-p15.1"></span>;) but as we are too prone to excess, we
ought to restrain the lusts of the flesh rather than to seek some color
of excuse for a sinful indulgence. But as I have said, this question
does not belong to the present passage. It follows —

<span id="iii.xi.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xi-p2"></span>**8.** I will hiss for them, and gather
them; for I have redeemed them: and they shall increase as they have
increased.

<span id="iii.xi.xi-p3"></span>**8.** Sibilabo illis et congregabo
eos**,** quia redemi eos; et multiplicabuntur sicuti multiplicait sunt.

<span id="iii.xi.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xi-p6"></span>The same is the object of this verse. By
the word whistle, Zechariah means what it imports in other passages, —
that it will not be an arduous world for God; for we are wont to measure
his works by what our flesh understands. Since then the Jews might have
easily raised this objection, — that their brethren were dispersed
through various countries and among many nations, so that the assembling
of them was incredible, the Prophet meets this objection and says, that
God was able by mere whistling or by a single nod to restore them to
their country. God is sometimes said to whistle for the wicked, when he
constrains them unwillingly to do him service, and employs them as
instruments to execute his hidden purposes; for when great armies daily
assemble, it is no doubt through the secret appointment of God. When
therefore trumpets sound and drums beat, the Lord whistles from heaven,
to lead the reprobate here and there as it pleases him. But in this
passage the Prophet simply means, that though God may not have many
heralds nor an equipped army to open a way for his people, he will be
satisfied with whistling only; for when it should please him, a free
passage would be made for captives, though the whole world were to
hinder their return. These two words then are to be joined together, *I
will whistle for them and gather them*; as though Zechariah had said,
that the nod of God would alone be sufficient, whenever he designed to
gather the people.  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md)

<span id="iii.xi.xi-p8"></span>He then adds, *For I have redeemed them*.
Here also I retain the past time, as the verb is in the past tense: for
God speaks of redemption already begun, as though he had said, “I have
promised that your exile would only be for a time; I have already
appeared in part as your Redeemer, and I will not discontinue my work
until it be completed.” God then no doubt confirms here what I have
stated, — that as he had begun in some measure to redeem his people, a
complete redemption was to be expected, though the distressed could
hardly believe this. But they ought to have felt assured, that God, as
it is said in <span id="iii.xi.xi-p8.1"></span>[Ps
138:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xi.xi-p8.1"></span>, would not forsake the work of his hands.
Hence by the consideration of what had commenced he encourages the Jews
here to entertain confidence, so that they might with composed minds
look for the end, and doubt not but that the whole people would be
saved; for the Lord had already proved himself to be their Redeemer.
 <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) It is indeed true that this had
not been fulfilled as to all the Israelites: but we must ever remember,
that gratuitous election so existed as to the whole people, that God had
notwithstanding but a small flock, as Paul teaches us. (<span
id="iii.xi.xi-p9.4"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.xi.xi-p9.4"></span>.) The Prophet at the same time intimates
that Christ would be the head of the Church, and would gather from all
parts of the earth the Jews who had been before scattered; and thus the
promised restoration is to be extended to all the tribes. It afterwards
follows —

<span id="iii.xi.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.xii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.xi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p2"></span>**9.** And I will sow them among the
people: and they shall remember me in far countries; and they shall live
with their children, and turn again.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p3"></span>**9.** Et seminabo eos in populis**,**
et in remotis partibus recordabuntur mei**,** et vivent cum fillis suis
t revertentur.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p6"></span>He continues the same subject, and
employs here a most suitable metaphor — that the dispersion of the
people would have a better issue than what any one then could have
conceived, for it would be like sowing. The verb for scattering or
sowing is often taken in a bad sense; for when people rested in their
country, they ought then to have considered that they were living under
God’s protection. Dispersion, then, was an evidence of a curse, and it
is often so taken by Moses. Now God uses it here in an opposite meaning,
as though he had said, that he would at his pleasure turn darkness into
light. The meaning then is, that the people had been dispersed through
God being angry with them, but that the issue of this dispersion would
be joyful; for the Jews would dwell everywhere, and be God’s seed, and
thus be made to produce abundant fruit. We then see that the meaning is,
that God’s favor would surpass the wickedness of the people; for those
would bear fruit who had been scattered, and scattered because God would
no longer exercise care over them, and defend them in the promised land.
As God then had so often threatened by Moses that he would scatter the
Jews, he now says in another sense, that he *would sow* them, and for
this ends that they might everywhere produce fruit.  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md)

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p12"></span>It was an instance of the wonderful
grace of God, that he so ordered his dreadful judgment as to make the
dispersion, as it has been said, a sowing of the people; for it hence
happened, that the knowledge of celestial truth shone everywhere; and at
length when the gospel was proclaimed, a freer access was had to the
Gentiles, because Jews were dispersed through all lands. The first
receptacles (*Hospitia*) of the gospel were the synagogues. We see that
the apostles everywhere went first to the Jews, and when a few were
converted, the door was now opened that more might come, and Gentiles
were also added to the Jews. Thus the punishment of exile, which had
been inflicted on them, was the means of opening the door for the
gospel; and God thus scattered his seed here and there, that it might in
due time produce fruit beyond the expectation of all; and this
consideration availed not a little to moderate the impatient desires of
the people; for the Prophet intimates that this alone ought to have
satisfied them — that their exile would be productive of good, for the
Lord would thereby gather much people to himself. Had the Jews been
confined within their own borders, the name of the God of Israel would
not have been heard of elsewhere; but as there was no part of the East,
no part of Asia and of Greece, which had not some Jews — and they
inhabited many cities of Italy — hence it was that the Apostles found,
as we have said, wherever they came, some already prepared to embrace
the gospel.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *They shall
remember me in distant lands*. He shows the manner how the memory of God
would be preserved: though the Jews sacrificed not in the temple, though
they dwelt not in the holy land, they would yet ever worship the only
true God; as then the seed cast on the ground, though it may not appear,
and seem even to be wholly lost, being apparently consumed by
rottenness, does yet germinate in its season, and produces fruit; so God
teaches us, that the memory of his name will occasion this people to
fructify in their dispersion. But as God promises this, we hence learn
that it is through his singular kindness that we cherish piety in our
hearts, when he sharply and severely chastises us. When therefore we
cease not to worship God, it is certain that we are kept by his Spirit;
for were this in the power of man, this promise would be useless, and
even absurd.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p14"></span>He says further, *They shall live with
their sons, and shall return*. He again speaks of sons, that the Jews
might not make too much haste; for we know that men, having strong
desires, hurry on immoderately. That they might not then prescribe time
to God, the Prophet reminds them that it ought to have been enough for
them that the Lord would quicken them as it were from the dead, together
with their children. He however promises them a return, not that they
would return to their own country, but that they would be all united by
the faith of the gospel. Though then they changed not their place, nor
moved a foot from the lands where they sojourned, yet a return to their
country would be that gathering which would be made by the truth of the
gospel, as it is well known, according to the common mode of speaking
adopted by all the Prophets. It follows —

<span id="iii.xi.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p2"></span>**10.** I will bring them again also
out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria; and I will
bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; and *place* shall not be
found for them.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p3"></span>**10.** Et reducam eos e terra
Egypti**,** et ex Assur (ex Assyria) congregabo eos; et ad terram Gilead
et Libani adducam eos; et non invenietur illis.

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p6"></span>He confirms the same prediction — that
though the Jews were like broken pieces, they were yet to entertain hope
of their return and future restoration, since God was able to gather
them from the remotest parts whenever he stretched forth his hand. He
then names Egypt and Assyria, that the Jews might know that the
redemptions here promised is equally open to them all, however far
separated they might be. For though Egypt was not very far from Assyria,
yet they who had fled to Egypt were regarded with more dislike than the
rest, who had been forcibly driven into exile; for God had pronounced a
curse on the flight of those who sought refuge in Egypt. Since then they
were hated by the others, and as a hostile discord existed between them,
the Prophet says that the gathering of which he speaks would belong to
both.  <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md)

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p8"></span>He then adds, that such would be the
number of men, that there would be no place for them; for so ought these
words to be understood, *There shall not be found for them*; that is,
“They will cover the whole land,” according to what we have observed
elsewhere. It is said in Isaiah, “Secede from me,” not that the
faithful, when God shall increase his Church, will molest one another,
or desire to drive away their brethren; but by this mode of speaking
Isaiah means that the Church will be filled with such number of men that
they will press on one another. So also now Zechariah says, that the
number of people will be so great, that the place will be hardly large
enough for so vast a multitude. It follows —

<span id="iii.xi.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p2"></span>**11.** And he shall pass through the
sea with affliction, and shall smite the waves in the sea, and all the
deeps of the river shall dry up: and the pride of Assyria shall be
brought down, and the sceptre of Egypt shall depart away.

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p3"></span>**11.** Et transibit in mari
afflictio**,** et percutiet in mari fluctus; et arescent omnes
profunditates fluminis: et dejicietur superbia Assur**,** et sceptrum
Egypti recedet.

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms what he had said
respecting the power of God, which is so great that it can easily and
without any effort lay prostrate all the mighty forces of the world. As
then the impediments which the Jews observed might have subverted their
hope, the Prophet here removes them; he reminds the Jews that God’s
power would be far superior to all the impediments which the world could
throw in their way. But the expressions are figurative, and allusions
are made to the history of the first redemption.

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p7"></span>*Pass through the sea shall distress*.
As God formerly gave to his people a passage through the Red Sea, (<span
id="iii.xi.xiv-p7.1"></span>[Ex
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.xi.xiv-p7.1"></span>;) so the Prophet now testifies that this
power was unchangeable, so that God could easily restore his people,
though the sea was to be dried up, and rivers were to be emptied. He
says first, *Pass shall distress through the sea*, that is, spread shall
distress, etc., for so the verb <span id="iii.xi.xiv-p7.2"></span>עבר,
*ober*, is to be taken here. *Pass* then *shall distress through the
sea*,  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md) that is, the Lord will
terrify the sea, and so shake it with his power that the waters will
obey his command. But he afterwards explains himself in other words, *He
will smite the waves in the sea*. He means that God’s command is
sufficient to change the order of nature, so that the waters would
immediately disappear at his bidding. He then adds, *All the depths of
the river shall dry up*; some read, “shall be ashamed,” deriving the
verb from <span id="iii.xi.xiv-p12.1"></span>בוש, *bush*; but it comes
from <span id="iii.xi.xiv-p12.2"></span>יבש, *ibesh*: and this indeed
means sometimes to be ashamed, but it means here to dry up. Others
regard it as transitive, “The wind shall dry up the depths.” But as to
the object of the Prophet, the passive or active sense of the verb is of
no moment; for the Prophet no doubt means here, that there would be so
much force in the very nod of God as to dry up rivers suddenly,
according to what happened to Jordan; which being smitten by the rod of
Moses dried up and afforded a passage to the people.

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p13"></span>He at length speaks clearly, *Cast down
shall be the pride of Asshur, and the scepter of Egypt shall depart*. In
the preceding metaphor Zechariah alludes, as I have said, to the first
redemption, as it was usual with all the Prophets to remind the people
of the former miracles, that they might expect from the Lord in future
what their fathers had witnessed. He now however declares, that God
would be the Redeemer of his people, though the Assyrians on one side,
and the Egyptians on the other, were to attempt to frustrate his
purpose; for they could effect nothing by their obstinacy, as God could
easily subdue both. He at last adds —

<span id="iii.xi.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.xv-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xi.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xv-p2"></span>**12.** And I will strengthen them in the
LORD; and they shall walk up and down in his name, saith the LORD.

<span id="iii.xi.xv-p3"></span>**12.** Et reborabo eos in Iehova; et in
monime ejus ambulabunt**,** dicit Iehova.

<span id="iii.xi.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xi.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xv-p6"></span>Here at length he includes the substance
of what we have noticed, that there would be sufficient help in God to
raise up and support his people, and to render them victorious over all
their enemies. He had already proved this by saying, that God had
formerly sufficiently testified by many miracles how much superior he
was to the whole world; but he briefly completes the whole of this
proof, and shows, that the Jews, provided that they relied on God and
expected from him what he had promised, would be sufficiently strong,
though the whole power of the world were to rise up against them.

<span id="iii.xi.xv-p7"></span>He also mentions the name of God, *They
shall walk*, he says, *in his name*, that is, under his auspices. In
short, there is here an implied contrast between the name of God and the
wealth and the forces of their enemies, which might have filled the
minds of the faithful with fear, and cast them down. Hence the Prophet
bids the Jews to give the glory to God, and not to doubt but that they
would be victorious, whatever hindrance the world might throw in their
way. And by this word walk, he means a continued course of life, as
though he had said, that the people indeed had returned from exile, that
is, in part; but that more of them were to be expected, for the Lord had
not only been a leader in their return, but that he would be also their
perpetual guardian, and defend them to the end.

<span id="iii.xi.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are
constrained continually to groan under the burden of our sins, and the
captivity in which we are held justly exposes us to continual trembling
and sorrow, — O grant, that the deliverance, already begun, may inspire
us with the hope, so as to expect more from thee than what we can see
with our eyes; and may we continually call on thee until thou completes
what thou hast begun, and puttest to flight both Satan and our sins, so
that being in true and full liberty devoted to thee, we may be partakers
of that power which has already appeared in our head, until having at
length passed through all our contests, we may reach that blessed rest,
where we shall enjoy the fruit of our victory in Christ our Lord — Amen

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc30013.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="iii.xi.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p9"></span> The word in the singular number is found
twice, in <span id="iii.xi.ii-p9.1"></span>[Job
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#026.md), [Job
38:25](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.xi.ii-p9.1"></span>, and rendered “lightning.” *Scott*, the
versifier of the book of Job, renders it “blaze” or “flash of
lightning,” deriving it from an Arabic word which means to cut a thing
like the jagged edge of a leaf. It is then the zigzag flash of
lightning. *Marckius* renders it here “coruscations;” *Dathius* and
*Henderson* “lightnings.” To avoid the connection of two words of
similar import, the arrangement of the verse may be different, —

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p10"></span>Ask ye from Jehovah rain in the latter
season;  
Jehovah, who makes the flashes and the rain,  
Will a shower give to you,  
To every one grass in the field.

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p11"></span>“To you,” \[<span
id="iii.xi.ii-p11.1"></span>לכם\]; so read many MSS., about fifteen, and
the Syriac. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc30013.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p8"></span> Literally, “the teraphims.” See <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p8.1"></span>[Hosea
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xi.iii-p8.1"></span>,
vol. 1 page 130. They were household gods, called *Penates* by the
heathens. “Images” is the rendering of the *Targum* of *Onkelos*, and
“worshippers of images” of *Jonathan* in this place. *Jerome* has “<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p8.3"></span>simulacra — images.” *Parkhurst* derives the
word from \[<span id="iii.xi.iii-p8.4"></span>רפה\], an appaller, they
being the objects of dread of fear. *Gesenius*, from an Arabic word,
which means to “live in comfort,” they being viewed as the givers of
happiness. *Lee*, from an Ethiopic word, signifying a “remnant, a
survivor,” and thinks that they mean “relics.” Whatever may be the
meaning of the word, they were no doubt a sort of household gods, made,
as *Aben Ezra* says, in a human form, and consulted, says *Kimchi*, as
to future events.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p9"></span>There are three kinds of idolatrous and
superstitious practices mentioned here — the images which were consulted
as oracles, the pretenders to visions, and the dreamers of dreams; but
all that was spoken, and seen, and dreamt, was vain, and false, and
useless. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc30013.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="iii.xi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p8"></span> As to “the corner-stone,” \[<span
id="iii.xi.v-p8.1"></span>פנה\], the view given here is correct. The
chiefs of the people are in several places called “the corner-stones of
the people.” See \[<span id="iii.xi.v-p8.2"></span>[Jud
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xi.v-p8.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.xi.v-p8.3"></span>[1Sa
14:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#038.md)<span id="iii.xi.v-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="iii.xi.v-p8.4"></span>[Isa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xi.v-p8.4"></span>.
“The angle or corner,” says *Blayney*, “metaphorically denotes the chief
personage in the community, on whom its strength and security
principally depend.”

<span id="iii.xi.v-p9"></span>With regard to the “nail,” rendered “peg,”
by *Henderson*, the correct idea seems not to be given. The word \[<span
id="iii.xi.v-p9.1"></span>יתד\], signifies two things — the hooked
stake, fixed in the ground, by which tents were fastened — and the
hooked nail or peg affixed to the sides of rooms, and put in the wall
when built, so as to form a part of the building, and on which household
stuff and instruments of war were suspended. The first is probably here
intended, as it fastened and secured the tent, so the inferior officers
of the state, next to the leaders or chiefs, were a strength to the
community. See *Lowth* on <span id="iii.xi.v-p9.2"></span>[Isa
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.xi.v-p9.2"></span>.
See <span id="iii.xi.v-p9.3"></span>[Ezr.
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#008.md), [Ezek.
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.xi.v-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.v-p10"></span>“Exactor” is the most common meaning of
\[<span id="iii.xi.v-p10.1"></span>נגש\]; but here, as in <span
id="iii.xi.v-p10.2"></span>[Isa
60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.xi.v-p10.2"></span>, it seems to signify a ruler, a military
chief, or a conqueror, as the “corner-stone” denotes the civil chief.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p11"></span>In a series of sentences, which have only
one verb, our mode is to put the verb in the first clause; but the
Hebrew set it in the last, as we find to be the case here, as well in
the last verse of the last chapter. This verse then ought to be rendered
thus—

<span id="iii.xi.v-p12"></span>From him shall come forth the
corner-stone,  
From him the stake,  
From him the bow of war,  
From him only every conqueror,

<span id="iii.xi.v-p13"></span>*or*,

<span id="iii.xi.v-p14"></span>From him every ruler altogether.

<span id="iii.xi.v-p15"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc30013.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="iii.xi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p8"></span> *Henderson* says, that this refers to
the numerous cavalry of the SyroGrecian army. See <span
id="iii.xi.vi-p8.1"></span>[1Ma
3:39](../../../bib/apo/ma1003.htm#039.md)<span id="iii.xi.vi-p8.1"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc30013.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="iii.xi.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p9"></span> The opinion of those who regard this
prophecy as having been accomplished in the history of the Jews before
the coming of Christ, is that “the house of Joseph” were those of the
ten tribes who had joined themselves to the tribe of Judah. So *Grotius*
says, and *Henderson* observes, “It is clear from the reference thus
made, that part, if not most of all the tribes, returned and took
possession of their patrimonial lands after the captivity. But *Scott*
and *Adam Clarke*, though they allow that this prophecy was in part
fulfilled when the Jews successfully resisted their SyroGrecian enemies,
yet think that its full accomplishment is yet future; while *Calvin*
evidently considers that a spiritual union in Christ is intended,
conveyed in a language borrowed from the civil condition of the Jews. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc30013.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="iii.xi.ix-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p11"></span> *Kimchi* says that \[<span
id="iii.xi.ix-p11.1"></span>ישב\], to dwell, and \[<span
id="iii.xi.ix-p11.2"></span>שוב\], to return, are included in this verb;
but of such amalgamation there are no examples. The true reading no
doubt is either \[<span id="iii.xi.ix-p11.3"></span>והשבתים\], “and I
will restore them,” supported by six MSS. the *Targum*, the *Syriac*,
and the *Vulgate*; or \[<span id="iii.xi.ix-p11.4"></span>והושבתים\],
“and I will settle them,” supported by the *Septuagint*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc30013.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="iii.xi.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ix-p15"></span> Literally it is, “and I will answer
them,” \[<span id="iii.xi.ix-p15.1"></span>ואענם\];—\[<span
id="iii.xi.ix-p15.2"></span>και ἐπακούσομαι αυτοις\]—”and I will hear
them,” is the *Septuagint*; but the proper meaning of the verb is to
answer; and so *Henderson* renders it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc30013.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="iii.xi.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.x-p7"></span> The words literally are, —

<span id="iii.xi.x-p8"></span>And they shall be like a valiant man of
Ephraim.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p9"></span>So the *Septuagint*, only the “valiant
man” is taken in a collective sense, “And they shall be like the
warriors (\[<span id="iii.xi.x-p9.1"></span>μαχηται\]) of Ephraim.” With
this corresponds the *Targum* and the *Syriac*. The fact is, that the
words cannot be grammatically rendered otherwise. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc30013.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xi-p7"></span> The word rendered here “whistle,” is
rendered “hist,” by *Lowth,* in <span id="iii.xi.xi-p7.1"></span>[Isa.
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#026.md), [Isa.
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xi.xi-p7.1"></span>;
and he quotes *Cyril*, who says, “it is a metaphor taken from the
practice of those who keep bees; who draw them out of their hives into
the fields, and lead them back again by a hiss or a whistle.” This is
probable, for it is connected in <span id="iii.xi.xi-p7.2"></span>[Isa
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xi.xi-p7.2"></span>
with the fly and the bee. *Grotius* takes the metaphor from the whistle
of the shepherd, by which he collects his sheep. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc30013.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xi-p9"></span> The verb for “redeem” is in the past
time, preceded by \[<span id="iii.xi.xi-p9.1"></span>כי\], *for*,
*because*, or *when*. The *Septuagint* give the future time, “because I
shall redeem them.” *Jun.* and *Trem.,* and *Piscator* read thus, “when
I shall redeem them.” There is a similar phrase in verse 6, and in a
like manner connected, which may be rendered in the same way, “when I
shall pity them,” instead of, “for I have pitied them:” for \[<span
id="iii.xi.xi-p9.2"></span>כי\], as well as \[<span
id="iii.xi.xi-p9.3"></span>ו\], has sometimes a conversive power, at
least it turns the past to a future time. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc30013.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p7"></span> The sowing here, as admitted by all,
evidently means scattering; yet the verse is rendered differently.
*Dathius* and *Henderson* render the first \[<span
id="iii.xi.xii-p7.1"></span>ו\] “though,” and the second “yet.” This and
the following verse may be thus translated —

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p9"></span>**9.** Though I shall scatter them among
the nations, Yet in remote parts shall they remember me; And they shall
live, even their children, and return:

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p10"></span>**10.** Yea, I will restore them from
the land of Egypt, And from Assyria will I gather them; And to the land
of Gilead and Lebanon will I bring thm, And no place shall be found for
them.

<span id="iii.xi.xii-p11"></span>“And they shall live” I take to mean,
that they should live, not themselves, but in their children. But
*Dathius* and *Newcome* follow the *Septuagint* — “And they shall
cherish (*or*, preserve) their children,” which the Hebrew will not
bear; and *Marckius* and *Henderson* give the same version with *Calvin*
— “And they shall live with their children.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc30013.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiii-p7"></span> This promise of restoration from Egypt
and Assyria is considered by *Grotius*, *Dathius*, and *Henderson*, as
having been fulfilled literally. *Grotius* says that one hundred and
twenty thousand were restored from Egypt \[a larger number than what was
restored from Babylon\] by Ptolemy Philadelphus, and that many were
restored from Assyria by Alexander, the son of Antiochus Epiphanes, and
by Demetrius; and he refers to Josephus’s of the Fathers, and some
moderns, such as *Marckius* and *Henry*, viewed the prophecy as
fulfilled in a spiritual sense, that is, in the spiritual restoration of
the Jews, the language being taken from what belonged to a temporal
restoration. But *Scott* and *Adam Clarke* seemed disposed to regard
this prophecy as yet to be fulfilled, in the restoration of the Jews to
their own land, as well as to the faith of the gospel. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc30013.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xiv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p8"></span> So *Pagninus*, *Drusius*, and the
*Syriac. The Septuagint*, the *Arabic*, the *Vulgate*, and also
*Jerome*, give a different version — “And he shall pass through the
narrow sea,” or, “through the straits of the sea;” and this is the
obvious meaning of the Hebrew, which is literally, “and he shall pass
through the sea of straitness,” or narrowness, *i.e.*, through the (or
a) narrow sea; the allusion is evidently to the Red Sea, which is
narrow. *Henderson* connects \[<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p8.1"></span>צרה\]
as a verb with the following line —

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p9"></span>He shall cleave and smite the waves of
the sea.

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p10"></span>He derives the peculiar sense of
“cleaving” from the Chaldee \[<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p10.1"></span>צרא\]:
but this is not necessary, for the other meaning is quite suitable, and
countenanced by good authorities. *Blayney* give this version —

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p11"></span>And some shall pass over the sea to
Tyre;

<span id="iii.xi.xiv-p12"></span>which is quite without any meaning in
this connection, there being nothing in the passage to lead us to Tyre.
— *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc30014.md)
