[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc30024)  [Next](cc30026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION of

<span id="v.i-p2"></span><span id="v.i-p2.1"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION of

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>THE BOOK OF ZECHARIAH.

<span id="v.i.i"></span>

<span id="v.i.i-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="v.i.i-p3"></span>**1** In the eighth month, in the second year
of Darius, came the word of Jehovah to Zechariah, the son of Barachiah,
the son of Iddo, the Prophet, saying —

<span id="v.i.i-p4"></span>**2** Very angry has Jehovah been with your
fathers:

<span id="v.i.i-p5"></span>**3** Thou shalt therefore say to them, —
Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — Return ye to me, saith Jehovah of hosts;
And I will return to you, saith Jehovah of hosts:

<span id="v.i.i-p6"></span>**4** Be ye not like your fathers, For cry to
them did the former Prophets, saying, — Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
“Return ye, I pray, from your evil ways, And from your evil works;” But
they heard not, nor attended to me, Saith Jehovah.

<span id="v.i.i-p7"></span>**5** Your fathers — where are they? And the
Prophets — do they for ever live?

<span id="v.i.i-p8"></span>**6** But my words and my statutes, Which I
committed to my servants the Prophets, Have they not laid hold on your
fathers? — When they returned, they said, — “As Jehovah of hosts had
purposed to do to us According to our ways and our works, So hath he
done to us.”

<span id="v.i.i-p9"></span>**7** On the twenty-fourth of the eleventh
month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of Jehovah to
Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo, the Prophet, saying, —

<span id="v.i.i-p10"></span>**8** I saw by night, and behold a man
riding on a red horse; and he stood among the myrtles in a low place;
and after him were horses, red, variegated, and white.

<span id="v.i.i-p11"></span>**9** And I said, What are these, my Lord?
And the Angel, who spoke with me, said to me, I will show thee what
these are.

<span id="v.i.i-p12"></span>**10** And the Angel, who stood among the
myrtles, answered and said, These are they whom Jehovah has sent to walk
to and fro through the earth.

<span id="v.i.i-p13"></span>**11** And they answered the angel of
Jehovah, who stood among the myrtles, and said — “We have walked to and
fro through the earth, and, behold, the whole earth rests and is quiet.”

<span id="v.i.i-p14"></span>**12** And the Angel of Jehovah answered and
said, Jehovah of hosts! How long wilt thou not pity Jerusalem And the
cities of Judah, Which thou hast despised these seventy years! (**42**)

<span id="v.i.i-p15"></span>**13** Then answered Jehovah the Angel, who
spoke with me, with good words, with comfortable words.

<span id="v.i.i-p16"></span>**14** And the Angel, who spoke with me,
said to me, Cry, saying, —— Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — I am zealous
for Jerusalem And for Sion, with great zeal: (**44**)

<span id="v.i.i-p17"></span>**15** And with great anger am I angry With
the nations which are quiet; For I was angry a little, And they helped
on the evil.

<span id="v.i.i-p18"></span>**16** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, — I am
turned to Jerusalem in compassions; My house shall be built in it, Saith
Jehovah of hosts; And a line shall be extended over Jerusalem.

<span id="v.i.i-p19"></span>**17** Cry again, saying, — Thus saith
Jehovah of hosts, — Yet wear out shall cities through abundance,
(**51**) And Jehovah shall yet comfort Zion, And will yet choose
Jerusalem.

<span id="v.i.i-p20"></span>**18** And I raised my eyes and saw, and
behold four horns;

<span id="v.i.i-p21"></span>**19** and I said to the angel, who was
speaking with me, What are these? and he said to me, These are the four
horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.

<span id="v.i.i-p22"></span>**20** Then Jehovah showed me four smiths:

<span id="v.i.i-p23"></span>**21** and I said, What are these coming to
do? and he said, saying, Those are the horns which have scattered Judah,
so that no one could raise up his head; but these are come to frighten
them, to thrust away the horns of the nations, which raised the horn
against the land of Judah to scatter it. (**57**)

<span id="v.i.ii"></span>

<span id="v.i.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="v.i.ii-p3"></span>**1** And I raised my eyes and saw, and
behold a man in whose hand was a measuring-line:

<span id="v.i.ii-p4"></span>**2** and I said, Where art thou going? And
he said to me, To measure Jerusalem, that I may see what is its breadth,
and what is its length.

<span id="v.i.ii-p5"></span>**3** And behold the angel who was speaking
with me, he went forth, and another angel went forth to meet him, and
said to him,

<span id="v.i.ii-p6"></span>**4** Run, speak to this youth, saying, — In
the villages shall dwell Jerusalem, For the number of men and cattle in
it:

<span id="v.i.ii-p7"></span>**5** And I shall be to it, saith Jehovah, A
wall of fire round about, And for glory shall I be in the midst of it

<span id="v.i.ii-p8"></span>**6** Ho! Ho! flee ye From the land of the
north, saith Jehovah: For to the four winds of heaven Have I scattered
you, saith Jehovah. (**65**)

<span id="v.i.ii-p9"></span>**7** Ho! Zion! be thou delivered, Who
dwellest with the daughter of Babylon.

<span id="v.i.ii-p10"></span>**8** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
After the glory hath he sent me To the nations with spoiled you: For he
who touches you Touches the apple of his eye.

<span id="v.i.ii-p11"></span>**9** For, behold, I shake my hand over
them, And they shall be a prey to their servants; And ye shall know That
Jehovah of hosts hath sent me.

<span id="v.i.ii-p12"></span>**10** Exult and rejoice, thou daughter of
Zion; For behold I am coming, And will dwell in thy midst, saith
Jehovah:

<span id="v.i.ii-p13"></span>**11** And join themselves shall many
nations To Jehovah in that day; And they shall be to me a people, And I
will dwell in the midst of thee; And thou shalt know, That Jehovah of
hosts has sent me to thee:

<span id="v.i.ii-p14"></span>**12** And Jehovah will take Judah As his
hereditary portion in the holy land; And he will yet choose Jerusalem.
Be silent all flesh before Jehovah; Be silent all flesh before Jehovah;
Fore roused he is from his holy habitation.

<span id="v.i.iii"></span>

<span id="v.i.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="v.i.iii-p3"></span>**1** And he showed me Joshua the high
priest standing before the angel of Jehovah, and Satan standing at his
right hand to oppose him.

<span id="v.i.iii-p4"></span>**2** And Jehovah said to Satan, — Rebuke
thee, Satan, let Jehovah; Yea, rebuke thee let Jehovah, Who has chosen
Jehovah: Is not this a brand snatched from the fire!

<span id="v.i.iii-p5"></span>**3** And Joshua was clad in sordid
garments, and stood before the angel:

<span id="v.i.iii-p6"></span>**4** and he answered and said to those who
stood before him, saying, Take the sordid garments from off him: and he
said to him, See I have made to pass from thee thine iniquity, and I
will clothe thee with new garments.

<span id="v.i.iii-p7"></span>**5** And I said, Let them set a pure mitre
on his head: and they set a mitre on his head when they had clothed him
with garments; and the angel of Jehovah stood by:

<span id="v.i.iii-p8"></span>**6** And protest did the angel of Jehovah
to Joshua, saying, —

<span id="v.i.iii-p9"></span>**7** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, If in my
ways wilt thou walk, And my charge wilt thou keep, thou shalt then rule
my house, And thou shalt also keep my courts; And I will give thee a
free intercourse Among those who are present. (**94**)

<span id="v.i.iii-p10"></span>**8** Hear now, O Joshua! the high priest,
Thou and thy associates who stand before thee; For men of wonder are
these; For, behold, I will bring forth my servant, the Branch:

<span id="v.i.iii-p11"></span>**9** For, behold, the stone which I have
set before Joshua, On that one stone are seven eyes; Behold, I will
engrave its engraving, Saith Jehovah of hosts; And I will remove the
iniquity Of that land in one day:

<span id="v.i.iii-p12"></span>**10** In that day, saith Jehovah, Ye
shall call, every one his neighbour, Under the vine and under the
figtree. (**101**)

<span id="v.i.iv"></span>

<span id="v.i.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="v.i.iv-p3"></span>**1** And return did the angel who had bee
speaking with me, and roused me as a man who is roused from his sleep:

<span id="v.i.iv-p4"></span>**2** And he said to me, What dost thou see?
and I said, I see and behold a candlestick, all of gold, and a bowl on
its top, and seven lamps on it, seven pourers to the seven lamps, which
are on its top,

<span id="v.i.iv-p5"></span>**3** And two olive-trees by it, one on the
right of the bowl and one on its left.

<span id="v.i.iv-p6"></span>**4** Then I answered and said to the angel
who was speaking with me, saying, What are these, my Lord?

<span id="v.i.iv-p7"></span>**5** And the angel who was speaking with
me, answered and said to me, Knowest thou not? and I said, No, my Lord.

<span id="v.i.iv-p8"></span>**6** And he answered and said to me,
saying, Not by a host, and not by courage, But by my Spirit, (**110**)
Saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="v.i.iv-p9"></span>**7** What art thou, great mountain, Before
Zerubbabel? — A plain: And he shall bring forth the top-stone, *With*
shoutings, “Grace, grace to it.”

<span id="v.i.iv-p10"></span>**8** Then came the word of Jehovah to me,
saying, —

<span id="v.i.iv-p11"></span>**9** The hands of Zerubbabel have founded
this house, And his hands shall complete it; And thou shalt know That
Jehovah of hosts has sent me to you.

<span id="v.i.iv-p12"></span>**10** For who has despised the day of
small things! For they shall rejoice when they see The plummet in the
hand of Zerubbabel. These seven, the eyes of Jehovah are they, Which go
round through the whole earth.

<span id="v.i.iv-p13"></span>**11** And I answered and said to him, What
are these two olive-trees on the right of the candlestick, and on its
left?

<span id="v.i.iv-p14"></span>**12** And I answered the second time and
said, What are these two flowings of the olive-tree, which are between
the two pipes of gold, which pour golden oil from themselves?

<span id="v.i.iv-p15"></span>**13** And he said to me, saying, Knowest
thou not what these are? And I said, No, my Lord.

<span id="v.i.iv-p16"></span>**14** And he said, These are the two sons
of oil which stand with the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="v.i.v"></span>

<span id="v.i.v-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="v.i.v-p3"></span>**1** And I returned and raised my eyes and
looked, and behold a flying roll.

<span id="v.i.v-p4"></span>**2** And he said to me, What dost thou see?
And I said, I see a flying roll, its length twenty cubits, and its
breadth ten cubits.

<span id="v.i.v-p5"></span>**3** And he said to me, This is the curse
which goeth forth over the face of the whole land; for every one who
steals shall on this as on that side be punished, and every one who
swears shall on this as on that side be punished. (**129**)

<span id="v.i.v-p6"></span>**4** I will bring it forth, saith Jehovah of
hosts; and it shall come into the house of the thief, and into the house
of him who swears by my name falsely; and it shall abide in the midst of
his house and consume it, both its timber and its stones.

<span id="v.i.v-p7"></span>**5** And the angel who had been speaking
with me came forth and said to me, Raise now thine eyes, and see what
this is that goeth forth.

<span id="v.i.v-p8"></span>**6** And I said, What is this? And he said,
This is a measure which goeth forth: he said also, This is their eye
through all the earth.

<span id="v.i.v-p9"></span>**7** And behold, a thin piece of lead was
carried along, and a woman was sitting in the midst of the measure.

<span id="v.i.v-p10"></span>**8** And he said, This if Wickedness: and
he cast the piece of lead on its mouth.

<span id="v.i.v-p11"></span>**9** And I raised my eyes and saw, and
behold two women going forth, and wind in their wings; for they had
wings like the wings of a stork; and they raised up the measure between
earth and heaven.

<span id="v.i.v-p12"></span>**10** And I said to the angel who was
speaking with me, Where do these carry the measure?

<span id="v.i.v-p13"></span>**11** And he said to me, To build for it a
house in the land of Shinar; and it shall be set and fixed there on its
own base.

<span id="v.i.vi"></span>

<span id="v.i.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="v.i.vi-p3"></span>**1** And I turned and raised mine eyes and
looked, and behold four chariots going forth from the midst of two
mountains, and mountains were mountains of brass:

<span id="v.i.vi-p4"></span>**2** In the first chariot were red horses,
and in the second chariot black horses,

<span id="v.i.vi-p5"></span>**3** And in the third chariot white horses,
and in the fourth chariot grisled and bay horses.

<span id="v.i.vi-p6"></span>**4** And I answered and said to the angel
who was speaking with me, What are these, my Lord?

<span id="v.i.vi-p7"></span>**5** And the angel answered and said to me,
These are the four spirits of heaven, going forth from their station
before the Lord of the whole earth;

<span id="v.i.vi-p8"></span>**6** And the black horses go forth to the
land of the north, and the white go forth after them, and the grisled go
forth to the land of the south.

<span id="v.i.vi-p9"></span>**7** When the bay went forth, they asked
that they might perambulate through the earth: and the perambulated
through the earth.

<span id="v.i.vi-p10"></span>**8** And he called me, and spoke to me,
saying, See, those who went forth to the land of the north have quieted
my spirit in the land of the north.

<span id="v.i.vi-p11"></span>**9** And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="v.i.vi-p12"></span>**10** Take from the exiles, from Heldai,
and from Tobiah, and from Jedaiah (and go in that day into the house of
Josiah the son of Zephaniah) who have come from Babylon;

<span id="v.i.vi-p13"></span>**11** Yea take *from them* silver and gold
and make crowns, (**154**,) and set *them* on the head of Joshua, the
son of Josedech, the high-priest;

<span id="v.i.vi-p14"></span>**12** And speak to him, saying, Thus saith
Jehovah of hosts, saying, Behold the man! Branch is his name; And from
his won place shall he grow up, And shall build the temple of Jehovah;

<span id="v.i.vi-p15"></span>**13** Yea, he shall build the temple of
Jehovah, And shall himself bear the glory, And shall sit and rule on his
throne, And shall be a priest on his throne, And the counsel of peace
shall be between the two.

<span id="v.i.vi-p16"></span>**14** And the crowns shall be to Heldai
and to Tobiah, And to Jedaiah, and to Hen, the son of Zephaniah, For a
memorial in the temple of Jehovah.

<span id="v.i.vi-p17"></span>**15** And those afar off shall come and
build In the temple of Jehovah; And ye shall know That Jehovah of hosts,
has sent me to you: And *thus* shall it be, if by hearing ye will hear
The voice of Jehovah your God.

<span id="v.i.vii"></span>

<span id="v.i.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="v.i.vii-p3"></span>**1** And in the fourth year of king Darius
the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah, on the fourth day of the ninth
month, even Chisleu:

<span id="v.i.vii-p4"></span>**2** For Sherezer had sent to the house of
God, and also Regemmelech and his men, to entreat the favour of Jehovah,

<span id="v.i.vii-p5"></span>**3** *And* to speak to the priests who
were in the house of Jehovah of hosts, and to the Prophets, saying,
“Shall I weep in the fifth month? Shall I separate myself as I have done
these years?”

<span id="v.i.vii-p6"></span>**4** And the word of Jehovah came to me
saying, (**165**)

<span id="v.i.vii-p7"></span>**5** Speak to all the people of the land
and to the priests, saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and
seventh month, even those seventy years, did you by fasting fast to me
to me?

<span id="v.i.vii-p8"></span>**6** And when ye ate and when ye drank,
did you not eat and drink for yourselves?

<span id="v.i.vii-p9"></span>**7** Are not these the words which Jehovah
proclaimed by the former Prophets, when Jerusalem was quiet and wealthy,
and its cities around it, *when* both the south and the plain country
were quiet?

<span id="v.i.vii-p10"></span>**8** And the word of Jehovah came to
Zechariah, saying,

<span id="v.i.vii-p11"></span>**9** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, saying,
The judgment of truth pronounce, And kindness and mercies show, Every
one to his brother;

<span id="v.i.vii-p12"></span>**10** And the widow and the orphan, The
stranger and the poor, rob not; An evil to his brother Let none of you
imagine in his heart:

<span id="v.i.vii-p13"></span>**11** But they refused to attend, And
presented the withdrawing shoulder, And their ears they made heavy so as
not to hear;

<span id="v.i.vii-p14"></span>**12** And their heart they made an
adamant, That they might not hear the words Which Jehovah of hosts had
sent By his Spirit, through the former prophets; And there was great
wrath from Jehovah of hosts:

<span id="v.i.vii-p15"></span>**13** And it was, that as he had called
and they heard not, So they shall call, and I will not hear, Saith
Jehovah of hosts;

<span id="v.i.vii-p16"></span>**14** And I will scatter them among all
the nations, Whom they have not known, And the land shall be desolate
after them, So that there shall be none passing through nor returning:
And they made the land of delight a waste.

<span id="v.i.viii"></span>

<span id="v.i.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="v.i.viii-p3"></span>**1** And the word of Jehovah of hosts
came, saying, —

<span id="v.i.viii-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
Zealous have I been for Zion with great zeal, And with great indignation
have I been zealous for her.

<span id="v.i.viii-p5"></span>**3** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — I am
returned to Zion and will dwell In the midst of Jerusalem; And called
shall be Jerusalem, “The city of truth,” And the mount of Jehovah of
hosts, “The mount of holiness.”

<span id="v.i.viii-p6"></span>**4** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — Yet
dwell shall aged men and aged women In the streets of Jerusalem, Each
one with his staff in his hand for very age;

<span id="v.i.viii-p7"></span>**5** And the streets of the city shall be
full of boys and girls, Who shall play in its streets.

<span id="v.i.viii-p8"></span>**6** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — If
marvellous it be In the eyes of the remnant of this people in these
days, Shall it also in mine eyes be marvellous? Saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="v.i.viii-p9"></span>**7** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
Behold, I will save my people From the land of the east And from the
land of the setting sun;

<span id="v.i.viii-p10"></span>**8** And I will restore them, And they
shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; And they shall be to me a people,
And I will be to them a God, In truth and in righteousness.

<span id="v.i.viii-p11"></span>**9** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
Strengthened be your hands, Who hear in these days these words From the
mouth of the prophets, Who were in the day when founded Was the house of
Jehovah of hosts, And the temple, that it might be built.

<span id="v.i.viii-p12"></span>**10** For before those days There was no
hire for man, and no hire for beast; And to the goer and to the comer,
There was no peace because of distress; (**207**) And I sent forth all
men, Each one against his neighbour.

<span id="v.i.viii-p13"></span>**11** But now, not according to former
days, Shall I *deal* with the residue of this people, Saith Jehovah of
hosts:

<span id="v.i.viii-p14"></span>**12** For the seed shall be prosperous;
The vine shall yield its fruit, And the earth shall yield its increase,
And the heavens shall give their dew; yea, I will cause the remnant of
this people To inherit all these things. (**210**)

<span id="v.i.viii-p15"></span>**13** And it shall be, that as ye were a
curse among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, So will I
save you, and ye shall be a blessing; Fear not, strengthened be your
hands.

<span id="v.i.viii-p16"></span>**14** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
As I thought to bring evil on you, When provoke me did your fathers,
Saith Jehovah of hosts, And I did not repent;

<span id="v.i.viii-p17"></span>**15** So have I turned, I have thought
in these days To do good to Jerusalem And to the house of Judah, fear ye
not

<span id="v.i.viii-p18"></span>**16** These are the things which ye
shall do, — Speak ye the truth, each one to his neighbour; The truth and
the judgment of peace Proclaim in your gates;

<span id="v.i.viii-p19"></span>**17** And evil to his neighbour Let none
of you imagine in your hearts; And a false oath love not; For all these
things I hate, saith Jehovah.

<span id="v.i.viii-p20"></span>**18** And the word of Jehovah of hosts
came to me, saying, —

<span id="v.i.viii-p21"></span>**19** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, The
fast of the fourth, and the fast of the fifth, And the fast of the
seventh, and the fast of the tenth *month*, Shall be to the house of
Judah For joy, and gladness, and cheerful feasts; Therefore love ye
truth and peace. (**223**)

<span id="v.i.viii-p22"></span>**20** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — It
*shall* yet *be*, that come shall people And the inhabitants of great
cities;

<span id="v.i.viii-p23"></span>**21** Yea, come shall the inhabitants Of
one to another, saying, “Going let us go to entreat the face of Jehovah,
and to seek Jehovah of hosts, I will also go:”

<span id="v.i.viii-p24"></span>**22** Yea, come shall great and strong
nation To seek Jehovah of hosts at Jerusalem, And to entreat the face of
Jehovah.

<span id="v.i.viii-p25"></span>**23** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — In
those days *shall it be*, That ten men, of all languages of the nations,
Shall lay hold on the skirt of a Jew, saying, “We will walk with you,
For we have heard that God is with you.”

<span id="v.i.ix"></span>

<span id="v.i.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="v.i.ix-p3"></span>**1** The burden of the word of Jehovah On
the land of Hadrach, And Damascus its resting-place, When to Jehovah
shall be the eye of man And of all the tribes of Israel:

<span id="v.i.ix-p4"></span>**2** Even Hamath shall border on it, Tyre
*also* Sidon, Though it be very wise:

<span id="v.i.ix-p5"></span>**3** And built hath Tyre a fortress for
herself, And heaped together silver as dust, And gold as the mire of the
streets;

<span id="v.i.ix-p6"></span>**4** Behold, Jehovah will drive her out,
And smite in the sea her power, And with fire shall she be consumed.
(**239**)

<span id="v.i.ix-p7"></span>**5** See shall Ashkelon, and fear, And
Gaza, — and it will be very sorrowful; Ekron also, — for confounded
shall be her expectation: And perish shall the king from Gaza, And
Ashkelon shall not be inhabited;

<span id="v.i.ix-p8"></span>**6** And dwell shall a stranger in Ashdod,
For I will cut off the pride of the Philistines;

<span id="v.i.ix-p9"></span>**7** And take away will I his blood from
his mouth And his abominations from between his teeth; And he, the
remnant, even he *shall be* for our God; He shall be even as a leader in
Judah, And Ekron, as a Jebusite:

<span id="v.i.ix-p10"></span>**8** I will also be a camp to my house
From an army, when passing through and returning; And pass through them
shall the exactor no more; For now I have seen with mine eyes.

<span id="v.i.ix-p11"></span>**9** Exult greatly, thou daughter of Zion,
Shout, thou daughter of Jerusalem; Behold, the King shall come to thee,
Just and saved shall he be, Poor and riding on an ass, Even on a colt,
the foal of an ass:

<span id="v.i.ix-p12"></span>**10** And cut off shall I the chariot from
Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem; cut off also shall be the bow of
war; And speak peace shall he to the nations; And his dominion shall be
from sea to sea, And from the river to the extremities of the earth.

<span id="v.i.ix-p13"></span>**11** As for thee also, by the blood of
thy covenant, Have I sent forth thy captive From the pit, in which there
was no water:

<span id="v.i.ix-p14"></span>**12** Return to the stronghold, ye
captives of hope; Even to day I declare, Double blessings will I render
to thee;

<span id="v.i.ix-p15"></span>**13** For I will bend for me Judah as a
bow, I will fill *my quiver with* Ephraim; And will rouse thy sons, O
Zion, Against thy sons, O Greece; And I will make thee as the sword of a
mighty man:

<span id="v.i.ix-p16"></span>**14** Jehovah also shall over them be
seen, And go forth as lightning shall his arrow; Yea, the Lord Jehovah,
with the trumpet shall he blow, And march forth in the whirlwind of the
south. (**269**)

<span id="v.i.ix-p17"></span>**15** Jehovah of hosts will defend them,
And they shall devour and subdue with sling-stones; They shall also
drink and make a noise as through wine, And filled shall they be as the
bowls, As the corners of the altar;

<span id="v.i.ix-p18"></span>**16** And save them shall Jehovah their
God In that day, as a flock, his own people; For as the stones of a
crown shall they be raised over his land.

<span id="v.i.ix-p19"></span>**17** For how great is his goodness! And
how great his beauty! Corn shall refresh young men, And new wine the
maids. (**276**)

<span id="v.i.x"></span>

<span id="v.i.x-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="v.i.x-p3"></span>**1** Ask ye from Jehovah rain in the latter
season; *And* Jehovah will make clouds; And rain — a shower, will he
give them, To every one grass in the field. (**279**)

<span id="v.i.x-p4"></span>**2** Surely the images have spoken vanity,
And the diviners have seen falsehood, And dreams of vanity have they
spoken; In vain have they comforted: They have therefore wandered like
sheep, They were distressed, for there was no shepherd.

<span id="v.i.x-p5"></span>**3** Against the shepherds was my fury
kindled, The he-goats will I punish; For visit will Jehovah of hosts His
flock, the house of Judah, And make them as his splendid horse in was.

<span id="v.i.x-p6"></span>**4** From him shall come forth the
corner-stone, From him the nail, From him the bow of war, From him also
every exactor. (**286**)

<span id="v.i.x-p7"></span>**5** And they shall be as mighty men,
Treading down *their enemies* In the mire of the streets in battle; And
they shall fight, for Jehovah will be with them; And ashamed shall be
the riders on horses.

<span id="v.i.x-p8"></span>**6** I will also strengthen the house of
Judah, And the house of Joseph will I save, And cause them to return and
dwell; For I have pitied them, and they shall be As though I had not
cast them away; For I Jehovah am their God, And I will hear them:

<span id="v.i.x-p9"></span>**7** And they shall be as a mighty man,
*even* Ephraim; And rejoice shall their heart as through wine; Their
sons also shall see and rejoice, Exult shall their heart in Jehovah.

<span id="v.i.x-p10"></span>**8** I will whistle for them and gather
them: For I have redeemed them, And they shall increase as they had
increased.

<span id="v.i.x-p11"></span>**9** Sow them also will I among the people,
And in distant lands will they remember me, And they shall live with
their sons and return;

<span id="v.i.x-p12"></span>**10** Yea, I will restore them from the
land of Egypt, And from Assyria will I gather them, And to the land of
Gilead and Lebanon will I bring them, And no *place* shall be found for
them. (**196**)

<span id="v.i.x-p13"></span>**11** And spread shall distress over the
sea, For he will smite in the sea the waves, And dry up shall the depths
of the river; Yea, cast down shall be the pride of Assyria, And the
sceptre of Egypt shall depart.

<span id="v.i.x-p14"></span>**12** I will also strengthen them in
Jehovah; And in his name shall they walk, saith Jehovah.

<span id="v.i.xi"></span>

<span id="v.i.xi-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.xi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="v.i.xi-p3"></span>**1** Open, Lebanon, thy doors, That consume
may the fire thy cedars:

<span id="v.i.xi-p4"></span>**2** Howl, thou fir-tree, Fore the cedar
has fallen, For the strong has been laid waste: Howl, ye oaks of Bashan,
For fallen has the fortified forest.

<span id="v.i.xi-p5"></span>**3** The voice of the howling of shepherds!
For wasted is their excellency; The voice of the roaring of lions! For
laid waste is the pride of Jordan.

<span id="v.i.xi-p6"></span>**4** Thus saith Jehovah my God, — Feed the
flock of slaughter:

<span id="v.i.xi-p7"></span>**5** They who possess them, slay them, And
consider not that they sin; And he who sells them, says, — “Blessed be
Jehovah, for I am enriched;” Yea, he who feeds them spares them not.

<span id="v.i.xi-p8"></span>**6** Surely I will no more spare the
inhabitants of the land, saith Jehovah; And behold, I will deliver every
man Into the hand of his neighbour, And into the hand of his king; And
smite shall they the land, And I will not deliver it from their hand.

<span id="v.i.xi-p9"></span>**7** And I fed the flock of slaughter,
especially the poor of the flock; and I took to me two rods; the one I
called “Beauty,” and the other I called “Cords;” and I fed the flock:

<span id="v.i.xi-p10"></span>**8** And I rejected three shepherds in one
month: and wearied was my soul with them, and their soul also hated me:

<span id="v.i.xi-p11"></span>**9** And I said, — I will not feed you;
What is to die, let it die, What is to be cast off, let it be cast off,
And those which remain, let them devour, Every one the flesh of another.

<span id="v.i.xi-p12"></span>**10** And I took my rod “Beauty,” and
broke it, that broken might be the covenant which I had made with all
the people:

<span id="v.i.xi-p13"></span>**11** And it was broken in that day; and
so the poor of the flock, who attended to me, knew that it was the word
of Jehovah.

<span id="v.i.xi-p14"></span>**12** Then I said to them, “If it be good
in your eyes, give me my reward; if not, forbear:” and they weighed *as*
my reward thirty silverings.

<span id="v.i.xi-p15"></span>**13** And Jehovah said to me, “Cast it to
the potter, the magnificent price at which I have been valued by them!”
And I took the thirty silverings and cast them into the temple of
Jehovah to the potter.

<span id="v.i.xi-p16"></span>**14** Then I broke my other rod, “Cords,”
that broken might be the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.

<span id="v.i.xi-p17"></span>**15** And Jehovah said to me, take again
to thee the implements of a foolish shepherd; —

<span id="v.i.xi-p18"></span>**16** For behold, I will raise up a
shepherd in the land; What is cut off he will not visit, What is young
he will not seek, What is broken he will not heal, What stands sound he
will not feed; But the flesh of the fat he will devour, And their hoofs
will he break. —

<span id="v.i.xi-p19"></span>**17** Woe to the worthless shepherd! Who
forsakes the flock; The sword shall be on his arm And on his right eye;
(**336**) His arm by drying shall dry up, And his right eye by
contracting shall be contracted.

<span id="v.i.xii"></span>

<span id="v.i.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.xii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="v.i.xii-p3"></span>**1** The burden of the word of Jehovah on
Israel; — Say does Jehovah, Who expanded the heavens and founded the
earth, And formed the spirit of man within him, —

<span id="v.i.xii-p4"></span>**2** Behold, I make Jerusalem A threshold
of bruising to all the people around; And as to Judah, *so* shall he be
During the siege against Jerusalem. (**344**)

<span id="v.i.xii-p5"></span>**3** It shall also be in that day *That* I
will make Jerusalem A burdensome stone to all people; Whosoever will
lift it shall be cut in pieces, Though assembled against it Should be
all the nations of the earth. (**345**)

<span id="v.i.xii-p6"></span>**4** In that day, saith Jehovah, I will
smite every horse with stupor, And its rider with madness; and on the
house of Judah I will open mine eyes; And every horse of the people Will
I smite with blindness:

<span id="v.i.xii-p7"></span>**5** And say will the chiefs of Judah in
their hearts, — “Strength to me *are* the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Through Jehovah of hosts their God.” (**349**)

<span id="v.i.xii-p8"></span>**6** In that day I will make the chiefs of
Judah Like a pot fire among wood; And like a torch of fire in a sheaf,
And they shall consume, on the right hand And on the left, all the
nations around; And inhabited shall be Jerusalem In her own place, in
Jerusalem:

<span id="v.i.xii-p9"></span>**7** And save shall Jehovah The tents of
Judah *as* at the beginning; And thus the honour of the house of David,
and the honour of the citizen of Jerusalem, Shall not exult over Judah.
(**345**)

<span id="v.i.xii-p10"></span>**8** In that day Jehovah will protect The
inhabitant of Jerusalem; And the feeble among them shall be like David,
And the house of David like angels, (**357**) As the angel of Jehovah
before their face.

<span id="v.i.xii-p11"></span>**9** And it shall be in that day, *That*
I will seek to destroy all the nations Who shall come against Jerusalem:

<span id="v.i.xii-p12"></span>**10** And I will pour upon the house of
David, And upon the inhabitant of Jerusalem, The spirit of grace and of
lamentations; And they shall look to me whom they have pierced: And
lament shall they for him, As with a lamentation for an only-begotten;
And bitter shall they be for him, As with a bitterness for a first-born.

<span id="v.i.xii-p13"></span>**11** In that day great shall be the
lamentation in Jerusalem, Like the lamentation of Hadadrimmon In the
valley of Megiddon:

<span id="v.i.xii-p14"></span>**12** And lament shall the land, Every
family apart; The family of the house of David apart, And their wives
apart; The family of the house of Nathan apart, And their wives apart;

<span id="v.i.xii-p15"></span>**13** The family of the house of Levi
apart, And their wives apart; The family of Shimei apart; And their
wives apart;

<span id="v.i.xii-p16"></span>**14** All the remaining families, Every
family apart, And their wives apart;

<span id="v.i.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.i.xiii-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.xiii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="v.i.xiii-p3"></span>**1** In that day shall a fountain be
opened To the house of David And to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, For
expiation and for sprinkling.

<span id="v.i.xiii-p4"></span>**2** And it shall be in that day, saith
Jehovah, *That* I will cut off the names of idols from the land, And
they shall be remembered no more; And the prophets also and the unclean
spirit Will I exterminate from the land.

<span id="v.i.xiii-p5"></span>**3** And it shall be, when prophesy yet
shall any one, That say to him will his gather and his mother, Who begat
him, “Thou shalt not live, For a lie hast thou spoken in Jehovah’s
name;” And they shall pierce him, Even his father and his mother who
begat him; Because he had prophesied.

<span id="v.i.xiii-p6"></span>**4** It shall also be in that day That
ashamed shall be the prophets, Every on of his vision, when he has
prophesied; And they shall not wear a hairy garment, That they may
deceive:

<span id="v.i.xiii-p7"></span>**5** But he shall say, “I am not a
prophet, A husbandman am I, for man has taught me To be a shepherd from
my youth.”

<span id="v.i.xiii-p8"></span>**6** When *one* shall say to him, “Why
are these wounds in thine hands?” Then he will say, “Because I have been
stricken In the house of my friends.” (**393**)

<span id="v.i.xiii-p9"></span>**7** O sword! awake against my shepherd,
And against the man, my associate, Saith Jehovah of hosts: Smite the
shepherd, and scattered shall be the sheep; And I will turn my hand to
the little ones.

<span id="v.i.xiii-p10"></span>**8** And it shall be in all the land,
saith Jehovah, That two parts in it shall be cut off — shall die, And
that the third shall remain in it:

<span id="v.i.xiii-p11"></span>**9** And I will bring the third part
through the fire, And will melt them as silver is melted, And try them
as gold is tried; They shall call on my name and I will answer them; I
will say, “My people are the;” And they will say, “Jehovah is out God.”

<span id="v.i.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.i.xiv-p1"></span>

<span id="v.i.xiv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="v.i.xiv-p3"></span>**1** Behold, the day of Jehovah cometh!
And divided shall be thy spoils in the midst of thee:

<span id="v.i.xiv-p4"></span>**2** For I will gather all nations Against
Jerusalem for war; And taken shall be the city And plundered shall be
the houses, And the women shall be ravished; And go forth shall half of
the city into exile; And the residue of the people Shall not be cut off
from the city.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p5"></span>**3** And go forth shall Jehovah; And he
will fight against these nations, As in the day when he fought in the
day of battle:

<span id="v.i.xiv-p6"></span>**4** And stand shall his feet in that day
On the mount of Olives, Which is nigh Jerusalem on the east; And rent
shall be the mount of Olives in the middle, From east to west there
*shall be* a great valley;  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) And
recede shall half of the mount to the north And half of it to the south:

<span id="v.i.xiv-p8"></span>**5** And ye shall flee through the valley
of the mountains, For reach shall the valley of the mountains to Azal;
And ye shall flee as ye fled from the earthquake In the days of Uzziah,
king of Judah: And come shall Jehovah my God; — All the saints *shall
be* with the. (**416**)

<span id="v.i.xiv-p9"></span>**6** And it shall be, that in that day
There shall not be clear light nor thick darkness;

<span id="v.i.xiv-p10"></span>**7** But it shall be one day, known to
Jehovah, Neither day nor night; Bur it shall be, that in the evening
There will be light.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p11"></span>**8** And it shall be in that day That go
forth shall living waters from Jerusalem; Half of them towards the
eastern sea, And halt of them towards the western sea; In summer and
winter shall they be:

<span id="v.i.xiv-p12"></span>**9** And Jehovah shall be king over the
whole earth; In that day there shall be one Jehovah, And his name *shall
be* one.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p13"></span>**10** Turned shall be the whole land to a
plain, From Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem; And raised shall it be
and inhabited in its own place, From the gate of Benjamin, To the place
of the first gate, to the gate of the corners, And from the citadel of
Hananeel, To the wine-vats of the king.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p14"></span>**11** And they shall dwell in it, And
there shall be no more utter destruction;.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p15"></span>**12** And this shall be the plague, With
which Jehovah shall smite all the people, Who shall fight against
Jerusalem; — Melt away shall their flesh, While they stand on their
feet, And their eyes shall melt away in their sockets, Their tongue also
shall melt away in their mouth.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p16"></span>**13** And it shall be, that in that day A
great tumult from Jehovah shall be among them, And lay hold shall each
one On the hand of his companion, And rise up shall his hand Against the
hand of his neighbour.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p17"></span>**14** And even Judah shall fight against
Jerusalem, And collected shall be the forces of all nations around, Gold
*also* and silver and garments in great abundance.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p18"></span>**15** And the plague of the horse, mule,
camel, and ass, And of every beast which shall be in their camps, Shall
be even as this plague.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p19"></span>**16** And it shall be, that every one who
shall remain, Of all the nations which shall come against Jerusalem,
Shall ascend from year to year To worship the king, Jehovah of hosts,
And to celebrate the feast of tabernacles.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p20"></span>**17** And it shall be as to those who
will not ascend, Of the families of the earth unto Jerusalem, To worship
the king, Jehovah of hosts, That upon them there shall not be rain:

<span id="v.i.xiv-p21"></span>**18** And if the family of Egypt shall
not ascend and come, It shall not be on them; (**447**) There shall also
be the plague, With which Jehovah shall smite all the nations, Who shall
not ascend To celebrate the feast of tabernacles.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p22"></span>**19** Such will be the punishment of
Egypt, And the punishment of all the nations, Which will not ascend To
celebrate the feast of tabernacle.

<span id="v.i.xiv-p23"></span>**20** In that day there shall be on the
blinders of horses, Holiness unto Jehovah; And it shall be, that the
pots in the house of Jehovah, Shall be like the vessels before the
altar:

<span id="v.i.xiv-p24"></span>**21** And every pot in Jerusalem and
Judah, Shall be holiness to Jehovah of hosts; And come shall all who
shall sacrifice, And take them and seethe in them: And there shalt not
be a Canaanite any more, In the house of Jehovah of hosts, in that day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc30025.htm#fr_277) <span
id="v.i.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.i.xiv-p7"></span> This is somewhat different from the
version of *Calvin*, which I am not able to follow; I have therefore
given what I conceive to be a literal rendering of the Original. — *Ed*.
And inhabited shall be Jerusalem in safety

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi](cc30026)
