[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll04)  [Next](tll06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Maps

But not even geological epochs, it will be observed, are assigned to the
maps. If, however, an inference may be drawn from all the evidence
before us, it would seem probable that the older of the two Lemurian
maps represented the earth's configuration from the Permian, through the
Triassic and into the Jurassic epoch, while the second map probably
represents the earth's configuration through the Cretaceous and into the
Eocene period.

From the older of the two maps it may be seen that the equatorial
continent of Lemuria at the time of its greatest expansion nearly
girdled the globe, extending as it then did from the site of the present
Cape Verd Islands a few miles from the coast of Sierra Leone, in a
south-easterly direction through Africa, Australia, the Society Islands
and all the intervening seas, to a point but a few miles distant from a
great island continent (about the size of the present South America)
which spread over the remainder of the Pacific Ocean, and included Cape
Horn and parts of Patagonia.

A remarkable feature in the second map of Lemuria is the great length,
and at parts the extreme narrowness, of the straits which separated the
two great blocks of land into which the continent had by this time been
split, and it will be observed that the straits at present existing
between the islands of Bali and Lomboc coincide with a portion of the
straits which then divided these

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

two continents. It will also be seen that these straits continued in a
northerly direction by the west, not by the east coast of Borneo, as
conjectured by Ernst Haeckel.

With reference to the distribution of fauna and flora, and the existence
of so many types common to India and Africa alike, pointed out by Mr.
Blandford, it will be observed that between parts of India and great
tracts of Africa there was direct land communication during the first
map period, and that similar communication was partially maintained in
the second map period also; while a comparison of the maps of Atlantis
with those of Lemuria will demonstrate that continuous land
communication existed, now at one epoch, and now at another, between so
many different parts of the earth's surface, at present separated by
sea, that the existing distribution of fauna and flora in the two
Americas, in Europe and in Eastern lands, which has been such a puzzle
to naturalists, may with perfect ease be accounted for.

The island indicated in the earlier Lemurian map as existing to the
north-west of the extreme promontory of that continent, and due west of
the present coast of Spain, was probably a centre from which proceeded,
during long ages, the distribution of fauna and flora above referred to.
For--and this is a most interesting fact--it will be seen that this
island must have been the nucleus, from first to last, of the subsequent
great continent of Atlantis. It existed, as we see, in these earliest
Lemurian times. It was joined in the second map period to land which had
previously formed part of the great Lemurian continent; and indeed, so
many accretions of territory had it by this time received that it might
more appropriately be called a continent than an island. It was the
great mountainous region of Atlantis at its prime, when Atlantis
embraced great tracts of land which have now become North and South
America. It remained the mountainous region of Atlantis in its
decadence, and of Ruta in the Ruta

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

and Daitya epoch, and it practically constituted the island of
Poseidonis--the last remnant of the continent of Atlantis--the final
submergence of which took place in the year 9564 B.C.

A comparison of the two maps here given, along with the four maps of
Atlantis, will also show that Australia and New Zealand, Madagascar,
parts of Somaliland, the south of Africa, and the extreme southern
portion of Patagonia are lands which have *probably* existed through all
the intervening catastrophes since the early days of the Lemurian
period. The same may be said of the southern parts of India and Ceylon,
with the exception in the case of Ceylon, of a temporary submergence in
the Ruta and Daitya epoch.

It is true there are also remains still existing of the even earlier
Hyperborean continent, and they of course are the oldest known lands on
the face of the earth. These are Greenland, Iceland, Spitzbergen, the
most northerly parts of Norway and Sweden, and the extreme north cape of
Siberia.

Japan is shown by the maps to have been above water, whether as an
island, or as part of a continent, since the date of the second Lemurian
map. Spain, too, has doubtless existed since that time. Spain is,
therefore, with the exception of the most northerly parts of Norway and
Sweden, *probably* the oldest land in Europe.

The indeterminate character of the statements just made is rendered
necessary by our knowledge that there *did* occur subsidences and
upheavals of different portions of the earth's surface during the ages
which lay between the periods represented by the maps.

For example, soon after the date of the second Lemurian map we are
informed that the whole Malay Peninsula was submerged and remained so
for a long time, but a subsequent upheaval of that region must have
taken place before the date of the first Atlantean map, for, what is now
the Malay Peninsula is there

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

exhibited as part of a great continent. Similarly there have been
repeated minor subsidences and upheavals nearer home in more recent
times, and Haeckel is perfectly correct in saying that England--he might
with greater accuracy have said the islands of Great Britain and
Ireland, which were then joined together "has repeatedly been connected
with the European continent, and been repeatedly separated from it."

In order to bring the subject more clearly before the mind, a tabular
statement is here annexed which supplies a condensed history of the
animal and plant life on our globe, bracketed--according to
Haeckel--with the contemporary rock strata. Two other columns give the
contemporary races of man, and such of the great cataclysms as are known
to occult students.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Reptiles and Pine Forests](tll06.md)
