[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll01)  [Next](tll03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# The Lost Lemuria

### Evidence supplied by Geology and by the relative distribution of living and extinct Animals and Plants.

It is generally recognised by science that what is now dry land, on the
surface of our globe, was once the ocean floor, and that what is now the
ocean floor was once dry land. Geologists have in some cases been able
to specify the exact portions of the earth's surface where these
subsidences and upheavals have taken place, and although the lost
continent of Atlantis has so far received scant recognition from the
world of science, the general concensus of opinion has for long pointed
to the existence, at some prehistoric time, of a vast southern continent
to which the name of Lemuria has been assigned.

"The history of the earth's development shows us that the distribution
of land and water on its surface is ever and continually changing. In
consequence of geological changes of the earth's crust, *elevations* and
*depressions* of the ground take place everywhere, sometimes more
strongly marked in one place, sometimes in another. Even if they happen
so slowly that in the course of centuries the seashore rises or sinks
only a few inches, or even only a few lines, still they nevertheless
effect great results in the course of long periods of time. And
long--immeasurably long--periods of time have not been wanting in the
earth's history. During the course of many millions of years, ever since
organic life existed on the earth, land and water have perpetually
struggled for supremacy. Continents and islands have sunk into the sea,
and

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

new ones have arisen out of its bosom. Lakes and seas have been slowly
raised and dried up, and new water basins have arisen by the sinking of
the ground. Peninsulas have become islands by the narrow neck of land
which connected them with the mainland sinking into the water. The
islands of an archipelago have become the peaks of a continuous chain of
mountains by the whole floor of their sea being considerably raised.

"Thus the Mediterranean at one time was an inland sea, when in the place
of the Straits of Gibraltar, an isthmus connected Africa with Spain.
England even during the more recent history of the earth, when man
already existed, has repeatedly been connected with the European
continent and been repeatedly separated from it. Nay, even Europe and
North America have been directly connected. The South Sea at one time
formed a large Pacific Continent, and the numerous little islands which
now lie scattered in it were simply the highest peaks of the mountains
covering that continent. The Indian Ocean formed a continent which
extended from the Sunda Islands along the southern coast of Asia to the
east coast of Africa. This large continent of former times Sclater, an
Englishman, has called *Lemuria*, from the monkey-like animals which
inhabited it, and it is at the same time of great importance from being
the probable cradle of the human race, which in all likelihood here
first developed out of anthropoid apes. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) The important proof which Alfred Wallace has
furnished, by the help of chorological facts, that the present Malayan
Archipelago consists in reality of two completely different divisions,
is particularly interesting. The western division, the Indo-Malayan
Archipelago, comprising the large islands of

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Borneo, Java and Sumatra, was formerly connected
by Malacca with the Asiatic continent, and probably also with the
Lemurian continent just mentioned. The eastern division on the other
hand, the Austro-Malayan Archipelago, comprising Celebes, the Moluccas,
New Guinea, Solomon's Islands, etc., was formerly directly connected
with Australia. Both divisions were formerly two continents separated by
a strait, but they have now for the most part sunk below the level of
the sea. Wallace, solely on the ground of his accurate chorological
observations, has been able in the most accurate manner to determine the
position of this former strait, the south end of which passes between
Balij and Lombok.

"Thus, ever since liquid water existed on the earth, the boundaries of
water and land have eternally changed, and we may assert that the
outlines of continents and islands have never remained for an hour, nay,
even for a minute, exactly the same. For the waves eternally and
perpetually break on the edge of the coast, and whatever the land in
these places loses in extent, it gains in other places by the
accumulation of mud, which condenses into solid stone and again rises
above the level of the sea as new land. Nothing can be more erroneous
than the idea of a firm and unchangeable outline of our continents, such
as is impressed upon us in early youth by defective lessons on
geography, which are devoid of a geological basis." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

The name Lemuria, as above stated, was originally adopted by Mr. Sclater
in recognition of the fact that it was [probably](errata.htm#0) on this
continent that animals of the Lemuroid type were developed.

"This," writes A. R. Wallace, "is undoubtedly a legitimate and highly
probable supposition, and it is an example of the way in which a study
of the geographical distribution of animals may enable us to reconstruct
the geography of a bygone age. . . .

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It \[this continent\] represents what was
probably a primary zoological region in some past geological epoch; but
what that epoch was and what were the limits of the region in question,
we are quite unable to say. If we are to suppose that it comprised the
whole area now inhabited by Lemuroid animals, we must make it extend
from West Africa to Burmah, South China and Celebes, an area which it
possibly did once occupy." <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

"We have already had occasion," he elsewhere writes, "to refer to an
ancient connection between this sub-region (the Ethiopian) and
Madagascar, in order to explain the distribution of the Lemurine type,
and some other curious affinities between the two countries. This view
is supported by the geology of India, which shows us Ceylon and South
India consisting mainly of granite and old-metamorphic rocks, while the
greater part of the peninsula is of tertiary formation, with a few
isolated patches of secondary rocks. It is evident, therefore, that
during much of the tertiary period, <span id="fr_3"></span>[2](#fn_3)
Ceylon and South India were bounded on the north by a considerable
extent of sea, and probably formed part of an extensive Southern
Continent or great island. The very numerous and remarkable cases of
affinity with Malaya, require, however, some closer approximation with
these islands, which probably occurred at a later period. When, still
later, the great plains and tablelands of Hindostan were formed, and a
permanent land communication effected with the rich and highly developed
Himalo-Chinese fauna, a rapid immigration of new types took place, and
many of the less

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

specialised forms of mammalia and birds became extinct. Among reptiles
and insects the competition was less severe, or the older forms were too
well adapted to local conditions to be expelled; so that it is among
these groups alone that we find any considerable number of what are
probably the remains of the ancient fauna of a now submerged Southern
Continent." <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

After stating that during the whole of the tertiary and perhaps during
much of the secondary periods, the great land masses of the earth were
probably situated in the Northern Hemisphere, Wallace proceeds, "In the
Southern Hemisphere there appear to have been three considerable and
very ancient land masses, varying in extent from time to time, but
always keeping distinct from each other, and represented more or less
completely by Australia, South Africa and South America of our time.
Into these flowed successive waves of life as they each in turn became
temporarily united with some part of the Northern land." <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5)

Although, apparently in vindication of some conclusions of his which had
been criticised by Dr. Hartlaub, Wallace subsequently denied the
necessity of postulating the existence of such a continent, his general
recognition of the facts of subsidences and upheavals of great portions
of the earth's surface, as well as the inferences which he draws from
the acknowledged relations of living and extinct faunas as above stated,
remain of course unaltered.

The following extracts from Mr. H. F. Blandford's most interesting paper
read before a meeting of the Geological Society deals with the subject
in still greater detail <span id="fr_6"></span>[3](#fn_6):--

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

"The affinities between the fossils of both animals and plants of the
Beaufort group of Africa and those of the Indian Panchets and Kathmis
are such as to suggest the former existence of a land connexion between
the two areas. But the resemblance of the African and Indian fossil
faunas does not cease with Permian and Triassic times. The plant beds of
the Uitenhage group have furnished eleven forms of plants, two of which
Mr. Tate has identified with Indian Rájmahál plants. The Indian Jurassic
fossils have yet to be described (with a few exceptions), but it has
been stated that Dr. Stoliezka was much struck with the affinities of
certain of the Cutch fossils to African forms; and Dr. Stoliezka and Mr.
Griesbach have shown that of the Cretaceous fossils of the Umtafuni
river in Natal, the majority (22 out of 35 described forms) are
identical with species from Southern India. Now the plant-bearing series
of India and the Karoo and part of the Uitenhage formation of Africa are
in all probability of fresh-water origin, both indicating the existence
of a large land area around, from the waste of which these deposits are
derived. Was this land continuous between the two regions? And is there
anything in the present physical geography of the Indian Ocean which
would suggest its probable position? Further, what was the connexion
between this land and Australia which we must equally assume to have
existed in Permian times? And, lastly, are there any peculiarities in
the existing fauna and flora of India, Africa and the intervening
islands which would lend support to the idea of a former connexion more
direct than that which now exists between Africa and South India and the
Malay peninsula? The speculation here put forward is no new one. It has
long been a subject of thought in the minds of some Indian and European
naturalists, among the former of whom I may mention my brother \[Mr.
Blandford\] and Dr. Stoliezka, their speculations being grounded on the
relationship and partial

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

density of the faunas and floras of past times, not less than on that
existing community of forms which has led Mr. Andrew Murray, Mr.
Searles, V. Wood, jun., and Professor Huxley to infer the existence of a
Miocene continent occupying a part of the Indian Ocean. Indeed, all that
I can pretend to aim at in this paper is to endeavour to give some
additional definition and extension to the conception of its geological
aspect.

"With regard to the geographical evidence, a glance at the map will show
that from the neighbourhood of the West Coast of India to that of the
Seychelles, Madagascar, and the Mauritius, extends a line of coral
atolls and banks, including Adas bank, the Laccadives, Maldives, the
Chagos group and the Sava de Mulha, all indicating the existence of a
submerged mountain range or ranges. The Seychelles, too, are mentioned
by Mr. Darwin as rising from an extensive and tolerably level bank
having a depth of between 30 and 40 fathoms; so that, although now
partly encircled by fringing reefs, they may be regarded as a virtual
extension of the same submerged axis. Further west the Cosmoledo and
Comoro Islands consist of atolls and islands surrounded by barrier
reefs; and these bring us pretty close to the present shores of Africa
and Madagascar. It seems at least probable that in this chain of atolls,
banks, and barrier reefs we have indicated the position of an ancient
mountain chain, which possibly formed the back-bone of a tract of later
Palæozoic Mesozoic, and early Tertiary land, being related to it much as
the Alpine and Himálayan system is to the Europæo-Asiatic continent, and
the Rocky Mountains and Andes to the two Americas. As it is desirable to
designate this Mesozoic land by a name, I would propose that of
Indo-Oceana. \[The name given to it by Mr. Sclater, *viz*., Lemuria, is,
however, the one which has been most generally adopted.\] Professor
Huxley has suggested on palæontological grounds that a land connexion
existed in this

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

region (or rather between Abyssinia and India) during the Miocene epoch.
From what has been said above it will be seen that I infer its existence
from a far earlier date. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) With regard
to its depression, the only present evidence relates to its northern
extremity, and shows that it was in this region, later than the great
trap-flows of the Dakhan. These enormous sheets of volcanic rock are
remarkably horizontal to the east of the Gháts and the Sakyádri range,
but to the west of this they begin to dip seawards, so that the island
of Bombay is composed of the higher parts of the formation. This
indicates only that the depression to the westward has taken place in
Tertiary times; and to that extent Professor Huxley's inference, that it
was after the Miocene period, is quite consistent with the geological
evidence."

After proceeding at some length to instance the close relationship of
many of the fauna in the lands under consideration (Lion, Hyæna, Jackal,
Leopard, Antelope, Gazelle, Sand-grouse, Indian Bustard, many Land
Molusca, and notably the Lemur and the Scaly Anteater) the writer
proceeds as follows:--

"Palæontology, physical geography and geology, equally with the
ascertained distribution of living animals and plants, offer thus their
concurrent testimony to the former close connexion of Africa and India,
including the tropical islands of the Indian Ocean. This Indo-Oceanic
land appears to have existed from at least early Permian times, probably
(as Professor Huxley has pointed out) up to the close of the Miocene
epoch; <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8) and South Africa and Peninsular
India are the existing remnants of that ancient land. It may not have
been absolutely continuous during the whole of this long period. Indeed,
the Cretaceous

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

rocks of Southern India and Southern Africa, and the marine Jurassic
beds of the same regions, prove that some portions of it were, for
longer or shorter periods, invaded by the sea; but any break of
continuity was probably not prolonged; for Mr. Wallace's investigations
in the Eastern Archipelago have shown how narrow a sea may offer an
insuperable barrier to the migration of land animals. In Palæozoic times
this land must have been connected with Australia, and in Tertiary times
with Malayana, since the Malayan forms with African alliances are in
several cases distinct from those of India. We know as yet too little of
the geology of the eastern peninsula to say from what epoch dates its
connexion with Indo-Oceanic land. Mr. Theobald has ascertained the
existence of Triassic, Cretaceous, and Nummulitic rocks in the Arabian
coast range; and Carboniferous limestone is known to occur from Moulmein
southward, while the range east of the Irrawadi is formed of younger
Tertiary rocks. From this it would appear that a considerable part of
the Malay peninsula must have been occupied by the sea during the
greater part of the Mesozoic and Eocene periods. Plant-bearing rocks of
Rániganj age have been identified as forming the outer spurs of the
Sikkim Himálaya; the ancient land must therefore have extended some
distance to the north of the present Gangetic delta. Coal both of
Cretaceous and Tertiary age occurs in the Khasi hills, and also in Upper
Assam, but in both cases associated with marine beds; so that it would
appear that in this region the boundaries of land and sea oscillated
somewhat during Cretaceous and Eocene times. To the north-west of India
the existence of great formations of Cretaceous and Nummulitic age,
stretching far through Baluchistán and Persia, and entering into the
structure of the north-west Himálaya, prove that in the later Mesozoic
and Eocene ages India had no direct communication with western Asia;
while the Jurassic rocks of Cutch, the Salt

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

range, and the northern Himálaya, show that in the preceding period the
sea covered a large part of the present Indus basin; and the Triassic,
Carboniferous, and still more recent marine formations of the Himálaya,
indicate that from very early times till the upheaval of that great
chain, much of its present site was for ages covered by the sea.

"To sum up the views advanced in this paper.

"1st. The plant-bearing series of India ranges from early Permian to the
latest Jurassic times, indicating (except in a few cases and locally)
the uninterrupted continuity of land and fresh water conditions. These
may have prevailed from much earlier times.

"2nd. In the early Permian, as in the Postpliocene age, a cold climate
prevailed down to low latitudes, and I am inclined to believe in both
hemispheres simultaneously. With the decrease of cold the flora and
reptilian fauna of Permian times were diffused to Africa, India, and
possibly Australia; or the flora may have existed in Australia somewhat
earlier, and have been diffused thence.

"3rd. India, South Africa and Australia were connected by an
Indo-Oceanic Continent in the Permian epoch; and the two former
countries remained connected (with at the utmost only short
interruptions) up to the end of the Miocene period. During the latter
part of the time this land was also connected with Malayana.

"4th. In common with some previous writers, I consider that the position
of this land was defined by the range of coral reefs and banks that now
exist between the Arabian sea and East Africa.

"5th. Up to the end of the Nummulitic epoch no direct connexion (except
possibly for short periods) existed between India and Western Asia."

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

In the discussion which followed the reading of the paper, Professor
Ramsay "agreed with the author in the belief in the junction of Africa
with India and Australia in geological times."

Mr. Woodward "was pleased to find that the author had added further
evidence, derived from the fossil flora of the mesozoic series of India,
in corroboration of the views of Huxley, Sclater and others as to the
former existence of an old submerged continent ('Lemuria') which
Darwin's researches on coral reefs had long since foreshadowed."

"Of the five now existing continents," writes Ernst Haeckel, in his
great work "The History of Creation," <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)
"neither Australia, nor America, nor Europe can have been this primæval
home \[of man\], or the so-called 'Paradise,' the 'cradle of the human
race.' Most circumstances indicate Southern Asia as the locality in
question. Besides Southern Asia, the only other of the now existing
continents which might be viewed in this light is Africa. But there are
a number of circumstances (especially chorological facts) which suggest
that the primeval home of man was a continent now sunk below the surface
of the Indian Ocean, which extended along the south of Asia, as it is at
present (and probably in direct connection with it), towards the east,
as far as Further India and the Sunda Islands; towards the west, as far
as Madagascar and the south-eastern shores of Africa. We have already
mentioned that many facts in animal and vegetable geography render the
former existence of such a South Indian continent very probable. Sclater
has given this continent the name of Lemuria, from the semi-apes which
were characteristic of it. By assuming this Lemuria to have been man's
primæval home, we greatly facilitate the explanation of the geographical
distribution of the human species by migration."

In a subsequent work, "The Pedigree of Man," Haeckel asserts

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

the existence of Lemuria at some early epoch of the earth's history as
an acknowledged fact.

The following quotation from Dr. Hartlaub's writings may bring to a
close this portion of the evidence in favour of the existence of the
lost Lemuria <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](tll03.htm#fn_10):--

"Five and thirty years ago, Isidore Geoffroy St. Hilaire remarked that,
if one had to classify the Island of Madagascar exclusively on
zoological considerations, and without reference to its geographical
situation, it could be shown to be neither Asiatic nor African, but
quite different from either, and almost a fourth continent. And this
fourth continent could be further proved to be, as regards its fauna,
much more different from Africa, which lies so near to it, than from
India which is so far away. With these words the correctness and
pregnancy of which later investigations tend to bring into their full
light, the French naturalist first stated the interesting problem for
the solution of which an hypothesis based on scientific knowledge has
recently been propounded, for this fourth continent of Isidore Geoffroy
is Sclater's 'Lemuria'--that sunken land which, containing parts of
Africa, must have extended far eastwards over Southern India and Ceylon,
and the highest points of which we recognise in the volcanic peaks of
Bourbon and Mauritius, and in the central range of Madagascar itself-the
last resorts of the almost extinct Lemurine race which formerly peopled
it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](tll02.htm#fr_0) Haeckel is correct enough
in his surmise that Lemuria was the cradle of the human race as it now
exists, but it was not out of Anthropoid apes that mankind developed. A
reference will be made later on to the position in nature which the
Anthropoid apes really occupy.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](tll02.htm#fr_1) Ernst Haeckel's "Hist. of
Creation," 2nd ed., 1876, Vol. I., pp. 360-62.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:1](tll02.htm#fr_2) Alfred Russell Wallace's
"The Geographical Distribution of Animals--with a study of the relations
of living and extinct Faunas as elucidating the past changes of the
Earth's Surface." London: Macmillan & Co., 1876. Vol. I., pp. 76-7.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4:2](tll02.htm#fr_3) Ceylon and South India, it
is true, have been bounded on the north by a considerable extent of sea,
but that was at a much earlier date than the Tertiary period.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5:1](tll02.htm#fr_4) Wallace's "Geographical
Distribution, etc." Vol. I, pp. 328-9.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5:2](tll02.htm#fr_5) Wallace's "Geographical
Distribution, etc.," Vol. ii., p. 155.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[5:3](tll02.htm#fr_6) H. F. Blandford "On the age
and correlations of the Plant-bearing series of India and the former
existence of an Indo-Oceanic Continent," see Quarterly journal of the
Geological Society, Vol. xxxi., 1875, pp. 534-540.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8:1](tll02.htm#fr_7) A reference to the maps
will show that Mr. Blandford's estimate of date is the more correct of
the two.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8:2](tll02.htm#fr_8) Parts of the continent of
course endured, but the dismemberment of Lemuria is said to have taken
place before the beginning of the Eocene Age.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[11:1](tll02.htm#fr_9) Vol. ii., pp. 325-6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Evidence obtained from Archaic Records](tll03)
