[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll02)  [Next](tll04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Evidence obtained from Archaic Records.

The further evidence we have with regard to Lemuria and its inhabitants
has been obtained from the same source and in the same manner as that
which resulted in the writing of the *Story of Atlantis*. In this case
also the author has been privileged to obtain copies of two maps, one
representing Lemuria

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

(and the adjoining lands) during the period of that continent's greatest
expansion, the other exhibiting its outlines after its dismemberment by
great catastrophes, but long before its final destruction.

It was never professed that the maps of Atlantis were correct *to a
single degree* of latitude, or longitude, but, with the far greater
difficulty of obtaining the information in the present case, it must be
stated that still less must these maps of Lemuria be taken as absolutely
accurate. In the former case there was a globe, a good bas-relief in
terra-cotta, and a well-preserved map on parchment, or skin of some
sort, to copy from. In the present case there was only a broken
terra-cotta model and a very badly preserved and crumpled map, so that
the difficulty of carrying back the remembrance of all the details, and
consequently of reproducing exact copies, has been far greater.

We were told that it was by mighty Adepts in the days of Atlantis that
the Atlantean maps were produced, but we are not aware whether the
Lemurian maps were fashioned by some of the divine instructors in the
days when Lemuria still existed, or in still later days of the Atlantean
epoch.

But while guarding against over-confidence in the absolute accuracy of
the maps in question, the transcriber of the archaic originals believes
that they may in all important particulars, e taken as approximately
correct.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[12:1](tll02.htm#fr_10.md) Dr. G. Hartlaub "On the
Avifauna of Madagascar and the Mascarene Islands," see "The Ibis," a
Quarterly journal of Ornithology. Fourth Series, Vol. i., 1877, p. 334.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Probable Duration of the Continent of Lemuria](tll04.md)
