[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll08)  [Next](tll10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Organs of Vision.

The organs of vision of these creatures before they developed bones were
of a rudimentary nature, at least such was the condition of the two eyes
in front with which they sought for their food upon the ground. But
there was a third eye at the back of the head, the atrophied remnant of
which is now known as the pineal gland. This, as we know, is now a
centre solely of astral vision, but at the epoch of which we are
speaking it was the chief centre not only of astral but of physical
sight. Referring to reptiles which had become extinct, Professor Ray
Lankester, in a recent lecture at the Royal Institution, is reported to
have drawn special attention "to the size of the parietal foramen in the
skull which showed that in the ichthyosaurs the parietal or pineal eye
on the top of the head must have been very large." In this respect he
went on to say mankind were inferior to these big sea lizards, "for we
had lost the third eye which might be studied in the common lizard, or
better in the great blue lizard of the South of France." <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md)

Somewhat before the middle of the Lemurian period, probably during the
evolution of the third sub-race, the gigantic gelatinous

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

body began slowly to solidify and the soft-boned limbs developed into a
bony structure. These primitive creatures were now able to stand
upright, and the two eyes in the face gradually became the chief organs
of physical sight, though the third eye still remained to some extent an
organ of physical sight also, and this it did till the very end of the
Lemurian epoch. It, of course, remained an actual organ, as it still is
a potential focus, of psychic vision. This psychic vision continued to
be an attribute of the race not only throughout the whole Lemurian
period, but well into the days of Atlantis.

A curious fact to note is that when the race first attained the power of
standing and moving in an upright position, they could walk backwards
with almost as great ease as forwards. This may be accounted for not
only by the capacity for vision possessed by the third eye, but
doubtless also by the curious projection at the heels which will
presently be referred to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[22:1](tll09.htm#fr_14.md) The "Standard," 8th
Jan., 1904.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Description of Lemurian Man](tll10.md)
