[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll15)  [Next](tll17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The First Taking of Life.

The first instance of sin, the first taking of life--quoted above from
an old commentary on the stanzas of Dzyan, may be taken as indicative of
the attitude which was then inaugurated between the human and the animal
kingdom, and which has since attained such awful proportions, not only
between men and animals, but between the different races of men
themselves. And this opens up a most interesting avenue of thought.

The fact that Kings and Emperors consider it necessary or appropriate,
on all state occasions, to appear in the garb of one of the fighting
branches of their service, is a significant indication of the apotheosis
reached by the combative qualities in man! The custom doubtless comes
down from a time when the King was the warrior-chief, and when his
kingship was acknowledged solely in virtue of his being the chief
warrior. But now that the Fifth Root Race is in ascendency, whose chief
characteristic and function is the development of intellect, it might
have been expected that the dominant attribute of the Fourth Root Race

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

would have been a little less conspicuously paraded. But the era of one
race overlaps another, and though, as we know, the leading races of the
world all belong to the Fifth Root Race, the vast majority of its
inhabitants still belong to the Fourth, and it would appear that the
Fifth Root Race has not yet outstripped Fourth Race characteristics, for
it is by infinitely slow degrees that man's evolution is accomplished.

It will be interesting here to summarise the history of this strife and
bloodshed from its genesis during these far-off ages on Lemuria.

From the information placed before the writer it would seem that the
antagonism between men and animals was developed first. With the
evolution of man's physical body, suitable food for that body naturally
became an urgent need, so that in addition to the antagonism brought
about by the necessity of self-defence against the now ferocious
animals, the desire of food also urged men to their slaughter, and as we
have seen above, one of the first uses they made of their budding
mentality was to train animals to act as hunters in the chase.

The element of strife having once been kindled, men soon began to use
weapons of offence against each other. The causes of aggression were
naturally the same as those which exist to-day among savage communities.
The possession of any desirable object by one of his fellows was
sufficient inducement for a man to attempt to take it by force. Nor was
strife limited to single acts of aggression. As among savages to-day,
bands of marauders would attack and pillage the communities who dwelt at
a distance from their own village. But to this extent only, we are told,
was warfare organised on Lemuria, even down to the end of its seventh
sub-race.

It was reserved for the Atlanteans to develop the principle of strife on
organised lines--to collect and to drill armies and to

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

build navies. This principle of strife was indeed the fundamental
characteristic of the Fourth Root Race. All through the Atlantean
period, as we know, warfare was the order of the day, and battles were
constantly fought on land and sea. And so deeply rooted in man's nature
during the Atlantean period did this principle of strife become, that
even now the most intellectually developed of the Aryan races are ready
to war upon each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[31:1](tll15.htm#fr_18.md) It must, however, be
noted that the Chinese *people* are mainly descended from the fourth or
Turanian sub-race of the Fourth Root Race.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[31:2](tll15.htm#fr_19.md) "Secret Doctrine," Vol.
ii., p. 198.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Arts](tll17.md)
