[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll10)  [Next](tll12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Processes of Reproduction.

After instancing the simplest processes of propagation by self-division,
and by the formation of buds (Gernmatio), Haeckel proceeds, "A third
mode of non-sexual propagation, that of the formation of germ-buds
(Polysporogonia) is intimately connected with the formation of buds. In
the case of the lower, imperfect organisms, among animals, especially in
the case of the plant-like animals and worms, we very frequently find
that in the interior of an individual composed of many cells, a small
group of cells separates itself from those surrounding it, and that this
small isolated group gradually develops itself into an individual, which
becomes like the parent and sooner or later comes out of it . . . . . .
. The formation of germ buds is evidently but little different from real
budding. But, on the other hand, it is connected with a fourth kind of
non-sexual propagation, which almost forms a transition to sexual
reproduction, namely, the formation of germ cells (Monosporogonia). In
this case it is no longer a group of cells but a single cell, which
separates itself from the surrounding cells in the interior of the
producing organism, and which becomes further developed after it has
come out of its parent.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sexual or amphigonic propagation (Amphigonia) is
the usual method of propagation among all higher animals and plants. It
is evident that it has only developed at a very late period of the
earth's history, from non-sexual propagation, and apparently in the
first instance from the method of propagation by germ-cells . . . . . .
In all the chief forms of non-sexual propagation mentioned above--in
fission, in the formation of buds, germ-buds, and germ-cells--the
separated cell or group of cells was able by itself to develop into a
new individual, but in the case of sexual propagation, the cell must
first be fructified by another generative substance. The fructifying
sperm must first mix with the germ-cell (the egg) before the latter can
develop into a new individual. These two generative substances, the
sperm and the egg, are either produced by one and the same individual
hermaphrodite (Hermaphroditismus) or by two different individuals
(sexual-separation).

"The simpler and more ancient form of sexual propagation is through
double-sexed individuals. It occurs in the great majority of plants, but
only in a minority of animals, for example, in the garden snails,
leeches, earth-worms, and many other worms. Every single individual
among hermaphrodites produces within itself materials of both
sexes--eggs and sperm. In most of the higher plants every blossom
contains both the male organ (stamens and anther) and the female organ
(style and germ). Every garden snail produces in one part of its sexual
gland eggs, and in another part sperm. Many hermaphrodites can fructify
themselves; in others, however, reciprocal fructification of both
hermaphrodites is necessary for causing the development of the eggs.
This latter case is evidently a transition to sexual separation.

"Sexual separation, which characterises the more complicated of the two
kinds of sexual reproduction, has evidently been

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

developed from the condition of hermaphroditism at a late period of the
organic history of the world. It is at present the universal method of
propagation of the higher animals . . . . . . The so-called virginal
reproduction (Parthenogenesis) offers an interesting form of transition
from sexual reproduction to the non-sexual formation of germ-cells which
most resembles it. . . . In this case germ-cells which otherwise appear
and are formed exactly like egg-cells, become capable of developing
themselves into new individuals without requiring the fructifying seed.
The most remarkable and the most instructive of the different
parthenogenetic phenomena are furnished by those cases in which the same
germ-cells, according as they are fructified or not, produce different
kinds of individuals. Among our common honey bees, a male individual (a
drone) arises out of the eggs of the queen, if the egg has not been
fructified; a female (a queen, or working bee) if the egg has been
fructified. It is evident from this, that in reality there exists no
wide chasm between sexual and non-sexual reproduction, but that both
modes of reproduction are directly connected." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

Now, the interesting fact in connection with the evolution of Third Race
man on Lemuria, is that his mode of reproduction ran through phases
which were closely analogous with some of the processes above described.
Sweat-born, egg-born and Androgyne are the terms used in the Secret
Doctrine.

"Almost sexless, in its early beginnings, it became bisexual or
androgynous; very gradually, of course. The passage from the former to
the latter transformation required numberless generations, during which
the simple cell that issued from the earliest parent (the two in one),
first developed into a bisexual being; and then the cell, becoming a
regular egg, gave forth a unisexual creature. The Third Race mankind is
the most mysterious

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

of all the hitherto developed five Races. The mystery of the "How" of
the generation of the distinct sexes must, of course, be very obscure
here, as it is the business of an embryologist and a specialist, the
present work giving only faint outlines of the process. But it is
evident that the units of the Third Race humanity began to separate in
their pre-natal shells, or eggs, and to issue out of them as distinct
male and female babes, ages after the appearance of its early
progenitors. And, as time rolled on its geological periods, the newly
born sub-races began to lose their natal capacities. Toward the end of
the fourth sub-race, the babe lost its faculty of walking as soon as
liberated from its shell, and by the end of the fifth, mankind was born
under the same conditions and by the same identical process as our
historical generations. This required, of course, millions of
years." <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[27:1](tll11.htm#fr_15) Ernst Haeckel's " The
History of Creation," 2nd ed., Vol. I., pp. 193-8.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[28:1](tll11.htm#fr_16) "The Secret Doctrine,"
Vol. ii., p. 197.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lemurian Races still Inhabiting the Earth](tll12)
