[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll17)  [Next](tll19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

### Teachers of the Lemurian Race.

But now there occurred an event pregnant with consequences the most
momentous in the history of the human race. An event too full of
mystical import, for its narration brings into view Beings who belonged
to entirely different systems of evolution, and who nevertheless came at
this epoch to be associated with our humanity.

The lament of the Lhas "who had not built men," at seeing their future
abodes defiled, is at first sight far from intelligible. Though the
descent of these Beings into human bodies is not the chief event to
which we have to refer, some explanation of its cause and its result
must first be attempted. Now, we are given to understand that these Lhas
were the highly evolved humanity of some system of evolution which had
run its course at a period in the infinitely far-off past. They had
reached a high stage of development on their chain of worlds, and since
its dissolution had passed the intervening ages in the bliss of some
Nirvanic condition. But their karma now necessitated a return to some
field of action and of physical causes, and as they had not yet fully
learnt the lesson of compassion, their temporary task now lay in
becoming guides and teachers of the Lemurian race, who then required all
the help and guidance they could get.

But other Beings also took up the task--in this case voluntarily. These
came from the scheme of evolution which has Venus as its one physical
planet. That scheme has already reached the Seventh Round of its planets
in its Fifth Manvantara; its humanity therefore stands at a far higher
level than ordinary mankind on this earth has yet attained. They are
"divine" while we are only "human." The Lemurians, as we have seen, were
then merely on the verge of attaining true manhood. It was to supply a
temporary need--the education of our infant humanity--that these divine
Beings came--as we possibly, long ages hence, may similarly be called to
give a helping hand to the beings

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

struggling up to manhood on the Jupiter or the Saturn chain. Under their
guidance and influence the Lemurians rapidly advanced in mental growth.
The stirring of their minds with feelings of love and reverence for
those whom they felt to be infinitely wiser and greater than themselves
naturally resulted in efforts of imitation, and so the necessary advance
in mental growth was achieved which transformed the higher mental sheath
into a vehicle capable of carrying over the human characteristics from
life to life, thus warranting that outpouring of the Divine Life which
endowed the recipient with individual immortality. As expressed in the
archaic stanzas of Dzyan, "Then all men became endowed with Manas."

A great distinction, however, must be noted between the coming of the
exalted Beings from the Venus scheme and that of those described as the
highly evolved humanity of some previous system of evolution. The
former, as we have seen, were under no karmic impulse. They came as men
to live and work among them, but they were not required to assume their
physical limitations, being in a position to provide appropriate
vehicles for themselves.

The Lhas on the other hand had actually to be born in the bodies of the
race as it then existed. Better would it have been both for them and for
the race if there had been no hesitation or delay on their part in
taking up their Karmic task, for the sin of the mindless and all its
consequences would have been avoided. Their task, too, would have been
an easier one, for it consisted not only in acting as guides and
teachers, but in improving the racial type--in short, in evolving out of
the half-human, half-animal form then existing, the physical body of the
man to be.

It must be remembered that up to this time the Lemurian race consisted
of the second and third groups of the Lunar Pitris. But now that they
were approaching the level reached on the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lunar chain by the first group of Pitris, it
became necessary for these again to return to incarnation, and this they
did all through the fifth, sixth and seventh sub-races (indeed, some did
not take birth till the Atlantean period), so that the impetus given to
the progress of the race was a cumulative force.

The positions occupied by the divine beings from the Venus chain were
naturally those of rulers, instructors in religion, and teachers of the
arts, and it is in this latter capacity that a reference to the arts
taught by them comes to our aid in the consideration of the history of
this early race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Arts continued](tll19.md)
