[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll14)  [Next](tll16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Origin of Language.

As stated in the stanzas of Dzyan above quoted, the men of that epoch,
even though they had become completely physical, still remained
speechless. Naturally the astral and etherial ancestors of this Third
Root Race had no need to produce a series of sounds in order to convey
their thoughts, living as they did in astral and etherial conditions,
but when man became physical he could not for long remain dumb. We are
told that the sounds which these primitive men made to express their
thoughts were at first composed entirely of vowels. In the slow course
of evolution the consonant sounds gradually came into use, but the
development of language from first to last on the continent of Lemuria
never reached beyond the mono-

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

syllabic phase. The Chinese language of to-day is the sole great lineal
descendant of ancient Lemurian speech <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](tll16.htm#fn_18) for "the whole human race was at
that time of one language and of one lip." <span
id="fr_19"></span>[2](tll16.htm#fn_19)

In Humboldt's classification of language, the Chinese, as we know, is
called the *isolating* as distinguished from the more highly evolved
*agglutinative*, and the still more highly evolved *inflectional*.
Readers of the *Story of Atlantis* may remember that many different
languages were developed on that continent, but all belonged to the
*agglutinative*, or, as Max Müller prefers to call it, the *combinatory*
type, while the still higher development of inflectional speech, in the
Aryan and Semitic tongues, was reserved for our own era of the Fifth
Root Race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Taking of Life](tll16)
