[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll18)  [Next](tll20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Arts continued.

Under the guidance of their divine teachers the people began to learn
the use of fire, and the means by which it could be obtained, at first
by friction, and later on by the use of flints and iron. They were
taught to explore for metals, to smelt and to mould them, and instead of
spears of sharpened wood they now began to use spears tipped with
sharpened metal.

They were also taught to dig and till the ground and to cultivate the
seeds of wild grain till it improved in type. This cultivation carried
on through the vast ages which have since elapsed has resulted in the
evolution of the various cereals which we now possess--barley, oats,
maize, millet, etc. But an exception must here be noted. Wheat was not
evolved upon this planet like the other cereals. It was a gift of the
divine beings who brought it from Venus ready for the food of man. Nor
was wheat their only gift. The one animal form whose type has not been
evolved on our chain of worlds is that of the bee. It, too, was brought
from Venus.

The Lemurians now also began to learn the art of spinning and weaving
fabrics with which to clothe themselves. These were made of the coarse
hair of a species of animal now extinct, but which bore some resemblance
to the llamas of to-day, the ancestors of which they may possibly have
been. We have seen

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

above that the earliest articles of clothing of Lemurian man were robes
of skin stripped from the beasts he had slain. These skins he still
continued to wear on the colder parts of the continent, but he now
learnt to cure and dress the skin in some rude fashion.

One of the first things the people were taught was the use of fire in
the preparation of their food, and whether it was the flesh of animals
they slew or the pounded grains of wheat, their modes of cooking were
closely analogous to those we hear of as existing to-day among savage
communities. With reference to the gift of wheat so marvellously brought
from Venus, the divine rulers doubtless realised the advisability of at
once procuring such food for the people, for they must have known that
it would take many generations before the cultivation of the wild seeds
could provide an adequate supply.

Rude and barbarous as were the people during the period of the fifth and
sixth sub-races, such of them as had the privilege of coming in contact
with their divine teachers were naturally inspired with such feelings of
reverence and worship as helped to lift them out of their savage
condition. The constant influx, too, of more intelligent beings from the
first group of the Lunar Pitris, who were then beginning to return to
incarnation, helped the attainment of a more civilised state.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Great Cities and Statues](tll20.md)
