[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll22)  [Next](tll24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

### Founding of the Atlantean Race.

In concluding this sketch, a reference to the process by which the
Fourth Root Race was brought into existence, will appropriately bring to
an end what we know of the story of Lemuria and link it on to that of
Atlantis.

It may be remembered from previous writings on the subject that it was
from the *fifth* or Semitic sub-race of the Fourth Root Race that was
chosen the nucleus destined to become our great Fifth or Aryan Root
Race. It was not, however, until the time of the seventh sub-race on
Lemuria that humanity was sufficiently developed physiologically to
warrant the choice of individuals fit to become the parents of a new
Root Race. So it was from the seventh sub-race that the segregation was
effected. The colony was first settled on land which occupied the site
of the present Ashantee and Western Nigeria. A reference to the second
map will show this as a promontory lying to the north-west of the
island-continent which embraced the Cape of Good Hope and parts of
western Africa. Having been guarded for generations from any admixture
with a lower type, the colony gradually increased in numbers, and the
time came when it was ready to receive and to hand on the new impulse to
physical heredity which the Manu was destined to impart.

Students of Theosophy are aware that, up to the present day, no one
belonging to our humanity has been in a position to undertake the
exalted office of Manu, though it is stated that the founding of the
coming Sixth Root Race will be entrusted to the guidance of one of our
Masters of Wisdom--one who, while belonging to our humanity, has
nevertheless reached a most exalted level in the Divine Hierarchy.

In the case we are considering--the founding of the Fourth Root Race--it
was one of the Adepts from Venus who undertook the duties of the Manu.
Naturally he belonged to a very high order, for it must be understood
that the Beings who came from

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

the Venus system as rulers and teachers of our infant humanity did not
all stand at the same level. It is this circumstance which furnishes a
reason for the remarkable fact that may, in conclusion, be
stated--namely, that there existed in Lemuria a Lodge of Initiation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Lodge of Initiation](tll24.md)
