[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll19)  [Next](tll21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Great Cities and Statues.

During the later part of the sixth, and the seventh sub-race they learnt
to build great cities. These appear to have been of cyclopean
architecture, corresponding with the gigantic bodies of the race. The
first cities were built on that extended mountainous region of the
continent which included, as will be seen in the first map, the present
Island of Madagascar. Another great city is described in the "Secret
Doctrine" <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md) as having been entirely
built of blocks of lava. It lay some 30 miles west of the present Easter
Island, and

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

it was subsequently destroyed by a series of volcanic eruptions. The
gigantic statues of Easter Island--measuring as most of them do about 27
feet in height by 8 feet across the shoulders--were probably intended to
be representative not only of the features, but of the height of those
who carved them, or it may be of their ancestors, for it was probably in
the later ages of the Lemuro-Atlanteans that the statues were erected.
It will be observed that by the second map period, the continent of
which Faster Island formed a part had been broken up and Faster Island
itself had become a comparatively small island, though of considerably
greater dimensions than it retains to-day.

Civilisations of comparative importance arose on different parts of the
continent and the great islands where the inhabitants built cities and
dwelt in settled communities, but large tribes who were also partially
civilised continued to lead a nomadic and patriarchial life; while other
parts of the land--in many cases the least accessible, as in our own
times--were peopled by tribes of extremely low type.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[37:1](tll20.htm#fr_20.md) Vol. ii., p. 317.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Religion](tll21.md)
