[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tll21)  [Next](tll23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Destruction of the Continent.

Unlike the subsequent fate of Atlantis, which was submerged by great
tidal waves, the continent of Lemuria perished by volcanic action. It
was raked by the burning ashes and the red-hot dust from numberless
volcanoes. Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, it is true, heralded each
of the great catastrophes which overtook Atlantis, but when the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

land had been shaken and rent, the sea rushed in and completed the work,
and most of the inhabitants perished by drowning. The Lemurians, on the
other hand, met their doom chiefly by fire or suffocation. Another
marked contrast between the fate of Lemuria and Atlantis was that while
four great catastrophes completed the destruction of the latter, the
former was slowly eaten away by internal fires, for, from the time when
the disintegrating process began towards the end of the first map
period, there was no cessation from the fiery activity, and whether in
one part of the continent or another, the volcanic action was incessant,
while the invariable sequence was the subsidence and total disappearance
of the land, just as in the case of Krakatoa in 1883.

So closely analogous was the eruption of Mount Pelée, which caused the
destruction of St. Pièrre, the capital of Martinique, about two years
ago, to the whole series of volcanic catastrophes on the continent of
Lemuria, that the description of the former given by some of the
survivors may be of interest. "An immense black cloud had suddenly burst
forth from the crater of Mont Pelée and rushed with terrific velocity
upon the city, destroying everything--inhabitants, houses and vegetation
alike--that it found in its path. In two or three minutes it passed
over, and the city was a blazing pyre of ruins. In both islands
\[Martinique and St. Vincent\] the eruptions were characterised by the
sudden discharge of immense quantities of red-hot dust, mixed with
steam, which flowed down the steep hillsides with an ever-increasing
velocity. In St. Vincent this had filled many valleys to a depth of
between 100 feet and 200 feet, and months after the eruptions was still
very hot, and the heavy rains which then fell thereon caused enormous
explosions, producing clouds of steam and dust that shot upwards to a
height of from 1500 feet to 2000 feet, and filled the rivers with black
boiling mud." Captain

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Freeman, of the "Roddam," then described "a
thrilling experience which he and his party had at Martinique. One
night, when they were lying at anchor in a little sloop about a mile
from St. Pièrre, the mountain exploded in a way that was apparently an
exact repetition of the original eruption. It was not entirely without
warning; hence they were enabled to sail at once a mile or two further
away, and thus probably saved their lives. In the darkness they saw the
summit glow with a bright red light; then soon, with loud detonations,
great red-hot stones were projected into the air and rolled down the
slopes. A few minutes later a prolonged rumbling noise was heard, and in
an instant was followed by a red-hot avalanche of dust, which rushed out
of the crater and rolled down the side with a terrific speed, which they
estimated at about 100 miles an hour, with a temperature of 1000°
centigrade. As to the probable explanation of these phenomena, no lava,
he said, had been seen to flow from either of the volcanoes, but only
steam and fine hot dust. The volcanoes were, therefore, of the explosive
type; and from all his observations he had concluded that the absence of
lava-flows was due to the material within the crater being partly solid,
or at least highly viscous, so that it could not flow like an ordinary
lava-stream. Since his return this theory had received striking
confirmation, for it was now known that within the crater of Mont Pelée
there was no lake of molten lava, but that a solid pillar of red-hot
rock was slowly rising upwards in a great conical, sharp-pointed hill,
until it might finally overtop the old summit of the mountain. It was
nearly 1000 feet high, and slowly grew as it was forced upwards by
pressure from beneath, while every now and then explosions of steam took
place, dislodging large pieces from its summit or its sides. Steam was
set free within this mass as it cooled, and the rock then passed into a
dangerous and highly explosive condition, such that an explosion must
sooner or later

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

take place, which shivered a great part of the mass into fine red-hot
dust." <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)

A reference to the first Lemurian map will show that in the lake lying
to the south-east of the extensive mountainous region there was an
island which consisted of little more than one great mountain. This
mountain was a very active volcano. The four mountains which lay to the
south-west of the lake were also active volcanoes, and in this region it
was that the disruption of the continent began. The seismic cataclysms
which followed the volcanic eruptions caused such wide-spread damage
that by the second map period a large portion of the southern part of
the continent had been submerged.

A marked characteristic of the land surface in early Lemurian times was
the great number of lakes and marshes, as well as the innumerable
volcanoes. Of course, all these are not shown on the map. Only some of
the great mountains which were volcanoes, and only some of the largest
lakes are there indicated.

Another volcano on the north-east coast of the continent began its
destructive work at an early date. Earthquakes completed the disruption,
and it seems probable that the sea shown in the second map as dotted
with small islands to the south-east of the present Japan, indicates the
area of seismic disturbance.

In the first map it will be seen that there were lakes in the centre of
what is now the island-continent of Australia--lakes where the land is
at present exceedingly dry and parched. By the second map period those
lakes had disappeared, and it seems natural to conjecture that the
districts where those lakes lay, must, during the eruptions of the great
volcanoes which lay to the south-east (between the present Australia and
New Zealand), have been so raked with red-hot volcanic dust that the
very water-springs were dried up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[41:1](tll22.htm#fr_21.md) The "Times," 14th Sept.,
1903.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Founding of the Atlantean Race](tll23.md)
