[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda03)  [Next](nda05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

THE Icelandic discovery of America was first announced, in print, more
than two centuries and a half ago. Within the past fifty years of this
period, the discovery has attracted more general attention than during
all of the interval preceding,--a fact, which is no doubt traceable to
the publication, in 1837, of a comprehensive work upon the subject
prepared by the Danish scholar, Carl Christian Rafn. Although it is now
more than half a century since this book was published, Rafn is still
very generally regarded as the standard authority upon the subject of
which he treats. But his zeal in promulgating the discovery seriously
prejudiced his judgment. His chief fault was the heedless confusing of
all of the material bearing directly or indirectly upon his theme,--the
failure to winnow the sound historical material from that which is
unsubstantiated. Rafn offered numerous explanations of the texts which
his work contained, and propounded many dubious theories and hazardous
conjectures. With these the authors, who have founded their
investigations upon his work, have more concerned themselves than with
the texts of the original documents. If less effort had been applied to
the dissemination and defence of fantastic speculations, and more to the
determination of the exact nature of the facts which have been preserved
in the Icelandic records, the discovery should

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

not have failed to be accepted as clearly established by sound
historical data. Upon any other hypothesis than this it is difficult to
account for the disposition American historians have shown to treat the
Icelandic discovery as possible, from conjectural causes, rather than as
determined by the historical records preserved by the fellow-countrymen
of the discoverers.

Bancroft, in his History of the United States, gave form to this
tendency many years ago, when he stated, that:

"The story of the colonization of America by Norsemen rests on
narratives mythological in form, and obscure in meaning, ancient yet not
contemporary. The intrepid mariners who colonized Greenland could easily
have extended their voyages to Labrador, and have explored the coasts to
the south of it. No clear historic evidence establishes the natural
probability that they accomplished the passage, and no vestige of their
presence on our continent has been found."

The latest historian of America, traversing the same field, virtually
iterates this conclusion, when he says:

"The extremely probable and almost necessary pre-Columbian knowledge of
the northeastern parts of America follows from the venturesome spirit of
the mariners of those seas for fish and traffic, and from the easy
transition from coast to coast by which they would have been lured to
meet more southerly climes. The chances from such natural causes are
quite as strong an argument in favor of the early Northmen venturings as
the somewhat questionable representations of the Sagas."

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

The same writer states, elsewhere, in this connection, that:

"Everywhere else where the Northmen, went they left proofs of this
occupation on the soil, but nowhere in America, except on an island on
the east shore of Baffin's Bay, has any authentic runic inscription been
found outside of Greenland."

If the authenticity of the Icelandic discovery of America is to be
determined by runic inscriptions or other archælogical remains left by
the discoverers, it is altogether probable that the discovery will never
be confirmed. The application of this same test, however, would render
the discovery of Iceland very problematical. The testimony is the same
in both cases, the essential difference between the two discoveries
being, after all, that the one led to practical results, while the
other, apparently, did not ( [1](nda12.htm#xref_1)). The absence of any
Icelandic remains south of Baffin's Bay makes neither for nor against
the credibility of the Icelandic discovery,--although it may be said,
that it is hardly reasonable to expect that, in the brief period of
their sojourn, the explorers would have left any buildings or implements
behind them, which would be likely to survive the ravages of the nine
centuries that have elapsed since the discovery.

The really important issue, which is raised by the paragraphs quoted, is
the broader one of the credibility of the Icelandic records. These
records, in so far as they relate to the discovery, disentangled from
wild theories and vague assumptions, would seem to speak best for
themselves, It is true that Icelandic historical sagas do

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

differ from the historical works of other lands, but this difference is
one of form. The Icelandic saga is peculiarly distinguished for the
presentation of events in a simple, straightforward manner, without
embellishment or commentary by the author. Fabulous sagas there are in
Icelandic literature, but this literature is by no means unique in the
possession of works both of history and romance, nor has it been
customary to regard works of fiction as discrediting the historical
narratives of a people which has created both. It is possible to
discriminate these two varieties of literary creation in other
languages, so is it no less possible in Icelandic. There is, indeed, no
clear reason why the statements of an historical saga should be called
in question, where these statements are logically consistent and
collaterally confirmed.

The information contained in Icelandic literature relative to the
discovery of America by the Icelanders, has been brought together here,
and an attempt has been made to trace the history of each of the elder
manuscripts containing this information. Inconsistencies have been
noted, and discriminations made in the material, so far as the facts
have seemed to warrant, and especially has an effort been made to avoid
any possibility of confusion between expressions of opinion and the
facts.

It is not altogether consistent with the plan of this book, to suggest
what seems to be established by the documents which it presents, these
documents being offered to bear witness for themselves, but a brief
recapitulation of the conclusions to which a study of the documents has
led may not be amiss, since these conclusions

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

differ radically, in many respects, from the views advanced by Rafn and
his followers, and are offered with a view to point further enquiry,
rather than to supplant it.

The eldest surviving manuscript containing an account of the discovery
of Wineland the Good, as the southernmost land reached by the Icelandic
discoverers was called, was written not later than 1334. This, and a
more recent manuscript containing virtually the same saga, present the
most cogent and consistent account of the discovery which has been
preserved. Many of the important incidents therein set forth are
confirmed by other Icelandic records of contemporary events, and the
information which this saga affords is simply, naturally and
intelligibly detailed. This information is of such a character that it
is natural to suppose it to have been derived from the statements of
those who had themselves visited the lands described; it is not
conceivable from what other source it could have been obtained, and,
except its author was gifted with unparalleled prescience, it could not
have been a fabrication. According to this history, for such it clearly
is, Wineland was discovered by a son of Eric Thorvaldsson, called the
Red, the first Icelandic explorer and colonist of Greenland. This son,
whose name was Leif, returning from a voyage to Norway, probably not
later than the year 1000, was driven out of the direct track to
Greenland, and came upon a country of which he had previously had no
knowledge. He returned thence to Greenland, and reported what he had
found, and all ineffectual attempt was made soon after to reach this

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

strange land again. A few years later one Thorfinn Thordarson, called
Karlsefni, an Icelander, who, had recently arrived in Greenland,
determined to renew the effort to find and explore the unknown country
which Leif had seen. He organized an expedition and sailed away from
Greenland toward the south-west. He first sighted a barren land, which,
because of the large flat stones that lay strewn upon its surface,
received the name of Helluland. Continuing thence, with winds from the
north, the explorers next found a wooded land, to which they gave the
name of Markland, from its trees, which, to these inhabitants of a
treeless land, were a sufficiently distinguishing characteristic.
Proceeding thence, they next described a coast-land, along which they
sailed, having the land upon their starboard side. The first portion of
this land-fall proved to be a long, sandy shore, but when they had
followed it for some time, they found it indented with bays and creeks,
and in one of these they stopped, and sent two of their company inland
to explore the country. These explorers, when they returned, brought
with them, the one a bunch of grapes, the other an ear of wild
\["self-sown"\] grain. They hoisted anchor then, and sailed on until
they came to a bay, at the mouth of which was an island with strong
currents flowing about it. They laid their course into the bay, and,
being pleased with the country thereabouts, decided to remain there the
first winter, which proved to be a severe one. In the following year,
Karlsefni, with the greater portion of his company, continued the
advance southward, halting finally at a river, which flowed down from
the land into, a lake and thence into

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

the sea. About the month of this river was shoal water, and it could
only be entered at flood-tide; they proceeded up the river with their
ship, and established themselves not far from the sea, and remained here
throughout the second winter. There were woods here, and in low-lands
fields of wild "wheat," and on the ridges grapes growing wild. Here for
the first time they encountered the inhabitants of the country, to whom
they gave the name of Skrellings, a name which seems to bear evidence of
their opprobrium. In the spring after their arrival at this spot, they
were visited for the second time by the Skrellings, with whom they now
engaged in barter; their visitors, however, becoming alarmed at the
bellowing of a bull, which Karlsefni had brought with him, fled to their
skin-canoes and rowed away. For three weeks after this, nothing was seen
of the natives; but, at the end of this interval, they returned in great
numbers and gave battle to Karlsefni and his companions. The Skrellings
filially withdrew, having lost several of their number, while two of
Karlsefni's men had fallen in the affray. The explorers, although they
were well content with the country, decided, after this experience, that
it would be unwise for them to attempt to remain in that region longer,
and they accordingly returned to the neighbourhood in which they had
passed the first winter, where they remained throughout the third
winter, and in the following spring set sail for Greenland.

In a manuscript written probably between 1370 and 1390, but certainly
before the close of the fourteenth century, are two detached narratives
which, considered together,

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

form another version of the history of the discovery and exploration of
Wineland. In this account the discovery is ascribed to one Biarni
Heriulfsson, and the date assigned to this event is fixed several years
anterior to that of Leif Ericsson's voyage; indeed, according to this
account, Leif's voyage to Wineland is not treated as accidental, but as
the direct result of Biarni's description of the land which he had
found. This version differs further, from that already described, in
recounting three voyages besides that undertaken by Leif, making in all
four voyages of exploration--the first headed by Leif, the second by
Leif's brother, Thorvald, the third by Karlsefni, and the fourth and
last led by Freydis, a natural daughter of Eric the Red. This account of
the discovery is treated at length, and certain of its inconsistencies
pointed out in another place, and it is, therefore, not necessary to
examine it more particularly here. The statement concerning the
discovery of Wineland by Biarni Heriulfsson is not confirmed by any
existing collateral evidence, while that which would assign the honour
to Leif Ericsson is; moreover, beyond the testimony of this, the Flatey
Book, version, there is no reason to believe that more than a single
voyage of exploration took place, namely, that of Thorfinn Karlsefni. So
far as the statements of this second version coincide with that of the
first, there seems to be no good reason for calling them in question;
where they do not, they may well receive more particular scrutiny than
has been directed to them, hitherto, since the Flatey Book narrative is
that which has generally been treated as the more important, and

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

its details have, in consequence, received the greater publicity.

Especially has one of the statements, which appears in this second
version, claimed the attention of writers, who have sought to determine
from it the site of Wineland. Rafn, by the ingenious application of a
subtile theory, succeeded in computing from this statement the exact
latitude, to the second, of the southernmost winter-quarters of the
explorers, and for nearly fifty years after its publication Rafn's
method of interpretation remained essentially unassailed. In 1883,
however, Professor Gustav Storm, of Christiana, propounded a novel, but
withal a simple and scientific interpretation of this passage, which can
hardly fail to appeal to the discernment of any reader who may not in
advance have formed his conclusions as to where Wineland ought to have
been. Professor Storm's method of interpretation does not seek to
determine, from the passage the exact spot which the explorers reached
(for which, it may be remarked, the passage does not afford sufficiently
accurate data), but he is enabled by his process of reasoning to
determine a limit, north of which Wineland could not have been, and this
limit is approximately A90. A region not far removed to the southward of
this latitude conforms sufficiently well to the description of the
country, given in the narratives of the exploration, to serve to confirm
Professor Storm's result, and also the relative accuracy of the mooted
passage itself. It will be apparent from an examination of this author's
treatise that it is not necessarily proven that Wineland may not have
been situated to the

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

southward of latitude 49°, but it would seem to be well-nigh certain
that thus far south it must have been.

There is no suggestion in Icelandic writings of a permanent occupation
of the country, and after the exploration at the beginning of the
eleventh century, it is not known that Wineland was ever again visited
by Icelanders, although it would appear that a voyage thither was
attempted in the year 1121, but with what result is not known. That
portion of the discovery known as Markland was revisited however, in
1347, by certain seamen from the Icelandic colony in Greenland.

It will be seen from this summary that the Wineland history is of the
briefest, but brief as it is, it has been put in jeopardy no less by
those who would prove too much, than by those who would deny all. It may
not be unprofitable in the present aspect of the question to appeal to
the records themselves.

ARTHUR M. REEVES.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Early Fragmentary References to Wineland](nda05)
