[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda10)  [Next](nda12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

## CHAPTER VII.

### THE PUBLICATION OF THE DISCOVERY

THE earliest foreign mention of Wineland appears in the work of the
prebendary, Adam of Bremen, called *Descriptio insularum aquilonis*. The
material for this work was obtained by its author during a sojourn at
the court of the Danish king, Svend Estridsson, after the year 1069, and
probably very soon thereafter, for his history appears to have been
completed before the year 1076, the date of king Svend's death. The most
important manuscript of Adam's longer work, the *Gesta Hammaburgensis
ecclesiæ pontificum*, is the Codex Vindobonensis deposited in the
Imperial Library of Vienna under the number 413. This manuscript,
written in the thirteenth century, contains also the complete
"description of the Northern islands," which is partially lacking in the
fine manuscript of the same century, contained in the Royal Library of
Copenhagen. This "description" was first printed in Lindenbruch's
edition of Adam's work, published in 1595, and is the first printed
reference to Wineland, being as follows: "Moreover he spoke of an island
in that ocean discovered by many, which is called Wineland, for the
reason that vines grow wild there, which yield the best of wine.
Moreover, that grain unsown grows there abundantly is not a fabulous
fancy, but from the accounts of the Danes we know to be a fact. Beyond
this island, it is said. there is no habitable land in

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

that ocean, but all those regions which are beyond are filled with
insupportable ice and boundless gloom, to which Martian thus refers:
"One day's sail beyond Thile the sea is frozen." This was essayed not
long since by that very enterprising Northmen's prince, Harold, who
explored the extent of the northern ocean with his ship, but was
scarcely able by retreating to escape in safety from the gulf's enormous
abyss, where before his eyes the vanishing bounds of earth were hidden
in gloom."

The learned cleric, it will be observed, is very careful to give his
authority for a narrative which evidently impressed him as bordering
sharply upon the fabulous. The situation which he would ascribe to the
strange country is inaccurate enough, but the land where vines grow wild
and grain self-sown, stripped of the historian's adornments, would
accord sufficiently well with the accounts of the discoverers of
Wineland to enable us to identify the country, if Adam had not himself
given us the name of this land, and thus arrested all uncertainty. It is
not strange, however, that with the lapse of time the knowledge of such
a land should have been erased from the recollection of the outer world.
The author of the so called "Breve Chronicon Norvegiæ" is, therefore,
constrained to omit all reference to this wonderful land, although his
reference to Greenland indicates an acquaintance with that tradition,
which in Icelandic geographical notices, already cited, would ascribe
Wineland to a more southerly clime, bordering indeed upon Africa. The
manuscript of this history, which has been preserved, belongs to the
Earl of Dalhousie, and was probably written

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

between the years 1443 and 1460. The passage mentioned, while it is not
strictly pertinent, in a measure indicates, perhaps, the information
accessible at this period to an author who must have been more or less
acquainted with the current lore of the land in which the Wineland
history was still preserved. Greenland, this author writes, "which
country was discovered and settled by the inhabitants of Thule
\[Telensibus\], and strengthened by the Catholic faith, lies at the
western boundary of Europe, almost bordering upon the African isles,
where the overflowing sea spreads out." No quickening evidence came from
Iceland until long afterward, and those who saw Adam's Wineland recital
probably regarded it as the artless testimony of a too-credulous
historian.

After the publication of Adam of Bremen's work, in 1595, the name of
Wineland next recurs in print in a poem written by the Danish clergyman,
Claus Christoffersson Lyschander, called the Chronicle of Greenland,
which was published in Copenhagen in 1608. Founded, apparently, upon the
scantiest of historical material, which material was treated with the
broadest of poetic license, the Chronicle is devoid of historical value.
Lyschander seems to have derived from Icelandic Annals the knowledge of
Bishop Eric's Wineland voyage, and to have elaborated this entry, with
the aid of his vivid imagination, into three lines of doggerel in
somewhat the following manner:

And Eric of Greenland did the deed,  
Planted in Wineland both folk and creed,  
Which are there e'en now surviving.

 

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

A few years prior to this rhapsody of Lyschander's, the geographer
Ortelius had ascribed to the Northmen the credit of the discovery of
America. According to Alexander von Humboldt, Ortelius announced this
opinion in 1570, and he cites Ortelius' work, "Theatrum orbis terrarum,"
in the edition of 1601. The edition of 1584 of Ortelius' work does not
so credit the discovery, but the English edition of 1606 does
explicitly, and clearly sets forth upon what foundation the author rests
his statement. Ortelius does not seem to have had, and could not well
have had at the time he wrote, any acquaintance with Icelandic records;
his opinion, as he himself tells us, was based upon the marvellous
relation of the voyages of the brothers Zeni, first published in 1558.
It is not pertinent to dwell here upon the authenticity of the Zeni
discoveries, and while it is true that Ortelius stated the fact, when he
announced that the "New World was entered upon many ages past by certain
'islanders' of Greenland and Iceland," he travelled to it by a
circuitous route, and hit upon it, after all, by a happy chance.

The debased taste in Iceland, which followed the age when the greater
sagas were committed to writing, found its gratification in the creation
of fictitious tales, in recounting the exploits of foreign heroes, and
for a time the garnered wealth of their historical literature was
disregarded or forgotten by the people of Iceland. With the revival of
learning, which came in post-Reformation times, after a long period of
comparative literary inactivity, came a reawakening of interest in the
elder literature, and the Icelandic scholars of this era heralded abroad

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the great wealth of the discarded treasures which their ancestors had
amassed.

The first writer in modern times to glean from Icelandic records, and to
publish, as thus established, the discovery made by his countrymen, was
Arngrim Jonsson \[Arngrimr Jonsson\], who was born in Iceland in 1568.
His various historical works, published during his life-time, were
written in Latin, and all, with the exception of the first edition of a
single work, issued from presses on the Continent. His writings were,
for the most part, devoted to the history of his fatherland and to its
defence, but incidentally two of these, at least, refer to the Wineland
discovery. The first of these works, "Crymogœa, sive Rerum
Islandicarum," was published in Hamburg in 1610, 1614, 1630. The notice
in this book refers to the discovery of "New Land" in 1285, and
Land-Rolf's expedition to Iceland \[undertaken with a view to the
exploration of this land\], diverges into a consideration of the
Frislanda of the Zeni narrative, which the author regards as Iceland,
and concludes: "In truth we believe the country which Land-Rolf sought
to be Wineland, formerly so-called by the Icelanders, concerning which
island of America, in the region of Greenland, perhaps the modern
Estotelandia, elsewhere;" a statement chiefly interesting from the fact
that it is the first printed theory as to the location of Wineland.

In a second book, written *ca.* 1635, but not published until 1643,
Arngrim refers at some length to Karlsefni and his Wineland voyage,
which information he states he draws from Hauk's history, and also makes
mention

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

of Bishop Eric's Wineland voyage, noting incidentally Adam of Bremen's
reference to that country.

Arngrim died in 1648, leaving behind him an unprinted Latin manuscript,
which was subsequently translated into Icelandic and published in
Iceland under the title "Gronlandia." In this treatise he deals more
minutely with the Wineland discovery, but it is probable that this book
failed to obtain as wide a circulation among the scholars of Europe as
his earlier works, and even though it had become well known, it was
destined to be followed, a few years later, by a much more exhaustive
work, which must have supplanted it.

Although the Icelandic discovery had now been published, the chief
documents from which the knowledge of the discovery was drawn, remained
for many years in Iceland, where they were practically inaccessible to
the foreign student. Arngrim Jonsson was himself, probably, the first to
set the example, which, actively followed after his death, soon placed
the Icelandic manuscripts within comparatively easy reach of the
students of the Continent. We have already seen, incidentally, how
certain of these codices were exported; it remained for the tireless
bibliophile, Arni Magnusson, to complete the deportation of manuscripts
from his fatherland, so that early in the eighteenth century all of the
more important early vellums containing the Wineland narrations were
lodged in the libraries of Copenhagen. The hugest of all these
manuscripts, the Flatey Book, had been brought by the talented
Icelander, Thormod Torfæus, from Iceland to Denmark, as a gift to King
Frederick the Third.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

In the year 1715 Torfæus published the first book devoted exclusively to
the discovery of Wineland. In this little work the place of priority is
assigned to the account of the discovery as unfolded in the Flatey Book;
this is followed by a compendium of the Saga of Eric the Red \[Thorfinns
Saga\], with which the author seems to have become acquainted through a
transcript of the Hauk's Book Saga, made by Biorn of Skardsa. The
interest which Torfæus' little book elicited was of such a character
that the general dissemination of the knowledge of the discovery may
almost be said to date from its appearance; the publication of texts of
the sagas upon which Torfæus' book was based was not accomplished,
however until the present century.

In 1837 the sumptuous work entitled "Antiquitates Americanæ" was
published by the Royal Society of Northern Antiquaries of Copenhagen.
The book was edited by Carl Christian Rafn, with whom were associated
Finn Magnusen and Sveinbiorn Egilsson; the associate editors, however,
especially the last-named, seem to have shared to a very limited extent
in the preparation of the work; all were scholarly men, well versed in
the literature of Iceland. This book was by far the most elaborate which
had been published up to that time upon the subject of the Icelandic
discovery of America, and in it the texts of the sagas relating to the
discovery were first printed, and with these the lesser references
bearing upon the discovery, which were scattered through other Icelandic
writings. Side by side with the Icelandic texts, Latin and Danish
versions of these texts were presented,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

and along with these the interpretations and theories of the gifted
editor, Rafn. The book obtained a wide circulation, and upon it have
been based almost all of the numerous treatises upon the same subject
which have since appeared. Rafn's theories touching the Old Stone Tower
at Newport, R. I., and the Dighton Picture Rock near Taunton, Mass.,
have latterly fallen into disfavour, but others of his errors, less
palpable than these, if we may judge by recent publications, still
exercise potent sway. While the editor of the "Antiquitates Americanæ"
deserves great praise for having been the first to publish to the world
the original records, he has seriously qualified the credit to which he
is entitled by the extravagant theories and hazardous statements to
which he gave currency, and which have prejudiced many readers against
the credibility of the records themselves.

Since the publication of the "Antiquitates Americanæ" the most important
and original treatise upon the Wineland discovery which has appeared, is
that recently published by Dr. Gustav Storm, Professor of History in the
University of Christiania, entitled, "Studies relating to the Wineland
voyages, Wineland's Geography and Ethnography." These "Studies" appear
to have been the natural sequence of an article upon the vexed question,
affecting the site of Wineland, to which reference has already been
made. Professor Storm's method of treatment is altogether different from
that of Rafn; it is philosophical, logical, and apparently entirely
uninfluenced by preconceived theories, being based strictly upon the
records. These records of the Icelandic discovery have now

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

been presented here. They clearly establish the fact that some portion
of the eastern coast of North America was visited by people of Iceland
and the Icelandic colony in Greenland early in the eleventh century. In
matters of detail, however, the history of the discovery leaves wide the
door to conjecture as to the actual site of Wineland. It was apparently
not north of the latitude of northern Newfoundland; present climatic
conditions indicate that it was situated somewhat south of this
latitude, but how far south the records do not show.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes](nda12)
