[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda14)  [Next](nda16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

### SECOND PERIOD.

WE have thus seen how the desire to tell of old times arose and was
propagated amongst the inhabitants of the new colony. But the
remembrance and relation of individual exploits, and the transmission of
these records from one generation to the other, would perhaps have never
led to the Icelanders becoming historians had not such habits been
united with a strong feeling for poetry, a desire for fame, and that
peculiar state of society which had been formed amongst them.

The Island had been colonized in peace; each enterprising navigator as
he touched its shore took possession of a tract of land without
impediment, and became the independent proprietor of his small estate;
but now these settlements approached each other; interests began to
clash; individual demeanour to become developed. The social bonds had
been too loosely attached to keep within due limits the wild self will
of so many impetuous Northmen. True, their ancient Norwegian customs had
been spontaneously resumed on their arrival, and fifty years later (A.
D. 928), the laws of Ulfliot had given a form and consistency to the
moral code; but these checks had little weight when individual power or
interest were enabled to oppose them. Personal strength was necessary
for personal safety; and the many narratives which have been preserved,
detailing the untimely fate of the most respectable families in the
course of the first two centuries, exhibit a long list of feuds and
deeds of violence unchecked by the laws or the judicial authority of the
land.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

These civil broils were not, however, in general, of a very sanguinary
character, and often consisted of individual encounters, where courage
and presence of mind were equally exhibited on both sides, and the
contest was obstinate: in a more general fray the loss was looked upon
as considerable if ten men fell.

The time of feud was also a time of re-union: the object of the
individual was spread abroad; discussion was created, sympathy was
awakened; the relative merits of the contending parties became the theme
of conversation, and the Skalds were stimulated to the composition of
new specimens of their inspiring art. On particular occasions they
improvised. Hate as well as love formed the theme of these effusions,
and the same means were employed to give a graceful form to satire, in
which style of composition these ancient poets were remarkably
successful: in fact, so cutting were these sallies, and of so much
weight among a people peculiarly under the influence of public opinion,
that they often became the causes of bloodshed, and were looked upon as
a ground of complaint before the Courts. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) For the most part, however, the songs were
of an historical character; sometimes the Skald sang of his own
exploits, sometimes of those of his friends, who upon such occasions
were accustomed to present him with costly gifts: After the Norwegian
Skald, Eyvind Skialdespilder, had sung a Drapa or ode in praise of the
Icelanders, every peasant in the island contributed three pieces of
silver, which were applied to the purchase of a clasp or ornament for a
mantel

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

that weighed 50 marks and this they sent to the bard, as an
acknowledgment of his poetic powers.

The climate and mode of living contributed to keep alive this taste for
poetry, which the Icelanders had inherited from their Norwegian
ancestors. Agriculture was almost entirely confined to the care of
pasture and meadow land; fishing could only be carried on at certain
seasons, and the feeding of cattle required little attention. Their
hostile proceedings were also soon concluded; but was a reprisal
apprehended, it became necessary for the chief to retain his followers
at the farm until a reconciliation was brought about, and these
assemblages in the common room, during the long winter evenings,
contributed to increase the social union and reciprocal communication of
past events. Public amusements also brought the people frequently
together: besides the great feasts, which lasted from eight to fourteen
days, sports and games, such as bowls or wrestling, were carried on in
the several districts for many weeks in succession; and still more
attractive was the Heste-thing, where stallions were made to fight
against each other, to the great amusement of both old and young. To
these reunions must be added those caused by attendance at the different
courts, and particularly at the Althing <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) or general Assizes, where all the first
men of the island met annually, with great pomp and parade. It was
looked upon as a disgrace to be absent from this meeting, which was held
in the open air on the banks of the Thingvalla Vatn, the largest lake in
Iceland, a natural hill or mount forming the court.

To figure here with a display and retinue that drew upon him the eyes of
all beholders, was the great ambition of the

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Chief, whose power
and influence depended much upon the number of friends and followers he
could produce on such occasions. These were again determined by the
degree of support and assistance which they could calculate on obtaining
from him in the hour of need; and hence the anxiety on the part of the
Icelandic yeoman to be fully acquainted with the character and
circumstances of his chief, to which cause may be more immediately
attributed the interest which he took in all new Sagas or narratives of
remarkable individuals.

In the Laxdæla Saga <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) it is related
that, after a brave Icelander, named Bolle Bolleson, had gallantly
defeated an assailant, by whom he had been attacked in the course of a
journey through the island, his exploit became the subject of a new
Saga, which quickly spread over the district and added considerably to
his reputation. In Gisle Sursens Saga, a stranger is introduced, saying
to his neighbours at the court--"Shew me the men of great deeds, those
from whom the Sagas proceed."

The greater number of the remaining Sagas bear what may be called a
political stamp; they contain a detail of the most important disputes
between individual families, or districts, painted in the most minute
manner, and followed by a general description of the most important
personages in the narrative. How much weight was attached to these
personal descriptions is shewn by the nature of the Icelandic language,
which is richer than any other European tongue in words that express
those various qualities and shades of character which are of the most
importance in society. The exterior of the chief person in the Saga is

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

also painted with equal accuracy, especially his features, in which the
richness of the language is also observable; and even the particulars of
the dress are not omitted. This was of importance in a country where it
was not always easy to determine whether the stranger who made his
appearance was friend or foe, and a remarkable instance is mentioned in
the Laxdæla Saga of a chief named Helge Hardbeinsen identifying some
stranger knights, whom he had never seen, solely from the accurate
description of their personal appearance, which was brought to him by
the messenger who communicated the intelligence of their approach.

The same characteristics are imprinted on the Sagas. The peculiarities
of the narrator never appear; it is as if one only heard the simple echo
of an old tradition; no introductory remarks are made, but the history
begins at once abruptly with:--"There was a man called so and so, son of
so and so," etc.: no judgment is pronounced upon the transaction, but it
is merely added that this deed increased the hero's reputation, or that
was considered bad. In most Sagas the dialogistic form prevails,
particularly in those of more ancient date, for this form was natural to
the people, who insensibly threw their narratives into dialogue, and
thus they acquired a more poetical colouring; for not only were the
conversations related which had actually taken place, but also those
which from the nature of the subject it might have been concluded had
been held; and the general mode of expression being simple and nearly
uniform, and the character being best developed in this definite form,
those imaginary conversations were, for the most part, not inconsistent
with truth.

The talent for narrating was naturally generated by the desire of
hearing these narratives. Those Skalds who remembered

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the old Sagas, and whose imagination was lively, were best enabled to
adopt the dramatic form, and now, independent of their local or
political interest, the narratives became interesting on their own
account. Scarce a century after the colonization of the country we find
that the people took great pleasure in this amusement. "Is no one come,"
asks Thorvard, at a meeting of the people mentioned in Viga Glums Saga,
"who can amuse us with a new story?" They answered him: "There is always
sport and amusement when thou are present." He replied: "I can think of
nothing better than Glum's songs," upon which he sang one of those which
he had learned. In the Sturlunga Saga a certain priest, named Ingemund,
is mentioned as a man rich in knowledge, who told good stories, afforded
much amusement, and indited good songs for which he obtained payment
abroad. Such a narrator was called a Sagaman.

Thus did oral tradition, beginning with the mythic, proceed thence to
the historical and end with the fabulous. We have now come to the period
when books were written and collected in the island; but in order to
trace the cause of that peculiar fondness for their own history, which
led the Icelanders not only to become the historians of Iceland but of
the whole North, it is necessary to go back to the earlier condition of
the country and the people.

It may at first sight appear that the local position of this remote
island would be alone sufficient to prevent the inhabitants from taking
any interest in the affairs of other countries; but the communication
with Norway continued; the migration from thence lasted for many
generations, even after the island was colonized, and many merchant
ships passed annually between Iceland and the parent state. They brought
with them meal, building-timber, leather, fine

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

cloth and tapestry, taking in exchange silver, skins, coarse cloth
(Wadmel), and other kinds of wollens, as well as dried fish.

As soon as it was known that a merchant had brought a cargo to the
Icelandic coast the chief of the temple, and in later times the governor
of the province, rode down immediately to the ship and asked for news;
he then fixed the price at which the various goods were to be sold to
the people of the district, chose what he wanted for himself, and
invited the captain of the vessel to stop at his house for the winter.
The visitor was now looked upon as one of the family, he entered into
their amusements, and disputes, entertained them at Yule with his
stories, and presented his host at parting with a piece of English
tapestry, or some other costly gift, in return for the hospitality which
he had received. Piratical expeditions had at this time given place to
trading voyages, and the merchant or ship's captain was often a person
of good family sometimes attached to the Norwegian Court, and hence well
acquainted with ail that was passing there. How much this intercourse
tended to the increase of historical material is shown by an old MS. of
St. Olafs Saga, wherein is stated that:--"In the time of Harald
Haarfager there was much sailing from Norway to Iceland; every summer
was news [communicated](errata.htm#6) between the two countries, and
this was afterwards remembered, and became the subject of narratives."

The Icelanders not only received intelligence from Norway, but brought
it away themselves. They were led to undertake these voyages as well
from the desire to see their relations, and claim inheritances, as for
the purpose of procuring more valuable building-timber than the merchant
could bring them. The chief considered that his reputation

 

<span id="img_16900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FRONT VIEW OF THE
OLD ICELANDIC SKÁLI OR HALL](tn/16900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16900.jpg)  
FRONT VIEW OF THE OLD ICELANDIC SKÁLI OR HALL  
</span>

 

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

depended much upon the number of persons he could entertain, and for
this purpose a spacious hall was required. This formed a separate
building, in the midst of which the cheerful wood fire blazed upwards to
an aperture in the roof, unchecked by ceilings or partition walls:--

The drinking hall, a separate house, was built  
Of heart of fir; not twice three hundred men  
Could fill that hall, when gather'd there at Yule.

    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*    \*

The cheerful faggot on the straw-strewn floor  
Unceasing blazed, gladdening its stony hearth,  
While downwards through the dense smoke shot the stars,  
Those heavenly friends, upon the guests below. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

The adventurous stripling, on the other hand, sailed to Norway for the
purpose of there engaging in a sea-roving expedition, or seeking
advancement amongst his influential kinsmen; and thus many earned renown
at the courts of the Norwegian kings, or entered into mercantile
pursuits in order to obtain wealth, or experience and consideration. For
the old Northern maxim of "a fool is the home-bred child," also held
good in Iceland, and therefore do we find Bolle Bollesen saying to his
father-in-law Snorre Gode, who wished to dissuade him from going abroad:
"Little do I think he knows who knows no more than Iceland." Trading was
often undertaken by young men solely as the means of acquiring
knowledge, which being accomplished, the pursuit was given up.

After the lapse of a few centuries this passion for travelling was
increased by a new cause which had more immediate influence upon the
collection of historical materials.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

The Skalds passed over to England, the Orkneys, and the Norwegian
courts, seeking rewards and reputation. They neither required the aid of
friends nor money for such expeditions, but boldly entering the drinking
hall of the kings craved permission to sing a drapa in praise of the
monarch, which was always granted, and the bard received handsome
presents, such as weapons, clothes, gold rings, together with an
honourable reception at the court, in return for his exertions.

The Icelandic Skalds, favoured by the independent position of their
country, and a superior knowledge of the Scandinavian mythology,
acquired a marked pre-eminence over their competitors in other parts of
the North. The praises of a stranger bard, from a free country, were
more flattering to a king or chieftain than the more servile adulation
of his own laureate; and it was but reasonable, as well as politic, to
reward him well who had come from so great a distance, and who,
travelling from land to land, could sound the king's praise and tell of
the royal bounty. The odes thus sung were all of an historical
character; and it was therefore necessary for the Skald to be well
acquainted with the deeds of the monarch and his ancestors. It was also
required of him that he should be able to repeat the national ballads;
and the extraordinary power of the Skalds in this particular is shown in
the saga of the blind Skald Stuf, who one evening sang sixty songs
before Harald Haardraade, and could repeat four times as many longer
poems!

But if a knowledge of history was of importance to the Skald, it was
absolutely indispensable to the Sagaman. A remarkable anecdote of one of
these narrators is contained in the Saga of Thorstein Frode, preserved
in the Arne-Magnæan

 

<span id="img_17100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![GROUND PLAN OF THE
INTERIOR OF THE OLD ICELANDIC SKÁLI OR HALL](tn/17100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17100.jpg)  
GROUND PLAN OF THE INTERIOR OF THE OLD ICELANDIC SKÁLI OR HALL  
</span>

 

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

collection of Icelandic MSS.; <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) a
certain Sagaman, called Thorstein, repaired to King Harald of Norway.
The Brig asked him "whether he knew anything that would amuse." He
replied that he knew a few sagas. "I will receive thee," said the king,
"and thou shalt entertain whoever requires it of thee." Thorstein became
favoured by the courtiers, and obtained clothes from them; the king also
gave him a good sword.

Towards Yule <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14) he became sorrowful;
the king guessed the cause, namely, that his Sagas were at an end, and
that he had nothing for Yule. He answered that so it was; he had one
remaining, and that he durst not tell, for it was about the king's
journeys. The king said that he should begin with that the first day of
Yule, and he (the king) would take care

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

that it should last to the end of the festival. The thirteenth day
Thorstein's Saga came to an end, and now he looked anxiously for the
judgment of the king who said smiling: "It is not the worse told because
thou hast a talent therefor, but where didst thou get it?" Thorstein
answered: "It is my custom to repair every summer to the Althing in our
land, and there I learn the sagas which Haldor Snorreson relates." The
king said: "Then it is no wonder thou knowest them so well," and upon
this, gave him a good ship load; and now Thorstein passed often between
Norway and Iceland.

To comprehend how such a narrative could have lasted thirteen days, we
must presume that the dialogistic form was freely used, and that the
story was interrupted and decorated with verses and poetical allusions
to a considerable extent. The anecdote also shows that while Sagamen
were of later origin than Skalds, they also stood in lower estimation;
the Skald was enrolled amongst the courtiers; the Sagaman was only
looked upon as an amusing visitor.

In the 11th century, the Icelanders ceased to engage in piratical
expeditions; the chiefs, whose power and riches had increased, looked
with contempt on trading voyages; but on the other hand it was often a
result of their feuds, that one of the parties was obliged to leave the
country for a few years. Sometimes also they engaged in a voluntary
pilgrimage to Rome. Such an expedition went first to Denmark, where it
was always well received by the Danish kings, and more particularly in
the 13th century we find the Icelandic chiefs drawing forth expressions
of respect and esteem at the court of Valdemar II.

All these travellers were sure to return home after a few years and
establish themselves in Iceland, nor could the

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

most flattering reception at foreign courts abate their inherent love of
country. Thus King Harald Gormson could not prevail upon Gunnar of
Hlidarende to remain at his court, although he held out the temptations
of a wife and fortune; and hence says Hakon to Finboge Ramme, "That is
just the way with you Icelanders! the moment you are valued and favoured
by princes, you want to get away." When the travelled man came home he
was received with the greatest attention; he was instantly sought out at
the Althing, and now he must make a public statement of his travels and
adventures. The curiosity of Icelanders is proverbial, and seems to be
in proportion to their distance from the continent. If a ship arrived,
the people instantly ran down to the shore to ask for news, unless the
chief of the district (Herredsforstanderen) had ruled that he should be
the first. Thorstein Ingemundson, a hospitable man, who lived in the
10th century, looked upon it as the duty of every stranger to visit him
first; and he was once highly exasperated with some strangers who
neglected this courtesy. When Kiartan, mentioned in the history of Olaf
Tryggveson, had returned from Norway, and was grieving over the
infidelity of his betrothed, his father was most distressed at the
people thus losing the benefit of his stories; and when he was
afterwards married, and a splendid wedding took place on the island,
nothing amused the guests more than the bridegroom's narratives of his
services under the great King Olaf Tryggveson. However desirous the new
comer might be to learn what had happened during his absence from home,
be was always first obliged to tell his countrymen the news from abroad.
A remarkable illustration of this is given in the life of Bishop Magnus,
who returned from Saxony by Norway (A. D. 1135), just as the

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

people were assembled at the Althing, and were loudly contending upon a
matter respecting which no unanimity could be obtained. A messenger
suddenly appears among the crowd, and states that the Bishop is riding
up. Upon this they all become so pleased that they instantly leave the
court, and the Bishop is obliged to parade on a height near the church,
and tell all the people what had happened in Norway whilst he was
abroad!

Such a narrative, told by a person of veracity, went from mouth to
mouth, under the name of the first narrator, which was looked upon as a
security for the truth of the Saga.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[163:1](nda15.htm#fr_9) "As an instance of the
effect produced by these satirical songs, it is related that Harold
Blaatand, King of Denmark, was so incensed at some severe lines which
the Icelanders had made upon him for seizing one of their ships, that he
sent a fleet to ravage the island, which occurrence led them to make a
law subjecting any one to capital punishment who should indulge in
satire against the Sovereigns of Norway, Sweden and Denmark!"

<span id="fn_10"></span>[164:1](nda15.htm#fr_10) Ting or Thing signifies
in the old Scandinavian tongue *to speak*, and hence a popular assembly,
or court of justice. The national assembly of Norway still retains the
name of Stor-thing, or great meeting, and is divided into two chambers
called the Lag-thing, and Odels-thing.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[165:1](nda15.htm#fr_11) The annals of a
particular family, as the Eyrbiggia Saga is of a particular district in
Iceland. The former has been translated into Latin by Mr. Repp, and Sir
Waiter Scott has given a brief account of the other.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[169:1](nda15.htm#fr_12) Frithiof's Saga.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[171:1](nda15.htm#fr_13) Arne Magnussen, a
learned Icelander and ardent patriot, devoted his time, talents, and
fortune to the national literature of his country. Filling the situation
of Professor of Northern Antiquaries at the University of Copenhagen, in
the beginning of the 18th century, he amassed the largest collection of
books and manuscripts that has, perhaps, ever been brought together by
one individual. Amongst these are the rarest and most ancient vellum
MSS. in the old northern tongue, relating to the history, laws, manners,
and customs of the ancient Scandinavians. The great fire of Copenhagen,
in 1728, robbed the devoted antiquary of many of these often dearly
purchased treasures; but he recommenced his labours with undiminished
zeal, and although then in his 65th year, was enabled to leave to his
country, at his death (A. D. 1730), nearly 2000 Icelandic MSS., together
with a fund of 10,000 rix dollars for their publication. Little progress
was made towards carrying the testator's wishes into effect until a
commission, called the Arne-Magnæan commission, was instituted by the
King of Denmark, in 1772, soon after which the publication commenced,
and all the most important MSS, have been given to the public by this
society. The collection is called the Arne-Magnæan collection, and is
preserved in the University Library of Copenhagen.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[171:2](nda15.htm#fr_14) Yule was a pagan
festival, celebrated in honor of Thor, at the beginning of February,
when the Northmen's year commenced, and they offered sacrifices for
peace and fruitful seasons to this deity, who presided over the air,
launched the thunder, and guarded mankind from giants and genii; it
lasted 14 days. Etymologists differ as to the derivation of the name,
but the most probable seems to be the supposition that it was so called
from *Jolner*, one of the many names for Odin, the father of Thor. After
the introduction of Christianity, the anniversary of Yule was
transferred to Christmas, which is still called by that name throughout
Scandinavia. The word Yule is also used In many parts of Scotland to
denote the same festive period, shewing the early connection of the
Caledonians with their more northern neighbours, and tending to confirm
the conjecture of Tacitus, as, well as the accounts of ancient English
chroniclers, that the Picts were of northern descent, or as Moore
expressively says, "from the same hive of northern adventurers, who were
then pouring forth their predatory swarms over Europe."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Period](nda16)
