[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Iceland](../ice/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nda24)  [Next](nda26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HK2G4O/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Norse Discovery of America*, by A.M Reeves, N.L. Beamish and R.B.
Anderson, \[1906\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VOYAGE OF GUDLEIF GUDLAUGSON TO GREAT IRELAND.

A. D. 1029.

EYRBYGGJA SAGA, CAP. 64. VELLUM FRAGMENT, No. 4456, in 4to.  
*Collated with the before mentioned MSS*.

Gudleif hight a man; he was son of Gudlaug the rich, of Straumfjord, and
brother of Thorfinn, from whom the Sturlungers are descended. Gudleif
was a great merchant, he had a merchant ship, but Thorolf Eyrar Loptson
had another, that time they fought against Gyrd, son of Sigvald Jarl;
then lost Gyrd his eye. It happened in the last years of the reign of
King Olaf the Saint, that Gudleif undertook a trading voyage to
Dublin; <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) but when he sailed from the
west, intended he to sail to Iceland; he sailed then from the west of
Ireland, <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) and met with north-east
winds, and was driven far to the west, and south-west, in the sea, where
no land was to be seen. But it was already far gone in the summer, and
they

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

made many prayers that they might escape from the sea; and it came to
pass that they saw land. It was a great land, but they knew not what
land it was. Then took they the resolve to sail to the land, for they
were weary of contending longer with the violence of the sea. They found
there a good harbour; and when they had been a short time on shore, came
people to them: they knew none of the people, *but it rather appeared to
them that they spoke Irish*. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) Soon
came to them so great a number that it made up many hundreds. These men
fell upon them and seized them all, and bound them, and drove them up
the country. There were they brought before an assembly, to be judged.
*They understood so much* that some were for killing them, but others
would have them distributed amongst the inhabitants, and made slaves.
And while this was going on saw they where rode a great body of men, and
a large banner was borne in the midst. Then thought they that there must
be a chief in the troop; but when it came near, saw they that under the
banner rode a large and dignified man, who was much in years, and whose
hair was white. All present bowed down before the man, and received him
as well as they could. Now observed they that all opinions and
resolutions concerning their business, were submitted to his decision.
Then ordered this man Gudleif and his companions to be brought before
him, and when they had come before this man, spoke he to them in the
Northern

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

tongue, and asked them from what country they came. They answered him,
that the most of them were Icelanders. The man asked which of them were
Icelanders? Gudleif said that he was an Icelander. He then saluted the
old man, and he received it well, and asked from what part of Iceland he
came. Gudleif said that he was from that district which hight
Borgafjord. Then enquired he from what part of Borgafjord he came, and
Gudleif answered just as it was. Then asked this man about almost every
one of the principal men in Borgafjord and Breidafjord; and when they
talked thereon, enquired he minutely about every thing, first of Snorri
Godi, and his sister Thurid of Froda, and most about Kjartan her son.
The people of the country now called out, on the other side, that some
decision should be made about the seamen. After this. went the great man
away from them, and named twelve of his men with himself, and they sat a
long time talking. Then went they to the meeting of the people, and the
old man said to Gudleif: "I and the people of the country have talked
together about your business, and the people have left the matter to me;
but I will now give ye leave to depart whence ye will; but although ye
may think that the summer is almost gone, yet will I counsel ye to
remove from hence, for here are the people not to be trusted, and bad to
deal with, and they think besides that the laws have been broken to
their injury." Gudleif answered: "What shall we say, if fate permits us
to return to our own country, who has given us this freedom?" He
answered: "That can I not tell you, for I

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

like not that my relations and foster-brothers should make such a
journey hereto, as ye would have made, if ye had not had the benefit of
my help; but now is my age so advanced, that I may expect every hour old
age to overpower me; and even if I could live yet for a time, there are
here more powerful men than me, who little peace would give to
foreigners that might come here, although they be not just here in the
neighbourhood where ye landed." Then caused he their ship to be made
ready for sea, and was there with them, until a fair wind sprung up,
which was favourable to take them from the land. But before they
separated took this man a gold ring from his hand, and gave it into the
hands of Gudleif, and therewith a good sword; then said he to Gudleif:
"If the fates permit you to come to your own country, then shall you
take this sword to the yeoman, Kjartan of Froda, but the ring to Thurid
his mother." Gudleif replied: "What shall I say, about it, as to who
sends them these valuables?" He answered: "Say that he sends them who
was a better friend of the lady of Froda, than of her brother, Godi of
Helgafell; but if any man therefore thinks that he knows who has owned
these articles, then say these my words, that I forbid any one to come
to me, for it is the most dangerous expedition, unless it happens as
fortunately with others at the landing place, as with you; but here is
the land great, and bad as to harbours, and in all parts may strangers
expect hostility, when it does not turn out as has been with you." After
this, Gudleif and his people put to, sea, and they landed in Ireland
late in harvest, and were in Dublin for

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

the winter. But in the summer after, sailed they to, Iceland, and
Gudleif delivered over there these valuables; and people held it for
certain, that this man was Bjorn, the Champion of Breidavik, and no
other account to be relied on is there in confirmation of this, except
that which is now given here.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The reader will no doubt come to the same conclusion drawn by the
Icelanders respecting the identity of the aged chief, to whose
generosity and friendly feeling Gudleif and his companions were so much
indebted, and unhesitatingly pronounce him to have been none other than
Bjorn Asbrandson, the Champion of Breidavik, who, it will be remembered,
had set sail about thirty years before, with a northeast wind, and had
not since been heard of. The remarkable accordance of all the personal
details, to which the writer evidently attaches the principal
importance, with the historical events, which are only incidentally
alluded to, enable us to determine dates and intervals of time with a
degree of accuracy that places the truth of the narrative beyond all
question, and gives a high degree of interest to these two voyages. The
mention of Sigurd Jarl of the Orkneys, Palnatoki, Styrbjorn the nephew
of Erik of Sweden, the battle of Fyrisvold, Snorri Godi, "the latter
part of the reign of king Olaf the saint," gives a chronological
character to the narratives, and enables us to fix with confidence,
nearly the exact period of the principal events. Hence it appears that
Gudleif Gudlaugson, sailing from the west of Ireland in the year 1029,
with a N. E. wind, is driven far to the south and south-west, where no
land was to be seen, and that after being exposed for many

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

days to the violence of the winds and waves, he at length finds shelter
upon a coast, where Bjorn Asbrandson, who had left Iceland with N. E.
winds thirty years before, had become established as chief of the
inhabitants of the country. He finds him, as might naturally have been
expected, "stricken in years," and "his hair was white," for Bjorn had
left Iceland for Jomsborg in the prime of life, had, after taking part
in the achievements of the Jomsvikings up to the death of Palnatoki in
993, returned to and resided in Iceland until 999, and now thirty
winters had passed over his head since his ultimate departure from his
native land. The locality of the newly discovered country is next to be
determined: Now if a line be drawn running N. E. to S. W. the course of
Bjorn Asbrandson, from the western coast of Iceland, and another in the
same direction (the course of Gudleif Gudlaugson) from the west coast of
Ireland, they would intersect each other on the southern shores of the
United States, somewhere about Carolina or Georgia. This position
accords well with the description of the locality of their country,
given by the Skrælings to Thorfinn Karlsefne, and which the Northmen
believed to be White Man's land or Great Ireland, as also with the
geographical notices of the same land which have been already adduced;
and when to these evidences be added the statements of Gudleif and his
companions respecting the language of the natives, "*which appeared to
them to be Irish*," there is every reason to conclude that this was the
Hvitramannaland, Albania, or Ireland ed mikla of the Northmen.

The notices of the country contained in these two narratives are,
doubtless, scanty, and merely incidental, the object of the narrators
being evidently to trace the romantic

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

and adventurous career of the Champion of Breidavik, and the perilous
voyage of his countrymen, but this very circumstance is an argument in
favour of the honesty of the statement as regards the supposed Irish
settlement; and the simple and unpretending character of both
narratives, supported, as they are, by historical references,
confirmatory of the principal events, gives to these incidental
allusions a degree of importance to which they would not otherwise be
entitled.

Professor Rafn is of opinion that the White Man's Land, or Great Ireland
of the Northmen was the country situated to the south of Chesapeake Bay,
including North and South Carolina, Georgia, and East Florida. It is
well known that the Esquimaux Indians formerly inhabited countries much
further south than they do at present, and a very remarkable tradition
is stated to be still preserved amongst the Shawnese Indians, who
emigrated 87 years ago, from West Florida to Ohio, that Florida was once
*inhabited by white men, who used iron instruments*. A German writer
also mentions an old tradition of the ancestors of the Shawnese having
come *from beyond the sea*.

Various circumstances shew that Great Ireland was a country, of the
existence of which the Icelandic historians had no doubt; it is spoken
of in the Saga of Thorfirm Karlsefne as a country well known by name to
the Northmen; in the account of Ari Marson's voyage, and the
geographical fragment, its position is pointed out:--"west from Ireland,
near Vinland the good"--"next and somewhat behind Vinland," and the
following extract, taken from the collection of Bjorn Johnson, will shew
that a Chart had actually been made of this distant land:--

"Sir Erlend Thordson had obtained from abroad the

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

geographical chart of that Albania, or land of the White men, which is
situated opposite Vinland the good, of which mention has been before
made in this little book, and which the merchants formerly called
Hibernia Major or Great Ireland, and lies, as has been said, to the west
of Ireland proper. This chart had held accurately all those tracts of
land, and the boundaries of Markland, Einfœtingjaland, and little
Helluland, together with Greenland, to the west of it, where apparently
begins the good Terra Florida." This Sir Erlend was priest of the parish
of Staden in Steingrimsfjord, on the west coast of Iceland, in the year
1568, but no further information has been obtained respecting the chart,
which probably contained the outlines of all the countries known to the
Northmen soon after their discovery of the American continent.

From what cause could the name of Great Ireland have arisen, but from
the fact of the country having been colonized by the Irish? Coming from
their own green island to a vast continent possessing many of the
fertile qualities of their native soil, the appellation would have been
natural and appropriate; and costume, colour, or peculiar habits, might
have readily given rise to the country being denominated White Man's
Land by the neighbouring Esquimaux. Nor does this conclusion involve any
improbability: we have seen that the Irish visited and inhabited Iceland
towards the close of the 8th century, to have accomplished which they
must have traversed a stormy ocean to the extent of about 800 miles;
that a hundred years before the time of Dicuil, namely in the year 725,
they had been found upon the Farœ islands; that in the 10th century,
voyages between Iceland and Ireland were of ordinary occurrence; and
that in the beginning of the

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 11th century,
White Man's Land or Great Ireland is mentioned,--not as a newly
discovered country,--but as a land *long known by name* to the Northmen.
Neither the Icelandic historians nor navigators were, in the least
degree, interested in originating or giving currency to any fable
respecting an Irish settlement on the southern shores of North America,
for they set up no claim to the discovery of that part of the Western
continent, their intercourse being limited to the coasts north of
Chesapeake Bay. The discovery of Vinland and Great Ireland appear to
have been totally independent of each other: the latter is only
incidentally alluded to by the Northern navigators; with the name they
were familiar, but of the peculiar locality of the country they were
ignorant, nor was it until after the return of Karlsefni from Vinland in
1011, and the information which he obtained from the Skrellings or
Esquimaux who were captured during the voyage, that the Northmen became
convinced that White Man's Land or Great Ireland was a part of the same
vast continent, of which Helluland, Markland, and Vinland formed
portions.

The traces of Irish origin which have been observed among some of the
Indian tribes of North and Central America tend also to strengthen the
presumption that these countries had been colonized from Ireland at some
remote period of time. Rask, the eminent Danish philologist, leans to
this opinion which he founds upon the early voyages of the Irish to
Iceland and the similitude between the Hiberno-Celtic, and American
Indian dialects. "It is well known," he says, "that Iceland was
discovered and partially inhabited by the Irish before its discovery and
occupation by the Scandinavians; and when we find that the Icelanders,
descended from the Scandinavians, discovered North

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> America, it will
appear less improbable that the Irish, who, at that period, were more
advanced in learning and civilization, should have undertaken similar
expeditions with success:" the name of *Irland it Mikla* he also
considers to be a sufficient indication of the Irish having emigrated
thither from their own country.

It seems to be generally admitted by historians and antiquaries that the
main stream of colonization has flowed from east to west, the Celts
preceding the Teutonic and Sarmatian races, by a long interval of time.
Herodotus, four centuries before the Christian era, places the Celts
beyond the pillars of Hercules, and upon the borders of the most
westerly region in Europe, and Cæsar in the first century finds them in
Gaul and Britain; that their successors, the Goths, should have driven
them to seek for regions still further westward is therefore in full
accordance with the course of their former migrations, and the same
nomadic principle which brought them from Asia to the British isles,
might have wafted them in later ages to the western world.

The illustrious Leibnitz seems to have contemplated the possibility of
such a remote Celtic settlement when he wrote:--"And if there be *any
island beyond Ireland*, where *the Celtic language* is in use, by the
help thereof we should be guided, as by a thread, to the knowledge of
still more ancient things."

The remarkable narrative of Lionel Wafer who resided for several months
amongst the inhabitants of the Isthmus of America, contains some
remarkable passages bearing upon this subject, and which, as the author
had no preconceived opinions on the affinity of languages, or favourite
theory to uphold, are deserving of notice: speaking of their language,
he says:--

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

"My knowledge of the Highland language made me the more capable of
learning the Darien Indians' language, when I was among them, for there
is some affinity; not in the signification of the words of each
language, but in the pronunciation, which I could easily imitate, both
being spoken pretty much in the throat, with frequent aspirates, and
much the same sharp or circumflex tang or cant." This writer, however,
had evidently not paid much attention to the affinities of the two
languages which he compares and finds only to resemble in pronunciation,
for many of the words which he afterwards adduces as examples of the
Indian language, bear a marked similitude to those of the Celtic, as may
readily be seen by the following comparison:

|                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| AMERICAN-INDIAN.                                 | CELTIC.                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Tautah--Father                                   | Taduys (Welsh), Tad (Corn.) Tat (Armoric) Dad or Daddy (vulg. Irish).                                                                                                                      |
| Namah--Mother                                    | Naing (Irish).                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Poonah--Woman                                    | Bean (Ir.), Bun (Armor.).                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Neenah--Girl                                     | Neean (ancient Scotch).                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Nee--the Moon                                    | Neul, a star--light--neultaib njme, the stars of heaven(Ir.).                                                                                                                              |
| Eechah (pron. Eetsha)--Ugly                      | Etseact--Death (Ir.)--the ugliest of all things.                                                                                                                                           |
| Paecchah--Foh! Ugly                              | Pah, prefixed to a word in Welsh augments its signification.                                                                                                                               |
| Eechah Malooquah, an expression of great dislike | Malluighe or malluigte, cursed, accursed (Irish).                                                                                                                                          |
| Cotchah, sleep                                   | Codalta and Codaltac, sleepy (Ir.).                                                                                                                                                        |
| Caupah (pron. Capa), hammock                     | Cába, a cloak, Caban, tent, cottage (Ir.), Caban, ib.(Welsh).                                                                                                                              |
| <span id="page_283">p. 283</span>                |                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Eetah, got                                       | Ed, to take, handle (Irish).                                                                                                                                                               |
| Doolah, water                                    | Tuile, a flood (Ir.).                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Copah, drink                                     | Ceóbac, drunkenness (Ir.).                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Mamaumah, fine                                   | Ma, ma, ba, would be nearly the sound of the repetition of the word ba, which signifies good in Irish: the m and b are also often used indiscriminately. See O'Brien--Remarks on letter M. |
| Eenah, to call                                   | Enwi, to name (Welsh), Henu, a name (Armor.).                                                                                                                                              |

 

Wafer further says: "Their way of reckoning from score to score is no
more than what our old English way was, but their saying, instead of
thirty-one, thirty-two, etc., one score and eleven, one score and
twelve, etc., is much like the Highlanders of Scotland and Ireland,
reckoning eleven and twenty, twelve and twenty, etc.; so for
fifty-three, the Highlanders say thirteen and two score, as the Darien
Indians would two score and thirteen, only changing the place. In my
youth I was well acquainted with the Highland or primitive Irish
language, both as it is spoken in the north of Ireland, particularly at
the Navan upon the Boyne, and about the town of Virgini upon Lough
Rammer in the Barony of Castle Raghen, in the County of Cavan; and also
in the Highlands of Scotland, where I have been up and down in several
places. . . . I learned a great deal of the Darien language in a month's
conversation with them."

Wafer's description of the dress of this tribe of American Indians,
presents also a remarkable coincidence with the short notices of the
inhabitants of White Man's Land, as given to Karlsefni by the
Esquimaux:--

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

"They have a sort of long cotton garment of their own, some *white*,
others of a rusty black, shaped like our carters' frocks, hanging down
to their heels, with a fringe of the same of cotton, about a span long,
and short, wide, open sleeves, reaching but to the middle of the arms.
These garments they put on over their heads. . . . When they are thus
assembled, they will sometimes walk about the place or plantation where
they are, with their robes on; and I once saw Lacenta (a chief) thus
walking about with two or three hundred of these attending him, as if he
was mustering them: and I took notice that those in the black gowns
walked before him, *and the white after him, each having their lances of
the same colour with their robes*. . . . They were all in their finest
robes, which are *long white gowns*, reaching to their ancles, with
fringes at the bottom, and in their hands they had half pikes."

The affinity between the American-Indian and Celtic languages, and
consequent probability of an European settlement having been formed upon
the shores of New Spain before the arrival of the Spaniards, appears to
have been entertained by many writers of eminence in the 17th century.
In the remarkable work entitled the "Turkish Spy," we find the author
positively affirming the similarity of the two languages, and stating
the tradition of an early European settlement:

"This prince (Charles II.) has several nations under his dominions, and
'tis thought he scarce knows the just extent of his territories in
America. There is a region in that continent inhabited by a people whom
they call Tuscorards and Doegs. *Their language is the same as is spoken
by the British or Welsh*. . . . Those Tuscorards and Doegs of America
are thought to descend from them. . . . It is certain

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

that when the Spaniards first conquered Mexico they were surprised to
hear the inhabitants discourse of a strange people, that formerly *came
thither in corraughs*, who taught them the knowledge of God, and of
immortality, instructed them also in virtue and morality, and prescribed
holy rites and ceremonies of religion. 'Tis remarkable also what an
Indian King said to a Spaniard, viz.: That in foregoing ages a strange
people arrived there by sea, to whom his ancestors gave hospitable
entertainment; in regard they found them men of wit and courage, endued
also with many other excellencies: but he could give no account of their
origin or name. . . . The British language is so prevalent here, that
the very towns, bridges, beasts, birds, rivers, hills, etc., are called
by British or Welsh names." "Who can tell," truly adds the author, "the
various transmigrations of mortals on earth, or trace out the true
originals of any people?"

The improbability of the Irish having, at any very remote period of
time, been in possession of vessels of sufficient power and capacity to
enable them to accomplish a voyage across the Atlantic may, perhaps, be
urged as an objection to this supposed early migration to the American
coast; but, without resting upon their ancient Spanish or Carthaginian
connexion, a very little enquiry will show, that at least in the first
centuries of the Christian era they were amply provided with the means
of accomplishing a voyage to the New World, which, from the western
coast of Ireland, little exceeds 1600 miles.

O'Halloran states, on the authority of the Psalter of Cashel, said to be
the oldest Irish MS., that Moghcorb, King of Leath Mogha, or Munster,
prepared *a large fleet* in the year 296, and invaded Denmark; and that
in the

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

following century (A. D. 367), Criomthan, who in the Psalter of Cashel
is styled Monarch of Ireland and Albany, and leader of the Franks and
Saxons, prepared a formidable fleet, and raised a large body of troops,
which were transported to Scotland, for the purpose of acting in
conjunction with the Picts and Saxons against the Roman wall, and
devastating the provinces of Britain. In 396, an expedition, upon a most
extensive and formidable scale, was undertaken by the celebrated Niall
of the Nine Hostages, one of the most distinguished princes of the
Milesian race: "Observing," says Moore, "that the Romans, after breaking
up the line of encampment along the coast opposite to Ireland, had
retired to the eastern shore and the northern wall; Niall perceived that
an apt opportunity was thus offered for a descent upon the now
unprotected territory. Instantly summoning, therefore, all the forces of
the island, and embarking them on board such *ships* as he could
collect, he ranged, with his *numerous navy*, along the whole coast of
Lancashire," etc. It was to this expedition that the poet Claudian,
lauding the achievement of his patron Stilicho, alluded, in the
memorable lines:--

By him defended, when the neighbouring hosts  
Of warlike nations spread along our coasts;  
When Scots <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) came thundering from the
Irish shores,  
And the wide ocean foamed from hostile oars.  
                                   De Laudab, Stil. Lib. 2.

 

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

This same Niall extended this enterprise to the coast of Brittany, and
ravaged the maritime districts of the northwest of Gaul, during which
expedition was captured the great Christian apostle, St. Patrick.

That such expeditions could have been carried on by means of the little
fragile currachs, to which mode of transport some writers would limit
the sea expeditions of the Irish at this period, seems scarcely
credible, and while allowing full force to the fearless and enterprising
spirit of the gallant Scoti, and the "contempto pelagi," alluded to by
Eric of Auxerre, we must allow them some more rational means for
conveying a body of troops across the British and Gallic channels than
these frail barks.

Not that the currachs were insufficient for individual enterprise of a
more peaceful character, and it seems probable that the monks of the 8th
century launched themselves on the northern ocean in these simple
hide-covered skiffs, and thus effected a passage to their island
retreats; for we find St. Cormac committing himself to the sea in a
similar bark, and on one occasion he is said to have been out of sight
of land for fourteen days and nights.

But the remarkable passage in Tacitus, which has been so often cited by
Irish historians in proof of the early maritime importance of their
country, would lead to the conclusion that at a period anterior to that
now under consideration, the Irish were possessed of ships, or vessels
of no mean size or description. "Ireland," the Roman historian says,
"situated midway between Britain and Spain, and convenient also to the
Gallic sea, connected a most powerful portion of the empire by
considerable mutual advantages; the soil and climate, and the
dispositions and habits of the people do not differ much from those of

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Britain: *the
approaches and harbours are better known, by reason of commerce and the
merchants*." "From this it appears," says Moore, "that though scarce
heard of till within a short period by the Romans, and almost as strange
to the Greeks, this sequestered island was yet in possession of channels
of intercourse distinct from either; and that whilst the Britons, shut
out from the continent by their Roman masters, saw themselves deprived
of all that profitable intercourse which they had long maintained with
the Veneti and other people of Gaul, Ireland still continued to
cultivate her old relations with Spain, and saw her barks venturing on
their accustomed course, between the Celtic Cape, and the Sacred
Promontory, as they had done for centuries before."

That Ireland must have been included amongst the Cassiterides which are
known to have been visited by the Phœnicians, before the Gallic invasion
of Britain, seems to be admitted by all unprejudiced writers upon this
subject, <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) and that the mystery, in
which these wily traders sought to conceal their commercial monopoly,
has led to the obscurity in which the records of their voyages is
involved. That the nautical knowledge and equipments of the Celtic
population of Spain and Ireland must have received considerable
advancement from this connection, is a natural consequence. Inhabiting
the maritime regions of the Spanish peninsula, they were necessarily
brought into immediate contact with the Carthaginian merchants, who had
formed settlements on the same coast, and from whom they probably
obtained not only their knowledge of navigation,

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

but of those religious rites and ceremonies which were afterwards
developed in the form of Druidism.

That the latter was not of British origin seems obvious. Caesar's
description of its observances is only reconcilable with his account of
Britain, on the assumption that the chief seat of the Druids was in
Ireland, for while he describes the Gauls as deriving their knowledge of
Druidism from the British, he represents the latter as inferior in
civilization to the Gauls. Even in the time of Tacitus the Britons are
represented as *ferocæ*, a state of barbarism obviously incompatible
with the creation of a highly wrought mysterious superstition, implying
considerable intellectual advancement and scientific knowledge: a
superstition, be it remembered, which is known to have existed amongst
the Phœnicians and Carthaginians.

The Roman knowledge of the British isles was extremely limited and
imperfect; before the time of Tacitus they were ignorant of the insular
position of Britain, and the acquaintance of Agricola with Ireland was
principally derived from the doubtful information of a faithless Irish
chief, who sought the Roman camp to betray his country. Ireland also,
according to Ptolemy, was formerly called *Little Britain*, therefore
when Caesar speaks of the Gauls repairing to Britain in order to become
instructed in the mysteries of Druidism, the term may have been intended
as a general expression for the British isles. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

The Druids, Caesar tells us, are concerned in divine matters,
superintend public and private sacrifices, interpret religious rites,
determine controversies, inheritance, boundaries of land, rewards and
punishments . . . . "They are said to learn by heart a great number of
verses, for which reason some continue in the discipline twenty
years."--"*They use written characters*."--"Much besides they discourse,
and deliver to youth, upon the stars, and their motion, on the magnitude
of the world and the earth, on the nature of things, on the influence
and power of the immortal Gods."

This particular class, combining the double office of judge and priest,
although common in the time of Caesar to the British isles, would
naturally be found most enlightened in that part of the three kingdoms,
whose direct communication with Spain, from a remote period, brought it
into more immediate contact with the Phœnician navigators; and the
appellations of "Sacred Isle," and "Sacred Promontory," in the works of
Ptolemy and Avienus, lead us involuntarily to the conclusion that,
hundreds of years before the Roman invasion of Britain, Ireland was the
depository of those Phœnician superstitions which afterwards became
adopted throughout the British Isles under the form of Druidism.

The root of the word Druid is to be found with little variation in the
Hiberno-Celtic language of the present day, *Draoj* signifying a Druid,
magician or wise man, and *Draoideacht* or Draoide-achta, magic or the
Druidical form of worship; the golden ornaments in the shape of a half
moon, which have been frequently found in the Irish bogs, are supposed
to have been connected with these superstitions, of which lunar worship
formed a part, and add to the numerous testimonies in proof of its great
antiquity.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

But the high state of perfection, if it may be so called, in which the
Druidical form of worship existed in Ireland, and the superior
acquirements of her Pagan priesthood to those of the British, is best
evinced by the vestige of the Ogham or occult character in which their
mysteries were recorded, and which presents a marked resemblance to the
secret mode of writing, known to have been used for similar purposes by
the hierarchies of the East.

It may therefore be presumed without much stretch of credulity that the
same communication with the Phœnician settlers on the coast of Spain
which transmitted these eastern superstitions to the Irish shore, may
have also brought with it some knowledge of navigation, and the
construction of ships; and therefore, that we are not driven to the
hide-covered currach for a means of transporting the Celtic settlers to
the American coast.

Or if the theory of those be adopted, who would bring the first
colonists of Ireland from Belgic, or Celtic Gaul, the description of
that people by Caesar will furnish equal evidence of maritime knowledge
at a period sufficiently early to transport an expedition to America in
the first centuries of the Christian era. The Veneti, inhabiting that
district of Armoric Gaul, now known by the name of Vannes, are stated to
have had vessels of considerable bulk and power, and admirably adapted
as well for coasting voyages, as a stormy sea. The hull was of oak, the
beams a foot in breadth, and fastened with iron, the bottom flat, the
sails of leather, and what to nautical men may, perhaps, appear somewhat
wonderful in those early days, the anchors were secured by means of
*chain cables*.

Looking therefore, either to the Phœnician, Carthaginian, Iberian,
Belgic, Gallic, or Scythic intercourse of an

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

early period,--to the more continuous Scandinavian occupation of later
years,--or to the primitive mode of transport of the simple skiff, it is
evident that ample nautical means were not wanting in Ireland to
transfer any part of her population to the western shores of America
long before the period when Great Ireland became known to the Northmen.

The absence of any notice of such a migration in Irish Annals,--if such
be the case,--is no argument against the probability of its existence.
The most brilliant period of Irish History remains unsupported by Irish
manuscripts. Of that enlightened age when pupils from all parts of
Europe sought learning from Irish seminaries and Irish
ecclesiastics,--when Columbkill dispensed the light of Christianity to
the Picts, Columbanus to the French, Callus to the Swiss, and the
brothers Ultan and Foilan to the Belgians,--when Virgilius, the Apostle
of Carinthia, astounded the German bishops with his superior knowledge
of cosmography and science--not one authentic written record now
remains. <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52)

Invasion from without, and internal dissension from within, have swept
away all written testimonies of a time, when the intellectual and
religious eminence of Ireland attracted the attention and admiration of
neighbouring nations, and obtained for her the just distinction of
"Sacred Island" and "School of the West:" it cannot therefore be a
matter of surprise that the records of earlier history should

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

have been lost amid the ravages of such general devastation. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)

But further examination of Icelandic Annals may possibly throw more
light upon this interesting question, and tend to unravel the mystery in
which the original inhabitants of America are involved. Lord
Kingsborough's splendid publication <span id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54)
in 1829 first brought to the notice of the British public the striking
similitude between Mexican and Egyptian monuments; the ruins of
Palenque, Guatemala and Yucatan, the former rivalling the pyramids of
Egypt or the ruins of Palmyra, were only known to a few hunters until
the end of the 18th century, and modern travellers are still engaged in
bringing the hidden wonders of this and other regions of the vast
American continent to the knowledge of the literary world

The argument founded upon the absence of Irish records might as
reasonably be applied to these later publications of the north; and why,
may it as well be asked, was the discovery of American by the Northmen
in the 10th century not satisfactorily established until the
nineteenth?--The

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

name of Vinland was, doubtless, known to Torfæus; and Wormskiold, Malte
Brun and others, following the erroneous calculation which he had made
of its locality, fixed it in a latitude with which the physical features
of the country did not correspond: <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55)
hence the whole statement in the Sagas was long looked upon as
fictitious; but the more accurate recent investigations of Danish
archaeologists have set the question at rest, and the discovery of
America by the Northmen has assumed its proper position in the history
of the tenth century.

The existence of a Celtic or Irish settlement upon the south-eastern
shores of North America, does not preclude the co-existence of other
races upon the western and northern shores. A colony from western
Ireland may have been planted on the east, while tribes from eastern
Asia had settled on the west; and both have driven before them the less
civilized, or more feeble Scythic wanderers, who may have entered at the
north: all emanating,--but by distinct and separate channels,--from the
one great center, which peopled the wide spread sphere, and thus
multiplying, in every region and every clime, the living evidences of
those sacred records which offer peace and immortality to man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[272:1](nda25.htm#fr_46) Some of the MSS. add
"*vestr*," shewing that Ireland was spoken of as lying westwards from
Iceland.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[272:2](nda25.htm#fr_47) Probably Limerick,
which was much frequented by the Northmen.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[273:1](nda25.htm#fr_48) This is a very
remarkable passage, and affords the strongest grounds for believing that
the country to which they were driven had been previously colonized from
Ireland. The Northmen, from their intercourse with the Irish ports,
might be supposed to have had just sufficient knowledge of the language
to detect its sounds (here probably corrupted), and understand the
general meaning of the words.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[286:1](nda25.htm#fr_49) The Irish are supposed
to have obtained the name of Scots or Scoti from the Scotic or Scythic
origin of the Spanish settlers under the sons of Milesius, whose
invasion Moore places "about a century or two" before the Christian era;
other more enthusiastic national historians take us back to 800 years
before that period; and O'Halloran fixes the lauding on the 17th of May,
A. M. 2736, or 1264 years before the birth of Christ. The name Scott, he
derives from Scota, the wife of Niulus, High Priest of Phœnius, the
inventor of letters, and ancestor of Milesius, in proof of which is
given a quotation from an Irish poem of the 9th century, entitled, Canam
bunadhas na Nagaoidheal, or "Let us rehearse the origin of the Irish."

<span id="fn_50"></span>[288:1](nda25.htm#fr_50) "We may therefore
admit, without much chance of error, that the Cassiterides visited by
the Phœnicians, were the British *islands*, though the Romans understood
by the name the islands of Scilly, with perhaps, part of the coast of
Cornwall."

<span id="fn_51"></span>[289:1](nda25.htm#fr_51) It should be
recollected that Cæsar merely mentions the origin of the Druids as
traditionary: "Disciplinam *existimatur* reperta esse in Britannia," &c.
Ibid. Sharon Turner would appear to lean to the opinion of Druidism
having originated with the Phœnicians or Carthaginians: "if this
system," he observes, "was the creature of a more civilized people, none
of the colonizers of Britain are so likely to have been its parents as
the Phœnicians or Carthaginians; the fact so explicitly asserted by
Cæsar, that the Druidical system began in Britain, and was thence
introduced into Gaul, increases our tendency to refer it to those
nations. The state of Britain was Inferior in civilization to that of
Gaul, and therefore It seems more reasonable to refer the intellectual
parts of Druidism to the foreign visitors *who are known* to have
cultivated such subjects, than to suppose them to have originated from
the rude unassisted natives."

<span id="fn_52"></span>[292:1](nda25.htm#fr_52) This point Is ably
handled by Mr. Moore, who shews that the arguments against ancient Irish
history, founded upon the non-existence of any authentic MSS. prior to
the 9th century (Psalter of Cashel), applies with much greater force to
the comparatively modern periods above mentioned, the records of which
are never questioned. Hist. Ir. Vol. I., p. 308.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[293:1](nda25.htm#fr_53) O'Halloran charges the
English Government with a wholesale destruction of Irish MSS. previous
to the reign of James I,:--

"What the false piety and mistaken zeal of the early Christians left
unfinished, the Danes continued, and the Saxon and Norman invaders
completed.. ..In Ireland, until the accession of James I, it was a part
of state policy to destroy or carry off all the manuscripts that could
be discovered. "What the president Carew," says the author of the
Analect (p. 555) "did in one province (Munster), Henry Sidney and his
predecessors did all over the kingdom, being charged to collect all the
manuscripts they could, that they might effectually destroy every
vestige of antiquity and letters throughout the kingdom! The learned
Archdeacon Lynch, with many others, give too many melancholy instances
of the kind." Hist. Ireland,, p. 94. "Many of these precious remains,"
says Moore, "were, as the author of Cambrensis Eversus tells us,
actually torn up by boys for covers of books, and by tailors for
measures. It was till the time of James I., says Mr. Webb, an object of
government to discover and destroy every literary remain of the Irish,
in order the more fully to eradicate from their minds every trace of
their ancient independence." Moore's Hist. of Ireland, V. I. p. 309,
note.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[293:2](nda25.htm#fr_54) "Mexican Antiquities,"
a work upon which this lamented nobleman expended (at least) £30,000 and
the best years of his life, but the circulation of which, from the small
number of copies printed, and the inaccessible price (£150) to the
majority of the reading public, was necessarily very limited.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[294:1](nda25.htm#fr_55) Torfæus, in consequence
of an erroneous interpretation of the passage, pp.
[64](nda07.htm#page_64), [65](nda07.htm#page_65), in the Saga of Erik
the Red, relating to the length of the day, which he took to be eight
hours instead of nine, fixed the latitude of Vinland at 49 degrees,
being that of Newfoundland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Norumbega](nda26)
