[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mht15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0893144177/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Most Holy Trinosophia*, by Count St.Germain \[1933\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

### NOTES AND COMMENTARIES

<span id="img_08700"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![I](img/08700.jpg.md) |

NITIATION into the Mysteries was defined by the ancient philosophers as
life’s supreme adventure and as the greatest good that can be conferred
upon the human soul during its terrestrial sojourn. Plato, in the
Phaedrus, writes thus of the supreme importance of acceptance into the
sacred Rites: "Likewise, in consequence of this divine initiation, we
become spectators of entire, simple, immovable and blessed visions in a
pure light; and were, ourselves, pure and immaculate and *liberated from
this surrounding vestment which we denominated body*, and to which we
are now bound as an oyster to its shell.'

St. Paul also refers to the "inner experience" by which we come to KNOW.
He says, "We speak of wisdom among the perfect, not the wisdom of this
world, nor of the Archons (Rulers) of this world, but divine wisdom in a
mystery, secret, which none of the Archons of this world know." An
initiation is an extension of consciousness toward an appreciation of
universal realities. The mystical ceremonials of the pagans and early
Christians were but the outward symbols of inward processes. By obscure
rites and pageantries the precious arcana of perfection was transmitted
from age to age. The profane were satisfied by the solemnity of the
outward forms and rituals, but the Adepts, those who had received the
keys, applied the wisdom which was locked within the allegories to
perfecting their internal spiritual faculties. Origen, the most mystical
of the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

anti-Nicean fathers, in his preface to St. John, admits the twofold
nature of all theological revelations: "To the literal minded \[or
exoterici\] we teach the Gospel in the historic way, preaching Jesus
Christ and Him crucified; but to the proficient, fired with the love of
Divine Wisdom \[the esoterici\] we impart the Logos \[the Word\].

Perfection is not bestowed: it is achieved. Men do not become wise
merely through the witnessing of sacred dramas . . . rather, by the
understanding of them. Symbolism is the language of divine truths, a
writing by means of which may be intimated things which it is unlawful
to actually reveal. "For the mystic symbols are well known to us who
belong to the Brotherhood." (Plutarch). By initiation the rule of works
is established. The divine man and the divine in man are brought to
completeness by works alone. The adepts of the old schools were "wise
Master Builders" with vision to see, with courage to do, and wisdom to
remain silent. "There is a secrecy and silence observed in all
Mysteries," wrote Tertullian, the creator of ecclesiastic Latinity.

During the ceremonials of initiation the neophyte was given the *LAW*.
The great verities by which the universe moves towards its inevitable
identity with God were revealed. It remained for the Initiate to apply
this Law and through this application to achieve conscious immortality.
There is a forking of the ways of knowledge at which practice diverges
from theory. A man may either fulfill the Law and thus by enlightened
action come finally to perfection, or he may accept the word of the Law
and, ignoring the spirit of it, remain as he is . . . imperfect and
unenlightened. He who receives the *LOGOS* and abides in the spirit
thereof gradually increases in wisdom. The Nazarean theurgists said of
such a one that "he had an oath." He was dedicated to the release of his
inner part from the domination of his outer senses and appetites. Says
Aretaeus, "Until the soul is set free it works within the body and is
obscured by vapors and clay." By vapors is arcanely signified the
appetites and excesses of the emotions which are as substanceless as a
mist, and by the clay is meant the unresponsiveness of the corporeal
form.

To increase in wisdom is to increase in enlightenment, for by
enlightenment is inferred the illumining of the inner recesses of the
reason by the light of the Logos—the spiritual sun. This development of
the ability to know by philosophic discipline is accompanied by
extensions of realization and appreciation. These extensions are the
true growth of the soul which increases towards inclusiveness. Hence, in
the sacred writings, this expansion of the soul’s sphere of action is
called initiation. By initiation the indwelling divinity verges towards
its own cause, the eternal Good. The chambers of

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

initiation are the "many mansions" through which the indwelling divinity
must pass as through the tortuous windings of the Cretan labyrinth.
Along its course are many doors, through each of which it is ushered
into a larger and more luminous area of function and action. With each
increase of our ability to appreciate the magnitudes of the divine plan,
we are said to be reborn. Rebirth is the passing out from an old
condition into a new state, from an old limitation to a new extension.
As we grow in knowledge, our universe seems to enlarge with us, taking
on the measure of our new constitution. Wisdom releases.

The academies of the old Mysteries invited the wisest and best of
humanity to depart from the mortal shadow of worldliness and devote
itself to those labors which are truly eternal. The perfection of Self
is the Great Work, the beginning and end of wisdom: the perfected Self
is the perfect offering and the consummation of the Great Work. He who
is perfect is of the greatest use to others, the greatest good to
himself and the most acceptable offering to the Most High.

With the collapse of the old pagan world and the corruption of the early
Christian Church, the Mysteries ceased as great institutions. Their
doctrines were lost, their priestcrafts were scattered, and their
temples fell to ruin. New theories, for the most part superficial and
insufficient, took the place of the earlier wisdom; and education,
divorced from its spiritual part, laid the foundation for our present
chaos. But the wise remained true to the ancient Rites. Those who had
received the arcana could not, did not, forget. They gathered in secret,
taught in secret and worshipped in secret. The temple fire burned in the
hearts of its initiates. The outer forms crumbled away; but the inner
spirit, strengthened by its participation in an everlasting truth, was
immortal. Out of the darkness of a degenerate civilization, across the
desert of sterile centuries, and finally through the Red Sea of the
Inquisition the Mystics of the ancient wisdom carried triumphantly the
Ark of their covenant.

The so-called Middle Ages were an era of fantastic symbolism. The
Hermetists devised composite monsters borrowed from the gods of Egypt;
the Cabbalists illuminated vellum with curious figures, seals,
pentacles, and grotesque signatures of demons; the alchemists filled
huge volumes with weird formulas telling of the mystic properties of
toads and dragon’s blood. In the dark field of medieval superstition
there also grew and blossomed the Mystic Rose, to be finally choked out
by the weeds of bigotry. These were strange centuries when false faith
had put wisdom to hazard. Yet who dares to deny that the mystical
traditions endured, and, clothed

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

in the terms of Egyptian myths and chemistry, were still available to
such as had eyes to perceive the tortured truth?

Against the background of dogmatic ignorance and purposeless pedantry
stands out sharply and clearly the luminous personality of the Comte de
St.-Germain. Master of the old wisdom, wise in forgotten truths,
proficient in all the curious arts of antiquity, learned beyond any
other man of the modern world, the mysterious Comte personified in his
own incredible achievements the metaphysical traditions of fifty
centuries. A thousand times the questions have been asked: where did
St.-Germain secure his astonishing knowledge of natural law? How did he
perpetuate himself from century to century, defying the natural
corruption which brings prince, priest, and pauper alike to a common
end? St.-Germain was the mouthpiece and representative of the
brotherhood of philosophers which had descended in an unbroken line from
the hierophants of Greece and Egypt. He had received the Logos. By his
wisdom he confounded the elders. The life of this one man puts to naught
the scholastic smugness of two thousand years.

*La Très Sainte Trinosophie* is supremely significant in that it sets
forth the spiritual processes which finally result in adeptship. It is
the diary of the soul’s coming of age. It may well be the actual record
of St.-Germain’s own acceptance into the mystical brotherhood of which
he finally became the Grand Master. As the purpose of the manuscript was
the instruction of disciples already familiar with the secret
terminology, the whole account is set forth symbolically in fragments of
ritual and allegory derived from the ceremonials of the classical era.
Though the first reading may serve only to perplex, a deep and careful
analysis of the text will gradually enlighten. Each will discover in the
writing that which he himself knows, he will interpret it according to
that which he himself is, and he will apply it according to that which
he himself desires. Symbols are all things to all men, yet beneath the
wide diversity of interpretations of which they are susceptible is a
wisdom simple and inevitable which can be comprehended only by the truly
wise. Opinions, theories, and beliefs fall away; at the root of every
emblem is a fact. Our manuscript is rich in these veiled facts and we
are reminded by the author that no part of it is without hidden
significance.

*La Très Sainte Trinosophie* is divided into twelve sections. Each is
illuminated by an appropriate design. The early sections seem to derive
their inspiration from the neo-Egyptian ritual called the Rite of
Memphis, and the trials of the candidate are concerned directly with the
four elements—earth, water, fire, and air. The grand

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

pattern for the whole document is the Zodiac, to the signs of which the
twelve sections of the writing are related. The Zodiac is the great soul
cycle and the sun’s passage through the zodiacal symbols is the original
from which the ancient priestcrafts derived the authority for their
sacred circumambulations. The ancients accepted the first sign of the
zodiac as the beginning and the last sign as the end of all mundane
activity. Similarly, Aries typified the beginning of regeneration or the
entrance of the soul into light at the vernal equinox of the philosophic
cycle, while Pisces signified the completion of the sacred pilgrimage
and the accomplishment of the Magnum Opus.

St.-Germain chiefly employs alchemical symbols in this book of The
Threefold Wisdom. This in no way infers that he is actually writing of
chemical processes, for, as most of the great alchemists have agreed,
the manufacturing of material gold is the least part of their science.
That St.-Germain’s meaning may be clear and the correlations between the
zodiacal signs and the alchemical processes become evident, the
following table will prove useful:

|                                 |                            |                                                                                                                                     |
|---------------------------------|----------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Aries                           | Calcination                | Expulsion of the animal soul through heat. (Purification by the fire of aspiration.)                                                |
| Taurus                          | Congelation                | The union of parts; the achievement of one-pointedness or purpose.                                                                  |
| Gemini                          | Fixation                   | The condition of becoming firm, the fixing of the will.                                                                             |
| Cancer                          | Dissolution                | To dissolve or to suspend in a fluid state; the universalizing of the personality.                                                  |
| Leo                             | Digestion                  | To soften by heat and moisture; to perfect the mind in wisdom (heat) and imagination (humidity).                                    |
| Virgo                           | Distillation               | The separation of the volatile principle from substance; the release of the soul from its involvement in bodily limitation.         |
| Libra                           | Sublimation                | The refining of elemental bodies; the increasing of the vibratory harmonies of the body.                                            |
| <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> |                            |                                                                                                                                     |
| Scorpio                         | Separation or Putrefaction | The philosophic death; an artificial decay by which the spiritual and material elements are separated from each other.              |
| Sagittarius                     | Incineration               | The burning away of dross; the soul fire comsumes the external body.                                                                |
| Capricorn                       | Fermentation               | The conversion of organic susbtance into new compounds by a ferment; the building of the Golden Man.                                |
| Aquarius                        | Multiplication             | The process of increasing; adeptship.                                                                                               |
| Pisces                          | Projection                 | The process of transmuting base substance into Gold; the perfection of the Work; immortality; in the eastern tradition, Buddhahood. |

The arrangement of these symbols and processes differs in minor degree
among the various writers, but the principle is always the same—the tran
mutation of the not-Self into the Self; the tincturing of the outer life
with the inner grace; the projection of soul upon its physical
environment; the sublimation of evil into good; the multiplication of
beauty, love, and truth until finally the powder of projection (wisdom)
shall tincture the whole world. The alchemists tell us that a minute
particle of the "Red Lion" can transmute into the purest gold a hundred
thousand times its own weight. Wisdom—and wisdom alone—can accomplish
this, for one wise man can perfect the ages, and a little truth will in
time so greatly increase that the universe may not contain it.

A ritual not dissimilar to that contained in the present writing is set
forth in the Popul Vuh, the sacred book of the Quichi Indians of Central
America. The neophyte, in his quest for wisdom, passes in succession
through twelve tests: He crosses a river of blood (Aries) then a river
of mud (Taurus), he detects a subterfuge (Gemini), he enters the house
of darkness (Cancer), then the house of spears (Leo), the house of cold
(Virgo), the house of tigers (Libra), the house of fire (Scorpio), and
the house of bats (Sagittarius) where he dies (incineration). The
picture at the head of the ninth section of St.Germain’s book depicts
death. The body of the Indian neophyte is burned on a scaffold
(Capricorn), the ashes scattered on the river (Aquarius), the ashes turn
into a man-fish (Pisces), in which form the initiate, who has completed
the cycle, destroys the evil genius who was his adversary through the
initiatory ritual. The twelve

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Princes of Xibalba
who are the Keepers of the Mysteries are of course the zodiacal gods.

As we follow St.-Germain into the lava beds of Vesuvius we indeed "tread
upon the threshold of Persephone." We follow him in his soul quest for
truth. Now we read only the symbols and we understand only in part, but
ultimately we must achieve as he achieved and face the universal course
with the same high courage that pressed him on to mastership. His
symbols are from the Book of Life, and although we do not see in daily
incident and happening the tests of which he writes, still each in his
own sphere of experience faces the same hazards herein defined. We
wander in the caverns of uncertainty; the ghostly forms of doubt harass
us; fear steals away our strength, selfishness our vision, and ignorance
our courage. But we are all alchemists in the laboratory of life: each
is distilling the elixir of experience. In due time each shall have
accomplished the perfection of this mysterious alchemical fluid, and
with it shall tincture his world and himself. Upon the base metals of
this present age he shall sprinkle the magical powder which his soul has
discovered; the ages of Iron, of Silver, of Copper, and of Lead shall
vanish away, and the Golden Age of the philosophers shall shine forth.

INTERPRETATION OF FIGURES AND TEXT

*SECTION I*.

(*Figure* I, page [34](mht04.htm#page_34).md) The highly decorated title
page of the manuscript is a valuable key to the interpretation of the
entire work. De Givry describes the emblems thus: "This author’s
symbolism is Egyptianized in the fashion of the day. On the title page
of the work \* \* \* we find \* \* \* the bird of Hermes, a tree with
golden fruit, and a vase in which the work is achieved, the primitive
material under the form of a ball embraced by two wings, and a luminous
triangle containing the Divine Name." In another place he adds: "The
Hebrew name El is on the right with another divine name lower down
written in Arabic; the letters AB near the latter are indicative of the
alphabet and represent the Word—The Divine Word. On the left is a Hebrew
inscription taken from the first verses of the Book of Genesis: 'And the
earth was without form, and void (HOhu-va-Bohu); and darkness was upon
the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God (Ruach Elohim) moved upon
the face of the waters'."

The letters in the golden triangle do not form the sacred name Jehovah
but, when decoded, yield the cryptic words: "Breathe after this One."
That the "soul breath" of the Cabbalists is to be inferred is evident
from the wings behind the hawk of Ra in the upper left corner. The
second square from the top at the right is of especial Freemasonic
interest. A candidate for initiation into the Mysteries

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

stands in symbolic posture before an altar—with "one shoe off and one
shoe on." The Hebrew letters *AL* (*EL*) in the small circle are one of
the ten Cabbalistic names of God signifying "God, the Creator," and is
associated with the Sephira Chesed or mercy. The letters AB are the
mystical signature of the writer who was a "father" (abba) or master of
the secret wisdom. The letters are also an abbreviation for an
alchemical process. The Arabic "divine name" really consists of Hebrew
words written in Arabic characters which read: "The Lord, the Most High,
purifies." The Hebrew inscription in the lower left corner, while
unquestionably the second verse of the first chapter of Genesis, does
not read as in the Authorized Version. Characters have been changed and
the sense altered to read in substance: "And the earth shall be a
desolate waste. There shall be lamenting, and hate and consternation
shall be upon the Face. And the Breath of El-him, because of the
presence of the spirit, shall destroy those that have departed from
God."

Analysis of the Text.

In the opening chapter of his manuscript, St.-Germain ingeniously
depicts the "relapsed" state of the human soul. The dungeon of the
Inquisition is the sphere of man’s animal consciousness. The physical
world, dominated by inquisitional impulses, constitutes the soul’s
torture chamber and house of testing. To the sage the material universe
is the antechamber where gather those who are awaiting acceptance into
the sacred rites. When the Comte speaks of "this place of exile" and the
"monarchs who rule" over it, he refers to the illusionary universe and
"the princes of this world." Here is the Prometheus myth, the Titan
bound to Caucasus for indiscretion, and Lucifer chained in the
bottomless pit for pride.

Throughout the early pages is traceable the allegory of the Prodigal
Son. First is depicted humanity’s heroic state during the Golden Age
before sin and death came into the world. St.-Germain describes himself
as "showered with the blessings of heaven and surrounded by power such
as the human mind cannot conceive." The Comte then writes that "one
moment destroyed everything." The mystery of the Fall of Man has never
been revealed to the profane. The great cyclic law which swept the hosts
of fiery Sparks into the abyss is known only to the elect. In the
darkness of chaos the rebel spirits established their world. They built
the cosmos and were locked within each of the material elements which
they had willed into being. When the lower earth had been completed, the
great Father desired to draw back into Himself His prodigal creation. To
accomplish this He caused to issue from His own being His *WORD*—the
Sotar or Messiah. Descending from the Abode of Light this heavenly
Archon diminished its splendor, and investing its glory in the dark
robes of earth, took upon Itself the cross of the cycles.

To the Gnostics, the physical universe was compounded of the dregs of
spirit. It was the abortion of space. Material existence was nature’s
punishment for the rebellion of the angels. This was clearly set forth
in the initiatory rituals which taught that men were reborn in earthly
bodies as punishment for sin. Those who perfected themselves were born
no more, but, like Buddha at the Great Release, passed on to the Nirvana
of the wise—a birthless, deathless state. From the dun,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

geons of materiality the sages released themselves through the practice
of their esoteric rites. Perfected in wisdom, these Initiates broke
through the adamantine wall of the mortal sphere and emerged into the
light of God.

The alchemical interpretation relates to the elementary spirits locked
within the physical forms of the elements. It should be noted that in
his procedure through the initiatory trials, St.-Germain identifies
*himself* with the substance from which the Philosopher’s Stone is to be
formed. He is the alchemical *matter* itself passing through twelve
cycles of refinement. It thus becomes evident that the alchemists
recognized that their Great Work consisted of the transmutation of
themselves. The earth (the dungeon) is filled with the seed souls of
precious metals; here they are locked awaiting Art and Wisdom. As gold
exists within every grain of sand but is incapable of manifesting itself
unless stimulated by alchemical processes, so the seeds of truth,
beauty, and knowledge exist within the dark earth of man’s animal
organism. The growth and perfection of these precious virtues is
stimulated by discipline and in the fullness of time all base impulses
and purposes are transmuted into the gold of soul power.

*SECTION II*.

(*Figure* II, page [40](mht05.htm#page_40).md) In his notes on the
*Trinosophia*, de Givry concerns himself solely with the alchemical
import of the symbolism of this figure. He says of the second plate that
it "represents a man gazing into a prophetic cup forming a magic mirror.
The conjoined signs of the Sun and the Moon are seen against the
pedestal of the table; at the top of the figure a super-position of
differently colored rectangles indicates the phases of the Work; and the
double sign of the lingam in a circle emblematically recalls the
Hermetic male and female. An inscription in Greek letters and made-up
characters gives a formula for the composition of Gold, or the Sun-King,
by means of a mixture of gold and silver regenerated by vital mercury;
linked to the blue rectangle giving this formula is a lower red
rectangle inscribed with the rule for the furnace fire in Hebrew
characters."

A careful analysis inclines us to suspect a more profound significance.
The circle at the upper right, though possibly phallic in its
superficial sense, is actually an occult monogram or seal containing two
Greek letters. Translated these signify "the Light of God" or "the Light
of Revelation." The rectangles at the upper left are the elements. The
arrangement is Oriental. The lower four are crowned by the fifth—the
quintessence, the mysterious Æther of the sages. The inscription in the
upper panel describes the quickening of the soul seed by the warmth of
the eastern quarter. (Aries.) There is also reference to the Breath
which moves in the vessel, or upon the waters. The number 62 appears,
accompanied by the admonition to open the heavenly gate (clairvoyance)
with the aid of the vessel or cup. Does the cup (ark) contain the Water
of Lethe, by partaking of which souls descending into generation lose
all memory of their heavenly origin? Or does it contain the Water of
Mnemosyne which flows at the gateway of wisdom and of which

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the adepts drink, the water of remembrance by which the soul remembers
its own substance and origin?

The female figure is Isis in her role of Initiatrix. She is Nature, and
her black skirt is the corporeal world by which part of her body is
concealed. The naked man is the neophyte. Unclothed he came into the
world and unclothed he must be born again. Bereft of all adornment,
stripped of all insignia of rank and power, he may bring to the temple
nothing that he has—only that which he is.

The table upheld by the Sun and Moon and at the base of which burns the
everlasting fire, is the world. The objects lying upon it, or held by
Isis, are three of the suit symbols which appear upon Tarot cards. The
whole design, in fact, is not dissimilar to that major Tarot trump which
is called Le Bateleur, the Juggler. The cup is the symbol of water, the
*spearhead* of fire and the *wand* of air. Fire, air, and water are the
symbols of the great Magical Agent. Their names in Hebrew are Chamah,
Ruach, and Majim, and by the Cabbala the first letter of each of these
words—*Ch*, *R*, and *M*—constitute Chiram, known to Freemasons as
Hiram. This is the invisible essence which is the father of the four
elements, and designates itself Chiram Telat Mechasot—Chiram the
Universal Agent, one in essence, three in aspect, in which is hidden the
wisdom of the whole world.

The Hebrew characters in the panel above the head of Isis are
translated: "On account of distress they shall cling to the Bestower,"
which means that those (the wise) who have become wearied with
worldliness shall turn to wisdom, the bestower of all good things.

Analysis of the Text.

The account of the initiatory ritual now begins. The disciple has waited
the appointed time in the dark material universe which is the womb of
the Mysteries. The process of philosophical birth proceeds according to
the ancient and immutable law. The neophyte, veiled and bearing the
Golden Bough (the mistletoe), advances toward the iron altar.

The choice of Vesuvius as the scene for the initiation is exceedingly
appropriate. The vent of the volcano leads downward into the
subterranean strata of the earth where dwell the subterranean deities
who must be first propitiated. The volcano is also the symbol of the
alchemical furnace. The veil signifies that the neophyte has reached the
state of the mystæ—one who perceives through a veil, or, in the
Christian Mysteries, "as through a glass darkly." Pliny refers to the
mistletoe as the "all-healer." It was presumably the Golden Bough given
to Æneas as a passport to the infernal regions. Sir James Frazer thus
comments upon the initiatory ceremony as set forth by Virgil:

"If the mistletoe, as a yellow withered bough in the sad autumn woods,
was conceived to contain the seed of fire, what better companion could a
forlorn wanderer in the nether shades take with him than a bough that
would be a lamp to his feet as well as a rod and staff to his hands?
Armed with it he might boldly confront

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the dreadful spectres that would cross his path on his adventurous
journey. Hence when Æneas, emerging from the forest, comes to the banks
of Styx, winding slow with sluggish stream through the infernal marsh,
and the surly ferryman refuses him passage in his boat, he has but to
draw the Golden Bough from his bosom and hold it up, and straightway the
blusterer quails at the sight and meekly receives the hero into his
crazy bark, which sinks deep in the water under the unusual weight of
the living man."

Mistletoe is a parasite, and as such symbolizes the heavenly man within
the mortal body. The soul grows from the body and in it, but is not of
it, for as the tree takes its nourishment from the earth even so the
body receives its sustenance from material sources; but the mistletoe
derives its vitality not from the dark loam but from the tree and the
air. The mistletoe is said to be luminous in the darkness, and has been
called the wise man’s torch. Its luminosity is the light of the internal
organs—the aura of the brain. He who bears the branch announces his
fitness to receive the initiation.

The neophyte lays the branch upon the iron altar; he gives himself to
the law, assuming the responsibilities of spiritual progress. The sacred
Word is spoken. The hallowed Bough bursts into flame: the sacrifice is
accepted. The earth opens. Down through the Royal Arches as into a great
abyss passes the candidate. The mists clear, revealing a vast cavern—the
dark mother from which all things must come—similar in significance to
Porphyry’s cave of the nymphs. The long white robe is the seamless
garment of the Nazarene woven from the endless thread of experience. The
copper lamp is enlightened love, without which no man may follow the
narrow path of wisdom. Robed in purity, illumined with compassion and
understanding, the neophyte follows the black vaulted passage which
leads to immortality.

After a great distance the passage ends in a square room from which lead
four doors. This is the Hall of Choosing. The doors signify the courses
which the soul can pursue. The black door is the path of asceticism and
labor; the red door is that of faith; the blue door is that of
purification, and the white door is that of adept-ship and of the
highest Mysteries. In the Bhagavad-Gita, Krishna describes these paths
and those who follow them, and reveals that the last is the highest and
the most perfect.

The neophyte enters through the black door of asceticism and labor and
is about to pass through the red door of enlightened love when it closes
upon him. He then turns to the door of purification and sacrifice but
this will not receive him. Then the star, the symbol of his essential
dæmon or genius, darts through the white door. Fate has decreed
adeptship. The neophyte follows his star.

The alchemical significance of the account reveals that at the beginning
of the Great Work the power of choice is given to the operator, that he
may decide the end to which his labor shall be directed. The black door
represents the making of material gold; the red door the Universal
Medicine for the healing of the nations;

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

the blue door the Elixir of Life, and the white door the Philosopher’s
Stone. From the door which is chosen we discover that aspect of the
Great Work which our author contemplates.

*SECTION III*.

(*Figure* III, page [44](mht06.htm#page_44).md) Two lions, one red and the
other black, guard the Crown. The Crown is Kether, the fountain of
wisdom. The king of beasts symbolizes nobility and rulership. In ancient
times, figures of lions adorned the thrones of princes. These animals
were also guardians of gates, and in Egypt the Sphinx, the man-headed
lioness guarded the entrance to the House of the Mysteries.

The inscription upon the flank of the lion is inverted. An inverted
symbol signifies a perverted power: thus, nobility becomes tyranny and
greatness leads to despotism. In the introduction to his writing,
St.-Germain warns his disciples of two adversaries which the neophyte
must overcome. One he terms the *misuse of power* and the other
*indiscretion*. The black lion represents tyranny and the red lion,
lust. Those who would accomplish wisdom must overcome these animals if
they would reach the Crown which lies beyond. The black lion is the
temptation of power—the impulse to build temporal empire in a spiritual
universe. The red lion is the temptation to possess. Its ministers in
the human body are the sense perceptions which would deflect the
aspiring candidate from his holy course and lead him into the fantastic
sphere of appetite and desire. There can be no compromise with these
monsters of perversion.

With the vision there appears suspended the strung bow of the will and
two lance-pointed arrows. Quickly must the bow be drawn and to the heart
of each beast a shaft be driven. "Kill out desire," decrees the eastern
master. "Slay ambition," wrote the western sage. The clouds upon which
the lions stand signify the unsubstantiality of the world’s pomp and
circumstance, while in the clear sky above, the golden Crown floats
unsupported. Wisdom is a sufficient foundation for itself, but all other
bodies and conditions depend for their support upon the frail stuff
"that dreams are made on."

The panel above the lions commands that man should bend the knee and
worship the all-powerful God who sends forth His love in winged splendor
from the first angle of the world. (Aries.) It also informs that the
sixth sign, which is mighty and powerful, is the ending and completion
of the ages. Virgo, the sixth sign of the zodiac, is the symbol of
service and renunciation by which the lions may be overcome. He who
gives up life for wisdom shall receive a fuller life.

Beneath the lions is a panel containing Greek characters which mean:
"Each must sprinkle himself with his own wine from the mountain of
Chios. He must drink to God before the wood. He must give himself in
exchange for that for which he yearns." These words are from an old
ritual. Wood was the symbol of Dionysius and it was in honor of this god
of the wood and of the vine that the ritual of the Communion was first
established. To drink of one’s own blood or to sprinkle oneself with his
own wine is to be immersed in or tinctured by the inner soul power.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fermentation was
the presence of Bacchus or the life in the juice of the grape, and the
Greeks used the symbol of intoxication, as do the Sufis of Islam, to
represent ecstacy. A man in an ecstatic state was described by them as
being one "intoxicated with God."

Analysis of the Text.

The first initiation is that of *earth*, represented by the black marble
passage, ways in the subterranean regions of the volcano. To pass this
test the body must be subdued in all its parts and become a perfect
instrument of the enlightened will. The bodily atoms and molecules must
be vibrated anew until there is no part of the physical fabric which
does not pulsate with spiritually directed energy.

The second mystery in the order of the Memphis Rite is that of *water*,
and at the beginning of this section the candidate finds himself
standing on the shore of a vast underground lake. This is the sea of
ether which separates the two worlds. It is the humidic body of the
earth, the sphere of generation. He who would reach the invisible world
must cross this sea, that is, become master of the generative powers of
nature. Led by the blazing star, the candidate throws himself into the
midst of the waves. With his lamp upon the crown of his head (the spirit
fire lifted into the pineal gland) he struggles for mastery over the
currents of the etheric world. His strength fails, and he cries out to
the Universal Cause for help. A boat appears, in it seated the king of
the earth with a golden crown upon his forehead. But the boat is pointed
*back* toward the shore from which the neophyte has come. The crowned
man offers the kingdoms of the earth but the disciple of wisdom who has
risen above these things cannot be thus easily tempted. Strengthened by
the courage of righteous decision and aided by the invisible genii, the
candidate fights his way to the distant shore. Before him rises the
silvery wall of the moon, the lady of the sea, whose dominion he has
passed.

The *fire* initiation awaits him. Having mastered the vital principle of
nature by which growth and propagation are controlled, the candidate
next faces ambition, the fire of pride and the flaming tyranny of
emotional excess. He beholds the lions, the fire symbols. The key to the
course of action is revealed by the hieroglyphics. The lions, the
writing and the wall dissolve. The path stretches out through the sphere
of eternal flame.

The alchemical aspect of the symbolism is one of purification or the
passing of the elements of the Stone through a bath. In this process of
purification they pass from an earthy state through a vaporous or watery
condition, to a fiery or gaseous quality. The lunar humidity present in
all bodies must be dried out, which led the Greek philosophers to
declare that "a dry soul is a wise one." The Platonists interpreted this
to mean that the mastery of the lunar principle brought to an end the
reign of corruption by which all bodies are finally dissolved. The moon
rules physical generation or the perpetuation of corruptible forms, but
the sun has dominion over spiritual generation, the creation of
incorruptible bodies. Man is the progeny of fire (the sun), water (the
moon), and air (the bird of Thoth). The

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

temptation by the king with the golden crown suggests one of the most
common difficulties of the alchemical tradition. Those who attempted the
art in most cases failed in their quest for wisdom because they became
fascinated with dreams of wealth. Material gold tempts the alchemist
away from his spiritual quest for enlightenment and immortality.

SECTION IV.

(*Figure* IV, page [48](mht07.htm#page_48).md) Upon an altar formed of the
twelve whorls of a winged serpent twisted about a spear rests the cup of
Everlastingness. The device is derived from the cyclic serpent so often
used in the Rites of Serapis. The twelve coils of the snake are
emblematic of the philosophic year and the spiral course of the Ain
through the zodiacal constellations. In the preparation of the Wise
Man’s Stone the elements pass through twelve stages of augmentation. In
each of these cycles the power of the matter is intensified, a fact
which is suggested by the increasing size of the serpent’s spirals. The
figure is also reminiscent of what the sages termed the philosophic
vortex—the natural form of the soul power in the human body.

In *Isis Unveiled*, H. P. Blavatsky writes: "Before our globe had become
egg-shaped or round it was a long trail of cosmic dust or fire-mist,
moving and writhing like a serpent. This, say the explanations, was the
Spirit of God moving on the Chaos until its breath had incubated cosmic
matter and made it assume the annular shape \* \* \*". In the *Chaldean
Oracles* the Universal Fire is described as moving with a serpentine
motion. The present symbol is the Universal Wisdom moving as a winged
serpent upon the surface of the primitive chaos—that is, the
unregenerated body of the neophyte. The ritual of the Sabazian Mysteries
included the drawing of a live snake across the breast of the candidate.
In the drawing, the serpent is twisted around the backbone—the spear—and
forms an appropriate support for the cup of immortality.

Beside this strange altar stands the jewelled sword. Faintly traceable
upon its sheath are the ancient symbols of the eye, the heart, and the
mouth, symbolic of the three persons of the Creative Triad—life in the
heart, light in the eye, breath in the mouth. The life, the light, and
the breath are the sources of all things and from their union in the
cruciform symbol the candidate must fashion the weapon for his
protection against the elemental darkness. The cycle symbol must be
overcome by wisdom. This is "the sword of quick decision" with which the
Oriental neophyte must cut low the snaky branches of the world banyan
tree, the emblem of the self-replenishing cycles and the law of rebirth.
The serpent is the spiral of evolution; the cup contains the shining
Nirvanic sea into which the soul is finally merged; the sword is the
*illumined will*—the same sword which solves the enigma of life’s
Gordian Knot by cutting it with a single stroke.

The cryptic words on the upper panel carry out this thought. Translated,
they are: "Reverence this vessel (the ark or cup) of Everlastingness;
offer freely of yourself a portion unto *IA* (Iah or Jah, Jehovah) and
to the corner (or angle) in

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

atonement." This is derived from the symbolism of the Chaldeans, who
regarded the Universal Cause as the Lord of the Angles.

Analysis of the Text.

The candidate enters upon the place of fire. A great sea of flames (the
astral world) stretches out in every direction, bubbling and seething
with an infernal fury. The dæmon orders the candidate to advance. With
his mind fixed upon Reality, the disciple obeys, only to discover that
the fire has lost its heat, and he walks unharmed into the midst of the
conflagration. He finds himself in the Temple of Sidereal Fire, in the
midst of which is the greenish-gold form of a serpent with ruby eyes and
diapered scales. The nature of the fire is clearly revealed, for we are
told that one-half of it burns with a vivid light, while the other half
is shadowed and blackish. Here is the serpent of the astral light,
which, according to Eliphas Levi, is twined around every flower that
grows in the garden of Kama, or desire. The yogi in his meditation knows
well the meaning of the House of Fire and the serpent which guards it.
Here the candidate discovers the significance of the Universal
Fire-Spirit which, turned downward, is the root of all evil, but if it
be lifted up, draws all men to wisdom. The serpent-fire must be
overcome. The sword is at hand, and with it the candidate strikes at the
brazen coils. Brass is the composite metal symbolic of the body of man,
before it is reduced by philosophy to its simple elements.

The Lord of the Fire World is vanquished. The senses are controlled; the
appetites are under the iron dominion of the will. Anger, hate, and
pride have been exiled from the soul. The three fires of illusion have
died out. The whole mirage of the astral light fades amidst a terrifying
outburst of sound and color. The candidate is lifted through the Arches
of the underworld. He passes quickly through the monsters that dwell on
the boundaries of excess. The cruciform sword scatters the foul throng
of darkness. Upward and upward, through the numerous layers of the globe
(the orbits of the interior stars) the neophyte rises, after his three
days (degrees) in the darkness of Hades. The stone is rolled away, and
at last, with a burst of glory, he rises into the light of day—the air
sphere where dwells the mind which must be conquered next.

The alchemical philosophy is evident. The circular space is a distilling
vessel which stands in the midst of the furnace flame. The serpent
represents elements within the retort, and the candidate portrays other
elements which have the power to dissolve and corrode the serpent. The
rising of the candidate upward through the walls of the globe here
signifies the vapors which, ascending through the long neck of the
distilling vessel, escape from the heated inferno below.

*SECTION V*.

(*Figure* V, page [50](mht08.htm#page_50).md) The strange bird hovering
above the altar fire is the sacred Ibis, symbol of Thoth, the Egyptian
god of wisdom and letters, and the patron of alchemy. It is the volatile
philosophical Mercury which can remain in a suspended state only "when
in the midst of the flames." By the philosophical Mercury we

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

must understand the regenerated principle of intellect—mind rendered
truly luminous by the flame of inspiration. In its beak the bird carries
a green branch, the acacia of Freemasonry—the symbol of rebirth and
immortality through spiritual enlightenment. The black feet and wings
signify the *earth* principle, the silvery body the *water* principle,
the red head the *fire* principle, and the golden neck the *airy*
principle. The spiritual bodies of the elements are thus united in a
philosophical creature, the bird of the wise men—the phœnix.

Beside the *bird* and the *altar* is an elaborate candlestick, its base
formed of twisted serpents. (Ida and Pingala?) The upper end of the
candlestick terminates in a lotus blossom from which rises a lighted
taper.This is the soul light, the inner radiance which reveals the
secret of the bird. As man’s external existence is lighted by an
external sun, by which he perceives all temporal concerns, so his
internal existence is illuminated by the light of the soul, the radiance
of which renders visible the workings of the divine mind within.

The inscription beneath reads: "To the strong is given the burden." This
refers to the qualifications for adeptship. The great truths of life can
be conferred only upon those who have been tested in the essentials of
character and understanding. In the panel above, the reader is
instructed to "Kindle a fire upon the high place, that the sacrifice may
be borne upward to the Desired One." The symbolism is borrowed from the
ceremonials of the old Jews. Upon the altar of burnt incense a fire was
continually burning. This is the fire of holy aspiration which consumes
the base elements of the body and transmutes them into soul qualities,
symbolized by the incense fumes, and these ascend as evidence of the
spiritual convenant between aspiring humanity and its Creator.

The panel to the right describes the ceremony which accompanies the
building of the sacred fire. The one on the left is part of a ritual, in
substance as follows: "When the years of this existence are done, and
the soul, outbreathing at death, approaches the gate of immortality, may
the bird bear it swiftly away to the abode of the wise." In the Egyptian
rites, the soul of the Initiate departed in the form of a bird which is
shown hovering over the couch on which the mummy lies. The soul-bird
with the green branch refers to the Messianic Mystery as set forth in
the *Book of the Dead*. Wisdom confers immortality upon the soul.
Without wisdom, the soul must perish with the body. This is the secret
of the ritual of the *Coming Forth by Day* or the *Breathing Out of the
Ka*.

Analysis of the Text.

The candidate next experienced the mystery of the *airy* or intellectual
principle. He is raised out of the subterranean depths by his guardian
spirit and lifted into the higher atmosphere. Below him is the desert.
Special attention is called to triangular masses—the pyramids. An early
manuscript in our collection affirms that the Egyptians were able to
manufacture the Philosopher’s Stone without artificial heat by burying
the retort in the desert sand, which furnished the exact temperature for
alchemical experiments. The desert is here a symbol for the aridity

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

and unproductivity of the unawakened consciousness. In the physical
universe spiritual values languish, yet in the midst of this mortal
sphere stand the pyramids, supreme symbols of spiritual alchemy—temples
of initiation in the desert of waiting. It is significant that the
atmosphere of Egypt is peculiarly conducive to the perpetuation of
ancient monuments of learning which, when moved from their old footings,
rapidly crumble away. Thus material life, the desert, is a natural
laboratory in which the supreme chemistry is accomplished through
suffering and aspiration.

The account of the rising and falling of the candidate through space
relates to the alternations of the substances in the retort by which
they pass through a cycle of attenuation and precipitation, to be
finally drawn off through the neck of the vessel. Hermes uses this
figure to set forth the mystery of rebirth, the periodic alternation of
the soul from a temporal to a sidereal condition, and its final
liberation through initiation. Reaching the upper extremity of the
intellectual sphere, the candidate is incapable of further function, and
swoons.

Upon regaining consciousness he discovers himself to be invested with a
starry garment, the same spoken of by Apuleius in his *Metamorphosis*,
and also that worn by the adepts of the Mithraic Rite. By the starry
garment is represented not only the auric body but the new universal
aspect of being—the sidereal consciousness bestowed by the experience of
initiation. The candidate may return to the narrowness of his physical
environment, but he can never again reduce his consciousness to the
limitations of the material state. The starry body is his regenerated
and illumined intellect.

The strange characters signifying the name of the *bird* with the green
branch are decoded to mean "To be given the life"—that is, immortality.
The name of the altar reads: "The Crown, Kether"and is decoded, "When
shall be the gate of entrance." Together, the two phrases mean:
"Immortality shall be conferred at the gate of the House of Wisdom." The
name of the *torch* is *Light;* but translated, the characters read:
"The dernier shall be hidden away and forgotten." This coin of the
prophet should be understood in the sense of the suit of Coins in the
Tarot deck, for this suit represents the material body over which the
symbol has rulership. The statement may then read: "The body of the wise
man shall be concealed." This thought was faithfully followed by the old
adepts. The tombs of the Initiates have never been discovered; and in
the famous Rosicrucian cemetery the resting places of the Brothers are
marked only by the Rose. During the initiation ceremonies, which took
place in the invisible worlds, the physical body of the neophyte was
hidden in a secret place where no disturbing forces could reach it while
the soul was exploring the mysteries of Amenti. Body here also
represents personality and the whole personal sphere of life which must
be cast aside and forgotten; also the personal ego which must die or be
buried that the Universal Self may be born from its seed.

*SECTION VI*.

(*Figure* VI, page [54](mht09.htm#page_54).md) The altar which our author
describes as being composed of

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

the four elements is triangular in shape. From this circumstance two
sacred numbers are produced: the square (4) plus the triangle (3) equals
7; and the four elements of the altar multiplied by the triangle equals
12. From this the composition of the world is made apparent. Nature is a
triangular arrangement of four elements; and the divine world, of which
the zodiac is a proper symbol, consists of these elements multiplied
three times, or in their three primary states. The altar is the human
body; its material parts—the square—are arranged in the spiritual
order—a triangle. Upon the altar are the three symbols from the previous
diagram. They are so placed as to form a triangle, and we must
understand them as salt, sulphur and Mercury—body, spirit, and soul.

In the air above the altar is the crux ansata, the symbol of generation
and fecundity. This may be considered as copper—the metal of Venus, and
a symbol of the reproductive energy of the soul. Venus is the Lucifer of
the ancients, the light bearer, the star of self-knowledge. This symbol
must remind the sage that the power to multiply is common to both the
internal and external man. As bodies generate bodies, so the inner body,
the soul, generates the archetypes of personalities. By alchemy, wisdom
perpetuates itself by applying to its own peculiar purposes the same
laws by which forms are perpetuated in the corporeal sphere.

The whole figure is a symbol of spiritual generation, the mystery of
Melchisedek, who is his own father and his own mother and is above the
law. It sets forth perpetual reenergization by the use of the Stone. It
tells of the very power, which St.-Germain himself possessed, of
continuing from century to century by means of the subtle Elixir, the
secret of which was known only to himself and his Masters. First, the
three parts of the composite man spirit, soul, and body—must be brought
into equilibrium, and from this equilibrium is born the Homunculi or
Crystal Man. This Man is an immortally generating ego capable of
precipitating personalities at will, yet itself unchanged by these
personalities and unlimited by them. Instead of the soul living in the
body and prisoned by its limitations, a new condition is established:
the body lives in the soul. To the adept, the physical form is but an
instrument for the expression of consciousness, intelligence, and
action—represented by the *candle*, the *bird*, and the burning *altar*.

Analysis of the Text.

This part contains some of the most beautiful symbolism in the entire
manuscript. The candidate, having transcended the four elements, now
continues into the sphere of higher causations, where he is instructed
in the great Cabbalistic principles by which the universal integrity is
preserved. The *palace* is the archetypal sphere—Plato’s world of Ideas.
The simple geometric arrangement reveals the divine harmony.

The doors of the archetypal world swing open and the Hierophant of the
Order comes forth. It is He who was called the Master of the Hidden
House, the Initiator, the Keeper of the Keys of Thoth. Alchemy is a
religion of fire, as is also Zarathustrism. The Magus therefore wears
the insignias of Zoroaster and speaks in the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

language of the Fire Prophet. The names which the Hierophant gives to
the *bird*, the *torch* and the *altar* are the same as those given in
the preceding section.

In company with the Initiator the candidate enters the immense temple,
whose 360 columns leave no doubt as to its identity with the universe.
The altar already described, being the threefold cause of the material
sphere, is placed in the center of the great hall. The Hierophant next
informs the disciple as to the new names which have been bestowed upon
the sacred objects. The *bird* is called *Ampheercha*, which is
interpreted to mean that a mother shall bear the likeness, or double.
This is a reference to the Immaculate Conception and to the Secret
Doctrine as the mother of the adepts. The name for the *altar* appears
to be the word for priest but refers to the Initiator as the one through
whom the disciple is born in the second or philosophic birth, a mystery
more fully explained in the name of the torch. The hall is called *Sky*
(the firmament) but involves in the formation of its characters the
Cabbalistic admonition: "Worship the glory which is to come." The
triangular altar is Athanor, a self-feeding digesting furnace used by
the alchemists, but the word may be divided into two. The first part
then means immortality and the second, the four quarters of the heavens.

The eighty-one Thrones placed within the palace of the Sky, each at the
top of nine steps, are of great significance. The Rosicrucian Mysteries
consisted of nine lesser and three greater rites or degrees—a system
which may be traced directly to the Cabbala. Out of Kether, the
universal Crown, issue the nine Sephiroth and from each of these in turn
issue nine others. Nine is the sacred number of Man, and in the old
Cabbala, Adam (ADM) is the numerical equivalent of r, 4, and 40—numbers
whose sum is 9. The symbolism of the nine is continued throughout
mystical literature. The Eleusinian Mysteries were given in nine
nocturnal ceremonials to represent the months of the prenatal epoch. By
Cabbalistic addition, eighty-one equals nine, and the Thrones signify
the eighty-one branches growing upon the great World Tree. The schools
of the Lesser Mysteries are patterned from the universal harmony and
here we see set forth the arrangement of the secret Brotherhood.

The name for the great hall is repeated in the text at the point where
the venerable members of the school enter and take their seats. The
disciple receives his philosophical name. He is called the Wise Man and
the words mean: "To be the Face or Manifestor of the Most High." The
nine masters of the lodge then bestow their gifts. The first gives a
cube of gray earth representing the element of earth; the second, three
cylinders of black stone—the three phases of the Moon; the third, a
rounded crystal—Mercury; the fourth a crest of blue plumes—Venus; the
fifth, a silver vase—the Sun; the sixth, a cluster of grapes—Mars; the
seventh, a *bird*—Jupiter; the eighth, a small *altar*—Saturn; and the
ninth, a *torch*—the fixed stars. For the understanding of the
significance of these gifts, consider the following fragments from the
Pyamander of Hermes relative to the ascension of the soul through the
nine spheres and its return to the Lords of each of these spheres the
gifts or limitations which are imposed by the laws of generation:

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

"After the lower nature has returned to the brutishness (the elements)
the higher struggles again to regain its spiritual estate. It ascends
the seven Rings upon which sit the Seven Governors and returns to each
their lower powers in this manner: Upon the first ring sits the Moon,
and to it is returned the ability to increase and diminish. Upon the
second ring sits Mercury, and to it are returned machinations, deceit,
and craftiness. Upon the third ring sits Venus, and to it are returned
the lusts and passions. Upon the fourth ring sits the Sun, and to this
Lord are returned ambitions. Upon the fifth ring sits Mars, and to it
are returned rashness and profane boldness. Upon the sixth ring sits
Jupiter, and to it are returned the sense of accumulation and riches.
And upon the seventh ring sits Saturn, at the Gate of Chaos, and to it
are returned falsehood and evil plotting.

"Then, being naked of all the accumulations of the seven Rings, the soul
comes to the Eighth Sphere, namely, the ring of the fixed stars. Here,
freed of all illusion, it dwells in the Light and sings praises to the
Father in a voice which only the pure of spirit may understand."

The name for the cube of gray earth relates to the mystery of the
spiritual birth; that of the three black cylinders is selflessness; that
of the rounded crystal signifies the end of the ages or the cycles; that
of the blue plumes is Aquarius or the Leg of the Great Man; that of the
silver vase is the birth of the spirit; that of the grapes is
regeneration; that of the bird, they who live in the light or truth;
that of the altar, the fruitage of virtue, or ultimate good; and that of
the torch "the springing forth," the Egyptian *Coming Forth by Day*—the
completion, the ninth mystery. That the torch is really a symbol of the
sphere of the fixed stars and of the corresponding strata of the human
soul is further proved by the fact that the manuscript tells us that it
is composed of brilliant particles.

The mastery of the nine parts of the soul constitutes the completion of
the Lesser Mysteries and the full control of all bodily faculties,
functions, and powers. The three Greater Mysteries lie beyond and are
still symbolized by the *bird*, the *torch*, and the *light*. The Lesser
Mysteries are rituals of self control and purification; the Greater
Mysteries are rituals of creation. In nine processes man purifies
himself, but only to the few are given the keys of the threefold
creative Mystery: the creation of form, the creation of thought, and the
creation of consciousness. Before leaving the chamber of initiation, the
candidate drinks of the Water of Life, the nectar of the gods, which is
explained by the philosophers as representing the blood of the Logos or
the Sun—the divine energy which sustains the elect, and which is
constantly flowing in the Grail of the Mysteries. According to the
Greeks, the gods partake of no mortal food, but are nourished from the
fountains of Eternal Good which spring up in the midst of the worlds.
Having given the secret sign to the adepts, the new Initiate departs
from the chamber by the right-hand path.

*SECTION VII*.

(*Figure* VII, page [60](mht10.htm#page_60).md) The key to the seventh
plate is equilibrium, this being the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

virtue bestowed by the seventh sign of the zodiac, Libra, the Balance.
Our author tells us that the central motif, two small circles and a
pendant cross, is a sacred seal. This may be interpreted as the
celestial sulphur and salt—the Sun and Moon. The suspended cross is the
Lapis Philosophorum, composed of the regenerated elements—*salt*
(earth), *sulphur* (fire), *Mercury* (air), and *Azoth* the æther (water
of the sages). The Sun and Moon are the father and mother of the
Philosopher’s Stone. They represent heaven and earth, from which is
generated the cross—man, the progeny of the two immortal agents, spirit
and matter. The cross also signifies the equilibrium of man suspended
between his origin and destiny. The arrangement of the figures indicates
the adept in whom the union of all opposites has been effected. The
Initiate is the rational androgyne.

Surrounding the central part of the symbol are two circles of figures.
The inner circle is composed of cuneiform characters; the outer, of
hieroglyphics derived from several ancient languages, arranged in a
manner entirely arbitrary, and undecipherable without the original key.
The circle of cuneiform characters must be interpreted by discovering
the Hebrew equivalents of the arrow-pointed letters. The text is
apparently prophetic, and at first reading may seem to refer to the
cosmic change which arises from the tipping of the celestial Balance. In
reality, however, the material deals strictly with changes which are to
take place in the soul of the Initiate. The cuneiformed-Hebrew reads as
follows, probably continuing from the outer circle of hieroglyphic text:

"And is the outbreathing of Everlastingness. Know that place (sign or
symbol, probably a zodiacal constellation) to be the end (of the ages).
The Leg (Aquarius, probably referring to the Aquarian Age or cycle) is
the beginning of the destruction." In the zodiacal cycle of adeptship,
Aquarius is the symbol of the final disintegration of the personality,
for beyond it lies only Pisces, the Nirvana.

St.-Germain’s manuscript also describes an axe, not shown in the
illustration. This is the instrument of separation, and would agree
exactly with the interpretation of the figure. This whole device is
suspended between two pillars of green marble. These may well be the
Jachin and Boaz of Freemasonry. Students of the Cabbala will remember
the third column which united these two, and which, like the great seal
in this figure, represented the adept whose perfected constitution
united wisdom and generation—the law and the prophets.

Analysis of the Text.

The Initiate again assumes the attributes of the alchemical substance
from which the Universal Stone is to be prepared. The entire section is
devoted to processes of purification, consisting of three baths. As the
result of the first bath, the water in the steel vessel becomes
discolored with the impurities given off by the philosophical *matter*.
In the second bath the elements of the Stone are impregnated with a
mysterious reddish liquid of an extremely corrosive quality. In the
third bath the corrosive principle is washed away. These three
processes, which require

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

sixteen days, completely purify the matter, which then passes on to its
next augmentation.

From a mystical viewpoint, the vessel filled with crystal-clear water is
the laver of purification placed in the courtyard of the Tabernacle of
the ancient Jews. The high priests who served the Lord must cleanse
themselves with the water from the laver before they could perform the
sacred duties of their office. The ceremony of baptism is but the outer
symbol of the inner truth. The Absolute Cause of all things in its
impersonal and utterly diffused condition was regarded as a vast ocean
filling all space. The Schamayim, which is the divine fiery water—the
out-flowing of the Word of God—descends from the divine Presence.
Dividing in the middle distance between spirit and matter, it becomes
solar fire and lunar water. This Schamayim was known to the alchemists
as the Universal Mercury, and is called Azoth, the measureless Spirit of
Life. This spiritual, fiery, original water passes through Eden (which
in Hebrew means "vapor") and pours itself into four main rivers—the
elements which are the conditions of the Universal Mercury. This is the
tincturing water by which the righteous are baptised. It is this water,
the Universal Mercury, the solvent of the sages, by which the spiritual
baptism is given. He who is immersed in this water, or who receives the
heavenly Schamayim into himself, becomes cleansed and purified. This
Schamayim contains within itself the twofold baptism. Its lunar power
baptises with water—the baptism given by John the Baptist; but its solar
principle baptises with fire—the Messianic baptism.

The Initiates of the ancient Mysteries being lifted up into an
apotheistic condition, received the divine baptism. They were immersed
in God, and by this immersion they were washed clean of the black spot
of original sin, which, according to Mohammed, is in the heart of every
mortal. The Schamayim of the alchemists is the Shining Sea of the
Buddhists, the boundless Nirvanic ocean, the water of space constantly
alight with God.

The silver axe with blue handle, attached to the column, is called the
*destroyer;* but the translation is: "Lift the voice to its fullness in
chant. (Or song.)" The axe is the ancient symbol of the Initiated
Builders, the "hewers of wood." It is also the emblem of separation or
division, and is an appropriate figure to represent separation through
purification.

The sign of Libra, which rules the seventh operation of the
philosophical mystery, divides the lower from the upper hemisphere of
the zodiac. It is also the ancient sign of the Passover, a feast which
signified the passing over of life from a material to an immaterial
condition by the alchemical baptism. The gross particles of the soul are
washed away and life is prepared for a supersubstantial existence.

*SECTION VIII*.

(*Figure* VIII, page [62](mht11.htm#page_62).md) In the sky blazes the
philosophical sun, within it the face of the Logos. Its rays are
concealed by the same clouds which must ever hide the Divine Light from
the eyes of the profane. The Lion is now crowned, its coronet

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

having seven rays, symbolic of the seven energies of the will. This is
no longer the despotic lion of the earlier illustration. Ambition has
been transmuted into aspiration; and that impulse which, unregenerated,
lures men on to temporal destruction, is now the force which bestows
courage upon spiritual enterprise.

The bunch of grapes symbolizes illumination. A curious work on alchemy
states that the grape has a special affinity for gold, and that when
vineyards are planted in areas where gold is abundant, the roots of the
vine absorb the minute particles of this precious metal and distribute
them throughout its stalk, leaves, and fruit. In alchemy, gold is the
symbol of the Supreme Principle. The Nazarene likened His disciples and
Himself to a vine with its fruits. The grape cluster is an appropriate
symbol for the school of the adepts, for the Initiates grow together
upon a single branch. Here also is a subtle allusion to the blood, which
carries within it the golden particles of the sun. The lion and the
grapes restate the old formula wisdom and generation.

The panels of characters on either side of the brazier contain fragments
from old rituals and mystery texts. The one upon the right reads:
"Kindle a light at the appointed time—the seventh hour of the dawning."
This is followed by an obscure reference to the coming forth of five at
the full sun (noon) and the panel concludes with the admonition: "Dance
in a circle and prophecy.-

The panel at the left is also descriptive of a ceremony: "Honor is paid
to the Giver of life.- The Initiate is admonished to sacrifice his Ka or
soul. The number q appears, and the symbol of the ark or coffin in which
candidates are buried in the mystery. Then the full face of the sun
appears, to represent resurrection. There is an allusion to the gate in
the heavens and the ascension of the Ka. With the aid of Egyptian
metaphysics, it is not difficult to decipher these symbols. The number

refers to the nine Lesser Mysteries associated with the box or
coffin—the body. The sun-face is the resurrection, and the whole panel
describes the passage of the soul (Ka) through the invisible worlds as
set forth in the symbolism of the Pyramid Rites. This is appropriately
placed in the eighth division of the manuscript, inasmuch as the eighth
sign of the zodiac is Scorpio and it was in a certain degree of this
sign that the high priest released the Ka of his disciple into the
Amenti.

Analysis of the Text.

The eighth section of the manuscript is devoted largely to an
understanding of the mystery of the alchemical *salt*. Of this mystery
of alchemy Eliphas Levi writes: "To separate the subtile from the gross
\* \* \* is to liberate the soul from the prejudices and (from) all
vice, which is accomplished by the use of Philosophical Salt, that is to
say, Wisdom; of Mercury, that is, personal skill and application;
finally, of Sulphur, representing vital energy and fire of will. By
these are we enabled to change into spiritual gold things which are of
all least precious, even the refuse of the earth." The Salt of the sages
is wisdom derived from experience, for experience is the salt of
earthiness, or the material state, and a wise man is the salt of the
earth. In our manuscript the salt is called "the first among the
regenerated." When the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Initiate
impregnates himself with salt, it is equivalent to saying that he makes
wisdom part of himself. Salt is a preservative of bodies, just as wisdom
is a preservative of souls. Decay cannot affect that one who has
discovered the wise man’s salt.

Leaving the circular apartment and the mass of white and shining salt,
the Initiate approaches the edge of a somber lake, and perceives at a
distance a bridge called *the strong to be subdued*. The term also
signifies a reflector or a shadow suspended over the lake, and betokens
the Rainbow Bridge, the Bifrost of the Scandanavians—the bridge which
leads from earth upward to Asgard, the terrestrial paradise where dwell
the twelve Ases, the Hierophants of the world.

The eighth sign of the zodiac is Scorpio, well represented by the dark
and somber waters. The sign of Scorpio was especially venerated by the
Rosicrucians, who performed certain of their rituals only when the sun
was in this constellation. With great difficulty the Initiate forces his
way through the morass of Scorpio to reach the great temple of
Sagittarius which looms in front and above.

*SECTION IX*.

(*Figure* IX, [p. 66](mht12.htm#page_66).md) As this section signifies
Sagittarius it is most appropriate that the figure of a horse should
appear in the symbolism. The Trojan Horse, concealing within its body
the army of conquering Greeks, represents the occult force of this
constellation by which the Trojans (the material world) fighting to
defend Helen (the lunar principle) were finally overcome. In astrology
the ninth house, which corresponds to Sagittarius, is the house of the
sacerdotal class, the priesthood, or the Mysteries. The hollow horse
with the men inside is, therefore, the temple and its adepts.

In our figure, an unusual application is made of this symbolism. A
corpse is falling from the horse. Beyond the ninth degree the physical
body cannot go, therefore it must here be cast off. Form can go no
further—the corpse is cast out of the temple.

The Arabic text at the top of the plate reads: "That which is hidden
shall be brought to view" or "the hidden things (sins) are to be
stripped off." The cuneiform consists of the following legend: "The gate
of the end (completion or conclusion) when the Leg or the Waterman turns
in the circle (the equinox in Aquarius)." In the boxlike frame is the
following: "The select few—how many are there? Forty who in brotherly
love assemble together to the four quarters and the Bird. Here below (in
the mortal sphere) to be held (gathering or assembly) until in its place
is the coming in the fourth quarter (Aquarius)." The large characters MB
refer to the alchemical process whereby the mortification and
destruction of the body is accomplished. The floriate letters are words
to be completed by the addition of other letters. When this has been
done, the sentence reads: "Seek after the all-powerful Lord who is the
guardian of the Tree of Life." In the lower half of the figure a
red-robed man is attempting to restore life to the corpse. This is
*fire* (or iron) striving to revivify the *ashes*, an alchemical emblem.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

Analysis of the Text.

In the ninth step of the ritual, the Initiate comes face to face with
the last great enemy—death, which must be experienced, understood, and
overcome. In the gloom of the great chamber with its ebon walls he
perceives the strange Horse of Troy. Here is *putrefaction*, the end of
all ignorance and the gate of life. The Initiate spends nine days in the
contemplation of this mystery, and is about to take up some of the foul
and disintegrating *substance* lying piled in a corner, when he is
warned by an invisible voice that the time has not yet come.

In Sagittarius, the ninth sign of the zodiac, the theory of philosophy
is perfected, for the world was created in six days but Art is perfected
in nine. Hermes writes thus: "But this multiplication (the augmentation
of the Philosopher’s Stone) cannot be carried on *ad infinitum*, but it
attains completeness in the ninth rotation; for when this tincture has
been rotated nine times it cannot be exalted any further, because it
will not permit any further separation." After theory comes practice,
after operation follows use. The adept, realizing that he already
possesses the power to tincture matter, would experiment with the black
decaying earth in the ninth chamber, but is prevented from so doing. He
must yet receive the three Greater Keys, for the power to accomplish
transmutation is imperfect until spiritual vision reveals the proper
*ends* which the adept must accomplish.

After leaving the house of putrefaction the Initiate observes that his
rohe changes color, becoming at last a beautiful green. This is a direct
allusion to the alchemical formula. We are told that during the
processes of digestion the alchemical substance changes color, which has
given rise to its being called the peacock because of its iridescence
during one of the periods of its digestion. The various colored garments
worn by the several degrees of the ancient priestcrafts represented
stages of spiritual unfoldment. According to the same rule, in the
preparation of the Wise Man’s Stone the base substance passes through a
philosophical spectrum, turning from one color to another according to
the end which the operator desires to achieve.

The three cryptic words with which the section is concluded cause the
last sentence to read: "The name of the hall is corruption. The name of
the first lake is the beginning of corruption, and the name of the
second lake the end of corruption." The three cypher words, when
connected, give the meaning: "Corruption is the beginning of decay and
corruption is followed by death." In the perfecting of the Stone of the
Wise Man it was discovered that it is impossible to unite the various
elements into new fundamental patterns until each has been reduced to
its most simple and original condition. This reduction, or the
destroying of the personality of the elements, is the philosophical
*corruption* which, brought about by *Art*, destroys all the apparent
differences in the alchemical materials, and renders possible a perfect
mingling of their principles to eventuate in the formation of the divine
Stone. Mystically, the philosophic death is the destruction of the
numerous aspects of the personality, so that from the soul and its
extensions (the divine elements) may be formed the Diamond Soul of the
Rose Cross.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

*SECTION X*.

(*Figure* X, [p. 70](mht13.htm#page_70).md) A man robed in a green garment
edged with gold, and bearing a lance, is arising amidst vaporous clouds
from an open sarcophogus. Above the human figure is suspended a golden
crown of light. The whole symbolizes the annual rebirth of the sun in
the tenth zodiacal sign—the winter solstice in Capricorn. As the tenth
month of the philosophic year, this hieroglyph sets forth the first of
the three Greater Mysteries which are presided over by the
constellations of Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces.

The drawing depicts the final victory of the spiritualized soul over the
limitations of the bodily tomb. The green garment reveals the adept to
be clothed in his illumined soul, which is under the rulership of Venus.
The breastplate bears upon it cryptic letters which mean *LIFE*. The
Initiate has achieved immortality. For him the tomb will be forever
empty. He has become one of that small band of the enlightened "whom
death has forgotten."

The Arabic characters on the lid of the coffin admonish the Elect that
they should seize upon a certain undesignated mystery "when the sixth
sign or age is to be the breath." These words evidently refer to the
parts of a ritual. That which is to be seized upon is the "master secret
of alchemy." The tomb is also the burial place of the master of magic
whose dernier (or body) was hidden, according to an earlier figure. In
one of the early Rosicrucian books is described a curious practice of
the Brethren. They are said to have periodically retired into their
glass eggs, where they rested for a certain number of years, after which
they broke through the walls and emerged again. This allegory in turn
alludes to the periodic withdrawal of the Mysteries from society and
their reappearance "after a certain time has passed." From the
inscription we are led to infer that the periods during which the secret
Brotherhood comes forth from its obscurity are regulated by the
astronomical cycles of the zodiac. We may read from the symbols, "When
the sixth sign is the life-giver I will come forth."

The hieroglyphics in the panel at the top of the page are descriptive of
the philosophic resurrection. They read in substance: "To be freed with
a shout of joy when the downpouring of the holy Spirit descends." There
is also mention of a covenant of blood with the One at the time of the
fourth quarter, that is, the Waterman with the Face. (Aquarius.)

Analysis of the Text.

Death is followed by resurrection. Man must die many times in order that
he may finally achieve immortality. The butterfly which decorates the
portals of the alabaster palace indicates clearly that the mystery of
rebirth is the subject of the tenth initiation. "The three stages
through which the butterfly passes in its unfoldment correspond to the
three degrees of the Mystery School, which degrees are regarded as
consummating the unfoldment of man by giving him emblematic wings by
which he may soar to the skies. Unregenerated man, ignorant and
helpless,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

is symbolized by the stage between ovum and larva; the diciple, seeking
truth and dwelling in meditation, by the second stage from larva to
pupa, at which time the insect enters its chrysalis (the tomb of the
Mysteries);the third stage from pupa to imago (wherein the perfect
butterfly comes forth) typifies the unfolded and enlightened soul of the
Initiate rising from the tomb of his baser nature." (See my
*Encyclopedic Outline of Symbolical Philosophy*.) The threefold mystery
of the butterfly is further suggested by the triple colonnade separated
by aisles and passageways.

The cryptic name of the hail indicates that it symbolizes the life cycle
and also the sphere of retribution. Translated, it reads: "At the
outpouring of the Almighty (the persecutors or the adversaries) shall be
shut up and overcome." Von Welling, in his *Opus*, describes how the
rebel angels—the elementary spirits—were locked in the dark elements of
the material universe as punishment for their rebellion. Alchemy, then,
is the art of purifying these malcontents and restoring them to their
original celestial state.

*SECTION XI*.

(*Figure* XI, page [72](mht14.htm#page_72).md) As the tenth illustration
represents the final liberation of the Divine Man from his physical
limitations, so the eleventh depicts the attempt of the intellect to
break away from bondage to the animal soul. The powerful man with his
girdle and helmet of iron, and his crest of red plumes, is the Demiurgus
or Regent of the physical world, the governor of the senses and
appetites. He is attempting to bind the spiritualized intellect to the
rock of ignorance. The handsome youth bearing' the caduceus, is the
philosophized intellect. The mastery of thought, which makes the mind a
servant of the spiritual self, is the eleventh step of the old rite.

The whole phenomenal Universe against which the neophyte has struggled
through his eleven strange and arduous adventures is personified in the
red-plumed man. Here the world is making its last effort to hold the
escaping superman. The effort is vain. No chains forged of earth can
restrain or bind the Philosphical Mercury. We are told that in the
alchemical processes this subtile essence can seep through an iron
vessel (the warrior)—or through glass or porcelain—and vanish, in spite
of every effort to capture its quintessence.

The eleventh figure contains numerous extraordinary and impressive
hieroglyphics. The characters on the shield include a crossed scythe and
sceptre—signifying death and resurrection, or mortality and sovereignty.
There is also the axe-blade, the hieroglyph of the hewer, the builder,
or the geometrician. The smaller hieroglyphics mean *egg* and *cave*,
and the lunar crescent may symbolize either a lunar quarter or a
gateway. These symbols unquestionably refer to steps in the initiatory
drama.

The words in the panel at the top of the figure may be translated: "To
be the sign of the Leg with Everlastingness, to pour out and to be the
herald of destruction." The thought is evidently prophetic, referring to
the destruction of the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

unrighteous in the sign of Aquarius, the constellation which rules the
eleventh section of the work.

The writing below the figures is purely mystical: "It is given that the
evil shall be trodden out in the sixth portico." The soul, in its
spiritual cycle of regeneration, crosses from the lower to the upper
hemisphere of the zodiac at the end of the sixth sign, Virgo, or the
Virgin. This virgin is the mother of the Messiahs. As physical
generation begins in Aries, so the generation of the wise begins with
the Mother (the Mysteries) from whom they are born into the celestial
hemisphere. The old order cannot proceed beyond the sixth gate, for the
seventh is that of the new man or the second birth—a mystery hinted at
in our inscription.

Analysis of the Text.

The Initiate, departing from the palace of the resurrection, sees
fluttering before him the mysterious bird *Ampheercha* which now,
however, has the wings of the butterfly added to its own. The
Cabbalistic meaning of the bird’s name is: "A mother shall bear the
likeness." The intellectual energy of the Hermetic Ibis is now perfected
by soul power, represented by the diaphanous wings of the butterfly.
Apuleius created the Psyche myth as a method of setting forth the
Hermetic Marriage or the union of the reason with the perfected soul.
This is the second Greater Mystery: the accomplishment of the
philosophic androgyne, in which the male and female principles of
wisdom—represented by the Ibis and the butterfly—are united in one
creature.

The Initiate is told to seize and affix the symbolic bird. For nine days
(degrees) the adept pursues the bird, which he finally forces to enter
the tower named corruption. The symbolism then continues, clothed in
alchemical terms. The tower is the vessel for further digestion, through
which the elements of the Stone must pass before their final perfection.
The Initiate drives a steel nail through the wings of the bird. The name
of the nail is an admonishment to make haste and complete the operation.
The bird is therefore crucified to the wheel, as was the dove of
Semiramis, or Ixion. The name of the hammer means to come forth and be
manifest, an allusion to the strength of will with which this final
operation must be accomplished.

Alchemically, the substance represented by the bird begins to gleam in
the retort. The luminous quality intimates that the soul power of the
Stone is beginning to shine triumphantly and that the arduous operations
of the alchemist are about to be rewarded.

The Initiate departs. Having completed the eleventh Mystery and fixed
the power of the soul-bird so that it can no more depart from him, he
passes out between two great pillars, and finds himself once more in the
Hall of Wisdom.

*SECTION XII*.

(*Figure* XII, page [76](mht15.htm#page_76).md) The pilgrimage of the adept
is at last completed. In the heavens

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

blazes the philosophic sun—a triangle surrounded by a circle and a
square, representing the union of the diversified elements of nature
into one divinely radiant and effulgent power. The female figure is
Isis—her body being no longer concealed by the black garment as in the
second picture. She is Nature. With one hand she points upward towards
the Divine Light which is her own Source, while with the other she
carries three globes emblematic of the perfection of Art, the supreme
Hermetic alchemy. The globes contain the three parts of the
Philosopher’s Stone, bound together by gold rings.

The "large strong man" is the Initiate himself. Through the meshes of
his golden armor protrudes the blue undergarment, his starry cloak. In
his hand he carries a white wand ornamented with magical characters.
This is the insignia of his rank, the baton of the adept.

The time for the twelfth and last step in the initiation is at hand. The
crown which was previously in the heavens is now upon the Initiate’s
helmet. Isis springs into the air, lifting with her the new Master.
Nature, the heartless destroyer of the ignorant, is the gracious servant
of the wise. Led by Nature herself, and lifted by her from an earthly
state, the Wise Man ascends into the presence of the three Masters of
the Universal Lodge whose radiant sun blazes in the sky.

In the twelfth zodiacal sign, Pisces, the Nirvana is accomplished, the
Stone is projected, the secrets of Nature are revealed, and the Initiate
soars upwards with the triumphant declaration of the Masters:
"Consummatum Est."

Analysis of the Text.

The Initiate now identifies himself again with the alchemical matter and
enters a crystal retort resting in a sand furnace which keeps it
constantly at a gentle heat. The name of the hall is "A place where
drops trickle." The basin sustaining it is "the desert of blazing fire,"
or "the agent which enables the drops to escape." From the bottom of the
glass retort, vapors are constantly ascending. The adept is lifted up,
and after thirty-six days is borne to the upper part of the globe. The
heat being reduced, he descends, and discovers that the color of his
garment has changed from green to brilliant red. "The solution in the
alchemical retort, if digested a certain length of time, will turn into
a red elixir, which is called the Universal Medicine. It resembles a
fiery water, and is luminous in the dark." (See *The True Way of Nature*
by Hermes.)

The adept himself is now the Universal Medicine. He is the very
substance which is for the healing of the nations. His crimson garment
is the vestment of the Red Elixir. He has become the Ruby-Diamond. After
gazing upon a hieroglyphical picture, by which his instruction is
perfected and completed, the new master of the Great Work finds himself
again in the Hall of Thrones in the Wise Man’s House.

He beholds the *bird*, the *altar* and the *torch* united into one
spiritual body. Heaven, earth, and man have been united by the
indissoluble bonds of Hermetic

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

wisdom. The projection of the Stone is the final testing of the
completeness of the Work. The adept strikes the golden sun, shattering
it into fragments. In his role of the Ruby-Diamond the Initiate then
touches each of the broken parts and they too become suns as glorious as
the original. The sun here represents the germ of the Universal Gold or
the divinity present in all natures. This is broken into fragments, in
agreement with the Bacchic tradition that the solar energy was
distributed throughout nature. The philosopher then touches the
fragments, and each becomes perfect. The alchemist is master of his Art,
and by virtue of the Stone he releases and perfects the fragments of
divinity locked within each mortal constitution.

The Supreme Judge of all works decrees that the adept has completed
regeneration and that the Work is perfect. The children of light—his
brother Initiates—hasten to join him. The gates of Universal Life are
open, the veil of the mystae is lifted. The adept is now an epoptes—one
who sees clearly. The elemental spirits symbolizing bodily limitations
acknowledge the mastery of the inner principles. The philosophic birth
is complete. The ages acknowledge a new Master.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

 

<span id="img_11700"></span> ![](img/11700.jpg)

 

 

 

 
