[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1020)  [Next](sbe1022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 64

## CHAPTER XIX.

THE JUST.

   256., 257. A man is not just if he carries a matter by violence; no,
he who distinguishes both right and wrong, who is learned and leads
others, not by violence, but by law and equity, and who is guarded by
the law and intelligent, he is called just.

   258. A man is not learned because he talks much; he who is patient,
free from hatred and fear, he is called learned.

   259. A man is not a supporter of the law because he talks much; even
if a man has learnt little, but sees the law bodily, he is a supporter
of the law, a man who never neglects the law.

   260. A man is not an elder because his head is grey; his age may be
ripe, but he is called 'Old-in-vain.'

   261. He in whom there is truth, virtue, love, restraint, moderation,
he who is free from impurity and is wise, he is called an elder.

   262. An envious, greedy, dishonest man does not become respectable by
means of much talking only, or by the beauty of his complexion.

   263. He in whom all this is destroyed, and taken out with the very
root, he, when freed from hatred and wise, is called respectable.

\[259. Buddhaghosa here takes law (dhamma) in the sense of the four
great truths, see note to [verse 190](sbe1016.htm#pp_190). Could
dhamma*m* kâyena passati mean, 'he observes the law in his acts?'
Hardly, if we compare expressions like dhamma*m* vipassato, [v.
373](sbe1027.htm#pp_373).\]

p\. 65

   264. Not by tonsure does an undisciplined man who speaks falsehood
become a Sama*n*a; can a man be a Sama*n*a who is still held captive by
desire and greediness?

   265. He who always quiets the evil, whether small or large, he is
called a Sama*n*a (a quiet man), because he has quieted all evil.

   266. A man is not a mendicant (Bhikshu) simply because he asks others
for alms; he who adopts the whole law is a Bhikshu, not he who only
begs.

   267. He who is above good and evil, who is chaste, who with knowledge
passes through the world, he indeed is called a Bhikshu.

   268., 269. A man is not a Muni because he observes silence (mona,
i.e. mauna), if he is foolish

\[265. This is a curious etymology, because it shows that at the time
when this verse was written, the original meaning of *s*rama*n*a had
been forgotten. *S*rama*n*a meant originally, in the language br the
Brahmans, a man who performed hard penances, from *s*ram, 'to work
hard,' &c. When it became the name of the Buddhist ascetics, the
language had changed, and *s*rama*n*a was pronounced sama*n*a. Now there
is another Sanskrit root, *s*am, 'to quiet,' which in Pâli becomes
likewise sam, and from this root sam, 'to quiet,' and not from *s*ram,
'to tire,' did the popular etymology of the day and the writer of our
verse derive the title of the Buddhist priests. The original form
*s*rama*n*a became known to the Greeks as {Greek: *Sarmanai*}, that of
sama*n*a as {Greek: *Samanaioi*}; the former through Megasthenes, the
latter through Bardesanes, 80-60 B.C. (See Lassen, Indische
Alterthumskunde, II, 700.) The Chinese Shamen and the Tungusian Shamen
come from the same source, though the latter has sometimes been doubted.
See Schott, Über die doppelte Bedeutung des Wortes Schamane, in the
Philosophical Transactions of the Berlin Academy, 1842, p. 463 seq.

266-270. The etymologies here given of the ordinary titles of the
followers of Buddha are entirely fanciful, and are curious only as
showing how the people who spoke Pâli had lost the etymological
consciousness of their language. A Bhikshu is a beggar, i.e. a Buddhist
friar who bas left his family and lives entirely on alms. Muni is a
sage, hence *S*âkya-muni, a name of Gautama. Muni comes from man, 'to
think,' and from muni comes mauna, 'silence.' Ariya, again, is the
general name of those who embrace a religious life. It meant originally
'respectable, noble.' In verse 270 it seems as if the writer wished to
guard against deriving ariya from ari, 'enemy.' See note to [verse
22](sbe1004.htm#pp_22).\]

p\. 66

and ignorant; but the wise who, taking the balance, chooses the good and
avoids evil, he is a Muni, and is a Muni thereby; he who in this world
weighs both sides is called a Muni.

   270. A man is not an elect (Ariya) because he injures living
creatures; because he has pity on all living creatures, therefore is a
man called Ariya.

   271., 272. Not only by discipline and vows, not only by much
learning, not by entering into a trance, not by sleeping alone, do I
earn the happiness of release which no worldling can know. Bhikshu, be
not confident as long as thou hast not attained the extinction of
desires.

\[272. See Childers, Notes, p. 7.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Way.](sbe1022)
