[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1015)  [Next](sbe1017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 49

## CHAPTER XIV.

THE BUDDHA (THE AWAKENED).

   179. He whose conquest is not conquered again, into whose conquest no
one in this world enters, by what track can you lead him, the Awakened,
the Omniscient, the trackless?

   180. He whom no desire with its snares and poisons can lead astray,
by what track can you lead him, the Awakened, the Omniscient, the
trackless?

   181. Even the gods envy those who are awakened and not forgetful, who
are given to meditation, who are wise, and who delight in the repose of
retirement (from the world).

   182. Difficult (to obtain) is the conception of men, difficult is the
life of mortals, difficult is the hearing of the True Law, difficult is
the birth of the Awakened (the attainment of Buddhahood).

\[179, 180. Buddha, the Awakened, is to be taken as an appellative
rather than as the proper name of the Buddha (see v. 183). It means,
anybody who has arrived at complete knowledge. Anantago*k*aram I take in
the sense of, possessed of unlimited knowledge. Apadam, which Dr.
Fausböll takes as an epithet of Buddha and translates by 'non
investigabilis,' is translated 'trackless,' in order to show the play on
the word pada; see Childers, s.v. The commentator says: 'The man who is
possessed of even a single one of such conditions as râga, &c., him ye
may lead forward; but the Buddha has not even one condition or basis of
renewed existence, and therefore by what track will you lead this
unconditioned Buddha?' Cf. Dhp. vv. [92](sbe1009.htm#pp_92),
[420](sbe1028.htm#pp_420); and *G*âtaka, vol. i. pp. 79, 313.

182\. Mr. Beal (Dhammapada, p. 110) states that this verse occurs in the
Sûtra of the Forty-two Sections.\]

p\. 50

   183. Not to commit any sin, to do good, and to purify one's mind,
that is the teaching of (all) the Awakened.

   184. The Awakened call patience the highest penance, long-suffering
the highest Nirvâ*n*a; for he is not an anchorite (pravra*g*ita) who
strikes others, he is not an ascetic (*s*rama*n*a) who insults others.

   185. Not to blame, not to strike, to live restrained under the law,
to be moderate in eating, to sleep and sit alone, and to dwell on the
highest thoughts,--this is the teaching of the Awakened.

\[183. This verse is again one of the most solemn verses among the
Buddhists. According to Csoma Körösi, it ought to follow the famous Âryâ
stanza, 'Ye dhammâ' (Lotus, p. 522), and serve as its complement. But
though this may be the case in Tibet, it was not so originally. The same
verse (ascribed to Kanakamuni) occurs at the end of the Chinese
translation of the Prâtimoksha. (Beal, J. R. A. S. XIX, p. 473; Catena,
p. 159); in the Tibetan translation of the Gâthâsa<u>n</u>graha, v. 14
(Schiefner, Mél. Asiat. I VIII, pp. 568, 586; and Csoma Körösi, As. Res.
XX, p. 79). Burnouf has fully discussed the metre and meaning of our
verse on pp. 527, 528 of his 'Lotus.' He prefers sa*k*ittaparidamanam,
which Csoma translated by 'the mind must be brought under entire
subjection' (sva*k*ittaparidamanam), and the late Dr. Mill by 'proprii
intellectus subjugatio.' But his own MS. of the Mahâpadhâna-sutta gave
likewise sa*k*ittapariyodapanam, and this is no doubt the correct
reading. (See D'Alwis, Attanugaluvansa, p. cxxix.) We found
pariyodappeya in [verse 88](sbe1008.htm#pp_88), in the sense of purging
oneself from the troubles of thought. From the same verb, (pari) ava +
dai, we may derive the name Avadâna, a legend, originally a pure and
virtuous act, an {Greek: *aridteia*}, afterwards a sacred story, and
possibly a story the hearing of which purifies the mind. See
Boehtlingk-Roth, s.v. avadâna.

184\. Childers, following the commentator, translates, 'Patience, which
is long-suffering, is the best devotion, the Buddhas declare that
Nirvâ*n*a is the best (of things).'

185\. Cf. Suttanipâta, [v. 337](sbe1034.htm#pp_337). Pâtimokkhe, 'under
the law,' i.e. according to the law, the law which leads to Moksha, or
'freedom.' Prâtimoksha is the title of the oldest collection of the
moral laws of the Buddhists (Burnouf, Introduction, p. 300; Bigandet,
The Life of Gaudama, p. 439; Rhys Davids, Buddhism, p. 162), and as it
was common both to the Southem and the Northem Buddhists, pâtimokkhe in
our passage may possibly be meant, as Professor Weber suggests, as the
title of that very collection. The commentator explains it by
ge*tth*akasîla and pâtimokkhasîla. Sayanâsam might stand for
*s*ayanâ*s*anam, see Mahâbh. XII, 6684; but in Buddhist literature it is
intended for *s*ayanâsanam; see also Mahâbh. XII, 9978, *s*ayyâsane.
Fausböll now reads pânta instead of pattha*ñ*.

187\. There is a curious similarity between this verse and verse 6503
(9919) of the *S*ântiparva:  
      Ya*k* *k*a kâmasukha*m* loke, ya*k* *k*a divyam mahat sukham,  
      T*ri*sh*n*âkshayasukhasyaite nârhata*h* sho*d*a*s*i*m* kalâm.  
'And whatever delight of love there is on earth, and whatever is the
great delight in heaven, they are not worth the sixteenth part of the
pleasure which springs from the destruction of all desires.' The two
verses 186, 187 are ascribed to king Mandhât*ri* shortly before his
death (Mél. Asiat. VIII, p. 471; see also *G*âtaka, vol. ii. p. 113).\]

p\. 51

   186. There is no satisfying lusts, even by a shower of gold pieces;
he who knows that lusts have a short taste and cause pain, he is wise;

   187. Even in heavenly pleasures he finds no satisfaction, the
disciple who is fully awakened delights only in the destruction of all
desires.

   188. Men, driven by fear, go to many a refuge, to mountains and
forests, to groves and sacred trees.

   189. But that is not a safe refuge, that is not the best refuge; a
man is not delivered from all pains after having gone to that refuge.

   190. He who takes refuge with Buddha, the Law,

\[188-192. These verses occur in Sanskrit in the Prâtihâryasûtra,
translated by Burnouf, Introduction, pp. 162-189; see p. 186. Burnouf
translates rukkha*k*etyâni by 'arbres consacrés;' properly, sacred
shrines under or near a tree. See also *G*âtaka vol. i. p. 97.

190\. Budda, Dharma, and Sa<u>n</u>gha are called the Tri*s*ara*n*a (cf.
Burnouf, Introd. p. 630). The four holy truths are the four statements
that there is pain in this world, that the source of pain is desire,
that desire can be annihilated, that there is a way (shown by Buddha) by
which the annihilation of all desires can be achieved, and freedom be
obtained. That way consists of eight parts. (See Burnouf, Introduction,
p. 630.) The eightfold way forms the subject of Chapter XVIII. (See also
Feer, Journal As. 1870, p. 418, and Chips from a German Workshop, 2nd
ed. vol. i. p. 251 seq.)\]

p\. 52

and the Church; he who, with clear understanding, sees the four holy
truths:--

   191. Viz. pain, the origin of pain, the destruction of pain, and the
eightfold holy way that leads to the quieting of pain;--

   192. That is the safe refuge, that is the best refuge; having gone to
that refuge, a man is delivered from all pain.

   193. A supernatural person (a Buddha) is not easily found, he is not
born everywhere. Wherever such a sage is born, that race prospers.

   194. Happy is the arising of the awakened, happy is the teaching of
the True Law, happy is peace in the church, happy is the devotion of
those who are at peace.

   195., 196. He who pays homage to those who deserve homage, whether
the awakened (Buddha) or their disciples, those who have overcome the
host (of evils), and crossed the flood of sorrow, he who pays homage to
such as have found deliverance and know no fear, his merit can never be
measured by anybody.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Happiness.](sbe1017)
