[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1011)  [Next](sbe1013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 36

## CHAPTER X.

PUNISHMENT.

   129. All men tremble at punishment, all men fear death; remember that
you are like unto them, and do not kill, nor cause slaughter.

   130. All men tremble at punishment, all men love life; remember that
thou art like unto them, and do not kill, nor cause slaughter.

   131. He who seeking his own happiness punishes or kills beings who
also long for happiness, will not find happiness after death.

\[129. One feels tempted, no doubt, to take upama in the sense of 'the
nearest (der Nächste), the neighbour,' and to translate, 'having made
oneself one's neighbour,' i.e. loving one's neighbour as oneself. But as
upamäm, with a short a, is the correct accusative of upamâ, we must
translate, 'having made oneself the likeness, the image of others,
having placed oneself in the place of others.' This is an expression
which occurs frequently in Sanskrit; cf. Hitopade*s*a I, 11:  
      Prâ*n*â yathâtmano 'bhîsh*t*â bhûtânâm api te tathâ,  
      Âtmaupamyena bhûteshu dayâ*m* kurvanti sâdhava*h*.  
'As life is dear to oneself, it is dear also to other living beings: by
comparing oneself with others, good people bestow pity on all beings.'

See also Hit. I, 12; Râm. V, 23, 5, âtmânam upamâ*m* k*ri*tvâ sveshu
dâreshu ramyatâm, 'making oneself a likeness, i.e. putting oneself in
the position of other people, it is right to love none but one's own
wife.' Dr. Fausböll has called attention to similar passages in the
Mahâbhârata, XIII, 5569 seq.

130\. Cf. [St. Luke vi. 31](../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#6:31).

131\. Dr. Fausböll points out the striking similarity between this verse
and two verses occurring in Manu and the Mahâbhârata:--  
Manu V, 45:  
      Yo 'hi*m*sakâni bhûtâni hinasty âtmasukhe*kkh*ayâ,  
      Sa *g*iva*ms* *k*a m*ri*tas *k*aiva na kva*k*it sukham edhate.  
Mahâbhârata XIII, 5568:  
      Ahi*m*sakâni bhûtâni da*nd*ena vinihanti ya*h*,  
      Âtmana*h* sukham i*kkh*an sa pretya naiva sukhî bhavet.  
If it were not for ahi*m*sakâni, in which Manu and the Mahâbhârata
agree, I should say that the verses in both were Sanskrit modifications
of the Pâli original. The verse in the Mahâbhârata presupposes the verse
of the Dhammapada.\]

p\. 37

   132. He who seeking his own happiness does not punish or kill beings
who also long for happiness, will find happiness after death.

   133. Do not speak harshly to anybody; those who are spoken to will
answer thee in the same way. Angry speech is painful, blows for blows
will touch thee.

   134. If, like a shattered metal plate (gong), thou utter not, then
thou hast reached Nirvâ*n*a; contention is not known to thee.

   135. As a cowherd with his staff drives his cows into the stable, so
do Age and Death drive the life of men.

   136. A fool does not know when he commits his evil deeds: but the
wicked man burns by his own deeds, as if burnt by fire.

   137. He who inflicts pain on innocent and harmless persons, will soon
come to one of these ten states:

\[133. See Mahâbhârata XII, 4056.

134\. See Childers, s.v. nibbâna, p. 270, and s.v. kâ*m*so; D'Alwis,
Buddhist Nirvâ*n*a, p. 35.

136\. The metaphor of 'burning' for 'suffering' is very common in
Buddhist literature. Everything burns, i.e. everything suffers, was one
of the first experiences of Buddha himself. See [v.
146](sbe1013.htm#pp_146).\]

p\. 38

   138. He will have cruel suffering, loss, injury of the body, heavy
affliction, or loss of mind,

   139. Or a misfortune coming from the king, or a fearful accusation,
or loss of relations, or destruction of treasures,

   140. Or lightning-fire will burn his houses; and when his body is
destroyed, the fool will go to hell.

   141. Not nakedness, not platted hair, not dirt, not fasting, or lying
on the earth, not rubbing with dust,

\[138. 'Cruel suffering' is explained by sîsaroga, 'headache,' &c.
'Loss' is taken for loss of money. 'Injury of the body' is held to be
the cutting off of the arm, and other limbs. 'Heavy afflictions' are,
again, various kinds of diseases.

139\. Upasarga means 'accident, misfortune.' Dr. Fausböll translates
râ*g*ato va upassaggam by 'fulgentis (lunae) defectionem;' Dr. Weber by
'Bestrafung vom König;' Beal by 'some governmental difficulty.'
Abbhakkhânam, Sanskrit abhyâkhyânam, is a heavy accusation for high
treason, or similar offences. Beal translates, 'some false accusation.'
The 'destruction of pleasures or treasures' is explained by gold being
changed to coals (see Buddhaghosha's Parables, p. 98; Thiessen,
Kisâgotamî, p. 6), pearls to cotton seed, corn to potsherds, and by men
and cattle becoming blind, lame, &c.

141\. Cf. Hibbert Lectures, p. 355. Dr. Fausböll has pointed out that
the same or avery similar verse occurs in a legend taken from the
Divyâvadâna, and translated by Burnouf (Introduction, p. 313 seq.)
Burnouf translates the verse: 'Ce n'est ni la coutume de marcher nu, ni
les cheveux nattés, ni l'usage d'argile, ni le choix des diverses
espèces d'aliments, ni l'habitude de coucher sur la terre nue, ni la
poussière, ni la malpropreté, ni l'attention à fuir l'abri d'un toit,
qui sont capables de dissiper le trouble dans lequel nous jettent les
désirs non-satisfaits; mais qu'un homme, maître de ses sens, calme,
recueilli, chaste, évitant de faire du mal à aucune créature,
accomplisse la Loi, et il sera, quoique paré d'ornements, un Brâhmane,
un Çramana, un Religieux.' See also [Suttanipâta, v.
248](sbe1020.htm#pp_248).

Walking naked and the other things mentioned in our verse are outward
signs of a saintly life, and these Buddha rejects because they do not
calm the passions. Nakedness he seems to have rejected on other grounds
too, if we may judge from the Sumâgadhâ-avadâna: 'A number of naked
friars were assembled in the house of the daughter of Anâtha-pi*nd*ika.
She called ber daughter-in-law, Sumâgadhâ, and said, "Go and see those
highly respectable persons." Sumâgadhâ, expecting to see some of the
saints, like *S*âriputra, Maudgalyâyana, and others, ran out full of
joy. But when she saw these friars with their hair like pigeon wings,
covered by nothing but dirt, offensive, and looking like demons, she
became sad. "Why are you sad?" said her mother-in-law. Sumâgadhâ
replied, "O mother, if these are saints, what must sinners be like?"

Burnouf (Introduction, p. 312) supposed that the *G*ainas only, and not
the Buddhists, allowed nakedness. But the *G*ainas, too, do not allow it
universally. They are divided into two parties, the *S*vetambaras and
Digambaras. The *S*vetambaras, clad in white, are the followers of
Par*s*vanâtha, and wear clothes. The Digambaras, i.e. sky-clad,
disrobed, are followers of Mahâvîra, resident chiefly in Southern India.
At present they, too, wear clothing, but not when eating. See Sâstram
Aiyar, p. xxi.

The *g*a*t*â, or the hair platted and gathered up in a knot, was a sign
of a *S*aiva ascetic. The sitting motionless is one of the postures
assumed by ascetics. Clough explains ukku*t*ika as 'the act of sitting
on the heels;' Wilson gives for utka*t*ukâsana, 'sitting on the hams.'
See Fausböll, note on verse 140.\]

p\. 39

not sitting motionless, can purify a mortal who has not overcome
desires.

   142. He who, though dressed in fine apparel, exercises tranquillity,
is quiet, subdued, restrained, chaste, and has ceased to find fault with
all other beings, he indeed is a Brâhma*n*a, an ascetic (*s*rama*n*a), a
friar (bhikshu).

   143. Is there in this world any man so restrained by humility that he
does not mind reproof, as a well-trained horse the whip?

   144. Like a well-trained horse when touched by

\[142. As to da*nd*anidhâna, see Mahâbh. XII, 6559, and [Sutta-nipâta,
v. 34](sbe1033.htm#pp_34).

143, 144. I am very doubtful as to the real meaning of these verses. If
their object is to show how reproof or punishment should be borne, my
translation would be right, though alpabodhati in the sense of parvi
facere is strange.\]

p\. 40

the whip, be ye active and lively, and by faith, by virtue, by energy,
by meditation, by discernment of the law you will overcome this great
pain (of reproof), perfect in knowledge and in behaviour, and never
forgetful.

   145. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they like); fletchers bend
the arrow; carpenters bend a log of wood; good people fashion
themselves.

\[145. The same as [verse 80](sbe1008.htm#pp_80). According to Fausböll
and Subhûti we ought to render the verses by, 'What man is there found
on earth so restrained by shame that he never provokes reproof, as a
good horse the whip?' See Childers, s.v. appabodhati.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Old Age.](sbe1013)
