[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1018)  [Next](sbe1020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 58

## CHAPTER XVII.

ANGER.

   221. Let a man leave anger, let him forsake pride, let him overcome
all bondage! No sufferings befall the man who is not attached to name
and form, and who calls nothing his own.

   222. He who holds back rising anger like a rolling chariot, him I
call a real driver; other people are but holding the reins.

   223. Let a man overcome anger by love, let him overcome evil by good;
let him overcome the greedy by liberality, the liar by truth!

   224. Speak the truth, do not yield to anger; give, if thou art asked
for little; by these three steps thou wilt go near the gods.

   225. The sages who injure nobody, and who always control their body,
they will go to the unchangeable place (Nirvâ*n*a), where, if they have
gone, they will suffer no more.

   226. Those who are ever watchful, who study day and night, and who
strive after Nirvâ*n*a, their passions will come to an end.

   227. This is an old saying, O Atula, this is not only of to-day:
'They blame him who sits silent,

\[221. 'Name and form' or 'mind and body' is the translation of
nâma-rûpa, the ninth of the Buddhist Nidânas. Cf. Burnouf, Introduction,
p. 501; see also Gogerly, Lecture on Buddhism, and Bigandet, The Life of
Gaudama, p. 454.

223\. Mahâbh. XII, 3550, asâdhu*m* sadhunâ *g*ayet. Cf. Ten *G*âtakas,
ed. Fausböll, p. 5.

227\. It appears from the commentary that porâ*n*am and a*gg*atanam are
neuters, referring to what happened formerly and what happens to-day,
and that they are not to be taken as adjectives referring to âsînam, &c.
The commentator must have read atula instead of atulam, and he explains
it as the name of a pupil whom Gautama addressed by that name. This may
be so (see note to [verse 166](sbe1014.htm#pp_166)); but atula may also
be taken in the sense of incomparable (Mahâbh. XIII, 1937), and in that
case we ought to supply, with Professor Weber, some such word as 'saw'
or 'saying.'\]

p\. 59

they blame him who speaks much, they also blame him who says little;
there is no one on earth who is not blamed.'

   228. There never was, there never will be, nor is there now, a man
who is always blamed, or a man who is always praised.

   229., 230. But he whom those who discriminate praise continually day
after day, as without blemish, wise, rich in knowledge and virtue, who
would dare to blame him, like a coin made of gold from the *G*ambû
river? Even the gods praise him, he is praised even by Brahman.

   231. Beware of bodily anger, and control thy body! Leave the sins of
the body, and with thy body practise virtue!

   232. Beware of the anger of the tongue, and control thy tongue! Leave
the sins of the tongue, and practise virtue with thy tongue!

   233. Beware of the anger of the mind, and control thy mind! Leave the
sins of the mind, and practise virtue with thy mind!

   234. The wise who control their body, who control their tongue, the
wise who control their mind, are indeed well controlled.

\[230. The Brahman worlds are higher that the Deva worlds as the Brahman
is higher than a Deva; see Hardy, Manual, p. 25; Burnouf, Introduction,
pp. 134, 184.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Impurity.](sbe1020)
