[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1025)  [Next](sbe1027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 80

## CHAPTER XXIV.

THIRST.

   334. The thirst of a thoughtless man grows like a creeper; he runs
from life to life, like a monkey seeking fruit in the forest.

   335. Whomsoever this fierce thirst overcomes, full of poison, in this
world, his sufferings increase like the abounding Bîra*n*a grass.

   336. He who overcomes this fierce thirst, difficult to be conquered
in this world, sufferings fall off from him, like water-drops from a
lotus leaf.

   337. This salutary word I tell you, 'Do ye, as many as are here
assembled, dig up the root of thirst, as he who wants the sweet-scented
U*s*îra root must dig up the Bîra*n*a grass, that Mâra (the tempter) may
not crush you again and again, as the stream crushes the reeds.'

   338. As a tree, even though it has been cut down, is firm so long as
its root is safe, and grows again, thus, unless the feeders of thirst
are destroyed, the pain (of life) will return again and again.

   339. He whose thirst running towards pleasure is exceeding strong in
the thirty-six channels, the

\[334. This is explained by a story in the Chinese translation. Beal,
Dhammapada, p. 148.

335\. Bîra*n*a grass is the Andropogon muricatum, and the scented root
of it is called U*s*îra (cf. verse 337).

338\. On Anusaya, i.e. Anu*s*aya (Anlage), see Wassiljew, Der
Buddhismus, p. 240 seq.

339\. The thirty-six channels, or passions, which are divided by the
commentator into eighteen external and eighteen internal, are explained
by Burnouf (Lotus, p. 649), from a gloss of the *G*ina-ala<u>n</u>kâra
'L'indication précise des affections dont un Buddha acte indépendant,
affections qui sont au nombre de dix-huit, nous est fourni par la glose
d'un livre appartenant aux Buddhistes de Ceylan,' &c. Subhûti gives the
right reading as manâpassavanâ; cf. Childers, Notes, p. 12.

Vâhâ, which Dr. Fausböll translates by 'equi,' may be vahâ, 'undae.' Cf.
[Suttanipâta, v. 1034](sbe1037.htm#pp_1034.md).\]

p\. 81

waves will carry away that misguided man, viz. his desires which are set
on passion.

   340. The channels run everywhere, the creeper (of passion) stands
sprouting; if you see the creeper springing up, cut its root by means of
knowledge.

   341. A creature's pleasures are extravagant and luxurious; sunk in
lust and looking for pleasure, men undergo (again and again) birth and
decay.

   342. Men, driven on by thirst, run about like a snared hare; held in
fetters and bonds, they undergo pain for a long time, again and again.

   343. Men, driven on by thirst, run about like a snared hare; let
therefore the mendicant drive out thirst, by striving after
passionlessness for himself.

   344. He who having got rid of the forest (of lust) (i.e. after having
reached Nirvâ*n*a) gives himself over to forest-life (i.e. to lust), and
who, when removed from the forest (i.e. from lust), runs to the forest
(i.e. to lust), look at that man! though free, he runs into bondage.

\[344. This verse seems again full of puns, all connected with the
twofold meaning of vana, 'forest and lust.' By replacing 'forest' by
'lust,' we may translate: 'He who, when free from lust, gives himself up
to lust, who, when removed from lust runs into lust, look at that man,'
&c. Nibbana, 'though with a short a, may be intended to remind the
hearer of Nibbâna. The right reading is nibbanatho; see Childers, Notes,
p. 8.\]

p\. 82

   345. Wise people do not call that a strong fetter which is made of
iron, wood, or hemp; far stronger is the care for precious stones and
rings, for sons and a wife.

   346. That fetter wise people call strong which drags down, yields,
but is difficult to undo; after having cut this at last, people leave
the world, free from cares, and leaving desires and pleasures behind.

   347. Those who are slaves to passions, run down with the stream (of
desires), as a spider runs down the web which he has made himself; when
they have cut this, at last, wise people leave the world free from
cares, leaving all affection behind.

   348. Give up what is before, give up what is behind, give up what is
in the middle, when thou goest to the other shore of existence; if thy
mind is altogether free, thou wilt not again enter into birth and decay.

   349. If a man is tossed about by doubts, full of strong passions, and
yearning only for what is delightful, his thirst will grow more and
more, and he will indeed make his fetters strong.

   350. If a man delights in quieting doubts, and, always reflecting,
dwells on what is not delightful

\[345. Apekhâ, apekshâ, 'care;' see Manu VI, 41, 49; [Suttanipâta, v.
37](sbe1005.htm#pp_37.md); and *G*âtaka, vol. ii. p. 140.

346\. Paribba*g*, i.e. parivra*g* ; see Manu VI, 41.

347\. The commentator explains the simile of the spider as follows: 'As
a spider, after having made its thread-web, sits in the middle, and
after killing with a violent rush a butterfly or a fly which has fallen
in its circle, drinks its juice, returns, and sits again in the same
place, in the same manner creatures who are given to passions, depraved
by hatred, and maddened by wrath, run along the stream of thirst which
they have made themselves, and cannot cross it,' &c.\]

p\. 83

(the impurity of the body, &c.), he certainly will remove, nay, he will
cut the fetter of Mâra.

   351. He who has reached the consummation, who does not tremble, who
is without thirst and without sin, he has broken all the thorns of life:
this will be his last body.

   352. He who is without thirst and without affection, who understands
the words and their interpretation, who knows the order of letters
(those which are before and which are after), he has received his last
body, he is called the great sage, the great man.

   353. 'I have conquered all, I know all, in all conditions of life I
am free from taint; I have left all, and through the destruction of
thirst I am free; having learnt myself, whom shall I teach?'

   354. The gift of the law exceeds all gifts; the sweetness of the law
exceeds all sweetness; the delight in the law exceeds all delights; the
extinction of thirst overcomes all pain.

   355. Pleasures destroy the foolish, if they look not for the other
shore; the foolish by his thirst for pleasures destroys himself, as if
he were his own enemy.

\[352. As to nirutti, and its technical meaning among the Buddhists, see
Burnouf, Lotus, p. 841. Fausböll translates 'niruttis vocabulorum
peritus,' which may be right, if we take nirutti in the sense of the
language of the Scriptures. See note to [verse 363](sbe1027.htm#pp_363.md).
Could not sannipâta mean sa*m*hitâ or sannikarsha? Sannipâta occurs in
the *S*âkala-prâti*s*âkhya, but with a different meaning.

353\. Cf. [Suttanipâta, v. 210](sbe1018.htm#pp_210.md).

354\. The dhammadâna, or 'gift of the law,' is the technical term for
instruction in the Buddhist religion. See Buddhaghosha's Parables, p.
160, where the story of the Sakkadevarâ*g*a is told, and where a free
rendering of our verse is given.\]

p\. 84

   356. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by passion:
therefore a gift bestowed on the passionless brings great reward.

   357. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by hatred:
therefore a gift bestowed on those who do not hate brings great reward.

   358. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by vanity:
therefore a gift bestowed on those who are free from vanity brings great
reward.

   359. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by lust:
therefore a gift bestowed on those who are free from lust brings great
reward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. The Bhikshu (Mendicant).](sbe1027.md)
