[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1007)  [Next](sbe1009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 23

## CHAPTER VI.

THE WISE MAN (PA*ND*ITA).

   76. If you see an intelligent man who tells you where true treasures
are to be found, who shows what is to be avoided, and administers
reproofs, follow that wise man; it will be better, not worse, for those
who follow him.

   77. Let him admonish, let him teach, let him forbid what is
improper!--he will be beloved of the good, by the bad he will be hated.

   78. Do not have evil-doers for friends, do not have low people for
friends: have virtuous people for friends, have for friends the best of
men.

   79. He who drinks in the law lives happily with a serene mind: the
sage rejoices always in the law, as preached by the elect (Ariyas).

   80. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they like); fletchers bend
the arrow; carpenters bend a log of wood; wise people fashion
themselves.

\[78. It is hardly possible to take mitte kalyâ*n*e in the technical
sense of kalyâ*n*a-mitra, 'ein geistlicher Rath,' a spiritual guide.
Burnouf (Introd. p. 284) shows that in the technical sense
kalyâ*n*a-mitra was widely spread in the Buddhist world.

79\. Ariya, 'elect, venerable,' is explained by the commentator as
referring to Buddha and other teachers.

80\. See verses [33](sbe1005.htm#pp_33) and [145](sbe1012.htm#pp_145.md),
the latter being a mere repetition of our verse. The nettikâs, to judge
from the commentary and from the general purport of the verse, are not
simply water-carriers, but builders of canals and aqueducts, who force
the water to go where it would not go by itself. The Chinese translator
says, 'the pilot manages his ship.' See Beal, l.c. p. 79.\]

p\. 24

   81. As a solid rock is not shaken by the wind, wise people falter not
amidst blame and praise.

   82. Wise people, after they have listened to the laws, become serene,
like a deep, smooth, and still lake.

   83. Good people walk on whatever befall, the good do not prattle,
longing for pleasure; whether touched by happiness or sorrow wise people
never appear elated or depressed.

   84. If, whether for his own sake, or for the sake of others, a man
wishes neither for a son, nor for wealth, nor for lordship, and if he
does not wish for his own success by unfair means, then he is good,
wise, and virtuous.

   85. Few are there among men who arrive at the other shore (become
Arhats); the other people here run up and down the shore.

\[83. The first line is very doubtful. I have adopted, in my
translation, a suggestion of Mr. Childers, who writes, 'I think it will
be necessary to take sabbattha in the sense of "everywhere," or "under
every condition;" pa*ñk*akhandâdibhedesu, sabbadhammesu, says
Buddhaghosha. I do not think we need assume that B. means the word
vi*g*ahanti to be a synonym of va*g*anti. I would rather take the whole
sentence together as a gloss upon the word va*g*anti:--va*g*antîti
arahatta*ñ*ânena apaka*ddh*antâ *kh*andarâga*m* vi*g*ahanti; va*g*anti
means that, ridding themselves of lust by the wisdom which Arhatship
confers, they cast it away.' I am inclined to think the line means 'the
righteous walk on (unmoved) in all the conditions of life.' Nindâ,
pasa*m*sâ, sukha, dukkha are four of the eight lokadhammas, or earthly
conditions; the remaining lokadhammas are lâbba, alâbha, yasa, ayasa.

In [v. 245](sbe1020.htm#pp_245.md), passatâ, 'by a man who sees,' means 'by
a man who sees clearly or truly.' ln the same manner vra*g* may mean,
not simply 'to walk,' but 'to walk properly,' or may be used
synonymously with pravra*g*.

85\. 'The other shore' is meant for Nirvâ*n*a, 'this shore' for common
life. On reaching Nirvâ*n*a, the dominion of death is overcome. The
commentator supplies târitvâ, 'having crossed,' in order to explain the
accusative ma*kk*udheyyam. Possibly pâram essanti should here be taken
as one word, in the sense of overcoming.\]

p\. 25

   86. But those who, when the law has been well preached to them,
follow the law, will pass across the dominion of death, however
difficult to overcome.

   87., 88. A wise man should leave the dark state (of ordinary life),
and follow the bright state (of the Bhikshu). After going from his home
to a homeless state, he should in his retirement look for enjoyment
where there seemed to be no enjoyment. Leaving all pleasures behind, and
calling nothing his own, the wise man should purge himself from all the
troubles of the mind.

   89. Those whose mind is well grounded in the (seven) elements of
knowledge, who without clinging

\[87, 88. Dark and bright are meant for bad and good; cf. [Sutta-nipâta,
v. 526](sbe1035.htm#pp_526), and [Dhp. v. 167](sbe1015.htm#pp_167.md).
Leaving one's home is the same as becoming a mendicant, without a home
or family, an anâgâra, or anchorite. A man in that state of viveka, or
retirement (see [v. 75](sbe1007.htm#pp_75), note.md), sees, that where
before there seemed to be no pleasure there real pleasure is to be
found, or vice versâ. A similar idea is expressed in [verse
99](sbe1009.htm#pp_99.md). See Burnouf, Lotus, p. 474, where he speaks of
'Le plaisir de la satisfaction, né de la distinction.'

The five troubles or evils of the mind are passion, anger, ignorance,
arrogance, pride; see Burnouf, Lotus, pp. 360, 443. As to pariyodapeyya,
see [verse 183](sbe1016.htm#pp_183.md), and Lotus, pp. 523, 528; as to
aki*ñk*ano, see Mahâbh. XII, 6568, 1240.

89\. The elements of knowledge are the seven Sambodhvangas, on which see
Burnouf, Lotus, p. 796. D'Alwis explains them as the thirty-seven
Bodhipakkhiya-dhammâ. Khî*n*âsavâ, which I have translated by 'they
whose frailties have been conquered,' may also be taken in a more
metaphysical sense, as explained in the note to [v.
39](sbe1005.htm#pp_39.md). The same applies to the other terms occurring in
this verse, such as âdâna, anupâdâya, &c. Dr. Fausböll seems inclined to
take âsava in this passage, and in the other passages where it occurs,
as the Pâli representative of â*s*raya. But â*s*raya, in Buddhist
phraseology, means rather the five organs of sense with manas, 'the
soul,' and these are kept distinct from the âsavas, 'the inclinations,
the appetites, passions, or vices.' The commentary on the Abhidharma,
when speaking of the Yogâ*k*âras, says, 'En réunissant ensemble les
réceptacles (â*s*r ya), les choses reçues (â*s*rita) et les supports
(âlambana), qui sont chacun composés de six termes, on a dix-huit termes
qu'on appelle "Dhâtus" ou contenants. La collection des six réceptacles,
ce sont les organes de la vue, de l'ouïe, de l'odorat, du goût, du
toucher, et le "manas" (ou l'organe du coeur), qui est le dernier. La
collection des six choses reçues, c'est la connaissance produite par la
vue et par les autres sens jusqu'au "manas" inclusivement. La collection
des six supports, ce sont la forme et les autres attributs sensibles
jusqu'au "Dharma" (la loi ou l'être) inclusivement.' See Burnouf,
Introduction, p. 449.

Parinibbuta is again a technical term, the Sanskrit pariniv*ri*ta
meaning 'freed from all worldly fetters,' like vimukta. See Burnouf,
Introduction, p. 590. See Childers, s.v. nibbâna, p. 270, and Notes on
Dhammapada, p. 3; and D'Alwis, Buddhist Nirvâ*n*a, p. 75.\]

p\. 26

to anything, rejoice in freedom from attachment, whose appetites have
been conquered, and who are full of light, are free (even) in this
world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Venerable (Arhat).](sbe1009.md)
