[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1006)  [Next](sbe1008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 20

## CHAPTER V.

THE FOOL.

   60. Long is the night to him who is awake; long is a mile to him who
is tired; long is life to the foolish who do not know the true law.

   61. If a traveller does not meet with one who is his better, or his
equal, let him firmly keep to his solitary journey; there is no
companionship with a fool.

   62. 'These sons belong to me, and this wealth belongs to me,' with
such thoughts a fool is tormented. He himself does not belong to
himself; how much less sons and wealth?

   63. The fool who knows his foolishness, is wise at least so far. But
a fool who thinks himself wise, he is called a fool indeed.

   64. If a fool be associated with a wise man even all his life, he
will perceive the truth as little as a spoon perceives the taste of
soup.

   65. If an intelligent man be associated for one minute only with a
wise man, he will soon perceive the truth, as the tongue perceives the
taste of soup.

   66. Fools of little understanding have themselves

\[60. 'Life,' sa*m*sâra, is the constant revolution of birth and death
which goes on for ever until the knowledge of the true law or the true
doctrine of Buddha enables a man to free himself from sa*m*sâra, and to
enter into Nirvâ*n*a. See Buddhaghosha's Parables, Parable XIX, p. 134.

61\. Cf. [Suttanipâta, v. 46](sbe1033.htm#pp_46.md).

63\. Cf. Beal, Dhammapada, p. 77.

65\. Cf. Beal, Dhammapada, p. 78.\]

p\. 21

for their greatest enemies, for they do evil deeds which must bear
bitter fruits.

   67. That deed is not well done of which a man must repent, and the
reward of which he receives crying and with a tearful face.

   68. No, that deed is well done of which a man does not repent, and
the reward of which he receives gladly and cheerfully.

   69. As long as the evil deed done does not bear fruit, the fool
thinks it is like honey; but when it ripens, then the fool suffers
grief.

   70. Let a fool month after month eat his food (like an ascetic) with
the tip of a blade of Ku*s*a grass, yet he is not worth the sixteenth
particle of those who have well weighed the law.

   71. An evil deed, like newly-drawn milk, does not turn (suddenly);
smouldering, like fire covered by ashes, it follows the fool.

\[67. See Beal, l.c. p. 78.

69\. Taken from the Sa*m*yutta-nikâya, where, however, we read thânanhi
instead of madhuvâ; see Feer, Comptes Rendus, 1871, p. 64.

70\. The commentator clearly takes sa<u>n</u>khâta in the sense of
sa<u>n</u>khyâta, 'reckoned,' for he explains it by *n*âtadhammâ,
tulitadhammâ. The eating with the tip of Ku*s*a grass has reference to
the fastings performed by the Brahmans, but disapproved of, except as a
moderate discipline, by the followers of Buddha. This verse seems to
interrupt the continuity of the other verses which treat of the reward
of evil deeds, or of the slow but sure ripening of every sinful act. See
Childers, s.v. sa<u>n</u>khâto.

71\. I am not at all certain of the simile, unless mu*kk*ati, as applied
to milk, can be used in the sense of changing or turning sour. In Manu
IV, 172, where a similar sentence occurs, the commentators are equally
doubtful: Nâdharma*s* *k*arito loke sadya*h* phalati gaur iva, 'for an
evil act committed in the world does not bear fruit at once, like a
cow;' or 'like the earth (in due season);' or 'like milk.' See Childers,
Notes, p. 6.\]

p\. 22

   72. And when the evil deed, after it has become known, brings sorrow
to the fool, then it destroys his bright lot, nay, it cleaves his head.

   73. Let the fool wish for a false reputation, for precedence among
the Bhikshus, for lordship in the convents, for worship among other
people!

   74. 'May both the layman and he who has left the world think that
this is done by me; may they be subject to me in everything which is to
be done or is not to be done,' thus is the mind of the fool, and his
desire and pride increase.

   75. 'One is the road that leads to wealth, another the road that
leads to Nirvâ*n*a;' if the Bhikshu, the disciple of Buddha, has learnt
this, he will not yearn for honour, he will strive after separation from
the world.

\[72. I take *ñ*attam for *gñ*apitam, the causative of *gñ*âtam, for
which in Sanskrit, too, we have the form without i, *gñ*aptam. This
*gñ*aptam, 'made known, revealed,' stands in opppsition to the *kh*anna,
'covered, hid,' of the preceding verse. Sukka*m*sa, which Fausböll
explains by *s*uklâ*m*sa, has probably a more technical and special
meaning. Childers traces *ñ*attam to the Vedic *gñ*âtram, 'knowledge.'
Fausböll refers to *G*âtaka, vol. i. p. 445, v. 118.

75\. Viveka, which in Sanskrit means chiefly understanding, has with the
Buddhists the more technical meaning of separation, whether separation
from the world and retirement to the solitude of the forest
(kâya-viveka), or separalion from idle thoughts (*k*itta-viveka), or the
highest separation and freedom (Nirvâ*n*a).\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Wise Man (Pandita).](sbe1008.md)
