[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1026)  [Next](sbe1028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 85

## CHAPTER XXV.

THE BHIKSHU (MENDICANT).

   360. Restraint in the eye is good, good is restraint in the ear, in
the nose restraint is good, good is restraint in the tongue.

   361. In the body restraint is good, good is restraint in speech, in
thought restraint is good, good is restraint in all things. A Bhikshu,
restrained in all things, is freed from all pain.

   362. He who controls his hand, he who controls his feet, he who
controls his speech, he who is well controlled, he who delights
inwardly, who is collected, who is solitary and content, him they call
Bhikshu.

   363. The Bhikshu who controls his mouth, who speaks wisely and
calmly, who teaches the meaning and the law, his word is sweet.

   364. He who dwells in the law, delights in the law, meditates on the
law, follows the law, that Bhikshu will never fall away from the true
law.

   365. Let him not despise what he has received,

\[363. On artha and dharma, see Stanislas Julien, Les Avadânas, I, 217,
note; 'Les quatre connaissances sont; 1&deg; la connaissance du sens
(artha); 2&deg; la connaissance de la Loi (dharma); 3&deg; la
connaissance des explications (niroukti); 4&deg; la connaissance de
l'intelligence (prâtibhâna).'

364\. The expression dhammârâmo, 'having his garden or delight
(Lustgarten) in the law,' is well matched by the Brahmanic expression
ekârâma, i.e. nirdvandva (Mahâbh. XIII, 1930). Cf. [Suttanipâta, v.
326](sbe1034.htm#pp_326); [Dhammapada, v. 32](sbe1004.htm#pp_32.md).\]

p\. 86

nor ever envy others: a mendicant who envies others does not obtain
peace of mind.

   366. A Bhikshu who, though he receives little, does not despise what
he has received, even the gods will praise him, if his life is pure, and
if he is not slothful.

   367. He who never identifies himself with name and form, and does not
grieve over what is no more, he indeed is called a Bhikshu.

   368. The Bhikshu who acts with kindness, who is calm in the doctrine
of Buddha, will reach the quiet place (Nirvâ*n*a), cessation of natural
desires, and happiness.

   369. O Bhikshu, empty this boat! if emptied, it will go quickly;
having cut off passion and hatred thou wilt go to Nirvâ*n*a.

   370. Cut off the five (senses), leave the five, rise above the five.
A Bhikshu, who has escaped from the five fetters, he is called
Oghati*nn*a, 'saved from the flood.'

   371. Meditate, O Bhikshu, and be not heedless! Do not direct thy
thought to what gives pleasure that thou mayest not for thy heedlessness
have to swallow the iron ball (in hell), and that thou mayest not cry
out when burning, 'This is pain.'

\[367. Nâmarûpa is here used again in its technical sense of mind and
body, neither of which, however, is with the Buddhists âtman, or 'self.'
Asat, 'what is not,' may therefore mean the same as nâmarûpa, or we may
take it in the sense of what is no more, as, for instance, the beauty or
youth of the body, the vigour of the mind, &c.

368\. See Childers, Notes, p. 11.

371\. The swallowing of hot iron balls is considered as a punishment in
hell; see [verse 308](sbe1024.htm#pp_308.md). Professor Weber has perceived
the right meaning of bhavassu, which can only be bhâvayasva, but I doubt
whether the rest of his rendering is right, for who would swallow an
iron ball by accident?\]

p\. 87

   372. Without knowledge there is no meditation, without meditation
there is no knowledge: he who has knowledge and meditation is near unto
Nirvâ*n*a.

   373. A Bhikshu who has entered his empty house, and whose mind is
tranquil, feels a more than human delight when he sees the law clearly.

   374. As soon as he has considered the origin and destruction of the
elements (khandha) of the body, he finds happiness and joy which belong
to those who know the immortal (Nirvâ*n*a).

   375. And this is the beginning here for a wise Bhikshu: watchfulness
over the senses, contentedness, restraint under the law; keep noble
friends whose life is pure, and who are not slothful.

   376. Let him live in charity, let him be perfect in his duties; then
in the fulness of delight he will make an end of suffering.

   377. As the Vassika plant sheds its withered flowers, men should shed
passion and hatred, O ye Bhikshus!

   378. The Bhikshu whose body and tongue and mind are quieted, who is
collected, and has rejected the baits of the world, he is called quiet.

   379. Rouse thyself by thyself, examine thyself by thyself, thus
self-protected and attentive wilt thou live happily, O Bhikshu!

   380. For self is the lord of self, self is the refuge of self;
therefore curb thyself as the merchant curbs a good horse.

\[372. Cf. Beal, Catena, p. 247.

375\. Cf. [Suttanipâta, v. 337](sbe1034.htm#pp_337.md).\]

p\. 88

   381. The Bhikshu, full of delight, who is calm in the doctrine of
Buddha will reach the quiet place (Nirvâ*n*a), cessation of natural
desires, and happiness.

   382. He who, even as a young Bhikshu, applies himself to the doctrine
of Buddha, brightens up this world, like the moon when free from clouds.

\[381. See [verse 368](#pp_368.md). D'Alwis translates, 'dissolution of the
sa<u>n</u>khâras (elements of existence).'\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI. The Brâhmana (Arhat).](sbe1028.md)
