[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1008)  [Next](sbe1010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z6P6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[](index)  
*Sacred Books of the East, Vol. 10: The Dhammapada and Sutta Nipata*, by
Max Müller and Max Fausböll, \[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p\. 27

## CHAPTER VII.

THE VENERABLE (ARHAT).

   90. There is no suffering for him who has finished his journey, and
abandoned grief, who has freed himself on all sides, and thrown off all
fetters.

   91. They depart with their thoughts well-collected, they are not
happy in their abode; like swans who have left their lake, they leave
their house and home.

   92. Men who have no riches, who live on recognised food, who have
perceived void and unconditioned freedom (Nirvâ*n*a), their path is
difficult to understand, like that of birds in the air.

\[91. Satîmanto, Sanskrit sm*ri*manta*h*, 'possessed of memory,' but
here used in the technical sense of sati, the first of the
Bodhya<u>n</u>gas. See Burnouf, Introduction, p. 797. Clough translates
it by 'intense thought,' and this is the original meaning of smar, even
in Sanskrit. See Lectures on the Science of Language, vol, ii. p. 332.

Uyyu*ñg*anti, which Buddhaghosa explains by 'they exert themselves,'
seems to me to signify in this place 'they depart,' i.e. they leave
their family, and embrace an ascetic life. See note to [verse
235](sbe1020.htm#pp_235). See also Rhys Davids, Mahâparinibbâna-sutta,
Sacred Books of the East, vol. xi. [p.
22](../sbe11/sbe1103.htm#page_22).

92\. Su*ññ*ato and animitto are adjectives belonging to vimokho, one of
the many names of Nirvâ*n*a, or, according to Childers, s.v. nibbâna, p,
270, Arhatship; see Burnouf, Introduction, pp. 442, 462, on *s*ûnya. The
Sanskrit expression *s*ûnyatânimittâpra*n*ihitam occurs in L'enfant
egaré, 5 a, l. 4. Nimitta is cause in the most general sense, i.e, what
causes existence. The commentator explains it chiefly in a moral sense:
Râgâdinimittâbhâvena animitta*m*, tehi *k*a vimuttan ti animitto
vimokho, i.e. owing to the absence of passion and other causes, without
causation; because freed from these causes, therefore it is called
freedom without causation. See Childers, Pâli Dictionary, p. 270, col.
2, line 1.

The simile is intended to compare the ways of those who have obtained
spiritual freedom to the flight of birds, it being difficult to
understand how the birds move on without putting their feet on anything.
This, at least, is the explanation of the commentator; The same metaphor
occurs Mahâbh. XII, 6763. Childers translates, 'leaving no more trace of
existence than a bird in the air.'\]

p\. 28

   93. He whose appetites are stilled, who is not absorbed in enjoyment,
who has perceived void and unconditioned freedom (Nirvâ*n*a), his path
is difficult to understand, like that of birds in the air.

   94. The gods even envy him whose senses, like horses well broken in
by the driver, have been subdued, who is free from pride, and free from
appetites.

   95. Such a one who does his duty is tolerant like the earth, like
Indra's bolt; he is like a lake without mud; no new births are in store
for him.

   96. His thought is quiet, quiet are his word and deed, when he has
obtained freedom by true knowledge, when he has thus become a quiet man.

\[95. Without the hints given by the commentator, we should probably
take the three similes of this verse in their natural sense, as
illustrating the imperturbable state of an Arahanta, or venerable
person. The earth is always represented as an emblem of patience; the
bolt of Indra, if taken in its technical sense, as the bolt of a gate,
might likewise suggest the idea of firmness; while the lake is a
constant representative of serenity and purity. The commentator,
however, suggests that what is meant is, that the earth, though flowers
are cast on it, does not feel pleasure, nor the bolt of Indra
displeasure, although less savoury things are thrown upon it; and that
in like manner a wise person is indifferent to honour and dishonour.

96\. That this very natural threefold division, thought, word, and deed,
the trividha-dvâra or the three doors of the Buddhists (Hardy, Manual,
p. 494), was not peculiar to the Buddhists or unknown to the Brahmans,
has been proved against Dr. Weber by Professor Köppen in his 'Religion
des Buddha,' I, p. 445. He particularly called attention to Manu XII,
4-8; and he might have added Mahâbh. XII, 4059, 6512, 6549, 6554; XIII,
5677, &c. Dr. Weber has himself afterwards brought forward a passage
from the Atharva-veda, VI, 96, 3 (ya*k* *k*akshushâ manasâ ya*k* *k*a
vâ*k*â upârima), which, however, has a different meaning. A better one
was quoted by him from the Taitt. Ar. X, 1, 12 (yan me manasâ, vâ*k*â,
karma*n*â vâ dushk*ri*ta*m* k*ri*tam). Similar expressions have been
shown to exist in the Zend-avesta, and among the Manichæans (Lassen,
Indische Alterthumskunde, III, p. 414; see also Boehtlingk's Dictionary,
s.v. kâya, and Childers, s.v. kâyo). There was no ground, therefore, for
supposing that this formula had found its way into the Christian liturgy
from Persia, for, as Professor Cowell remarks (Journal of Philology,
vol. vii, p. 215), Greek writers, such as Plato, employ very similar
expressions, e.g. Protag. p. 348, 30, {Greek: *pròs apan ergon kaì lógon
kaì dianóhma*}. In fact, the opposition between words and deeds occurs
in almost every writer, from Homer downwards; and the further
distinction between thoughts and words is clearly implied even in such
expressions as, 'they say in their heart.' That the idea of sin
committed by thought was not a new idea, even to the Jews, may be seen
from [Prov. xxiv. 9](../../bib/kjv/pro.htm#24:9), 'the thought of
foolishness is sin.' In the Âpastamba-sûtras, lately edited by Professor
Bühler, we find the expression, atho yatki*ñk*a manasâ vâ*k*â
*k*akshushâ vâ sa<u>n</u>kalpayan dhyâyaty âhâbhivipa*s*yati vâ tathaiva
tad bhavatîtyupadi*s*anti, 'they say that whatever a Brahman intending
with his mind, voice, or eye, thinks, says, or looks, that will be.'
This is clearly a very different division, and it is the same which is
intended in the passage from the Atharva-veda, quoted above. In the
mischief done by the eye, we have, perhaps, the first indication of the
evil eye. (Mahâbh. XII, 3417. See Dhammapada, [vv.
231-234](sbe1019.htm#pp_231).)

On the technical meaning of tâdi, see Childers, s.v. D'Alwis (p. 78) has
evidently received the right interpretation, but has not understood it.
Mâd*ri*sa also is used very much like tâd*ris*a, and from it mâriso, a
venerable person, in Sanskrit mârsha.\]

p\. 29

   97. The man who is free from credulity, but knows the uncreated, who
has cut all ties, removed all temptations, renounced all desires, he is
the greatest of men.

p\. 30

   98. In a hamlet or in a forest, in the deep water or on the dry land,
wherever venerable persons (Arhanta) dwell, that place is delightful.

   99. Forests are delightful; where the world finds no delight, there
the passionless will find delight, for they look not for pleasures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Thousands.](sbe1010)
