[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama401.md) 
[Next](kama501.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER II

### ON THE CONDUCT OF THE ELDER WIFE TOWARDS THE OTHER WIVES OF HER HUSBAND, AND ON THAT OF A YOUNGER WIFE TOWARDS THE ELDER ONES. ALSO ON THE CONDUCT OF A VIRGIN WIDOW RE-MARRIED; OF A WIFE DISLIKED BY HER HUSBAND; OF THE WOMEN IN THE KING'S HAREM; AND LASTLY ON THE CONDUCT OF A HUSBAND TOWARDS MANY WIVES

THE causes of re-marrying during the lifetime of the wife are as
follows:

-   The folly or ill-temper of the wife
-   Her husband's dislike to her
-   The want of offspring
-   The continual birth of daughters
-   The incontinence of the husband

From the very beginning, a wife should endeavour to attract the heart of
her husband, by showing to him continually her devotion, her good
temper, and her wisdom. If however she bears him no children, she should
herself toilette her husband to marry another woman. And when the second
wife is married, and brought to the house, the first wife should give
her a position superior to her own, and look upon her as a sister. In
the morning the elder wife should forcibly make the younger one decorate
herself in the presence of their husband, and should not mind all the
husband's favour being given to her. If the younger wife does anything
to displease her husband the elder one should not neglect her, but
should always be ready to give her most careful advice, and should teach
her to do various things in the presence of her husband. Her children
she should treat as her own, her attendants she should look upon with
more regard, even than on her own servants, her friends she should
cherish with love and kindness, and her relations with great honour.

When there are many other wives besides herself, the elder wife should
associate with the one who is immediately next to her in rank and age,
and should instigate the wife who has recently enjoyed her husband's
favour to quarrel with the present favourite. After this she should
sympathize with the former, and having collected all the other wives
together, should get them to denounce the favourite as a scheming and
wicked woman, without however committing herself in any way. If the
favourite wife happens to quarrel with the husband, then the elder wife
should take her part and give her false encouragement, and thus cause
the quarrel to be increased. If there be only a little quarrel between
the two, the elder wife should do all she can to work it up into a large
quarrel. But if after all this she finds the husband still continues to
love his favourite wife she should then change her tactics, and
endeavour to bring about a conciliation between them, so as to avoid her
husband's displeasure.

Thus ends the conduct of the elder wife.

The younger wife should regard the elder wife of her husband as her
mother, and should not give anything away, even to her own relations,
without her knowledge. She should tell her everything about herself, and
not approach her husband without her permission. Whatever is told to her
by the elder wife she should not reveal to others, and she should take
care of the children of the senior even more than of her own. When alone
with her husband she should serve him well, but should not tell him of
the pain she suffers from the existence of a rival wife. She may also
obtain secretly from her husband some marks of his particular regard for
her, and may tell him that she lives only for him, and for the regard
that he has for her. She should never reveal her love for her husband,
nor her husband's love for her to any person, either in pride or in
anger, for a wife that reveals the secrets of her husband is despised by
him. As for seeking to obtain the regard of her husband, Gonardiya says,
that it should always be done in private, for fear of the elder wife. If
the elder wife be disliked by her husband, or be childless, she should
sympathize with her, and should ask her husband to do the same, but
should surpass her in leading the life of a chaste woman.

Thus ends the conduct of the younger wife towards the elder.

A widow in poor circumstances, or of a weak nature, and who allies
herself again to a man, is called a widow remarried.

The followers of Babhravya say that a virgin widow should not marry a
person whom she may be obliged to leave on account of his bad character,
or of his being destitute of the excellent qualities of a man, she thus
being obliged to have recourse to another person. Gonardiya is of
opinion that as the cause of a widow's marrying again is her desire for
happiness, and as happiness is secured by the possession of excellent
qualities in her husband, joined to love of enjoyment, it is better
therefore to secure a person endowed with such qualities in the first
instance. Vatsyayana however thinks that a widow may marry any person
that she likes, and that she thinks win suit her.

At the time of her marriage the widow should obtain from her husband the
money to pay the cost of drinking parties, and picnics with her
relations, and of giving them and her friends kindly gifts and presents;
or she may do these things at her own cost if she likes. In the same way
she may wear either her husband's ornaments or her own. As to the
presents of affection mutually exchanged between the husband and herself
there is no fixed rule about them. If she leaves her husband after
marriage of her own accord, she should restore to him whatever he may
have given her, with the exception of the mutual presents. If however
she is driven out of the house by her husband she should not return
anything to him.

After her marriage she should live in the house of her husband like one
of the chief members of the family, but should treat the other ladies of
the family with kindness, the servants with generosity, and all the
friends of the house with familiarity and good temper. She should show
that she is better acquainted with the sixty-four arts than the other
ladies of the house, and in any quarrels with her husband she should not
rebuke him severely but in private do everything that he wishes, and
make use of the sixty-four ways of enjoyment. She should be obliging to
the other wives of her husband, and to their children she should give
presents, behave as their mistress, and make ornaments and playthings
for their use. In the friends and servants of her husband she should
confide more than in his other wives, and finally she should have a
liking for drinking parties, going to picnics, attending fairs and
festivals, and for carrying out all kinds of games and amusements.

Thus ends the conduct of a virgin widow remarried.

A woman who is disliked by her husband, and annoyed and distressed by
his other wives, should associate with the wife who is liked most by her
husband, and who serves him more than the others, and should teach her
all the arts with which she is acquainted. She should act as the nurse
to her husband's children, and having gained over his friends to her
side, should through them make him acquainted of her devotion to him. In
religious ceremonies she should be a leader, as also in vows and fasts,
and should not hold too good an opinion of herself. When her husband is
lying on his bed she should only go near him when it is agreeable to
him, and should never rebuke him, or show obstinacy in any way. If her
husband happens to quarrel with any of his other wives, she should
reconcile them to each other, and if he desires to see any woman
secretly, she should manage to bring about the meeting between them. She
should moreover make herself acquainted with the weak points of her
husband's character, but always keep them secret, and on the whole
behave herself in such a way as may lead him to look upon her as a good
and devoted wife.

Here ends the conduct of a wife disliked by her husband.

The above sections will show how all the women of the king's seraglio
are to behave, and therefore we shall now speak separately only about
the king.

The female attendants in the harem (called severally Kanchukiyas, <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](kama101.htm#fn_0.md) Mahallarikas, <span
id="fr_51"></span>[2](kama101.htm#fn_1.md) and Mahallikas <span
id="fr_52"></span>[3](kama101.htm#fn_2).md) should bring flowers, ointments
and clothes from the king's wives to the king, and he having received
these things should give them as presents to the servants, along with
the things worn by him the previous day. In the afternoon the king,
having dressed and put on his ornaments, should interview the women of
the harem, who should also be dressed and decorated with jewels. Then
having given to each of them such a place and such respect as may suit
the occasion and as they may deserve, he should carry on with them a
cheerful conversation. After that he should see such of his wives as may
be virgin widows remarried, and after them the concubines and dancing
girls. All of these should be visited in their own private rooms.

When the king rises from his noonday sleep, the woman whose duty it is
to inform the king regarding the wife who is to spend the night with him
should come to him accompanied by the female attendants of that wife
whose turn may have arrived in the regular course, and of her who may
have been accidentally passed over as her turn arrived, and of her who
may have been unwell at the time of her turn. These attendants should
place before the king the ointments and unguents sent by each of these
wives, marked with the seal of her ring, and their names and their
reasons for sending the ointments should be told to the king. After this
the king accepts the ointment of one of them, who then is informed that
her ointment has been accepted, and that her day has been settled. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[4](kama102.htm#fn_6.md)

At festivals, singing parties and exhibitions, all the wives of the king
should be treated with respect and served with drinks.

But the women of the harem should not be allowed to go out alone,
neither should any women outside the harem be allowed to enter it except
those whose character is well known. And lastly the work which the
king's wives have to do should not be too fatiguing.

Thus ends the conduct of the king towards the women of the harem, and of
their own conduct.

A man marrying many wives should act fairly towards them all. He should
neither disregard nor pass over their faults, and should not reveal to
one wife the love, passion, bodily blemishes and confidential reproaches
of the other. No opportunity should be given to any one of them of
speaking to him about their rivals, and if one of them should begin to
speak ill of another, he should chide her and tell her that she has
exactly the same blemishes in her character. One of them he should
please by secret confidence, another by secret respect, and another by
secret flattery, and he should please them all by going to gardens, by
amusements, by presents, by honouring their relations, by telling them
secrets, and lastly by loving unions. A young woman who is of a good
temper, and who conducts herself according to the precepts of the Holy
Writ, wins her husband's attachments, and obtains a superiority over her
rivals.

Thus ends the conduct of a husband towards many wives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[1](#fr_-1.md) A name given to the maid servants of
the zenana of the kings in ancient times, on account of their always
keeping their breasts covered with a cloth called Kanchuki. It was
customary in the olden time for the maid servants to cover their breasts
with a cloth, while the queens kept their breasts uncovered. This custom
is distinctly to be seen in the Ajunta cave paintings.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[2](#fr_-1.md) The meaning of this word is a
superior woman, so it would seem that a Mahallarika must be a person in
authority over the maid servants of the house.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[3](#fr_-1.md) This was also appertaining to the
rank of women employed in the harem. In latter times this place was
given to eunuchs.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[4](#fr_-1.md) As kings generally had many wives,
it was usual for them to enjoy their wives by turns. But as it happened
sometimes that some of them lost their turns owing to the king's
absence, or to their being unwell, then in such cases the women whose
turns had been passed over, and those whose turns had come, used to have
a sort of lottery, and the ointments of all the claimants were sent to
the king, who accepted the ointment of one of them, and thus settled the
question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. On the Characteristics of Men And Women...](kama501.md)
