[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama208.md) 
[Next](kama210.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IX

### OF THE AUPARISHTAKA OR MOUTH CONGRESS

THERE are two kinds of eunuchs, those that are disguised as males, and
those that are disguised as females. Eunuchs disguised as females
imitate their dress, speech, gestures, tenderness, timidity, simplicity,
softness and bashfulness. The acts that are done on the jaghana or
middle parts of women, are done in the mouths of these eunuchs, and this
is called Auparishtaka. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](kama101.htm#fn_0.md)
These eunuchs derive their imaginable pleasure, and their livelihood
from this kind of congress, and they lead the life of courtesans. So
much concerning eunuchs disguised as females.

Eunuchs disguised as males keep their desires secret, and when they wish
to do anything they lead the life of shampooers. Under the pretence of
shampooing, a eunuch of this kind embraces and draws towards himself the
thighs of the man whom he is shampooing, and after this he touches the
joints of his thighs and his jaghana, or central portions of his body.
Then, if he finds the lingam of the man erect, he presses it with his
hands and chaffs him for getting into that state. If after this, and
after knowing his intention, the man does not tell the eunuch to
proceed, then the latter does it of his own accord and begins the
congress. If however he is ordered by the man to do it, then he disputes
with him, and only consents at last with difficulty.

The following eight things are then done by the eunuch one after the
other:

The nominal congress  
Biting the sides  
Pressing outside  
Pressing inside  
Kissing  
Rubbing  
Sucking a mango fruit  
Swallowing up

At the end of each of these, the eunuch expresses his wish to stop, but
when one of them is finished, the man desires him to do another, and
after that is done, then the one that follows it, and so on.

When, holding the man's lingam with his hand, and placing it between his
lips, the eunuch moves about his mouth, it is called the 'nominal
congress'.

When, covering the end of the lingam with his fingers collected together
like the bud of a plant or flower, the eunuch presses the sides of it
with his lips, using his teeth also, it is called 'biting the sides'.

When, being desired to proceed, the eunuch presses the end of the lingam
with his lips closed together, and kisses it as if he were drawing it
out, it is called the 'outside pressing'.

When, being asked to go on, he puts the lingam further into his mouth,
and presses it with his lips and then takes it out, it is called the
'inside pressing'.

When, holding the lingam in his hand, the eunuch kisses it as if he were
kissing the lower lip, it is called 'kissing'.

When, after kissing it, he touches it with his tongue everywhere, and
passes the tongue over the end of it, it is called 'rubbing'.

When, in the same way, he puts the half of it into his mouth, and
forcibly kisses and sucks it, this is called 'sucking a mango fruit'.

And lastly, when, with the consent of the man, the eunuch puts the whole
lingam into his mouth, and presses it to the very end, as if he were
going to swallow it up, it is called 'swallowing up'.

Striking, scratching, and other things may also be done during this kind
of congress.

The Auparishtaka is practised also by unchaste and wanton women, female
attendants and serving maids, i.e. those who are not married to anybody,
but who live by shampooing.

The Acharyas (i.e. ancient and venerable authors) are of opinion that
this Auparishtaka is the work of a dog and not of a man, because it is a
low practice, and opposed to the orders of the Holy Writ, and because
the man himself suffers by bringing his lingam into contact with the
mouths of eunuchs and women. But Vatsyayana says that the orders of the
Holy Writ do not affect those who resort to courtesans, and the law
prohibits the practice of the Auparishtaka with married women only. As
regards the injury to the male, that can be easily remedied.

The people of Eastern India do not resort to women who practise the
Auparishtaka.

The people of Ahichhatra resort to such women, but do nothing with them,
so far as the mouth is concerned.

The people of Saketa do with these women every kind of mouth congress,
while the people of Nagara do not practise this, but do every other
thing.

The people of the Shurasena country, on the southern bank of the Jumna,
do everything without any hesitation, for they say that women being
naturally unclean, no one can be certain about their character, their
purity, their conduct, their practices, their confidences, or their
speech. They are not however on this account to be abandoned, because
religious law, on the authority of which they are reckoned pure, lays
down that the udder of a cow is clean at the time of milking, though the
mouth of a cow, and also the mouth of her calf, are considered unclean
by the Hindoos. Again a dog is clean when he seizes a deer in hunting,
though food touched by a dog is otherwise considered very unclean. A
bird is clean when it causes a fruit to fall from a tree by pecking at
it, though things eaten by crows and other birds are considered unclean.
And the mouth of a woman is clean for kissing and such like things at
the time of sexual intercourse. Vatsyayana moreover thinks that in all
these things connected with love, everybody should act according to the
custom of his country, and his own inclination.

There are also the following verses on the subject:

'The male servants of some men carry on the mouth congress with their
masters. It is also practised by some citizens, who know each other
well, among themselves. Some women of the harem, when they are amorous,
do the acts of the mouth on the yonis of one another, and some men do
the same thing with women. The way of doing this (i.e. of kissing the
yoni) should be known from kissing the mouth. When a man and woman lie
down in an inverted order, i.e. with the head of the one towards the
feet of the other and carry on this congress, it is called the "congress
of a crow".'

For the sake of such things courtesans abandon men possessed of good
qualities, liberal and clever, and become attached to low persons, such
as slaves and elephant drivers. The Auparishtaka, or mouth congress,
should never be done by a learned Brahman, by a minister that carries on
the business of a state, or by a man of good reputation, because though
the practice is allowed by the Shastras, there is no reason why it
should be carried on, and need only be practised in particular cases. As
for instance, the taste, and the strength, and the digestive qualities
of the flesh of dogs are mentioned in works on medicine, but it does not
therefore follow that it should be eaten by the wise. In the same way
there are some men, some places and some times, with respect to which
these practices can be made use of. A man should therefore pay regard to
the place, to the time, and to the practice which is to be carried out,
as also as to whether it is agreeable to his nature and to himself, and
then he may or may not practise these things according to circumstances.
But after all, these things being done secretly, and the mind of the man
being fickle, how can it be known what any person will do at any
particular time and for any particular purpose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[1](#fr_-1.md) This practice appears to have been
prevalent in some parts of India from a very ancient time. The Shustruta
, a work on medicine some two thousand years old, describes the wounding
of the lingam with the teeth as one of the causes of a disease treated
upon in that work. Traces of the practice are found as far back as the
eighth century, for various kinds of the Auparishtaka are represented in
the sculptures of many Shaiva temples at Bhuvaneshwara, near Cuttack, in
Orissa, and which were built about that period. From these sculptures
being found in such places, it would seem that this practice was popular
in that part of the country at that time. It does not seem to be so
prevalent now in Hindustan, its place perhaps is filled up by the
practice of sodomy, introduced since the Mahomedan period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. How to Begin and How to End the Congress. Different
Kinds of Congress, and Love Quarrels](kama210.md)
