[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama303) 
[Next](kama305) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IV

### ABOUT THINGS TO BE DONE ONLY BY THE MAN, AND THE ACQUISITION OF THE GIRL THEREBY. ALSO WHAT IS TO BE DONE BY A GIRL TO GAIN OVER A MAN, AND SUBJECT HIM TO HER

Now when the girl begins to show her love by outward signs and motions,
as described in the last chapter, the lover should try to gain her over
entirely by various ways and means, such as the following:

When engaged with her in any game or sport he should intentionally hold
her hand. He should practise upon her the various kinds of embraces,
such as the touching embrace, and others already described in a
preceding chapter (Part II, Chapter II). He should show her a pair of
human beings cut out of the leaf of a tree, and such like things, at
intervals. When engaged in water sports, he should dive at a distance
from her, and come tip close to her. He should show an increased liking
for the new foliage of trees and such like things. He should describe to
her the pangs he suffers on her account. He should relate to her the
beautiful dream that he has had with reference to other women. At
parties and assemblies of his caste he should sit near her, and touch
her under some pretence or other, and having placed his foot upon hers,
he should slowly touch each of her toes, and press the ends of the
nails; if successful in this, he should get hold of her foot with his
hand and repeat the same thing. He should also press a finger of her
hand between his toes when she happens to be washing his feet; and
whenever he gives anything to her or takes anything from her, he should
show her by his manner and look how much he loves her.

He should sprinkle upon her the water brought for rinsing his mouth; and
when alone with her in a lonely place, or in darkness, he should make
love to her, and tell her the true state of his mind without distressing
her in any way.

Whenever he sits with her on the same seat or bed he should say to her,
'I have something to tell you in private', and then, when she comes to
hear it in a quiet place, he should express his love to her more by
manner and signs than by words. When he comes to know the state of her
feelings towards him he should pretend to be ill, and should make her
come to his house to speak to him. There he should intentionally hold
her hand and place it on his eyes and forehead, and under the pretence
of preparing some medicine for him he should ask her to do the work for
his sake in the following words: 'This work must be done by you, and by
nobody else.' When she wants to go away he should let her go, with an
earnest request to come and see him again. This device of illness should
be continued for three days and three nights. After this, when she
begins coming to see him frequently, he should carry on long
conversations with her, for, says Ghotakamukha, 'though a man loves a
girl ever so much, he never succeeds in winning her without a great deal
of talking'. At last, when the man finds the girl completely gained
over, he may then begin to enjoy her. As for the saying that women grow
less timid than usual during the evening, and in darkness, and are
desirous of congress at those times, and do not oppose men then, and
should only be enjoyed at these hours, it is a matter of talk only.

When it is impossible for the man to carry on his endeavours alone, he
should, by means of the daughter of her nurse, or of a female friend in
whom she confides, cause the girl to be brought to him without making
known to her his design, and he should then proceed with her in the
manner above described. Or he should in the beginning send his own
female servant to live with the girl as her friend, and should then gain
her over by her means.

At last, when he knows the state of her feelings by her outward manner
and conduct towards him at religious ceremonies, marriage ceremonies,
fairs, festivals, theatres, public assemblies, and such like occasions,
he should begin to enjoy her when she is alone, for Vatsyayana lays it
down, that women, when resorted to at proper times and in proper places,
do not turn away from their lovers.

When a girl, possessed of good qualities and well-bred, though born in a
humble family, or destitute of wealth, and not therefore desired by her
equals, or an orphan girl, or one deprived of her parents, but observing
the rules of her family and caste, should wish to bring about her own
marriage when she comes of age, such a girl should endeavour to gain
over a strong and good looking young man, or a person whom she thinks
would marry her on account of the weakness of his mind, and even without
the consent of his parents. She should do this by such means as would
endear her to the said person, as well as by frequently seeing and
meeting him. Her mother also should constantly cause them to meet by
means of her female friends, and the daughter of her nurse. The girl
herself should try to get alone with her beloved in some quiet place,
and at odd times should give him flowers, betel nut, betel leaves and
perfumes. She should also show her skill in the practice of the arts, in
shampooing, in scratching and in pressing with the nails. She should
also talk to him on the subjects he likes best, and discuss with him the
ways and means of gaining over and winning the affections of a girl.

But old authors say that although the girl loves the man ever so much,
she should not offer herself, or make the first overtures, for a girl
who does this loses her dignity, and is liable to be scorned and
rejected. But when the man shows his wish to enjoy her, she should be
favourable to him and should show no change in her demeanour when he
embraces her, and should receive all the manifestations of his love as
if she were ignorant of the state of his mind. But when he tries to kiss
her she should oppose him; when he begs to be allowed to have sexual
intercourse with her she should let him touch her private parts only and
with considerable difficulty; and though importuned by him, she should
not yield herself up to him as if of her own accord, but should resist
his attempts to have her. It is only, moreover, when she is certain that
she is truly loved, and that her over is indeed devoted to her, and will
not change his mind, that she should then give herself up to him, and
persuade him to marry her quickly. After losing her virginity she should
tell her confidential friends about it.

Here end the efforts of a girl to gain over a man.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows:

'A girl who is much sought after should marry the man that she likes,
and whom she thinks would be obedient to her, and capable of giving her
pleasure. But when from the desire of wealth a girl is married by her
parents to a rich man without taking into consideration the character or
looks of the bridegroom, or when given to a man who has several wives,
she never becomes attached to the man, even though he be endowed with
good qualities, obedient to her will, active, strong, and healthy, and
anxious to please her in every way. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](kama101.htm#fn_0) A husband who is obedient but
yet master of himself, though he be poor and not good looking, is better
than one who is common to many women, even though he be handsome and
attractive. The wives of rich men, where there are many wives, are not
generally attached to their husbands, and are not confidential with
them, and even though they possess all the external enjoyments of life,
still have recourse to other men. A man who is of a low mind, who has
fallen from his social position, and who is much given to travelling,
does not deserve to be married; neither does one who has many wives and
children, or one who is devoted to sport and gambling, and who comes to
his wife only when he likes. Of all the lovers of a girl he only is her
true husband who possesses the qualities that are liked by her, and such
a husband only enjoys real superiority over her, because he is the
husband of love.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[1](#fr_-1) There is a good deal of truth in the
last few observations. Woman is a monogamous animal, and loves but one,
and likes to feel herself alone in the affections of one man, and cannot
bear rivals. It may also be taken as a general rule that women either
married to, or kept by, rich men love them for their wealth but not for
themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. On the Different Forms of Marriage](kama305)
