[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama205.md) 
[Next](kama207.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER VI

### OF THE DIFFERENT WAYS OF LYING DOWN, AND VARIOUS KINDS OF CONGRESS

On the occasion of a 'high congress' the Mrigi (Deer) woman should lie
down in such a way as to widen her yoni, while in a 'low congress' the
Hastini (Elephant) woman should lie down so as to contract hers. But in
an 'equal congress' they should lie down in the natural position. What
is said above concerning the Mrigi and the Hastini applies also to the
Vadawa (Mare) woman. In a 'low congress the woman should particularly
make use of medicine, to cause her desires to be satisfied quickly.

The Deer-woman has the following three ways of lying down:

 

The widely opened position  
The yawning position  
The position of the wife of Indra

When she lowers her head and raises her middle parts, it is called the
'widely opened position'. At such a time the man should apply some
unguent, so as to make the entrance easy.

When she raises her thighs and keeps them wide apart and engages in
congress, it is called the 'yawning position'.

When she places her thighs with her legs doubled on them upon her sides,
and thus engages in congress, it is called the position of Indrani and
this is learnt only by practice. The position is also useful in the case
of the 'highest congress'.

The 'clasping position' is used in 'low congress', and in the 'lowest
congress', together with the 'pressing position', the 'twining
position', and the 'mare's position'.

When the legs of both the male and the female are stretched straight out
over each other, it is called the 'clasping position'. It is of two
kinds, the side position and the supine position, according to the way
in which they lie down. In the side position the male should invariably
lie on his left side, and cause the woman to lie on her right side, and
this rule is to be observed in lying down with all kinds of women.

When, after congress has begun in the clasping position, the woman
presses her lover with her thighs, it is called the 'pressing position'.

When the woman places one of her thighs across the thigh of her lover it
is called the 'twining position'.

When a woman forcibly holds in her yoni the lingam after it is in, it is
called the 'mare's position'. This is learnt by practice only, and is
chiefly found among the women of the Andhra country.

The above are the different ways of lying down, mentioned by Babhravya.
Suvarnanabha, however, gives the following in addition:

When the female raises both of her thighs straight up, it is called the
'rising position'.

When she raises both of her legs, and places them on her lover's
shoulders, it is called the 'yawning position'.

When the legs are contracted, and thus held by the lover before his
bosom, it is called the 'pressed position'.

When only one of her legs is stretched out, it is called the 'half
pressed position'.

When the woman places one of her legs on her lover's shoulder, and
stretches the other out, and then places the latter on his shoulder, and
stretches out the other, and continues to do so alternately, it is
called the 'splitting of a bamboo'.

When one of her legs is placed on the head, and the other is stretched
out, it is called the 'fixing of a nail'. This is learnt by practice
only.

When both the legs of the woman are contracted, and placed on her
stomach, it is called the 'crab's position'.

When the thighs are raised and placed one upon the other, it is called
the 'packed position'.

When the shanks are placed one upon the other, it is called the
'lotus-like position'.

When a man, during congress, turns round, and enjoys the woman without
leaving her, while she embraces him round the back all the time, it is
called the 'turning position', and is learnt only by practice.

Thus, says Suvarnanabha, these different ways of lying down, sitting,
and standing should be practised in water, because it is easy to do so
therein. But Vatsyayana is of opinion that congress in water is
improper, because it is prohibited by the religious law.

When a man and a woman support themselves on each other's bodies, or on
a wall, or pillar, and thus while standing engage in congress, it is
called the 'supported congress'.

When a man supports himself against a wall, and the woman, sitting on
his hands joined together and held underneath her, throws her arms round
his neck, and putting her thighs alongside his waist, moves herself by
her feet, which are touching the wall against which the man is leaning,
it is called the 'suspended congress'.

When a woman stands on her hands and feet like a quadruped, and her
lover mounts her like a bull, it is called the 'congress of a cow'. At
this time everything that is ordinarily done on the bosom should be done
on the back.

In the same way can be carried on the congress of a dog, the congress of
a goat, the congress of a deer, the forcible mounting of an ass, the
congress of a cat, the jump of a tiger, the pressing of an elephant, the
rubbing of a boar, and the mounting of a horse. And in all these cases
the characteristics of these different animals should be manifested by
acting like them.

When a man enjoys two women at the same time, both of whom love him
equally, it is called the 'united congress'.

When a man enjoys many women altogether, it is called the 'congress of a
herd of cows'.

The following kinds of congress-sporting in water, or the congress of an
elephant with many female elephants which is said to take place only in
the water, the congress of a collection of goats, the congress of a
collection of deer take place in imitation of these animals.

In Gramaneri many young men enjoy a woman that may be married to one of
them, either one after the other, or at the same time. Thus one of them
holds her, another enjoys her, a third uses her mouth, a fourth holds
her middle part, and in this way they go on enjoying her several parts
alternately.

The same things can be done when several men are sitting in company with
one courtesan, or when one courtesan is alone with many men. In the same
way this can be done by the women of the king's harem when they
accidentally get hold of a man.

The people in the Southern countries have also a congress in the anus,
that is called the 'lower congress'.

Thus ends the various kinds of congress. There are also two verses on
the subject as follows:

'An ingenious person should multiply the kinds of congress after the
fashion of the different kinds of beasts and of birds. For these
different kinds of congress, performed according to the usage of each
country, and the liking of each individual, generate love, friendship,
and respect in the hearts of women.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. On the Various Ways of Striking, and of The Sounds
Appropriate to Them](kama207.md)
