[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama701) 
[Next](kama703) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER II

### OF THE WAYS OF EXCITING DESIRE, AND MISCELLANEOUS EXPERIMENTS, AND RECIPES

IF a man is unable to satisfy a Hastini, or Elephant woman, he should
have recourse to various means to excite her passion. At the
commencement he should rub her yoni with his hand or fingers, and not
begin to have intercourse with her until she becomes excited, or
experiences pleasure. This is one way of exciting a woman.

Or, he may make use of certain Apadravyas, or things which are put on or
around the lingam to supplement its length or its thickness, so as to
fit it to the yoni. In the opinion of Babhravya, these Apadravyas should
be made of gold, silver, copper, iron, ivory, buffalo's horn, various
kinds of wood, tin or lead, and should be soft, cool, provocative of
sexual vigour, and well fitted to serve the intended purpose.
Vatsyayana, however, says that they may be made according to the natural
liking of each individual.

The following are the different kinds of Apadravyas:

'The armlet' (Valaya) should be of the same size as the lingam, and
should have its outer surface made rough with globules.

'The couple' (Sanghati) is formed of two armlets.

'The bracelet' (Chudaka) is made by joining three or more armlets, until
they come up to the required length of the lingam.

'The single bracelet' is formed by wrapping a single wire around the
lingam, according to its dimensions.

The Kantuka or Jalaka is a tube open at both ends, with a hole through
it, outwardly rough and studded with soft globules, and made to fit the
side of the yoni, and tied to the waist.

When such a thing cannot be obtained, then a tube made of the wood
apple, or tubular stalk of the bottle gourd, or a reed made soft with
oil and extracts of plants, and tied to the waist with strings, may be
made use of, as also a row of soft pieces of wood tied together.

The above are the things that can be used in connection with or in the
place of the lingam.

The people of the southern countries think that true sexual pleasure
cannot be obtained without perforating the lingam, and they therefore
cause it to be pierced like the lobes of the ears of an infant pierced
for earrings.

Now, when a young man perforates his lingam he should pierce it with a
sharp instrument, and then stand in water so long as the blood continues
to flow. At night, he should engage in sexual intercourse, even with
vigour, so as to clean the hole. After this he should continue to wash
the hole with decoctions, and increase the size by putting into it small
pieces of cane, and the wrightia antidysenterica, and thus gradually
enlarging the orifice. It may also be washed with liquorice mixed with
honey, and the size of the hole increased by the fruit stalks of the
simapatra plant. The hole should also be anointed with a small quantity
of oil.

In the hole made in the lingam a man may put Apadravyas of various
forms, such as the 'round', the 'round on one side', the 'wooden
mortar', the 'flower', the 'armlet', the 'bone of the heron', the 'goad
of the elephant', the 'collection of eight balls', the 'lock of hair',
the 'place where four roads meet', and other things named according to
their forms and means of using them. All these Apadravyas should be
rough on the outside according to their requirements.

The ways of enlarging the lingam must be now related.

When a man wishes to enlarge his lingam, he should rub it with the
bristles of certain insects that live in trees, and then, after rubbing
it for ten nights with oils, he should again rub it with the bristles as
before. By continuing to do this a swelling will be gradually produced
in the lingam, and he should then lie on a cot, and cause his lingam to
hang down through a hole in the cot. After this he should take away all
the pain from the swelling by using cool concoctions. The swelling,
which is called 'Suka', and is often brought about among the people of
the Dravida country, lasts for life.

If the lingam is rubbed with the following things, the plant physalis
flexuosa, the shavara-kandaka plant, the jalasuka plant, the fruit of
the egg plant, the butter of a she buffalo, the hastri-charma plant, and
the juice of the vajrarasa plant, a swelling lasting for one month will
be produced.

By rubbing it with oil boiled in the concoctions of the above things,
the same effect will be produced, but lasting for six months.

The enlargement of the lingam is also effected by rubbing it or
moistening it with oil boiled on a moderate fire along with the seeds of
the pomegranate, and the cucumber, the juices of the valuka plant, the
hastri-charma plant, and the eggplant.

In addition to the above, other means may be learnt from experienced and
confidential persons.

The miscellaneous experiments and recipes are as follows:

If a man mixes the powder of the milk hedge plant, and the kantaka plant
with the excrement of a monkey and the powdered root of the lanjalika
plant, and throws this mixture on a woman, she will not love anybody
else afterwards.

If a man thickens the juice of the fruits of the cassia fistula, and the
eugenia jambolana by mixing them with the powder of the soma plant, the
vernonia anthelmintica, the eclipta prostata, and the lohopa-jihirka,
and applies this composition to the yoni of a woman, and then has sexual
intercourse with her, his love for her will be destroyed.

The same effect is produced if a man has connection with a woman who has
bathed in the buttermilk of a she-buffalo mixed with the powders of the
gopalika plant, the banu-padika plant and the yellow amaranth.

An ointment made of the flowers of the nauclea cadamba, the hog plum,
and the eugenia jambolana, and used by a woman, causes her to be
disliked by her husband.

Garlands made of the above flowers, when worn by the woman, produce the
same effect.

An ointment made of the fruit of the asteracantha longifolia
(kokilaksha) will contract the yoni of a Hastini or Elephant woman, and
this contraction lasts for one night.

An ointment made by pounding the roots of the nelumbrium speciosum, and
of the blue lotus, and the powder of the plant physalis flexuosa mixed
with ghee and honey, will enlarge the yoni of the Mrigi or Deer woman.

An ointment made of the fruit of the emblica myrabolans soaked in the
milky juice of the milk hedge plant, of the soma plant, the calotropis
gigantea, and the juice of the fruit of the vernonia anthelmintica, will
make the hair white.

The juice of the roots of the madayantaka plant, the yellow amaranth,
the anjanika plant, the clitoria ternateea, and the shlakshnaparin
plant, used as a lotion, will make the hair grow.

An ointment made by boiling the above roots in oil, and rubbed in, will
make the hair black, and will also gradually restore hair that has
fallen off.

If lac is saturated seven times in the sweat of the testicle of a white
horse, and applied to a red lip, the lip will become white.

The colour of the lips can be regained by means of the madayantika and
other plants mentioned above.

A woman who hears a man playing on a reed pipe which has been dressed
with the juices of the bahupadika plant, the tabernamontana coronaria,
the costus speciosus or arabicus, the pinus deodora, the euphorbia
antiquorum, the vajra and the kantaka plant, becomes his slave.

If food be mixed with the fruit of the thorn apple (dathura) it causes
intoxication.

If water be mixed with oil and the ashes of any kind of grass except the
kusha grass, it becomes the colour of milk.

If yellow myrabolans, the hog plum, the shrawana plant, and the priyangu
plant be all pounded together, and applied to iron pots, these pots
become red.

If a lamp, trimmed with oil extracted from the shrawana and priyangu
plants, its wick being made of cloth and the slough of the skins of
snakes, is lighted, and long pieces of wood placed near it, those pieces
of wood will resemble so many snakes.

Drinking the milk of a white cow who has a white calf at her foot is
auspicious, produces fame, and preserves life.

The blessings of venerable Brahmans, well propitiated, have the same
effect.

There are also some verses in conclusion:

'Thus have I written in a few words the "Science of love", after reading
the texts of ancient authors, and following the ways of enjoyment
mentioned in them.'

'He who is acquainted with the true principles of this science pays
regard to Dharma, Artha, Kama, and to his own experiences, as well as to
the teachings of others, and does not act simply on the dictates of his
own desire. As for the errors in the science of love which I have
mentioned in this work, on my own authority as an author, I have,
immediately after mentioning them, carefully censured and prohibited
them.'

'An act is never looked upon with indulgence for the simple reason that
it is authorised by the science, because it ought to be remembered that
it is the intention of the science, that the rules which it contains
should only be acted upon in particular cases. After reading and
considering the works of Babhravya and other ancient authors, and
thinking over the meaning of the rules given by them, the Kama Sutra was
composed, according to the precepts of Holy Writ, for the benefit of the
world, by Vatsyayana, while leading the life of a religious student, and
wholly engaged in the contemplation of the Deity.'

'This work is not intended to be used merely as an instrument for
satisfying our desires. A person, acquainted with the true principles of
this science, and who preserves his Dharma, Artha, and Kama, and has
regard for the practices of the people, is sure to obtain the mastery
over his senses.'

'In short, an intelligent and prudent person, attending to Dharma and
Artha, and attending to Kama also, without becoming the slave of his
passions, obtains success in everything that he may undertake.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concluding Remarks](kama703)
