[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama302) 
[Next](kama304) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III

### ON COURTSHIP, AND THE MANIFESTATION OF THE FEELINGS BY OUTWARD SIGNS AND DEEDS

A POOR man possessed of good qualities, a man born of a low family
possessed of mediocre qualities, a neighbour possessed of wealth, and
one under the control of his father, mother or brothers, should not
marry without endeavouring to gain over the girl from her childhood to
love and esteem him. Thus a boy separated from his parents, and living
in the house of his uncle, should try to gain over the daughter of his
uncle, or some other girl, even though she be previously betrothed to
another. And this way of gaining over a girl, says Ghotakamukha, is
unexceptional, because Dharma can be accomplished by means of it as well
as by any other way of marriage.

When a boy has thus begun to woo the girl he loves, he should spend his
time with her and amuse her with various games and diversions fitted for
their age and acquaintanceship, such as picking and collecting flowers,
making garlands of flowers, playing the parts of members of a fictitious
family, cooking food, playing with dice, playing with cards, the game of
odd and even, the game of finding out the middle finger, the game of six
pebbles, and such other games as may be prevalent in the country, and
agreeable to the disposition of the girl. In addition to this, he should
carry on various amusing games played by several persons together, such
as hide and seek, playing with seeds, hiding things in several small
heaps of wheat and looking for them, blindman's buff, gymnastic
exercises, and other games of the same sort, in company with the girl,
her friends and female attendants. The man should also show great
kindness to any woman whom the girl thinks fit to be trusted, and should
also make new acquaintances, but above all he should attach to himself
by kindness and little services the daughter of the girl's nurse, for if
she be gained over, even though she comes to know of his design, she
does not cause any obstruction, but is sometimes even able to effect a
union between him and the girl. And though she knows the true character
of the man, she always talks of his many excellent qualities to the
parents and relations of the girl, even though she may not be desired to
do so by him.

In this way the man should do whatever the girl takes most delight in,
and he should get for her whatever she may have a desire to possess.
Thus he should procure for her such playthings as may be hardly known to
other girls. He may also show her a ball dyed with various colours, and
other curiosities of the same sort; and should give her dolls made of
cloth, wood, buffalo-horn, wax, flour, or earth; also utensils for
cooking food, and figures in wood, such as a man and woman standing, a
pair of rams, or goats, or sheep; also temples made of earth, bamboo, or
wood, dedicated to various goddesses; and cages for parrots, cuckoos,
starlings, quails, cocks, and partridges; water-vessels of different
sorts and of elegant forms, machines for throwing water about, guitars,
stands for putting images upon, stools, lac, red arsenic, yellow
ointment, vermilion and collyrium, as well as sandalwood, saffron, betel
nut and betel leaves. Such things should be given at different times
whenever he gets a good opportunity of meeting her, and some of them
should be given in private, and some in public, according to
circumstances. In short, he should try in every way to make her look
upon him as one who would do for her everything that she wanted to be
done.

In the next place he should get her to meet him in some place privately,
and should then tell her that the reason of his giving presents to her
in secret was the fear that the parents of both of them might be
displeased, and then he may add that the things which he had given her
had been much desired by other people. When her love begins to show
signs of increasing he should relate to her agreeable stories if she
expresses a wish to hear such narratives. Or if she takes delight in
legerdemain, he should amaze her by performing various tricks of
jugglery; or if she feels a great curiosity to see a performance of the
various arts, he should show his own skill in them. When she is
delighted with singing he should entertain her with music, and on
certain days, and at the time of going together to moonlight fairs and
festivals, and at the time of her return after being absent from home,
he should present her with bouquets of flowers, and with chaplets for
the head, and with ear ornaments and rings, for these are the proper
occasions on which such things should be presented.

He should also teach the daughter of the girl's nurse all the sixty-four
means of pleasure practised by men, and under this pretext should also
inform her of his great skill in the art of sexual enjoyment. All this
time he should wear a fine dress, and make as good an appearance as
possible, for young women love men who live with them, and who are
handsome, good looking and well dressed. As for the sayings that though
women may fall in love, they still make no effort themselves to gain
over the object of their affections, that is only a matter of idle talk.

Now a girl always shows her love by outward signs and actions, such as
the following:

She never looks the man in the face, and becomes abashed when she is
looked at by him; under some pretext or other she shows her limbs to
him; she looks secretly at him though he has gone away from her side,
hangs down her head when she is asked some question by him, and answers
in indistinct words and unfinished sentences, delights to be in his
company for a long time, speaks to her attendants in a peculiar tone
with the hope of attracting his attention towards her when she is at a
distance from him, does not wish to go from the place where he is, under
some pretext or other she makes him look at different things, narrates
to him tales and stories very slowly so that she may continue conversing
with him for a long time, kisses and embraces before him a child sitting
in her lap, draws ornamental marks on the foreheads of her female
servants, performs sportive and graceful movements when her attendants
speak jestingly to her in the presence of her lover, confides in her
lover's friends, and respects and obeys them, shows kindness to his
servants, converses with them, and engages them to do her work as if she
were their mistress, and listens attentively to them when they tell
stories about her lover to somebody else, enters his house when induced
to do so by the daughter of her nurse, and by her assistance manages to
converse and play with him, avoids being seen by her lover when she is
not dressed and decorated, gives him by the hand of her female friend
her ear ornament, ring, or garland of flowers that he may have asked to
see, always wears anything that he may have presented to her, becomes
dejected when any other bridegroom is mentioned by her parents, and does
not mix with, those who may be of his party, or who may support his
claims.

There are also some verses on the subject as follows:

'A man, who has seen and perceived the feelings of the girl towards him,
and who has noticed the outward signs and movements by which those
feelings are expressed, should do everything in his power to effect a
union with her. He should gain over a young girl by childlike sports, a
damsel come of age by his skill in the arts, and a girl that loves him
by having recourse to persons in whom she confides.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. On Things to be Done Only by the Man, and the
Acquisition of the Girl Thereby. Also What is to be Done by a Girl to
Gain Over a Man and Subject Him to Her](kama304)
