[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama501) 
[Next](kama503) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER II

### ABOUT MAKING ACQUAINTANCE WITH THE WOMAN, AND OF THE EFFORTS TO GAIN HER OVER

ANCIENT authors are of opinion that girls are not so easily seduced by
employing female messengers as by the efforts of the man himself, but
that the wives of others are more easily got at by the aid of female
messengers than by the personal efforts of the man. But Vatsyayana lays
it down that whenever it is possible a man should always act himself in
these matters, and it is only when such is impracticable, or impossible,
that female messengers should be employed. As for the saying that women
who act and talk boldly and freely are to be won by the personal efforts
of the man, and that women who do not possess those qualities are to be
got at by female messengers, it is only a matter of talk.

Now when a man acts himself in the matter he should first of all make
the acquaintance of the woman he loves in the following manner:

He should arrange to be seen by the woman either on a natural or special
opportunity. A natural opportunity is when one of them goes to the house
of the other, and a special opportunity is when they meet either at the
house of a friend, or a caste-fellow, or a minister, or a physician, as
also on the occasion of marriage ceremonies, sacrifices, festivals,
funerals, and garden parties.

When they do meet, the man should be careful to look at her in such a
way as to cause the state of his mind to be made known to her; he should
pull about his moustache, make a sound with his nails, cause his own
ornaments to tinkle, bite his lower lip, and make various other signs of
that description. When she is looking at him he should speak to his
friends about her and other women, and should show to her his liberality
and his appreciation of enjoyments. When sitting by the side of a female
friend he should yawn and twist his body, contract his eyebrows, speak
very slowly as if he was weary, and listen to her indifferently. A
conversation having two meanings should also be carried on with a child
or some other person, apparently having regard to a third person, but
really having reference to the woman he loves, and in this way his love
should be made manifest under the pretext of referring to others rather
than to herself. He should make marks that have reference to her, on the
earth with his nails, or with a stick, and should embrace and kiss a
child in her presence, and give it the mixture of betel nut and betel
leaves with his tongue, and press its chin with his fingers in a
caressing way. All these things should be done at the proper time and in
proper places.

The man should fondle a child that may be sitting on her lap, and give
it something to play with, and also take the same back again.
Conversation with respect to the child may also be held with her, and in
this manner he should gradually become well acquainted with her, and he
should also make himself agreeable to her relations. Afterwards, this
acquaintance should be made a pretext for visiting her house frequently,
and on such occasions he should converse on the subject of love in her
absence but within her hearing. As his intimacy with her increases he
should place in her charge some kind of deposit or trust, and take away
from it a small portion at a time; or he may give her some fragrant
substances, or betel nuts to be kept for him by her. After this he
should endeavour to make her well acquainted with his own wife, and get
them to carry on confidential conversations, and to sit together in
lonely places. In order to see her frequently he should arrange so that
the same goldsmith, the same jeweller, the same basket maker, the same
dyer, and the same washerman should be employed by the two families. And
he should also pay her long visits openly under the pretence of being
engaged with her on business, and one business should lead to another,
so as to keep up the intercourse between them. Whenever she wants
anything, or is in need of money, or wishes to acquire skill in one of
the arts, he should cause her to understand that he is willing and able
to do anything that she wants, to give her money, or teach her one of
the arts, all these things being quite within his ability and power. In
the same way he should hold discussions with her in company with other
people, and they should talk of the doings and sayings of other persons,
and examine different things, like jewellery, precious stones, etc. On
such occasions he should show her certain things with the values of
which she may be unacquainted, and if she begins to dispute with him
about the things or their value, he should not contradict her, but point
out that he agrees with her in every way.

Thus end the ways of making the acquaintance of woman desired.

Now after a girl has become acquainted with the man as above described,
and has manifested her love to him by the various outward signs and by
the motions of her body, the man should make every effort to gain her
over. But as girls are not acquainted with sexual union, they should be
treated with the greatest delicacy, and the man should proceed with
considerable caution, though in the case of other women, accustomed to
sexual intercourse, this is not necessary. When the intentions of the
girl are known, and her bashfulness put aside, the man should begin to
make use of her money, and an interchange of clothes, flowers should be
made. In this the man should take particular care that the things given
by him are handsome and valuable. He should moreover receive from her a
mixture of betel nut and betel leaves, and when he is going to a party
he should ask for the flower in her hair, or for the flower in her hand.
If he himself gives her a flower it should be a sweet smelling one, and
marked with marks made by his nails or teeth. With increasing assiduity
he should dispel her fears, and by degrees get her to go with him to
some lonely place, and there he should embrace and kiss her. And finally
at the time of giving her some betel nut, or of receiving the same from
her, or at the time of making an exchange of flowers, he should touch
and press her private parts, thus bringing his efforts to a satisfactory
conclusion.

When a man is endeavouring to seduce one woman, he should not attempt to
seduce any other at the same time. But after he has succeeded with the
first, and enjoyed her for a considerable time, he can keep her
affections by giving her presents that she likes, and then commence
making up to another woman. When a man sees the husband of a woman going
to some place near his house, he should not enjoy the woman then, even
though she may be easily gained over at that time. A wise man having a
regard for his reputation should not think of seducing a woman who is
apprehensive, timid, not to be trusted, well guarded, or possessed of a
father-in-law, or mother-in-law.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Examination of the State of a Woman's Mind](kama503)
