[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama503.md) 
[Next](kama505.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER IV

### ABOUT THE BUSINESS OF A GO-BETWEEN

IF a woman has manifested her love or desire, either by signs or by
motions of the body, and is afterwards rarely or never seen anywhere, or
if a woman is met for the first time, the man should get a go-between to
approach her.

Now the go-between, having wheedled herself into the confidence of the
woman by acting according to her disposition, should try to make her
hate or despise her husband by holding artful conversations with her, by
telling her about medicines for getting children, by talking to her
about other people, by tales of various kinds, by stories about the
wives of other men, and by praising her beauty, wisdom, generosity and
good nature, and then saying to her: 'It is indeed a pity that you, who
are so excellent a woman in every way, should be possessed of a husband
of this kind. Beautiful lady, he is not fit even to serve you.' The
go-between should further talk to the woman about the weakness of the
passion of her husband, his jealousy, his roguery, his ingratitude, his
aversion to enjoyments, his dullness, his meanness, and all the other
faults that he may have, and with which she may be acquainted. She
should particularly harp upon that fault or that failing by which the
wife may appear to be the most affected. If the wife be a deer woman,
and the husband a hare man, then there would be no fault in that
direction, but in the event of his being a hare man, and she a mare
woman or elephant woman, then this fault should be pointed out to her.

Gonikaputra is of opinion that when it is the first affair of the woman,
or when her love has only been very secretly shown, the man should then
secure and send to her a go-between, with whom she may be already
acquainted, and in whom she confides.

But to return to our subject. The go-between should tell the woman about
the obedience and love of the man, and as her confidence and affection
increase, she should then explain to her the thing to be accomplished in
the following way. 'Hear this, Oh beautiful lady, that this man, born of
a good family, having seen you, has gone mad on your account. The poor
young man, who is tender by nature, has never been distressed in such a
way before, and it is highly probable that he will succumb under his
present affliction, and experience the pains of death.' If the woman
listens with a favourable ear, then on the following day the go-between,
having observed marks of good spirits in her face, in her eyes, and in
her manner of conversation, should again converse with her on the
subject of the man, and should tell her the stories of Ahalya <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](kama101.htm#fn_0.md) and Indra, of Sakoontala <span
id="fr_56"></span>[2](kama101.htm#fn_1.md) and Dushyanti, and such others
as may be fitted for the occasion. She should also describe to her the
strength of the man, his talents, his skill in the sixty-four sorts of
enjoyments mentioned by Babhravya, his good looks, and his liaison with
some praiseworthy woman, no matter whether this last ever took place or
not.

In addition to this, the go-between should carefully note the behaviour
of the woman, which if favourable would be as follows: She would address
her with a smiling look, would seat herself close beside her, and ask
her, 'Where have you been? What have you been doing? Where did you dine?
Where did you sleep? Where have you been sitting?' Moreover, the woman
would meet the go-between in lonely places and tell her stories there,
would yawn contemplatively, draw long sighs, give her presents, remember
her on occasions of festivals, dismiss her with a wish to see her again,
and say to her jestingly, 'Oh, well-speaking woman, why do you speak
these bad words to me?', would discourse on the sin of her union with
the man, would not tell her about any previous visits or conversations
that she may have had with him, but wish to be asked about these, and
lastly would laugh at the man's desire, but would not reproach him in
any way.

Thus ends the behaviour of the woman with the go-between.

When the woman manifests her love in the manner above described, the
go-between should increase it by bringing to her love tokens from the
man. But if the woman be not acquainted with the man personally, the
go-between should win her over by extolling and praising his good
qualities, and by telling stories about his love for her. Here Auddalaka
says that when a man or woman are not personally acquainted with each
other, and have not shown each other any signs of affection, the
employment of a go-between is useless.

The followers of Babhravya on the other hand affirm that even though
they be personally unacquainted, but have shown each other signs of
affection there is an occasion for the employment of a go-between.
Gonikaputra asserts that a go-between should be employed, provided they
are acquainted with each other, even though no signs of affection may
have passed between them. Vatsyayana however lays it down that even
though they may not be personally acquainted with each other, and may
not have shown each other any signs of affection, still they are both
capable of placing confidence in a go-between.

Now the go-between should show the woman the presents, such as the betel
nut and betel leaves, the perfumes, the flowers, and the rings which the
man may have given to her for the sake of the woman, and on these
presents should be impressed the marks of the man's teeth, and nails,
and other signs. On the cloth that he may send he should draw with
saffron both his hands joined together as if in earnest entreaty.

The go-between should also show to the woman ornamental figures of
various kinds cut in leaves, together with ear ornaments, and chaplets
made of flowers containing love letters expressive of the desire of the
man, <span id="fr_57"></span>[3](kama101.htm#fn_2.md) and she should cause
her to send affectionate presents to the man in return. After they have
mutually accepted each other's presents, then a meeting should be
arranged between them on the faith of the go-between.

The followers of Babhravya say that this meeting should take place at
the time of going to the temple of a Deity, or on occasions of fairs,
garden parties, theatrical performances, marriages, sacrifices,
festivals and funerals, as also at the time of going to the river to
bathe, or at times of natural calamities, <span
id="fr_58"></span>[4](kama102.htm#fn_6.md) fear of robbers or hostile
invasions of the country.

Gonikaputra is of opinion however that these meetings had better be
brought about in the abodes of female friends, mendicants, astrologers,
and ascetics. But Vatsyayana decides that that place is only well suited
for the purpose which has proper means of ingress and egress, and where
arrangements have been made to prevent any accidental occurrence, and
when a man who has once entered the house can also leave it at the
proper time without any disagreeable encounter.

Now go-betweens or female messengers are of the following different
kinds:

A go-between who takes upon herself the whole burden of the business

A go-between who does only a limited part of the business

A go-between who is the bearer of a letter only

A go-between acting on her own account

The go-between of an innocent young woman

A wife serving as a go-between

A mute go-between

A go-between who acts the part of the wind

A woman who, having observed the mutual passion of a man and woman,
brings them together and arranges it by the power of her own intellect,
such a one is called a go-between who takes upon herself the whole
burden of the business. This kind of go-between is chiefly employed when
the man and the woman are already acquainted with each other, and have
conversed together, and in such cases she is sent not only by the man
(as is always done in all other cases) but by the woman also. The above
name is also given to a go-between who, perceiving that the man and the
woman are suited to each other, tries to bring about a union between
them, even though they be not-acquainted with each other.

A go-between who, perceiving that some part of the affair is already
done, or that the advances on the part of the man are already made,
completes the rest of the business, is called a go-between who performs
only a limited part of the business.

A go-between who simply carries messages between a man and a woman, who
love each other, but who cannot frequently meet, is called the bearer of
a letter or message.

This name is also given to one who is sent by either of the lovers to
acquaint either the one or the other with the time and place of their
meeting.

A woman who goes herself to a man, and tells him of her having enjoyed
sexual union with him in a dream, and expresses her anger at his wife
having rebuked him for calling her by the name of her rival instead of
by her own name, and gives him something bearing the marks of her teeth
and nails and informs him that she knew she was formerly desired by him,
and asks him privately whether she or his wife is the best looking, such
a person is called a woman who is a go-between for herself. Now such a
woman should be met and interviewed by the man in private and secretly.

The above name is also given to a woman who having made an agreement
with some other woman to act as her go-between, gains over the man to
herself, by the means of making him personally acquainted with herself,
and thus causes the other woman to fail. The same applies to a man who,
acting as a go-between for another, and having no previous connection
with the woman, gains her over for himself, and thus causes the failure
of the other man.

A woman who has gained the confidence of the innocent young wife of any
man, and who has learned her secrets without exercising any pressure on
her mind, and found out from her how her husband behaves to her, if this
woman then teaches her the art of securing his favour, and decorates her
so as to show her love, and instructs her how and when to be angry, or
to pretend to be so, and then, having herself made marks of the nails
and teeth on the body of the wife, gets the latter to send for her
husband to show these marks to him, and thus excite him for enjoyment,
such is called the go-between of an innocent young woman. In such cases
the man should send replies to his wife through the same woman.

When a man gets his wife to gain the confidence of a woman whom he wants
to enjoy, and to call on her and talk to her about the wisdom and
ability of her husband, that wife is called a wife serving as a
go-between. In this case the feelings of the woman with regard to the
man should also be made known through the wife.

When any man sends a girl or a female servant to any woman under some
pretext or other, and places a letter in her bouquet of flowers, or in
her ear ornaments, or marks something about her with his teeth or nails,
that girl or female servant is called a mute go-between. In this case
the man should expect an answer from the woman through the same person.

A person, who carries a message to a woman, which has a double meaning,
or which relates to some past transactions, or which is unintelligible
to other people, is called a go-between who acts the part of the wind.
In this case the reply should be asked for through the same woman.

Thus end the different kinds of go-betweens.

A female astrologer, a female servant, a female beggar, or a female
artist are well acquainted with the business of a go-between, and very
soon gain the confidence of other women. Any one of them can raise
enmity between any two persons if she wishes to do so, or extol the
loveliness of any woman that she wishes to praise, or describe the arts
practised by other women in sexual union. They can also speak highly of
the love of a man, of his skill in sexual enjoyment, and of the desire
of other women, more beautiful even than the woman they are addressing,
for him, and explain the restraint under which he may be at home.

Lastly a go-between can, by the artfulness of her conversation, unite a
woman with a man even though he may not have been thought of by her, or
may have been considered beyond her aspirations. She can also bring back
a man to a woman, who, owing to some cause or other, has separated
himself from her.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[1](#fr_-1.md) The wife of the sage Gautama, she
was seduced by Indra the king of the Gods.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[2](#fr_-1.md) The heroine of one of the best, if
not the best, of Hindoo plays, and the best known in Sanscrit dramatic
literature. It was first brought to notice by Sir William Jones, and has
been well and poetically translated by Dr Monier Williams under the
title of Sakoontala, or the lost ring, an Indian drama, translated into
English prose and verse from the Sanscrit of Kalidasa.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[3](#fr_-1.md) It is presumed that something like
the following French verses are intended:

 

Quand on a juré le plus profond hommage,  
Voulez vous qu'infidèle on change de langage;  
Vous seul captivez mon esprit et mon coeur  
Que je puisse dans vos bras seuls goûter le bonheur;  
Je voudrais, mais en vain, que mon coeur en délire  
Couche oû ce papier n'oserait vous dire.  
Avec soin, de ces vers lisez leurs premiers mots,  
Vous verrez quel remède il faut à tous mes maux

 

Or these:

Quand on vous voit, on vous aime;  
Quand on vous aime, oû vous voit on?

<span id="fn_58"></span>[4](#fr_-1.md) It is supposed that storms,
earthquakes, famines and pestilent diseases are here alluded to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. On the Love of Persons in Authority with the Wives of
Other People](kama505.md)
