[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama101.md) 
[Next](kama103.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

## CHAPTER II

### ON THE ACQUISITION OF DHARMA, ARTHA AND KAMA

MAN, the period of whose life is one hundred years, should practise
Dharma, Artha and Kama at different times and in such a manner that they
may harmonize together and not clash in any way. He should acquire
learning in his childhood, in his youth and middle age he should attend
to Artha and Kama, and in his old age he should perform Dharma, and thus
seek to gain Moksha, i.e. release from further transmigration. Or, on
account of the uncertainty of life, he may practise them at times when
they are enjoined to be practised. But one thing is to be noted, he
should lead the life of a religious student until he finishes his
education.

Dharma is obedience to the command of the Shastra or Holy Writ of the
Hindoos to do certain things, such as the performance of sacrifices,
which are not generally done, because they do not belong to this world,
and produce no visible effect; and not to do other things, such as
eating meat, which is often done because it belongs to this world, and
has visible effects.

Dharma should be learnt from the Shruti (Holy Writ), and from those
conversant with it.

Artha is the acquisition of arts, land, gold, cattle, wealth, equipages
and friends. It is, further, the protection of what is acquired, and the
increase of what is protected.

Artha should be learnt from the king's officers, and from merchants who
may be versed in the ways of commerce.

Kama is the enjoyment of appropriate objects by the five senses of
hearing, feeling, seeing, tasting and smelling, assisted by the mind
together with the soul. The ingredient in this is a peculiar contact
between the organ of sense and its object, and the consciousness of
pleasure which arises from that contact is called Kama.

Kama is to be learnt from the Kama Sutra (aphorisms on love) and from
the practice of citizens.

When all the three, viz. Dharma, Artha and Kama, come together, the
former is better than the one which follows it, i.e. Dharma is better
than Artha, and Artha is better than Kama. But Artha should always be
first practised by the king for the livelihood of men is to be obtained
from it only. Again, Kama being the occupation of public women, they
should prefer it to the other two, and these are exceptions to the
general rule.

 

#### Objection 1

Some learned men say that as Dharma is connected with things not
belonging to this world, it is appropriately treated of in a book; and
so also is Artha, because it is practised only by the application of
proper means, and a knowledge of those means can only be obtained by
study and from books. But Kama being a thing which is practised even by
the brute creation, and which is to be found everywhere, does not want
any work on the subject.

 

#### Answer

This is not so. Sexual intercourse being a thing dependent on man and
woman requires the application of proper means by them, and those means
are to be learnt from the Kama Shastra. The non-application of proper
means, which we see in the brute creation, is caused by their being
unrestrained, and by the females among them only being fit for sexual
intercourse at certain seasons and no more, and by their intercourse not
being preceded by thought of any kind.

#### Objection 2

The Lokayatikas <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](kama101.htm#fn_0.md) say:
Religious ordinances should not be observed, for they bear a future
fruit, and at the same time it is also doubtful whether they will bear
any fruit at all. What foolish person will give away that which is in
his own hands into the hands of another? Moreover, it is better to have
a pigeon today than a peacock tomorrow; and a copper coin which we have
the certainty of obtaining, is better than a gold coin, the possession
of which is doubtful.

#### Answer

It is not so. 1st. Holy Writ, which ordains the practice of Dharma, does
not admit of a doubt.

2nd. Sacrifices such as those made for the destruction of enemies, or
for the fall of rain, are seen to bear fruit.

3rd. The sun, moon, stars, planets and other heavenly bodies appear to
work intentionally for the good of the world.

4th. the existence of this world is effected by the observance of the
rules respecting the four classes of men and their four stages of
life. <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](kama101.htm#fn_1.md)

5th. We see that seed is thrown into the ground with the hope of future
crops.

Vatsyayana is therefore of opinion that the ordinances of religion must
be obeyed.

#### Objection 3

Those who believe that destiny is the prime mover of all things say: We
should not exert ourselves to acquire wealth, for sometimes it is not
acquired although we strive to get it, while at other times it comes to
us of itself without any exertion on our part. Everything is therefore
in the power of destiny, who is the lord of gain and loss, of success
and defeat, of pleasure and pain. Thus we see that Bali <span
id="fr_5"></span>[3](kama101.htm#fn_2.md) was raised to the throne of Indra
by destiny, and was also put down by the same power, and it is destiny
only that call reinstate him.

#### Answer

It is not right to say so. As the acquisition of every object
presupposes at all events some exertion on the part of man, the
application of proper means may be said to be the cause of gaining all
our ends, and this application of proper means being thus necessary
(even where a thing is destined to happen), it follows that a person who
does nothing will enjoy no happiness.

#### Objection 4

Those who are inclined to think that Artha is the chief object to be
obtained argue thus. Pleasures should not be sought for, because they
are obstacles to the practice of Dharma and Artha, which are both
superior to them, and are also disliked by meritorious persons.
Pleasures also bring a man into distress, and into contact with low
persons; they cause him to commit unrighteous deeds, and produce
impurity in him; they make him regardless of the future, and encourage
carelessness and levity. And lastly, they cause him to be disbelieved by
all, received by none, and despised by everybody, including himself. It
is notorious, moreover, that many men who have given themselves up to
pleasure alone, have been ruined along with their families and
relations. Thus, king Dandakya, of the Bhoja dynasty, carried off a
Brahman's daughter with evil intent, and was eventually ruined and lost
his kingdom. Indra, too, having violated the chastity of Ahalya, was
made to suffer for it. In a like manner the mighty Kichaka, who tried to
seduce Draupadi, and Ravana, who attempted to gain over Sita, were
punished for their crimes. These and many others fell by reason of their
pleasures. <span id="fr_6"></span>[4](#fn_6.md)

#### Answer

This objection cannot be sustained, for pleasures, being as necessary
for the existence and well being of the body as food, are consequently
equally required. They are, moreover, the results of Dharma and Artha.
Pleasures are, therefore, to be followed with moderation and caution. No
one refrains from cooking food because there are beggars to ask for it,
or from sowing seed because there are deer to destroy the corn when it
is grown up.

Thus a man practising Dharma, Artha and Kama enjoys happiness both in
this world and in the world to come. The good perform those actions in
which there is no fear as to what is to result from them in the next
world, and in which there is no danger to their welfare. Any action
which conduces to the practice of Dharma, Artha and Kama together, or of
any two, or even one of them, should be performed, but an action which
conduces to the practice of one of them at the expense of the remaining
two should not be performed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[1](#fr_-1.md) These were certainly materialists who
seemed to think that a bird in the hand was worth two in the bush.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[2](#fr_-1.md) Among the Hindoos the four classes of
men are the Brahmans or priestly class, the Kshutrya or warlike class,
the Vaishya or agricultural and mercantile class, and the Shoodra or
menial class. The four stages of life are, the life of a religious
student, the life of a householder, the life of a hermit, and the life
of a Sunyasi or devotee.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[3](#fr_-1.md) Bali was a demon who had conquered
Indra and gained his throne, but was afterwards overcome by Vishnu at
the time of his fifth incarnation.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[4](kama505.htm#fr_62.md) Dandakya is said to have
abducted from the forest the daughter of a Brahman, named Bhargava, and,
being cursed by the Brahman, was buried with his kingdom under a shower
of dust. The place was called after his name the Dandaka forest,
celebrated in the Bamayana, but now unknown.

Ahalya was the wife of the sage Gautama. Indra caused her to believe
that he was Gautama, and thus enjoyed her. He was cursed by Gautama and
subsequently afflicted with a thousand ulcers on his body.

Kichaka was the brother-in-law of King Virata, with whom the Pandavas
had taken refuge for one year. Kichaka was killed by Bhima, who assumed
the disguise of Draupadi. For this story the Mahabarata should be
referred to.

The story of Ravana is told in the Ramayana, which with the Mahabarata
form the two great epic poems of the Hindoos; the latter was written by
Vyasa, and the former by Valmiki.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. On the Study of the Sixty-Four Arts](kama103.md)
