[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](kama502.md) 
[Next](kama504.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0892814411/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UFY4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana*, tr. by Richard Burton, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER III

### EXAMINATION OF THE STATE OF A WOMAN'S MIND

WHEN a man is trying to gain over a woman he should examine the state of
her mind, and act as follows:

If she listens to him, but does not manifest to him in any way her own
intentions, he should then try to gain her over by means of a
go-between.

If she meets him once, and again comes to meet him better dressed than
before, or comes to him in some lonely place, he should be certain that
she is capable of being enjoyed by the use of a little force. A woman
who lets a man make up to her, but does not give herself up, even after
a long time, should be considered as a trifler in love, but owing to the
fickleness of the human mind, even such a woman can be conquered by
always keeping up a close acquaintance with her.

When a woman avoids the attentions of a man, and on account of respect
for him, and pride in herself, will not meet him or approach him, she
can be gained over with difficulty, either by endeavouring to keep on
familiar terms with her, or else by an exceedingly clever go-between.

When a man makes up to a woman, and she reproaches him with harsh words,
she should be abandoned at once.

When a woman reproaches a man, but at the same time acts affectionately
towards him, she should be made love to in every way.

A woman, who meets a man in lonely places, and puts up with the touch of
his foot, but pretends, on account of the indecision of her mind, not to
be aware of it, should be conquered by patience, and by continued
efforts as follows:

If she happens to go to sleep in his vicinity he should put his left arm
round her, and see when she awakes whether she repulses him in reality,
or only repulses him in such a way as if she was desirous of the same
thing being done to her again. And what is done by the arm can also be
done by the foot. If the man succeeds in this point he should embrace
her more closely, and if she will not stand the embrace and gets up, but
behaves with him as usual the next day, he should consider then that she
is not unwilling to be enjoyed by him. If however she does not appear
again, the man should try to get over her by means of a go-between; and
if, after having disappeared for some time, she again appears, and
behaves with him as usual, the man should then consider that she would
not object to be united with him.

When a woman gives a man an opportunity, and makes her own love manifest
to him, he should proceed to enjoy her. And the signs of a woman
manifesting her love are these:

She calls out to a man without being addressed by him in the first
instance.

She shows herself to him in secret places.

She speaks to him tremblingly and inarticulately.

She has the fingers of her hand, and the toes of her feet moistened with
perspiration, and her face blooming with delight.

She occupies herself with shampooing his body and pressing his head.

When shampooing him she works with one hand only, and with the other she
touches and embraces parts of his body.

She remains with both hands placed on his body motionless as if she had
been surprised by something, or was overcome by fatigue.

She sometimes bends down her face upon his thighs and, when asked to
shampoo them does not manifest any unwillingness to do so.

She places one of her hands quite motionless on his body, and even
though the man should press it between two members of his body, she does
not remove it for a long time.

Lastly, when she has resisted all the efforts of the man to gain her
over, she returns to him next day to shampoo his body as before.

When a woman neither gives encouragement to a man, nor avoids him, but
hides herself and remains in some lonely place, she must be got at by
means of the female servant who may be near her. If when called by the
man she acts in the same way, then she should be gained over by means of
a skilful go-between. But if she will have nothing to say to the man, he
should consider well about her before he begins any further attempts to
gain her over.

Thus ends the examination of the state of a woman's mind.

A man should first get himself introduced to a woman, and then carry on
a conversation with her. He should give her hints of his love for her,
and if he finds from her replies that she receives these hints
favourably, he should then set to work to gain her over without any
fear. A woman who shows her love by outward signs to the man at his
first interview should be gained over very easily. In the same way a
lascivious woman, who when addressed in loving words replies openly in
words expressive of her love, should be considered to have been gained
over at that very moment. With regard to all women, whether they be
wise, simple, or confiding, this rule is laid down that those who make
an open manifestation of their love are easily gained over.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Business of a Go-Between](kama504.md)
