[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index.md) 
[Images](imglist)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ntna02)  [Next](ntna04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# NATIVE TRIBES OF THE NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA

## CHAPTER I

### INTRODUCTION

Nature of the country inhabited by the tribes.--List of tribes, with
their localities.--Physical appearance of the natives.--No Malay
admixture.--Cicatrices.--Larakia woman with joint of index finger cut
off.--Small number of children in each family.--Organisation of the
tribes, a general *résumé*.--Totemic systems, a general
*résumé*.--Intichiuma ceremonies.--Initiation ceremonies.--Burial and
mourning ceremonies.--Spirit children and origin of
children.--Reincarnation Sacred objects.--Camp
life.--Habitations.--Flies and mosquitos.--Corrobborees.--Definition of
tribe.--Sending out of messengers.--Characteristics of native
character.--Magic.--Mental ability.--Fondness for fun and sense of
humour.

OVER the vast area of more than five hundred and twenty thousand square
miles occupied by the Northern Territory there are, as might be
expected, great variations in regard to climate and natural features.
Whilst this is so, it is, on the other hand, possible to divide it into
three main parts, a Southern Central plateau, gradually rising from the
lowlands of Lake Eyre to the Macdonnell Ranges. A Northern Central
depression, in the form of

{p. 2}

a great basin, margined to the north, east and west by the Coastal
Ranges, and lastly a fringe of coastland between the latter and the sea.

The first two of these, again, agree in all essential features. They
have the same hot, dry climate, sparse vegetation of gum trees, Mulga
scrub, Hakeas and porcupine-grass. Every now and then, but very rarely,
the vegetation may be a little more luxuriant, in spots such as Palm
Creek in the Macdonnell Ranges where a solitary colony of Fan palms
(*Livistonia mariæ*) has managed to survive, and where groups of
graceful Cycads grow in crevices amongst the rocks. Away, however, from
the Ranges the country is more or less arid. The soil is dry and sandy
with tufts of pale, withered grass that grow so far apart from one
another that you can easily count them. It is wonderful how long the
grass keeps its moisture. It must have learned the habit of throwing its
roots down to a great depth. Towards the end of a long dry season,
however, you can powder the grass up in your hand, and, for lack of
nourishment, your horses become little more than bags of bones. For mile
after mile there is nothing but thin gum tree forest, and in the dry
season there is not a drop of surface water; you may get some by digging
a soakage in the sandy bed of a river where the gum trees show that
there is water below the surface, but, for the most part, you must rely
on the wells that the Government has sunk at intervals along the course
of the overland telegraph line. These vary in depth from a hundred to
two hundred and seventy feet. Each one is enclosed in a strong palisade
to keep out wandering horses and cattle and has, also, two trap doors
which close down over the opening and serve to keep out wild dogs and
small vermin. There is a windlass and a chain with a bucket at each end.

{p. 3}

The one shown in the illustration (Fig. 1) lies between the Katherine
Creek and Daly Waters. It is one of the deeper ones and by means of an
endless wire a horse can be hitched on to wind up the heavy bucket. When
this view was taken I was travelling on an experimental motor car trip
with the Administrator, and we utilised the motor car to do the winding
up.

Away to the east of the telegraph line there lies the Downs
country--huge stretches of slightly undulating open country, covered
with a most luxuriant growth of grass with, every now and then, river
beds, meandering across the open plains, starting nowhere in particular
and gradually petering out (Fig. 3). Their banks are bordered, here and
there, with clumps of coolibars but, often for scores of miles, you see
nothing bigger than a small scraggy bush and, as you travel along, you
collect such little twigs as you can to boil your next billy with. For
miles upon miles also, in many parts, the whole country face is studded
with white ant-hills of which there are several quite different kinds.
In the first place they vary much in colour according to the nature of
the ground. They may be red, or almost white, yellow of various shades,
grey, or various shades of brown. A fair idea of the surface formation
of the country can be had from the material of which they are made. In
form they vary immensely. Some never seem to exceed an average of
perhaps four or five feet in height and are in the form of single,
flattened columns, or slabs, sometimes tapering to a point, at others
with a bluntly rounded apex; others, again, are like masses of great
bubbles of sand, from a few inches to a foot or more in diameter. These
are piled irregularly on one another to form a mound which may finally
reach a height of six feet or even more. Then, in addition to the
smaller ones, which may be so

{p. 4}

numerous and so close together as to give the country the appearance of
a gigantic graveyard, there are the huge ones made, perhaps, of a single
shaft, or of a main central one, with others clustering round it like
smaller pinnacles around a main spire (Fig. 2). These are most
extraordinary structures; they may reach a height of twenty-five feet
and must have taken many years to build.

In the whole of the central area, that is inland from the coastal
ranges, there is no permanent flowing water. For a short time after the
rainfall the creeks run, but this may be only for a few hours. After
that the scattered water holes alone remain--some may last for a few
weeks, others for months, whilst others, such as the chain forming the
Newcastle Waters, are permanent, though, of course, they gradually
decrease in area as the dry season advances. Towards the close of the
dry season the natives must gather about the few remaining waters,
though it is wonderful how they will secure water by means of little
soakages in the sandy beds of creeks, or out of the roots of trees, or
even, if it comes to the worst, by licking the dew off herbage. Amongst
the ranges they have their little stores of water which no white man
would ever find; little crevices in the rocks or holes in trees out of
which they can sometimes only get the water by means of a whisp of grass
which they dip into the water and suck when it comes out.

The whole of the central area, right up to the Coastal Ranges, is very
much the same everywhere except that when, coming up from the south, you
reach Powell's creek, there is a distinct change in the vegetation. The
gums remain, but Bauhenias, with rich foliage, red flowers and large
brown pods appear; the Kapok with its bright yellow flowers is very
noticeable and the Mulga is largely replaced by Lancewood, while
Indiarubber, Ironwood,

{p. 5}

and so-called Quinine trees are abundant. But, even as far north as
this, the vegetation is not really tropical.

After rising from the central part on to the Coastal Ranges, the height
of which is not more than one thousand feet, there are sometimes, as,
for example, going down to the Coast on the Gulf of Carpentaria, a
series of "jump-ups," as they are called, where there is a sudden sharp
rise, or fall, according to which way you happen to be travelling. This
brings you down to the coast country where, in many ways, things are
very different from what you meet with on the uplands of the interior.
East, west, and northwards from the Ranges, rivers, such as the Roper,
Daly and the Alligators, rise and run to the sea. These are fine streams
with permanent running water, the tide affecting them for about eighty
miles from their mouth (Fig. 4). They are marked by the presence of a
series of rocky bars, each perhaps six, or at most eight, feet in
fright, that stretch across from side to side and over which the water
pours all the year round (Fig. 5). These bars separate long reaches of
deep, clear water, fifty to seventy yards in width, which may run for
miles. These rivers and the billabongs and backwaters of the coastal
district swarm with fish and water fowl of all kinds. Every now and then
there are swamp lands and shallower Pools, where the great,
red-flowering lotus grows, and the ordinary water pools are flecked with
white and heliotrope lilies (Fig. 6). The river courses are bordered
with magnificent paper-barks (*Melaleuca leucodendron*) that flower
profusely and attract great flocks of honey-eating birds. Now and again
you come across a patch of jungle (Fig. 7) with clumps of graceful
bamboos, fan palms, lawyer vines, mosquitos and land leeches, but,
except just for these isolated patches, there is little that is really
tropical. In many parts the so-called cycad "palm" grows profusely in

{p. 6}

the scrub with a stem from one to eight or even ten feet high, crowned
with a circle of stiff, fern-like leaves, with perhaps a large central
cone. The climate of this coastal district, especially along the north,
is very different from that of the interior. In the latter it is hot and
dry with cold winter nights. Along the Roper river even, about one
hundred miles from its mouth, the temperature in August fell to 29° F.
during the night, and very often we had a fog that did not lift till
nine o'clock it the morning. The climate in Darwin and along just the
coastal fringe is less pleasant, but even here the average wet bulb for
December is little more than 80, and these warm, moist conditions may be
said to last through November to March, the rest of the year being
relatively cool.

Such are the conditions under which the natives live, and, whether it be
the difference in the 'food and water supply, or not, the fact remains
that in many ways the coastal and island tribes are sharply marked off
from the inland ones, in regard both to their customs and their
organisations.

The distribution of some of the more important tribe is roughly shown on
the accompanying map, the numbers on which correspond to those in the
following list:

|                     |
|---------------------|
| 1\. Melville Island |
| 2\. Bathurst Island |
| 3\. Worgait         |
| 4\. Warrai          |
| 5\. Wulwullam       |
| 6\. Mulluk Mulluk   |
| 7\. Brinken         |
| 8\. Mudburra        |
| 9\. Waduman         |
| 10\. Bulinara       |
| 11\. Airiman        |
| 12\. Allura         |
| 13\. Larakia        |
| 14\. Kakadu         |
| 15\. Kulunglutji    |
| 16\. Umoriu         |
| 17\. Geimbio        |
| 18\. Koarnbut       |
| 19\. Watta          |
| 20\. Puneitja       |
| 21\. Gnornbur       |
| 22\. Djowei         |
| 23\. Djauan         |
| 24\. Mungarai       |
| 25\. Yungman        |
| 26\. Nullakun       |
| 27\. Mara           |
| 28\. Yukul          |
| 29\. Binbinga       |
| 30\. Umbaia         |
| 31\. Nganji         |
| 32\. Gnuin          |
| 33\. Kallaua        |
| 34\. Karawa         |
| 35\. Tjingilli      |
| 36\. Worgai         |
| 37\. Allowiri       |
| 38\. Warramunga     |
| 39\. Kaitish        |
| 40\. Unmatjera      |
| 41\. Arunta         |
| 42\. Walpari        |

 

[\[Map of the Northern Territory\]](img/map.jpg.md)

 

It is simply impossible to make any, except a most vague, estimate in
regard to the number of the natives in the northern part of the
territory. Down in the Macdonnell Ranges the old Arunta tribe is
practically decimated, and the same is true of others in the north, such
as the Larakia, Warrai, Wul-wullam; more especially is this true of
those who have had the misfortune to come into close contact with the
Chinese working on the gold fields.

There are, however, great areas, more especially in the north-east,
where the waters are permanent and the food supply abundant, and here,
sheltered from interference, as yet, by the nature of the country, they
probably exist in large numbers. The inland tribes, in fact one can say
all the mainland tribes, so far as their physical appearance is
concerned, are essentially similar to those members of the Warramunga,
Ngangi, Binbinga, Allaua, and other tribes whom we have previously
described.<sup>\[1\]</sup> In Figs. 8, 9, and 10, some typical
representatives of the Kakadu and Geimbio tribes, inhabiting the
Alligator River district, are represented. In Fig. 11 a group of women
belonging to the Mulluk Mulluk tribe on the Daly River is seen, and in
Fig. 12 a group of Port Essington natives. It will be seen that there is
considerable

\[1. Cf. *Northern Tribes*, Introduction. For their physical
measurements reference can be made to Dr. R. Burston, "Anthropometric
Measurements of One Hundred and Two Australian Aboriginals," *Bulletin
of Northern Territory*, 1913, External Affairs Dept., Melbourne.\]

{p. 8}

difference in regard to the curliness of the hair, sometimes it may, as
in the left-hand of the two in Fig. 8, be wavy, but not straight and
lank; at others, as in the right-hand man, it may be decidedly curly,
but never really woolly. Amongst these tribes there are the usual keloid
ridges of various forms, raised as ornaments on the upper part of the
arms, across the chest, and, sometimes, abdomen. The women always have
their hair cut short. There is only very rarely indeed seem anything
like a trace of Malay blood. It has been, perhaps not unnaturally,
suggested that, during years past, the intercourse between the Malays
who come south annually, in search of trepang and tortoiseshell, and,
the natives, has resulted in the introduction of a Malay strain in this
part of the continent. It is possible that, on very rare occasions, a
Malay or Macassar man may have succeeded in having intercourse with an
aboriginal woman, but he would only do so at the risk of his life. The
Malays have to be extremely careful in their dealings with these coastal
natives, who are strong and fierce, and are always on the look-out to
kill intruders. It would, under ordinary conditions, only be by mere
chance that a Malay would have the opportunity of seeing a native woman,
not one of whom would be allowed near a Malay camp, and, for a stranger
to venture into the bush, would mean certain death.

I have once, but only once, seen a native--a woman--who had clearly some
Malay blood in her, but she stood out markedly. It may be said that the
coastal races have been in no way physically influenced by contact with
Malays.<sup>\[1\]</sup>

Physically the finest natives whom I met with were

\[1. Mr. Sydney H. Ray, after his examination of the languages, has
decided that there is no evidence of Malay influence in these.\]

{p. 9}

those on Melville and Bathurst Islands, that is, the men, because there
was often a marked contrast in size between the men and women. The
latter were seldom more than four feet six or eight, the former were
often five feet ten or even six feet. The bodies of the men and women
alike (Figs. 14, 15, 16 and 17) were marked with very characteristic
cicatrices called *miunga* which are supposed to represent the barbs of
their spears. They are arranged, as can be seen, with remarkable
regularity and form the only instance that I know of in the whole of the
Northern Territory, in which you can recognise the tribe of an
individual by his body marks.<sup>\[1\]</sup> These keloid growths are
the results of cuts made by the individual himself, or by someone else,
with a stone knife or a sharp shell. They are added to, from time to
time. One of the Port Essington girls, probably about fifteen or sixteen
years of age, had a double row of small elevations of keloid tissue each
not much more than an eighth of an inch in diameter running on each side
in a curved line from below the shoulder on to the breast. I saw her one
day adding to the number of them, so as to carry the row further down
her breast. She had a little stick, about six inches long, and all that
she did was to burn one end in the fire until it was red hot and then
she pressed it straight down on to her breast, burning right through the
skin until she came to the white flesh beneath. She made six of these
marks at one time and, apparently, did not in the least mind what would
be to an ordinary white woman an extremely painful ordeal.

On Melville and Bathurst Islands one is struck, often,

\[1. Statements are made every now and then according to which these
cicatrices are said to be distinctive of tribes or other groups. They
do, of course, vary but I have never, except in this one instance, seen
any that are thus distinctive.\]

{p. 10}

by the very curly nature of the men's hair. This is shown in Figs. 16
and 17, which represent a man decorated for a ceremony. It is only on
these Islands that I have seen any decoration of the hair itself, apart,
sometimes, from a certain amount of grease and red ochre which is rubbed
on frequently amongst the central tribes. Here, however, there is a
regular design. The beard in these people is also very well developed,
in strong contrast to many of the mainland tribes such as the Kakadu and
Geimbio (Figs. 8 and 9), amongst whom it is usually only very sparsely
developed. These Islanders have, also, a curious custom of pulling out
their beards during certain ceremonies--their upper lips are always
bare. The women in all cases have short hair, because they must cut it
off periodically and use it for the manufacture of hair string.

In one tribe, the Larakia., the women (Fig. 18A) have an extraordinary
custom of mutilating the index finger of the left hand by removing the
terminal joint. It is either bitten off by the mother at a very early
age or, at a later time, cobweb is tied so tightly round that the
circulation is prevented and then the joint rots off. The custom has
nothing to do with initiation, and the natives have no idea of what it
means.

The biting operation is called *gwirung giwe*, which means finger, bite;
the finger is afterwards called *gwirung gimik*, or cut finger.

A remarkable feature of many of these tribes is the small number of
children, even though a man may have as many as five or six wives. The
greatest number of children that I met with belonging to one woman was
eight, in the case of a Kakadu woman. The same feature stands out
clearly in the genealogical table given in the chapter dealing with
organisation and in the photograph

{p. 11}

which represents (Fig. 9) a man of the Geimbio Tribe with his six wives.
The natives, in many parts, are certainly not prolific, and, under
normal conditions, they do not, apparently, kill their children. In the
more central parts there are times when food and water are very scarce
and life is hard, but on the coastal district and anywhere in the more
northern area, drained by the Roper, Daly, Katherine, Flora, King,
Liverpool, and many other rivers, there is never any scarcity of either
food or water. Whatever may be the cause, the native, even under normal
conditions, does not appear to increase in numbers, and, when he comes
into abnormal conditions, such as those associated with intercourse with
strangers, he very rapidly diminishes. Their numbers are, undoubtedly,
to a certain extent, kept down by their constant feuds. One thing is
noticeable, and that is that you seldom see a really old man or woman.
As usual, the younger women are in the possession of the older men, and
Mr. Cooper told me that he suspected that on Melville Island the older
men were every now and then speared by younger men to whom their wives
would descend. The disparity in age between a man and his wife is well
seen in the family figured. In connection with the question of obtaining
wives, attention may be drawn to the remarkable custom that I found in
vogue amongst the Kakadu, according to which, on the death of any man,
one of his wives may be handed over to a man who stands to her in the
relationship of *no-ornberi*, which includes her own sons. She must not
be his own mother, but may be any one of his actual father's or father's
brothers' wives. Not only is this so, but, even before his father's
death, the son calls this particular woman by the same name that he
applies to his wife. It may very likely be, in fact, in the cases
actually seen by me it is so,

{p. 12}

that the woman may be of just about the same age as the son.

Starting, on the one hand, in the very south of the Continent and
proceeding northwards to within less than a hundred miles of the coast
at Darwin, or starting, on the other hand, from the east coast, say from
Brisbane, and travelling right across the whole continent to the shores
of the Indian Ocean in Western Australia, we meet with a series of
tribes which have one fundamental feature in common, and that is a very
definite "class" organisation. In every case the tribe is divided into
two moieties, or main divisions, and each of these, again, into two or
four classes or sub-classes, for which there may, or may not, be
distinct names. These class groups regulate marriage, descent being
counted, sometimes in the paternal, sometimes in the maternal line, but,
in every case, there is a definite "class" organisation.

On the northern coast line, however, we meet with a group of tribes such
as the Kakadu, Umoriu, Geimbio, and others allied to them, in which this
is not present--whether it ever has been is a matter of conjecture; if
it has, there is, so far as I could discover, not a trace of it left
now. There is, on the other hand, a strong, local organisation which
governs marriage. In the Iwaidji and other tribes it is just possible
that the intermarrying groups are remnants of original classes.

We may, indeed, so far as their organisation is concerned, divide
Australian tribes into two main groups, and these again into various
sub-groups as follows:--

Group A.--Tribes with distinct class organisation. This we can divide
into at least five sub-groups.

Sub-group 1.--Tribes, such as those of the Dieri

\[1. This statement refers, of course, to the early days before the
natives had become contaminated by contact with the whites.\]

{p. 13}

nation, occupying the Lake Eyre region, in which descent is counted in
the maternal line. There are no names for the classes, but groups,
forming intermarrying groups, equivalent to classes and sub-classes in
other tribes, are undoubtedly present.

Sub-group 2.--Tribes, such as the Kamilroi with four class names and
descent counted in the female line.

Sub-group 3.--Tribes such as the Southern Arunta and the Warrai, in the
Northern Territory, and others occupying a very large area in Western
Australia, amongst whom four class names are present. In these, also,
though there are no distinct names for them, there are eight
intermarrying groups.

Sub-group 4.--Tribes, such as the Warramunga, with eight sub-classes and
indirect male descent; that is, a child passes into a sub-class which is
different from that of its father, but is one of four belonging to the
same moiety of the tribe as its father's. This form of organisation is
very widely spread over the central part of the Continent.

Sub-group 5.--Tribes, such as the Mara and Anula, with four sub-classes
and direct male descent of the class name. In these, again, there are
the equivalents of the eight sub-classes of the Warramunga. Their
existence becomes very evident when the marriage regulations are
Investigated, and their equivalence with the sub-classes of the
Warramunga group is clearly recognised when the two sets of tribes come
into contact with one another.

Group B.--Tribes without class organisation or with, at most, obscure
traces of such.

Sub-group 6.--This includes certain anomalous tribes In the
south-eastern part of the Continent, now all extinct. But little is
known of them, except that, if they had a class organisation, it was
very highly modified.

{p. 14}

Sub-group 7.--This includes tribes such as Kakadu, Umoriu, Geimbio and
other tribes, forming what I have called the Kakadu nation, and
inhabiting the Coburg Peninsula, and the district drained by the East,
South, and West Alligator Rivers, together with the Larakia oil the
mainland and the tribes on Melville and Bathurst Islands. In all of
these no class organisation is present; it has been replaced entirely by
a local organisation.

Amongst all the tribes there is a very strongly developed totemic system
which, naturally, varies to a great degree amongst groups of tribes
scattered over such a wild expanse of country. It is only when you have
the opportunity of coming into close contact with these natives and of
watching their secret ceremonies that you realise how strongly the
totemic system is developed. In every one of the tribes that I came
across every individual was associated with a totemic group.

There are, amongst these northern tribes, some very interesting features
in regard to their totemic systems, In some tribes, such as the Larakia,
Worgait, and Wul-wullam, the totemic groups are divided between the two
moieties of the tribe, so that, as a man may only marry a woman who
belongs to the other moiety of the tribe, the totemic groups are
exogamic. In these tribes the totem descends in the paternal line.

In other tribes, such as the Djauan, Warrai, Mungarai, Yungman, Mara,
and Nullakan, the totemic groups are divided between pairs of classes,
or groups, into which the fathers and their children, alternately, pass.
Thus in one moiety of the tribe we may have four sub-classes which we
may call *a*, *b*, *c*, *d*, and on the other side four which we may
call *e*, *f*, *g*, *h*. The rule is that a man of sub-class a marries a
woman of sub-class *e*, and *vice versâ*, and their children belong to
sub-class *d*. Now,

{p. 15}

oil the side of the tribe that includes the sub-classes *a*, *b*, *c*,
*d*, some of the totemic groups are divided between *a* and *d*, others
between *b* and *c*, in such a way that no two sub-classes contain the
same totemic groups. In the same way another set of totemic groups is
divided between the sub-classes belonging to the other moiety. It
follows that, as descent of the sub-class is counted in the paternal
line, the child must pass into a sub-class belonging to the father's
moiety, but into both a sub-class and a totemic group to which he does
not belong.

In other tribes, such as the Waduman, Mudburra, Ngainman and Bulinara,
the same totemic group is found on each side of the tribe, and the
totemic group descends in the maternal line. In others, again, such as
the Melville Island tribe, amongst whom no classes are found, the totem
descends in the maternal line.

The most modified amongst these northern tribes in regard to their
totemic system are undoubtedly the Kakadu, Geimbio, Kulunglutji and
allied tribe. They are strongly totemistic, but yet there is no descent
of the totem in either the paternal or maternal line. The spirit of the
dead person chooses its own totem, and, when it undergoes reincarnation,
tells the father of the child what is the *jereipunga*, or totem, of the
latter.

So far as the social aspect of totemism is concerned we may roughly
classify as follows the various Northern Territory tribes that have as
yet been studied from this point of view. In the first place they may be
divided into two main divisions according to whether the totemic groups
are or are not exogamic:--

Group I.--The totemic groups are exogamic. This again we may divide into
two, in one of which the descent is counted in the maternal, in the
other in the paternal line.

{p. 16}

\(A\) Descent of the totem is counted in the maternal line. This
includes groups of tribes that are really not allied to one another, and
in each of which the totemic organisation is distinct.

(*a*) Tribes in which there are two moieties and no class names, and in
which the totems are strictly divided between the two moieties, the
child taking both its mother's moiety and totem name. This includes the
important Dieri nation in the far southern part of the Territory.

(*b*) Tribes in which the totem groups are divided between the two
moieties and in which the descent of the class name is counted in the
paternal and that of the totem in the maternal line. This includes a
group of tribes out in the north-western part of the territory drained
by the Victoria River, such as the Waduman, Mudburra, Ngainman and
Bulinara.

(*c*) A group of much modified tribes in which there is no class
organisation and a tendency for the totemic group names to disappear or
merge into one another. This includes the Iwaidji tribe on the Coburg
Peninsula and the Melville and Bathurst Island tribes.

\(B\) Descent of the totem is counted in the paternal line. The totemic
are groups divided between the moieties in various ways.

(*a*) The totem groups are divided between the moieties so that the same
one is present in each. This occurs in the Larakia, Worgait, and
Wul-wullam tribes in which the descent of the totem is in the direct
paternal line, the child taking its father's totem.

(*b*) The totem groups are divided between the two moieties, the child
taking, with very rare exceptions, the father's totemic name. Very
occasionally it may belong to a totemic group different from that of its
father,

{p.17}

but it is always one belonging to the same moiety of the tribe as its
father's. This occurs in the Warramunga, Worgaia, Umbaia, Tjingilli, and
allied tribes.

(*c*) The totem groups are divided between pairs of lasses or groups
which belong to the same moiety so that, though the father's and the
children's classes, or groups may be distinct they may both belong to
the same totemic group. This is found in the Djauan, Mara, and Nullakun
tribes, in which the descent of the totem is in the direct paternal
line.

(*d*) The totem groups are divided between the subclasses in such a way
that the sub-class of the father contains one set of totemic groups and
that of the children another. It follows that there is a constant
alternation of totems from generation to generation, those of the father
and children being different and those of the grandfather and
grandchildren being similar. This may be spoken of as indirect paternal
descent of the totemic group. The child belongs to a totemic group on
the same side of the tribe as its father's but to a different one, just
as it belongs to a sub-class on its father's side but not to his. This
system, which shows the extreme case of division of the totemic groups
amongst the sub-classes, is met with in the Warrai, Mungarai, and
Nullakun tribes.

Group 2.--The totemic groups are not exogamic and there is no descent of
the totem either in the maternal or paternal line. There are two main
types.

(*a*) The tribe is divided into moieties and these into classes and
sub-classes amongst all of which the totemic groups are irregularly
distributed, so that the same group is present in each moiety. Descent
is neither in the paternal nor paternal line, and the totem of the child
depends entirely upon the locality at which it is supposed

{p. 18}

to have entered the mother in spirit form. This system is characteristic
of the Arunta nation, in the centre of the Continent, which includes the
Arunta, Unmatjera and Kaitish tribes. In the latter there is a decided
tendency for the totemic groups to be divided between the two moieties
and for the descent to follow in the paternal line.

(*b*) The tribe is not divided into moieties nor classes, but there are
a number of intermarrying local groups. The totem has nothing to do with
marriage and it descend, neither in the paternal nor in the maternal
line. The spirit of the ancestor, who is about to be reincarnated, tells
the father of the child exactly who the latter is, and what is the name
of its totem, which need not even be that the old ancestor. This system
is characteristic of the Kakadu nation.

It will be seen that there are, as might be expected when account is
taken of the wide area over which the various tribes are scattered in
the Northern Territory--an area equal in extent to four and a half times
that of Great Britain--very wide differences in regard to the totemic
systems. It is somewhat remarkable to find that counting descent in the
maternal line, which is usually regard as a primitive feature, is met
with in such varied group of tribes as the Dieri in the very south, in
which there are no class names and only moieties, the names of which
pass from mother to children, in the Waduman and others in the
north-west amongst whom there are class names that that pass from father
to child, and, lastly, in the Melville Islanders and Iwaidji, which are
most certainly modified tribes that have undergone profound changes in
regard to their organisation.

On the occasion of my first visit in 1911, I did not come across any
ceremonies which were the, equivalent of the Intichiuma in the Arunta
tribe, that is ceremonies

{p. 19}

designed to increase the supply of the totemic animal or plant. During
my second visit, with more opportunity of study, I found that such were
really present in certain tribes. There are two types of Intichiuma
ceremonies amongst the Central tribes, one represented by the Urabunna,
Arunta, Kaitish and Unmatjera tribes, the other by the Warramunga
nation.

In the Arunta the head man of each totemic group is called Alatunja and
he takes the lead in the performance of one special ceremony, as does
also the corresponding individual, called Ulqua, in the Kaitish tribe.

In this tribe also a very important part of the ceremony is the bringing
in of the totemic animal or plant to the head man of the group, who then
eats a little of it and tells the men who do not belong to the group
that he has made it for them and they are free to eat it. In the Kaitish
there is a slight but interesting addition in the form of a ceremony
connected with the Alcheringa history of the totem.

In the second type, represented by the Warramunga, here is only very
seldom any one special ceremony designed to secure the increase of the
totemic animal or plant. On the contrary, we have a great development of
the side which is just hinted at in the Kaitish. In the Warramunga the
Intichiuma consists in the performance of a series of ceremonies dealing
completely with the Alcheringa history of the ancestor of the totemic
group. Just, however, as in the Kaitish tribe we find a hint of hat is
the leading feature in the Warramunga, so again the latter we find hints
of the leading features in the Arunta and Kaitish. The head man of the
white cockatoo totemic group performs a special ceremony to increase the
numbers of white cockatoos and, again, in one or two instances, as in
that of the Carpet-snake totem, the men

{p. 20}

who do not belong to the group bring the animal in to the head man and,
before touching it themselves, ask him if he wishes to eat it. He tells
them no; that he made it for them and that they are free to eat it.

I was much interested in finding both of these types of Intichiuma
ceremony existing in the far north. In the Mudburra and Waduman tribes
on the Victoria River side the Arunta type exists. The head man of group
in the Waduman tribe is called Tjungunni. He performs a special ceremony
known as Tjutju, and, after this, when the animal or plant has increased
in numbers, the men who do not belong to the group go out and collect
some of it. If, for example, it be a "sugar-bag" then they take a little
of this up to the head man who eats a small portion and hands the rest
back to the other men, telling them they may eat it. The second type, in
somewhat modified form, is seen amongst the Kakadu. It is, perhaps, more
correctly speaking a mixture of the two types with, in addition,
features peculiar to itself. There is one special series of sacred
totemic ceremonies, called Muraian, in connection with which there are
performances associated with certain sacred sticks and stones called
also, collectively, Muraian. Muraian was an old, ancestral turtle-man,
or man-turtle, it is hard to say which. The other objects (Plates III.,
IV., V., VI., and VII.) are very carefully decorated sticks and stones,
the former representing fish, birds, snakes, yams, etc., the latter,
eggs of the various animals, or yams. In all cases, with the possible
exception of turtle, they represent, not the human ancestor, but the
actual animal or plant. On the other hand, the ceremonies of which this
performance forms a part are closely similar to those of the Warramunga
and represent the history of the old totemic ancestors of the various
groups.

{p. 21}

The discovery of these Intchiuma ceremonies among these northern tribes
is of considerable interest as showing that they are widely scattered
and form an important feature in the totemic systems of tribes extending
from Lake Eyre in the south to the Coburg Peninsula in the north.

In the matter of eating the totemic animal or plant, there is
considerable variation. In the majority of tribes such as the Arunta and
Warramunga, the members of the totemic group either do not eat their
totem at all or, at most, very sparingly. In the Warramunga they do not
eat their mother's totem unless it be given to them by a man belonging
to that totemic group. In the northern tribes here is considerable
variation in regard to the eating of the totemic animal or plant. In
some, such as the Kakadu, there appear to be no restrictions, though, on
the other hand, there are most elaborate restrictions in regard food
generally. In others, such as the Waduman, which is typical of very
many, a man will not capture or secure his own totemic animal or plant,
but will eat it if it be given to him by a man who belongs to another
totemic group.

The initiation ceremonies vary to a very considerable extent, and, so
far as the Northern Territory tribes are concerned, they may be divided
into three groups: (1) those such as the Larakia, Kakadu, Geimbio,
Iwaidji and allied tribes on the northern coast, together with those
inhabiting Melville and Bathurst Islands, in which neither circumcision
nor sub-incision is practised, (2) those, such as the Worgait, Mandot,
and Djauan, in which circumcision alone is practised, and (3) a very
extensive group occupying the whole of the Central area and extending
westwards into West Australia and eastwards into Queensland, in which
both circumcision and subincision

{p. 22}

are practised. This group of tribes includes the Arunta, Kaitish,
Warramunga, Worgai, Yungman, Mudburra, etc., and amongst them the women
are subjected to the rite of cutting the hymen with a stone knife, the
cut often extending through the perineum. So far as I have been able to
discover, the natives have no idea whatever as to the meaning of these
customs. One thing is certain, and that is that they have no relation to
the prevention of procreation. In the first place, the natives do not
associate procreation with sexual intercourse, and, in the second, no
man in any of the tribes in which these rites are practised is allowed
to take a wife until such time as he has been both circumcised and
subincised.

The burial and mourning ceremonies vary to some extent amongst the
different tribes. On the mainland there are three main types of burial
ceremonies, which are associated, respectively, with (1) ground burial,
(2) tree burial, and (3) the eating of the dead person and subsequent
burial of the bones in a bark coffin. The first of these is practised by
the Arunta, Kaitish, and other tribes further north, such as the Kakadu;
the second is practised by the Warramunga<sup>\[1\]</sup> nation and at
times by others such as the Kakadu, who also bury in the ground; the
third is met with in the Mara and allied tribes. A very interesting
purification ceremony is described in connection with the burial of a
woman which I witnessed in the Kakadu tribe.

The most extraordinary burial and mourning ceremonies are, however,
those of the Melville and Bathurst Islanders. Amongst these, years ago,
curious grave posts, unlike any met with on the mainland, were described
by Sir. Gordon Bremmer, who naturally, did not have

\[1. A full account of this is given in given *Northern Tribes*, Chapter
xvii., p. 505.\]

{p. 23}

opportunity of witnessing the ceremonies concerned with their erection.
I had the good fortune to do this in July, 1911, and again in March,
1912, on Melville Island, and during November, 1912, on Bathurst Island.
This method of burial is peculiar to the islands, and the ceremonies
associated with the erection of the posts are amongst the wildest that I
have seen in the whole of the Northern Territory.

Varied though these tribes are in regard to their organisations and
customs, there is fundamental agreement on certain points. It was in the
Central tribes that we first described the belief in the existence of
spirit children who inhabit certain definite localities and enter women.
It is interesting to see that this belief is universal amongst the
Northern Territory tribes. A similar belief has been shown by Dr. Roth
to exist amongst Queensland natives and by Mrs. Bates amongst certain
tribes in West Australia. In regard to this matter there has been
considerable difference of opinion, but I think it may now be regarded
as established that some such belief was once widely prevalent over a
large part of Australia. I am, myself, inclined to think that it was
once universal, for the reason that it now exists amongst tribes so
widely different from one another in many other respects as the Dieri,
Arunta, Waduman, Mara, Kakadu, and Melville Islanders. The Kakadu
beliefs are amongst the most definite that we have. Without going into
details which are explained later, it may be said there was one great
ancestor, named Imberombera, who was responsible, originally, for all
the spirit children with whom, either directly or by means of
individuals whom she sent out, the country was peopled. There were local
spirit centres, just as in the Arunta, and it is these spirit children
who have

{p. 24}

ever since been born again. With this belief is also closely bound up
that of reincarnation. It is curious again to find that there is
fundamental agreement in this matter right through the tribes and,
further, that the Arunta in the South and the Kakadu in the North have
remarkably parallel beliefs. In the former some of the ancestors are
known by name, others are not, Every individual has his, or her, secret
name, known only to the old men of his local totemic group, For some
reason this is one of the most secret and most difficult things to find
out in the Arunta. If the old ancestor is born again, then the human
incarnation takes that ancestor's as his own secret name. In the Kakadu,
on the other hand, the name of every ancestor is known and every member
of the tribe bears that ancestor's as his or her name in common,
everyday use. In some tribes, such as the Warramunga, each totem group
had one great ancestor from whom, when he shook himself during the
performance of ceremonies, numerous, but nameless, spirit children
emanated. We have, in fact, an interesting series of stages beginning
with the Arunta and its numerous original ancestors for each group,
passing through the Warramunga with its one ancestor for each group, and
then on to the Kakadu with its single great, original ancestor for all
the groups.

In some tribes, such as the Dieri and Warramunga, the belief holds that
the sex changes at each successive reincarnation.

The Kakadu also have a belief in a double spirit somewhat akin to that
of the Arunta. The original spirit, called Yalmuru, gives off a double,
called Iwaiyu. It is the latter that enters a woman and, after it has
done so, the Yalmuru comes, some night, to the father and tells him

{p. 25}

that the child inside his wife is so and so, naming the old ancestor of
whom he is the reincarnation, and saying also what his totem is.

There are one or two points in connection with this belief to which
attention may be drawn. In the first place it is essential to remember
that there is no such thing as a virgin amongst the women of the native
tribes from one end of Australia to the other. As soon as a native girl
reaches puberty, she is handed over to her allotted husband and has
continuous intercourse for the rest of her life. In that respect there
is no difference between any two native women, and yet the native sees
that some women have children, some do not. The intercourse is
continuous, the bearing of children is sporadic. It is long after a
woman has had intercourse before she becomes aware that there is a child
within her. Seeing then that every woman without exception has
continuous intercourse; that some have children, some do not; that those
that have them bear them at varying intervals which have no relationship
to the time of intercourse, and that the woman only knows she has a
child when the quickening takes place, which, again, has no reference to
intercourse, it is not a matter of surprise that the savage man, who is,
according to his lights, a very logical being, should seek some other
explanation of the origin of children than that of sexual connection.

There is one very interesting and suggestive point in his connection,
and that is the common explanation of he existence of half-castes given
universally by their mothers, speaking in pidgin English, viz., "Too
much me been eat em white man's flour." The chief difference hat they
recognised between their life before and after hey came into contact
with white men was, not the fact hat they had intercourse with white
men, instead of or

{p. 26}

side by side with, blacks, but that they ate white flour and that this
naturally affected the colour of their offspring. I have seen old
natives in Central Australia accept, without question, their wives'
half-caste children, making no difference whatever between them and the
pure bred ones. On the other hand, it is, of course, naturally, a belief
that is one of the first to become modified when the natives, have been
for some time in contact with white men.

In regard to sacred objects there is considerable difference amongst the
tribes. The churinga may be said to be distinctive of the Arunta and
Kaitish, and to dwindle in importance as we pass northward until,
amongst the coastal tribes, they are used only during initiation. On
Melville and Bathurst I could find no trace of them. The most
interesting new sacred objects that I came across were those called
Muraian amongst the Kakadu, to which reference has already been made.
There are no Nurtunjas nor Waningas nor ground drawings, that figure so
largely in the southern part of the Territory, but, through all tribes
on the mainland, the belief is universal amongst the women and children
that the sound made by the bull-roarer is the voice of a great spirit
which comes to take the youth away during the initiation ceremony. In no
case amongst these northern tribes did I find any indication of sacred
rock drawings such as we meet with in the Arunta and Kaitish. This
absence may be associated with that of any such spots as the
*Ertnatulunga*, where churinga are stored and close by which the sacred
drawings of the Arunta are typically found.

So far as the method of life of the northern tribes is concerned it is,
with certain changes, due to difference of environment, closely similar
to that of the southern tribes. There are favourite camping grounds
belonging

{p. 27}

to certain local groups which form the nearest approach to anything like
a permanent camp, but there is no continuous occupation and never the
slightest attempt to cultivate any crop or to lay by a store of food
other than such as may be required during the performance of some
particular ceremony or series of ceremonies. For example, in the
Alligator Rivers district there are very favourite camping grounds by
the side of great billabongs. As long as they can get lily-seeds and
roots in abundance, fish and wild fowl, there they stay, each family
with its own mia mia or, in the dry months, with nothing more than a
bough or two, slanted against a tree or shrub to obtain a little shelter
from the sun. All day long the women and children wade up to their necks
in the water gathering lily "tuck-out," while the men spear fish and
catch wild fowl or climb the trees after flying-fox and honey-bag. But
when they have thinned the lilies out, and the fish and fowl get hard to
catch, and the honey-bags are scarce, then they move on to another camp
where the same round is gone through day after day and month after month
all the year round. The cooking of their food is carried on in two ways.
Under common when they are in camp and making a hasty conditions, meal,
they simply use an ordinary fire, placing the food, such as a lizard or
a flying-fox, on the red-hot embers (Fig. 19). When the food is
sufficiently cooked, or while it is in process of cooking, it may be
torn up by the teeth of the cook and replaced on the fire for further
cooking or handed round for consumption. When, however, the natives are
camped in one place for any considerable length of time they cook much
more carefully, using what the Kakadu call *peindi*, or earth ovens
(Fig. 21), in which the food is placed on paper-bark, grass, or green
leaves above heated stones in a hole in the ground. It

{p. 28}

is then covered with more paper-bark, grass, or leaves, and the earth
piled over. So far as their food is concerned, it may be said that the
natives eat anything that is edible, In the more northern parts of the
Territory food is very abundant. The waterholes swarm with fish and wild
fowl, and on the land they secure plenty of kangaroos, birds, such as
native companion and jabiru, lizards and snakes. On the coast, dugongs
and large turtles (Midas sp.) and turtle eggs, at the right time of the
year, are easily obtained. I was much interested in watching the way in
which, amongst the Kakadu, the natives kill snakes. There are two or
three species of non-venomous ones, four feet and upwards in length,
that they obtain in considerable numbers. They collect a few, put them
into bags and either kill them on the spot or bring them alive into
camp. When a man wishes to kill one, he catches hold of it just behind
the head and puts the latter into his mouth, upside down. Holding the
neck tightly in his teeth, immediately behind the head, he gives the
body a sudden, strong, sharp jerk, dislocating the vertebral column and
killing the animal (Fig. 20). I had heard of this method but scarcely
thought it credible until, time after time, I had seen it done. In their
camps they make various forms of shelters and mia mias. The simplest
consists only of a few boughs, placed so as to protect them from the
sun's rays or the prevailing wind. They are very fragile, but it is
astonishing how cleverly, though simply, the native will lean a few
boughs up against one another in such a way as to make them a shade
against the sun or a fairly efficient protection against wind and rain.
They seem to know, instinctively, the right angle at which to slant the
boughs so as to make them able to withstand the pressure of a strong
wind. In many parts, during the summer

{p. 29}

months, violent monsoonal deluges have to be endured. On Melville and
Bathurst Islands great use is made of sheets of stringy bark, which the
natives strip from the gum-trees with their tomahawks in lengths of from
six to ten feet by two or three feet in width. With these they build,
sometimes dome-shaped, at others tent-shaped, mia mias, usually not more
than at most four feet high (Fig. 22). I was much struck on Melville
Island with their very simple but effective contrivance of picking up
and folding a sheet of bark in two and using it as an umbrella, slanting
it in such a direction as to keep off the torrent of rain that fell at
rapid intervals. I found this a most useful contrivance as a protection
for my cameras. If they are overtaken with specially heavy rain out in
the bush, away from the main camp, they often huddle close together,
side by side, in a line under the shelter of a few slanting sheets of
bark, with a trench, roughly-scooped out by their hands, in the best
position to lead the stream of water away from them. As soon as the rain
ceases they pick up their belongings and march on, quite cheerfully. I
once saw some twenty natives, quite dry, during pelting rain, under a
shelter of this kind that was not more than four feet high, and did not
subtend more than two feet of ground. In parts where it is available,
paper-bark, the bark of *Melaleuca leucodendron*, is used, and is in
some respects even more efficient than stringy-bark, because it is very
strong and tough and at the same time pliable. In addition to this it is
very warm and can easily be wrapped round their bodies as they lie on
the ground during the cold winter nights.

Over the greater part of the Territory there are, in addition to the
rains that do not seriously inconvenience the aboriginal, two main
sources of discomfort. The first of these is the cold at nights, during,
at all events, three

{p. 30}

winter months. It is a remarkable thing that, except for a small apron
or tassel, both men and women are stark naked. The only efficient
covering of any kind is an apron made of a fold of paper-bark. This,
however, is worn only on Melville and Bathurst Islands and is held in
place by their arms, which the women always carry characteristically
bent at the elbows, in such a way that the latter always hold the apron
close against the side of the body, just above the hip. During the
winter months in the upland interior districts, and along the Roper and
other rivers flowing into the Gulf of Carpentaria, the temperature at
night falls to 29° F., and it is a remarkable fact that the native,
though he feels the cold keenly, has never realised the fact that the
kangaroos, wallabies, and opossums that he catches and eats in plenty
would provide him with a warm covering. This is due, probably, to the
fact that he prefers to cook his animals in the skin so as to keep all
the juices inside, and, therefore, the first thing that he does is to
put the entire animal on the fire and singe the hair off. At night time
the whole family huddles together along with the dogs, under its bough
or bark shelter, with sheets of paper-bark under, above, and around
them, if they can get any, and with two or three small fires close to
them.

The second source of discomfort is the flies and mosquitos. The flies do
not trouble the native so much as they do the white men; in fact you
often see the former, especially the children, with their eyes encircled
with a mass of crawling flies, of which, apparently, they take little
notice. On the other hand, the mosquitos trouble the natives just as
much as they do the white men, with, often, very serious results. They
are no more immune from tropical diseases such as malarial fever than
are the white men. I have a stick

{p. 31}

marked with more than ninety notches indicating so many deaths from what
was supposed to be malarial fever on Melville Island in the course of
two months. To protect themselves against mosquitos they construct
special tent-like structures which vary in size to a very considerable
degree. I came across the one represented (Figures 24 and 25) in a camp
on the Roper River. It was fifteen feet long, between four and five feet
broad, and four feet high. The framework was rather like that of a boat
turned upside down. At either end there was a forked stick, and between
these two ran a ridgepole, occupying the position of an upturned keel. A
series of ribs arched over on either side. In some cases these ribs ran
from the ground to the ridge-pole but, in others, a pliant stem formed a
complete arch, fixed into the ground on each side and attached to the
ridge-pole in the middle. When the framework was complete, sheets of
paper-bark were very ingeniously laid on so as to form a wall
impenetrable both to rain and mosquitos. When in use, a small opening is
left at one end and, through this, the natives crawl until the hut can
hold no more. The opening is closed, smoke fires are lighted, and here,
almost hermetically sealed, they swelter and choke until the rain clears
off, or the morning light drives the mosquitos away. If they cannot get
bark their only hope is to make great smoke fires with green bushes and
grass, but, in the real mosquito season, they have, at best, very
uncomfortable and disturbed nights and have to make up for it by
sleeping during the day. In hilly districts they are a little more
fortunate, because if they can get up two or three hundred feet they are
relatively free from mosquitos. Near to Oenpelli, for example, on the
East Alligator River, there is an isolated hill about three hundred feet
high. {p. 32} Straight up this, through the scrub, there runs a path
that has been used for long years as a track to some rock shelters on
the top. Every night, as soon as the sun sets, a long procession of
natives winds up the hillside from the plains around the billabongs and
river, the women carrying their piccaninnies and pitchis containing
water and stores of lily-roots, yams, and other food, the men carrying
their spears and clubs.

The overhanging rocks form caves with low-lying, shelving roofs,
blackened with the smoke of years of fires, and walls decorated with
quaint but often very realistic drawings of the animals on which they
feed, all crudely drawn in red and yellow ochre, white pipe-clay and
charcoal mixed with grease. Here they camp free from mosquitos, in
comparative coolness, shifting from the northern to the southern face
and vice versa according to the direction from which the monsoon storms
are blowing.

When the time comes for the turtle to lay its eggs, they go to the
laying ground on some sandy beach. When the lagoons and billagongs are
alive with young geese the natives are there, camping close by and
catching them by the score. When birds are scarce they go to the
lily-pools and feed on roots, stems, and seeds. In the inland, drier
parts they gather together on the larger and more permanent water holes
where fish and shell fish, birds and vegetable food can be secured
longer than elsewhere. The moment the rains fall, off they scatter to
take advantage of supplies that do not exist during the dry season.

In camp, when they are not performing sacred ceremonies, the evenings
are always occupied with corrobborees, which may be witnessed by
everyone--men, women, and children alike. These ordinary corrobborees

{p. 33}

vary to a considerable extent in different parts. In the south they take
the form of set dances each with its own "figures," and one of these
corrobborees may occupy the evenings of two or three weeks. n the other
hand, in the more northern tribes these long corrobborees seem to be
absent, and, in their place, we have a series of short ones which may
only occupy a very little time--it may be only a few minutes. These
corrobborees deal with some particular incidents, such as a buffalo
hunt, a crocodile securing its prey, or the putting out of a lugger to
sea.

In some instances, as on Melville Island, the acting may be very
realistic. The men gather together and come into camp in single file, in
a long line; the main mass stands to one side, while, perhaps, two or
three at a time perform. imitating the actions of pulling up the anchor
and hoisting the sails. At others the men will stand round in a circle
(Figs. 26 and 27), while, one after the other, the dancers come out into
the open space and rush round and round, imitating the action of some
animal such as a buffalo or crocodile. All the time the audience stands
round, each man stamping the ground wildly with his right foot, while,
in unison, they strike their buttocks with their open palms. When the
performers show signs of flagging other men take their place, and so the
dance goes on, until, finally, the audience closes in upon them, and,
altogether, they form a dense mass of naked, howling savages, yelling
wildly, e! e! ai! ai! with their arms waving in the air. These
corrobborees are quite unlike any on the mainland, and are similar to
those performed at the grave during the mourning ceremonies of these
remarkable people.

One of the most striking features of the aboriginals is way in which
they are divided into a large series of

{p. 34}

tribes, each of which speaks a distinct dialect and occupies, or is
regarded as doing so, a tract of country the boundaries of which are
well known to the natives, The existence of these dialects is one of the
most puzzling and difficult things to understand amongst the
aboriginals. In the first place, it is not at all easy in many cases to
ascertain the native name of the tribe. As likely as not you will get a
locality name, not the true tribal name, and when once a mistake has
been made in pronunciation, or even in the actual word, and it has been
repeated by white men, the aboriginals are so anxious to please, and
also in some respects so indifferent, that the wrong pronunciation or
even word may actually be adopted by them and pass into circulation. For
example, the name Woolner, as it is commonly spelt, is a white man's
name for a tribe that calls itself Punuurlu. It may be a native word but
it has been mistakenly applied by the whites as a tribal name and has
been tacitly accepted by the natives or by a large number of them.

What exactly constitutes an Australian tribe is somewhat difficult to
say. It may conveniently be defined somewhat as follows:--A tribe is a
group of individuals speaking a common dialect, differing in the nature
of its words from that of other groups and regarded as owning a definite
tract of country, the boundaries of which are known to them, and
recognised by the members of other tribes. Each tribe may usually be
divided into section and the real test of whether a native is or is not
a member of any particular tribe is whether, under normal conditions, he
may wander freely over the country owned by that tribe. He must not
trespass on the land of any other tribe, entering upon this only after
he has received permission of the owners to do so. In the case ever of

{p. 35}

natives belonging to different sections of a tribe there is a
recognition of local ownership within the wider range of tribal
ownership. No members of any one local group enter a camp of natives
belonging to another local group until they have been formally invited
to do so.

When important ceremonies are about to take place messengers are always
sent out, often to distant tribes, and the etiquette observed
illustrates well one aspect of aboriginal character. Each messenger is
provided by some important member or recognised leader of the group that
sends him out with an object, the possession of which at once indicates
to all whom he meets that he is a messenger. In the southern parts of
the Territory this will take the form of a sacred stick called a
churinga, or, popularly, a bull-roarer. The bearer of this is absolutely
safe anywhere. On approaching a camp he sits down waiting until the
local men choose to take notice of him, which may not be until after an
hour or two. They all go on meanwhile, quite unconcernedly, as if he did
not exist, and then one or two of the older men will go over to him; he
will show them his credentials and deliver his message, after which he
is brought into camp, made free of the special men's camp and provided
with food. This same thing goes on at every camp that he visits and
exactly the same etiquette is observed when the visitors arrive at the
camp from which the messenger was sent. In the northern parts, as, for
example, in the Alligator River district, when boys are to be initiated,
they are sent out on a journey to distant camps amongst strange tribes
that often lasts for months. Each of them carries a small wand and under
the protection of this they travel in perfect safety. When they come to
a strange camp they stand close together, leaning on their

{p. 36}

wands and singing a special corrobboree song, which must be replied to
by the women in camp.

It is interesting to find that the natives have also, as were, extended
this feeling of sacredness of the persons of their own messengers to
those of aboriginals who are carrying messages for white men. A letter
is always spoken of as a "paper yabber" and is carried in a cleft stick
so that it can be, seen easily. Last year a native carried a "paper
yabber" for me 90 miles in this way, and they not infrequently traverse
longer distances than this, the cleft stick acting as a safe passport.
They look upon the "paper yabber" as a mysterious thing that is endowed
with the capacity of seeing, as is well instanced by an aboriginal who
abstracted a stick of tobacco from a parcel that he was carrying and was
highly indignant with the "paper yabber" for telling the white man what
he had done, because he had hidden it in a hollow log while committing
the theft, so that it should not be able to see what he was doing.

They have very little idea of private property. If you give a man, say,
a stick of tobacco there are certain individuals, such as men who might
lawfully be his fathers-in-law, to whom he is obliged by custom to give
some; and even if they are not on the spot, he will immediately share it
with others. Give a man a shirt in return for work that he has done for
you and the chances are that you will find a friend of his, who has done
nothing except ask for it, wearing it next day. On many of the cattle
stations the work is done by a few natives; but every one at hand shares
in the proceeds, whether these be clothes, food, or tobacco; and it
never occurs to them that the lazy loafer is living at the expense of
his more industrious brother.

Still another point of very great importance which

{p. 37}

must always be borne in mind in dealing with the aboriginals, is their
intense belief in evil magic In tribes inhabiting the country around the
Alligator Rivers, a very favourite form of magic is to get hold of some
excrement, it does not matter how small a piece, of a man or woman
against whom you may have a grudge, and whom you wish to injure. All you
have to do is to get two or three friends to help you perform a rather
elaborate ceremony out in some quiet spot, where he cannot see you, and
you can easily encompass his death. The belief has one beneficial result
in that the camps of these natives are much better from a sanitary point
of view than in most Australian tribes, because everything is carefully
buried, lest some enemy should be lurking about.

The natives have no idea of disease or pain of any kind as being due to
anything but evil magic, except that which is caused by an actual
accident that they can see. If a man has a headache, it is evil magic
that has got inside him and he will wear. in some tribes, his wife's
head rings, so that the magic may pass into them, and be thrown away
with them into the bush. If he has a pain in the back he will wear a
curious short wand, made of paper bark, which he fixes in his waist
girdle in the small of his back. The evil magic goes into this and can
be thrown away.

Anything that they do not understand they associate with evil magic. One
of the most striking and characteristic examples of this that I know of
is the fact that when first they came across the track of a cart they
thought it was a path along which evil magic was passing, and if they
were obliged to cross it they jumped over it as high in the air as they
could lest the magic should enter them.

Natives, also, are always most frightened of the magic of

{p. 38}

another tribe or distant part and will often fix upon some man who lives
50 or 100 miles away as guilty of causing the death by evil magic of a
member of their own group.

The result of all this is that there is always a feeling of mutual
suspicion and distrust between members of different tribes, each of
which has its own peculiar forms of magic by means of which it may
encompass the death of strangers. Often in our little camp, associated
with the departmental office in Darwin, we had natives of various tribes
together for a few days at a time, and it was very noticeable, not only
how they kept apart from one another, but the mutual distrust with which
they viewed each other. You have only to tell a native that he is the
victim of evil magic and he succumbs at once and can only be cured by
the exercise of counter magic, The feeling is so strong that on more
than one occasion when a woman, strong in magic power, had given it out
that she was using magic against some individual, it very seriously
interfered with the treatment of that native under medical supervision
in a hospital and, if this be so amongst natives who have been for long
in contact with white men, it can easily be realised what an enormous
part magic plays in the life of the primitive savage.

Even an aboriginal who has lived long with the whites and has lost most
of his old beliefs, will still firmly retain his faith in evil magic,
though he might be ashamed to own it in public.

The aboriginal is, indeed, a very curious mixture; mentally, about the
level of a child who has little control over his feelings and is liable
to give way to violent fits of temper, during which he may very likely
behave with great cruelty. As a general rule he is very fond of and very
good to his children. If the parents of a child die it is immediately
taken charge of by a blood or tribal

{p. 39}

father and mother. The only exception that I have ever known to this was
one case in Melville Island where we met with a little boy whose parents
were dead and who had been left behind in camp when the natives moved
on. (Fig. 23). We came across the poor little fellow sitting
disconsolately on the top of a bark mia mia. He has no sense of
responsibility and, except in rare cases, no initiative. His memory in
many cases is wonderful so far as subjects are concerned that affect his
life and mode of conduct. When once he has seen any place, or any
particular natural object, he knows it for all time. If once he has
heard a corrobboree he knows the words and music, and his memory in
respect to native traditions is marvellous. It must be understood,
however, that in proportion to the narrow sphere of their actions, there
is as great a mental difference amongst aboriginals as amongst whites in
their wider sphere. This is well recognised amongst the natives
themselves. For instance, there is one man on the Alligator River whose
management of the wooden trumpet used during their ceremonies is
wonderfully superior to that of any one else and whose fame as a
musician has spread even beyond the limits of his own tribe. Whenever he
is in camp he is always requested to play. So, again, in the making of
all their various weapons and utensils, there are always certain
individuals who are noted for their ability--some in making shields,
others in making knives. There was one man belonging to the Kakadu
tribe, on the Alligator River, who was extraordinarily able in regard to
remembering traditions, and was recognised as a great authority On the
subject of the past history of the tribe. He was relating to us a
tradition of the tribe, according to which in old ancestor sent out
different individuals to populate various parts of the country. There
were five groups of

{p. 40}

these individuals and he was able to tell us the names, so far as we
could judge, of all of them. They included those of one hundred and
twenty men and women, and not only did he know their names, but also the
totemic group to which each belonged and their intermarriages. It was
really a wonderful feat of memory and the information was evidently
correct, because it fitted in with traditions that we were told by other
natives and we tested him later and found him consistent. The possessor
of any particular capacity does not, except in very rare cases, secure
any very direct personal gain from its exercise beyond the fact that he
has a reputation for ability. Everything is communistic and even if a
man is provided with an extra supply of food, or, in recent years,
tobacco, in return for something he has made or done, it is usually not
long before it is divided amongst his friends. There is, amongst the
aborigines, an equal distribution of profits quite irrespective of
deserts.

Lastly, there is one feature that must not be omitted, and that is the
aboriginal's fondness for fun and his sense of humour. Under normal
conditions they are always cheerful and are constantly either
corrobboreeing, or playing and laughing with one another. Nothing amuses
them more than an accident that puts one of their number in an
undignified or uncomfortable position. If a friend tumbles over a log
and gives himself a good knock, they roar with laughter at him and the
chances are that he joins in. If any one comes up who did not see it
happen, he will be requested to do it again for the benefit of the new
arrival and, as likely as not, will repeat the performance. Years after
the event happened, the recital of how two of the old men of the Kakadu
tribe had to run for their lives and just managed to keep ahead of two
charging buffaloes and an imitation of how

{p. 41}

they ran, what they said, and what they looked like, were greeted with
roars of laughter and kept a camp cheerful for an hour or two. They are
wonderful at mimicking, anything that they think is funny and the acting
of two natives, one of whom tried to show me how a former Government
Resident of the Territory had behaved when he suddenly trod on a snake,
and the other who, after posing a few natives for the purpose, imitated
by means of three sticks for a tripod and a sheet of paper bark for a
focussing cloth, the actions of a very excitable photographer whom he
had watched, was wonderfully realistic.

There are said to be 20,000 aboriginals in the Territory, but on what
authority this statement is made I do not know, as it is quite
impossible to form any definite and reliable estimate, and the above
number is a mere guess. There are great areas, as in Arafura Land, where
practically no white man has been--at all events there is no
settlement--and here there is an abundance of native food and the tribes
wander unhampered in their native state. Judging by what I have seen and
heard, I think it probable that a census would show more nearly 20,000
than 20,000. One thing is certain and that is that in all parts where
they are in contact with outsiders, especially with Asiatics, they are
dying out with great rapidity.

The more primitive a race is, the more rapidly does it lose, or modify,
its old customs and beliefs, when it comes in contact with a higher
civilisation, and there are very few parts of Australia now left in
which it is possible to study the aboriginal in his natural state.

{p. 42}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Social Organisation and Marriage Regulations](ntna04.md)
