[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110486)  [Next](2110488) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.x.ii"></span> <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="iv.iii.x.ii-Page_267"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.x.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.iii.x.ii-p1"></span>A description of accidie, and the way
in which it creeps over the heart of a monk, and the injury it inflicts
on the soul.

<span id="iv.iii.x.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.x.ii-p2.1"></span>And</span> when this has taken possession
of some unhappy soul, it produces dislike of the place, disgust with the
cell, and disdain and contempt of the brethren who dwell with him or at
a little distance, as if they were careless or unspiritual. It also
makes the man lazy and sluggish about all manner of work which has to be
done within the enclosure of his dormitory. It does not suffer him to
stay in his cell, or to take any pains about reading, and he often
groans because he can do no good while he stays there, and complains and
sighs because he can bear no spiritual fruit so long as he is joined to
that society; and he complains that he is cut off from spiritual gain,
and is of no use in the place, as if he were one who, though he could
govern others and be useful to a great number of people, yet was
edifying none, nor profiting any one by his teaching and doctrine. He
cries up distant monasteries and those which are a long way off, and
describes such places as more profitable and better suited for
salvation; and besides this he paints the intercourse with the brethren
there as sweet and full of spiritual life. On the other hand, he says
that everything about him is rough, and not only that there is nothing
edifying among the brethren who are stopping there, but also that even
food for the body cannot be procured without great difficulty. Lastly he
fancies that he will never be well while he stays in that place, unless
he leaves his cell (in which he is sure to die if he stops in it any
longer) and takes himself off from thence as quickly as possible. Then
the fifth or sixth hour brings him such bodily weariness and longing for
food that he seems to himself worn out and wearied as if with a long
journey, or some very heavy work, or as if he had put off taking food
during a fast of two or three days. Then besides this he looks about
anxiously this way and that, and sighs that none of the brethren come to
see him, and often goes in and out of his cell, and frequently gazes up
at the sun, as if it was too slow in setting, and so a kind of
unreasonable confusion of mind takes possession of him like some foul
darkness, <span id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) and makes him idle and
useless for every spiritual work, so that he imagines that no cure for
so terrible an attack can be found in anything except visiting some one
of the brethren, or in the solace of sleep alone. Then the disease
suggests that he ought to show courteous and friendly hospitalities to
the brethren, and pay visits to the sick, whether near at hand or far
off. He talks too about some dutiful and religious offices; that those
kinsfolk ought to be inquired after, and that he ought to go and see
them oftener; that it would be a real work of piety to go more
frequently to visit that religious woman, devoted to the service of God,
who is deprived of all support of kindred; and that it would be a most
excellent thing to get what is needful for her who is neglected and
despised by her own kinsfolk; and that he ought piously to devote his
time to these things instead of staying uselessly and with no profit in
his cell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_964"></span>[267:965](2110487.htm#fr_964) <span
id="iv.iii.x.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x.ii-p3"></span> *Velut tætra suppletur caligine*
(Petschenig); the text of Gazæus reads *terra* for *tætra*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of the different ways in which accidie overcomes a
monk.](2110488)
