[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110066)  [Next](2110068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Martin</span>, then, clothed in this
garment, proceeds to offer the sacrifice <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) to God. And then on that very day—I am
about to narrate something wonderful—when he was engaged in blessing the
altar, as is usual, we beheld a globe of fire dart from his head, so
that, as it rose on high, the flame produced a hair of extraordinary
length. And, although we saw this take place on a very famous day in the
midst of a great multitude of people, only one of the virgins, one of
the presbyters, and only three of the monks, witnessed the sight: but
why the others did not behold it is a matter not to be decided by our
judgment.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>“About the same time, when my uncle
Evanthius, a highly Christian man, although occupied in the affairs of
this world, had begun to be afflicted with a very serious illness, to
the extreme danger of his life, he sent for Martin. And, without any
delay, Martin hastened towards him; but, before the blessed man had
completed the half of the distance between them, the sick man
experienced the power of him that was coming; and, being immediately
restored to health, he himself met us as we were approaching. With many
entreaties, he detained Martin, who wished to return home on the
following day; for, in the meantime, a serpent had struck with a deadly
blow a boy belonging to my uncle’s family; and Evanthius himself, on his
own shoulders, carried him all but lifeless through the force of the
poison, and laid him at the feet of the holy man, believing that nothing
was impossible to him. By this time, the serpent had diffused its poison
through all the members of the boy: one could see his skin swollen in
all his veins, and his vitals strung up like a leather-bottle. Martin
stretched forth his hand, felt all the limbs of the boy, and placed his
finger close to the little wound, at which the animal had instilled the
poison. Then in truth—I am going to tell things wonderful—we saw the
whole poison, drawn from every part of the body, gather quickly together
to Martin’s finger; and next, we beheld the poison mixed with blood
press through the small puncture of the wound, just as a long line <span
id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-Page_39"></span>of
abundant milk is wont to flow forth from the teats of goats or sheep,
when these are squeezed by the hand of shepherds. The boy rose up quite
well. We were amazed by so striking a miracle; and we acknowledged—as,
indeed, truth compelled us to do—that there was no one under heaven who
could equal the deeds of Martin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[38:114](2110067.htm#fr_113) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.ii-p2"></span> “oblaturus sacrificium.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](2110068)
