[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110820)  [Next](2110822.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.xi.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xiv-p1"></span>The answer how we can gain stability
of heart or of thoughts.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.xi.xiv-p2.1"></span>Isaac</span>: Although, in our former
discussion on the character of prayer, enough was, as I think, said on
this subject, yet as you want it repeated to you again, I will give you
a brief instruction on steadfastness of heart. There are three things
which make a shifting heart steadfast, watchings, meditation, and
prayer, diligence in which and constant attention will produce steadfast
firmness of mind. But this cannot be secured in any other way unless all
cares and anxieties of this present life have been first got rid of by
indefatigable persistence in work dedicated not to covetousness but to
the sacred uses of the monastery, that we may thus be able to fulfil the
Apostle’s command: “Pray without ceasing.” <span
id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680.md) For he prays *too little*, who is
accustomed only to pray at the times when he bends his knees. But he
*never* prays, who even while on his bended knees is distracted by all
kinds of wanderings of heart. And therefore what we would be found when
at our prayers, that we ought to be before the time of prayer. For at
the time of its prayers the mind cannot help being affected by its
previous condition, and while it is praying, will be either transported
to things heavenly, or dragged down to earthly things by those thoughts
in which it had been lingering before prayer.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xiv-p4"></span>Thus far did Abbot Isaac carry on his
Second Conference on the character of Prayer to us astonished hearers;
whose instruction on the consideration of that verse quoted above (which
he gave as a sort of outline for beginners to hold) we greatly admired,
and wished to follow very closely, as we fancied that it would be a
short and easy method; but we have found it even harder to observe than
that system of ours by which we used formerly to wander here and there
in varied meditations through the whole body of the Scriptures without
being tied by any chains of perseverance. It is then certain that no one
is kept away from perfection of heart by not being able to read, nor is
rustic simplicity any hindrance to the possession of purity of heart and
mind, which lies close at hand for all, if only they will by constant
meditation on this verse keep the thoughts of the mind safe and sound
towards God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[409:1681](2110821.htm#fr_1680.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xiv-p3"></span> [1 Thess. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conferences of John Cassian. Part II. Containing Conferences
XI-XVII.](2110822.md)
