[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110936)  [Next](2110938) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.viii.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.viii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="iv.v.viii.xvii-p1"></span>How the saints have profitably
employed a lie like hellebore.

<span id="iv.v.viii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.viii.xvii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so we ought to regard a lie
and to employ it as if its nature were that of hellebore; which is
useful if taken when some deadly disease is threatening, but if taken
without being required by some great danger is the cause of immediate
death. For so also we <span id="page_465">p. 465</span> <span
id="iv.v.viii.xvii-Page_465"></span>read that holy men and those most
approved by God employed lying, so as not only to incur no guilt of sin
from it, but even to attain the greatest goodness; and if deceit could
confer glory on them, what on the other hand would the truth have
brought them but condemnation? Just as Rahab, of whom Scripture gives a
record not only of no good deed but actually of unchastity, yet simply
for the lie, by means of which she preferred to hide the spies instead
of betraying them, had it vouchsafed to her to be joined with the people
of God in everlasting blessing. But if she had preferred to speak the
truth and to regard the safety of the citizens, there is no doubt that
she and all her house would not have escaped the coming destruction, nor
would it have been vouchsafed to her to be inserted in the progenitors
of our Lord’s nativity, <span id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021) and
reckoned in the list of the patriarchs, and through her descendants that
followed, to become the mother of the Saviour of all. Again Dalila, who
to provide for the safety of her fellow citizens betrayed the truth she
had discovered, obtained in exchange eternal destruction, and has left
to all men nothing but the memory of her sin. When then any grave danger
hangs on confession of the truth, then we must take to lying as a
refuge, yet in such a way as to be for our salvation troubled by the
guilt of a humbled conscience. But where there is no call of the utmost
necessity present, there a lie should be most carefully avoided as if it
were something deadly: just as we said of a cup of hellebore which is
indeed useful if it is only taken in the last resort when a deadly and
inevitable disease is threatening, while if it is taken when the body is
in a state of sound and rude health, its deadly properties at once go to
find out the vital parts. And this was clearly shown of Rahab of
Jericho, and the patriarch Jacob; the former of whom could only escape
death by means of this remedy, while the latter could not secure the
blessing of the first-born without it. For God is not only the Judge and
inspector of our words and actions, but He also looks into their purpose
and aim. And if He sees that anything has been done or promised by some
one for the sake of eternal salvation and shows insight into Divine
contemplation, even though it may appear to men to be hard and unfair,
yet He looks at the inner goodness of the heart and regards the desire
of the will rather than the actual words spoken, because He must take
into account the aim of the work and the disposition of the doer,
whereby, as was said above, one man may be justified by means of a lie,
while another may be guilty of a sin of everlasting death by telling the
truth. To which end the patriarch Jacob also had regard when he was not
afraid to imitate the hairy appearance of his brother’s body by wrapping
himself up in skins, and to his credit acquiesced in his mother’s
instigation of a lie for this object. For he saw that in this way there
would be bestowed on him greater gains of blessing and righteousness
than by keeping to the path of simplicity: for he did not doubt that the
stain of this lie would at once be washed away by the flood of the
paternal blessing, and would speedily be dissolved like a little cloud
by the breath of the Holy Spirit; and that richer rewards of merit would
be bestowed on him by means of this dissimulation which he put on than
by means of the truth, which was natural to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[465:2022](2110937.htm#fr_2021) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xvii-p3"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. An objection that only those men employed lies
with impunity, who lived under the law.](2110938)
