[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110963)  [Next](2110965) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p1"></span>Of true humility, and how Abbot
Serapion exposed the mock humility of a certain man.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> as I see that you have
learnt the first principles of this life from the best sort of monks,
i.e., that starting from the excellent school of the cœnobium you are
aim<span id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xi-Page_484"></span>ing at the lofty heights of the
anchorite’s rule, you should with genuine feeling of heart pursue the
virtue of humility and patience, which I doubt not that you learnt
there; and not feign it, as some do, by mock humility in words, or by an
artificial and unnecessary readiness for some duties of the body. And
this sham humility Abbot Serapion <span
id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082) once laughed to scorn most
capitally. For when one had come to him making a great display of his
lowliness by his dress and words, and the old man urged him, after his
custom, to “collect the prayer” <span
id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083) he would not consent to his
request, but debasing himself declared that he was involved in such
crimes that he did not deserve even to breathe the air which is common
to all, and refusing even the use of the mat preferred to sit down on
the bare ground. But when he had shown still less inclination for the
washing of the feet, then Abbot Serapion, when supper was finished, and
the customary Conference gave him an opportunity, began kindly and
gently to urge him not to roam with shifty lightmindedness over the
whole world, idly and vaguely, especially as he was young and strong,
but to keep to his cell in accordance with the rule of the Elders and to
elect to be supported by his own efforts rather than by the bounty of
others; which even the Apostle Paul would not allow, and though when he
was labouring in the cause of the gospel this provision might lightly
have been made for him, yet he preferred to work night and day, to
provide daily food for himself and for those who were ministering to him
and could not do the work with their own hands. Whereupon the other was
filled with such vexation and disgust that he could not hide by his
looks the annoyance which he felt in his heart. To whom the Elder: Thus
far, my son, you have loaded yourself with the weight of all kinds of
crimes, not fearing lest by the confession of such awful sins you bring
a reproach upon your reputation; how is it then, I pray, that now, at
our simple admonition, which involved no reproof, but simply showed a
feeling for your edification and love, I see that you are moved with
such disgust that you cannot hide it by your looks, or conceal it by an
appearance of calmness? Perhaps while you were humiliating yourself, you
were hoping to hear from our lips this saying: “The righteous man is the
accuser of himself in the opening of his discourse?” <span
id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084) Further, true humility of heart
must be preserved, which comes not from an affected humbling of body and
in word, but from an inward humbling of the soul: and this will only
then shine forth with clear evidences of patience when a man does not
boast about sins, which nobody will believe, but, when another
insolently accuses him of them, thinks nothing of it, and when with
gentle equanimity of spirit he puts up with wrongs offered to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[484:2083](2110964.htm#fr_2082) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p3"></span> On Serapion see the note on Conf. V.
i.

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[484:2084](2110964.htm#fr_2083) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p4"></span> Orationem Colligere. See the notes on
the Institutes III. vii.

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[484:2085](2110964.htm#fr_2084) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p5"></span> [Prov. xviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#017)<span id="iv.vi.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. A question how true patience can be
gained.](2110965)
