[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110065)  [Next](2110067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Well</span> then, when first, having left
the schools, I attached myself to the blessed man, a few days after
doing so, we followed him on his way to the church. In the way, a poor
man, half-naked in these winter-months, met him, and begged that some
clothing might be given him. Then Martin, calling for the chief-deacon,
gave orders that the shivering creature should be clothed without delay.
After that, entering a private apartment, and sitting down by himself,
as his custom was—for he secured for himself this retirement even in the
church, liberty being <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-Page_38"></span>granted to the clerics, since indeed the
presbyters were seated in another apartment, either spending their time
in mutual <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) courtesies, or
occupied in listening to affairs of business. But Martin kept himself in
his own seclusion up to the hour at which custom required that the
sacred rites should be dispensed to the people. And I will not pass by
this point that, when sitting in his retirement, he never used a chair;
and, as to the church, no one ever saw him sitting there, as I recently
saw a certain man (God is my witness), not without a feeling of shame at
the spectacle, seated on a lofty throne, yea, in its elevation, a kind
of royal tribunal; but Martin might be seen sitting on a rude little
stool, such as those in use by the lowest of servants, which we Gallic
country-people call *tripets*, <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110)
and which you men of learning, or those at least who are from Greece,
call *tripods*. Well, that poor man who had been chanced upon, as the
chief-deacon delayed to give him the garment, rushed into this private
apartment of the blessed man, complaining that he had not been attended
to by the cleric, and bitterly mourning over the cold he suffered. No
delay took place: the holy man, while the other did not observe,
secretly drew off his tunic which was below his outer <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) garment, and clothing the poor man
with this, told him to go on his way. Then, a little after, the
chief-deacon coming in informs him, according to custom, that the people
were waiting in the church, and that it was incumbent on him to proceed
to the performance of the sacred rites. Martin said to him in reply that
it was necessary that the poor man—referring to himself—should be
clothed, and that he could not possibly proceed to the church, unless
the poor man received a garment. But the deacon, not understanding the
true state of the case—that Martin, while outwardly clad with a cloak,
was not seen by him to be naked underneath, at last begins to complain
that the poor man does not make his appearance. ‘Let the garment which
has been got ready,’ said Martin, ‘be brought to me; there will not be
wanting the poor man requiring to be clothed.’ Then, at length, the
cleric, constrained by necessity, and now in not the sweetest temper,
hurriedly procures a rough <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112)
garment out of the nearest shop, short and shaggy, and costing only five
pieces of silver, and lays it, in wrath at the feet of Martin. ‘See,’
cries he, ‘there is the garment, but the poor man is not here.’ Martin,
nothing moved, bids him go to the door for a little, thus obtaining
secrecy, while, in his nakedness, he clothes himself with the garment,
striving with all his might to keep secret what he had done. But when do
such things remain concealed in the case of the saints desiring that
they should be so? Whether they will or not, all are brought to light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[38:110](2110066.htm#fr_109) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p2"></span> “salutationibus vacantes”: this is, in
the original, a very confused and obscure sentence.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[38:111](2110066.htm#fr_110) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p3"></span> Halm edits “tripeccias,” which may have
been the local *patois* for “tripetias” (ter-pes), corresponding to the
Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p3.1"></span>τρίπους</span>, and meaning “a three legged
stool.”

<span id="fn_111"></span>[38:112](2110066.htm#fr_111) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p4"></span> “Amphibalum”: a late Latin word
corresponding to the more classical *toga*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[38:113](2110066.htm#fr_112) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.i-p5"></span> “bigerricam vestem.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](2110067)
