[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110680)  [Next](2110682.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xviii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>Serapion</span>: Everybody is perfectly
agreed that there are eight principal faults which affect a monk. And
all of them are not included in the figure of the nations for this
reason, because in Deuteronomy Moses, or rather the Lord through him,
was speaking to those who had already gone forth from Egypt and been set
free from one most powerful nation, I mean that of the Egyptians. And we
find that this figure holds good also in our case, as when we have got
clear of the snares of this world we are found to be free from gluttony,
i.e., the sin of the belly and palate; and like them we have a conflict
against these seven remaining nations, without taking account at all of
the one which has been already overcome. And the land of this nation was
not given to Israel for a possession, but the command of the Lord
ordained that they should at once forsake it and go forth from it. And
for this cause our fasts ought to be made moderate, that there may be no
need for us through excessive abstinence, which results from weakness of
the flesh and infirmity, to return again to the land of Egypt, i.e., to
our former greed and carnal lust which we forsook when we made our
renunciation of this world. And this has happened in a figure, in those
who after having gone forth into the desert of virtue again hanker after
the flesh pots over which they sat in Egypt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. The reason why one nation is to be forsaken, while
seven are commanded to be destroyed.](2110682.md)
