[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110161)  [Next](2110163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxviii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxviii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxviii-p1.1"></span>At</span> that time Samson ruled over
the Hebrews, the Philistines having been subdued by the prowess of a
single individual. They, therefore, sought his life by stratagem, not
daring to assail him openly, and with this view they bribe his wife
(whom he had received after what has been stated took place) to betray
to them wherein the strength of her husband lay. She attacked him with
female blandishments; and, after he had deceived her, and staved off her
purpose for a long time, she persuaded him to tell that his strength was
situated in his hair. Presently she cut off his hair stealthily while he
was asleep, and thus delivered him up to the Philistines; for although
he had often before been given up to them, they had not been able to
hold him fast. Then they, having put out his eyes, bound him with
fetters, and cast him into prison. But, in course of time, his hair
which had been cut off began to grow again, and his strength to return
with it. And now Samson, conscious of his recovered strength, was only
waiting for an opportunity of righteous revenge. The Philistines had a
custom on their festival days of producing Samson as if to make a public
spectacle of him, while they mocked their illustrious captive.
Accordingly, on a certain day, when they were making a feast in honor of
their idol, they ordered Samson to be exhibited. Now, the temple, in
which all the people and all the princes of the Philistines feasted,
rested on two pillars of remarkable size; and Samson, when brought out,
was placed between these pillars. Then he, having first called upon the
Lord, seized his opportunity, and threw down the pillars. The whole
multitude was overwhelmed in the ruins of the building, and Samson
himself died along with his enemies, not without having avenged himself
upon them, after he had ruled the Hebrews twenty years. To him Simmichar
succeeded, of whom Scripture relates nothing more than that simple fact.
For I do not find that even the time when his rule came to an end is
mentioned, and I see that the people was for some time without a leader.
Accordingly, when civil war arose against the tribe of Benjamin, Judah
was chosen as a temporary leader in the war. But most of those who have
written about these times note that his rule was only for a single year.
On this account, many <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxviii-Page_85"></span>pass him by altogether, and place
Eli, the priest, immediately after Samson. We shall leave that point
doubtful, as one not positively ascertained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX.](2110163)
