[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110095)  [Next](2110097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xvi-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Upon</span> this, Postumianus exclaims,
“Let that well-known man in our immediate neighborhood, listen to that
example, who, when he is wise, takes no notice either of things present
or future, but if he has been offended, falls into utter fury, having no
control over himself. He then rages against the clerics, and makes
bitter attacks upon the laity, while he stirs up the whole world for his
own revenge. He will continue in this state of contention for three
years without intermission, and refuse to be mollified either by time or
reason. The condition of the man is to be lamented and pitied, even if
this were the only incurable evil by which he is afflicted. But you
ought, my Gallic friend, to have frequently recalled to his mind such
examples of patience and tranquillity, that he might know both how to be
angry and how to forgive. And if he happens to hear of this speech of
mine which has been briefly interpolated into our discourse, and.
directed against himself, let him know that I spoke, not more with the
lips of an enemy than the mind of a friend; because I should wish, if
the thing were possible, that he should be spoken of rather as being
like the bishop Martin, than the tyrant Phalaris. But let us pass away
from him, since the mention of him is far from pleasant, and let us
return, O Gaul, to our friend Martin.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.](2110097)
