[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110573)  [Next](2110575) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.vii-p1"></span>How peace of mind should be sought.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>Everything</span> should be done and
sought after by us for the sake of this. For this we must seek for
solitude, for this we know that we ought to submit to fastings, vigils,
toils, bodily nakedness, reading, and all other virtues that through
them we may be enabled to prepare our heart and to keep it unharmed by
all evil passions, and resting on these steps to mount to the perfection
of charity, and with regard to these observances, if by accident we have
been employed in some good and useful occupation and have been unable to
carry out our customary discipline, we should not be overcome by
vexation or anger, or passion, with the object of overcoming which, we
were going to do that which we have omitted. For the gain from fasting
will not balance the loss from anger, nor is the profit from reading so
great as the harm which results from despising a brother. Those things
which are of secondary importance, such as fastings, vigils, withdrawal
from the world, meditation on Scripture, we ought to practise with a
view to our main object, i.e., purity of heart, which is charity, and we
ought not on their account to drive away this main virtue, for as long
as it is still found in us intact and unharmed, we <span
id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ii.vii-Page_298"></span>shall not be hurt if any of the things
which are of secondary importance are necessarily omitted; since it will
not be of the slightest use to have done everything, if this main reason
of which we have spoken be removed, for the sake of which everything is
to be done. For on this account one is anxious to secure and provide for
one’s self the implements for any branch of work, not simply to possess
them to no purpose, nor as if one made the profit and advantage, which
is looked for from them, to consist in the bare fact of possession but
that by using them, one may effectually secure practical knowledge and
the end of that particular art of which they are auxiliaries. Therefore
fastings, vigils, meditation on the Scriptures, self-denial, and the
abnegation of all possessions are not perfection, but aids to
perfection: because the end of that science does not lie in these, but
by means of these we arrive at the end. He then will practise these
exercises to no purpose, who is contented with these as if they were the
highest good, and has fixed the purpose of his heart simply on them, and
does not extend his efforts towards reaching the end, on account of
which these should be sought: for he possesses indeed the implements of
his art, but is ignorant of the end, in which all that is valuable
resides. Whatever then can disturb that purity and peace of mind—even
though it may seem useful and valuable—should be shunned as really
hurtful, for by this rule we shall succeed in escaping harm from
mistakes and vagaries, and make straight for the desired end and reach
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of the main effort towards the contemplation of
things and an illustration from the case of Martha and Mary.](2110575)
