[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110243)  [Next](2110245.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span>A General Rule for distinguishing the Truth
of the Catholic Faith from the Falsehood of Heretical Pravity.

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>\[4.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>I have</span> often then inquired earnestly and
attentively of very many men eminent for sanctity and learning, how and
by what sure and so to speak universal rule I may be able to distinguish
the truth of Catholic faith from the falsehood of heretical pravity; and
I have always, and in almost every instance, received an answer to this
effect: That whether I or any one else should wish to detect the frauds
and avoid the snares of heretics as they rise, and to continue sound and
complete in the Catholic faith, we must, the Lord helping, fortify our
own belief in two ways; first, by the authority of the Divine Law, and
then, by the Tradition of the Catholic Church.

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span>\[5.\] But here some one perhaps will ask,
Since the canon of Scripture is complete, and sufficient of itself for
everything, and more than sufficient, what need is there to join with it
the authority of the Church’s interpretation? For this reason,—because,
owing to the depth of Holy Scripture, all do not accept it in one and
the same sense, but one understands its words in one way, another in
another; so that it seems to be capable of as many interpretations as
there are interpreters. For Novatian expounds it one way, Sabellius
another, Donatus another, Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, another,
Photinus, Apollinaris, Priscillian, another, Iovinian, Pelagius,
Celestius, another, lastly, Nestorius another. Therefore, it is very
necessary, on account of so great intricacies of such various error,
that the rule for the right understanding of the prophets and apostles
should be framed in accordance with the standard of Ecclesiastical and
Catholic interpretation.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>\[6.\] Moreover, in the Catholic Church
itself, all possible care must be taken, that we hold that faith which
has been believed everywhere, always, by all. For that is truly and in
the strictest sense “Catholic,” which, as the name itself and the reason
of the thing declare, comprehends all universally. This rule we shall
observe if we follow universality, antiquity, consent. We shall follow
universality if we confess that one faith to be true, which the whole
Church throughout the world confesses; antiquity, if we in no wise
depart from those interpretations which it is manifest were notoriously
held by our holy ancestors and fathers; consent, in like manner, if in
antiquity itself we adhere to the consentient definitions and
determinations of all, or at the least of almost all priests and
doctors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. What is to be done if one or more dissent from the
rest.](2110245.md)
