[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110254)  [Next](2110256) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iii.xiv-p1"></span>The Catholic Doctrine of the Trinity and
the Incarnation explained.

<span id="iii.xiv-p2"></span>\[36.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>In</span> these ways then do these rabid dogs,
Nestorius, Apollinaris, and Photinus, bark against the Catholic faith:
Photinus, by denying the Trinity; Apollinaris, by teaching that the
nature of the Word is mutable, and refusing to acknowledge that there
are two substances in Christ, denying moreover either that Christ had a
soul at all, or, at all events, that he had a rational soul, and
asserting that the Word of God supplied the place of the rational soul;
Nestorius, by affirming that there were always or at any rate that once
there were two Christs. But the Catholic Church, holding the right faith
both concerning God and concerning our Saviour, is guilty of blasphemy
neither in the mystery of the Trinity, nor in that of the Incarnation of
Christ. For she worships both one Godhead in the plenitude of the
Trinity, and the equality of the Trinity in one and the same majesty,
and she confesses one Christ Jesus, not two; the same both God and man,
the one as truly as the other. <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467)
One Person indeed she believes in Him, but two substances; two
substances but one Person: Two substances, because the Word of God is
not mutable, so as to be convertible into flesh; one Person, lest by
acknowledging two sons she should seem to worship not a Trinity, but a
Quaternity.

<span id="iii.xiv-p4"></span>\[37.\] But it will be well to unfold this
same doctrine more distinctly and explicitly again and again.

<span id="iii.xiv-p5"></span>In God there is one substance, but three
Persons; in Christ two substances, but one Person. In the Trinity,
another and another Person, not another and another substance (distinct
Persons, not distinct substances); <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) in the Saviour another and another
substance, not another and another Person, (distinct substances, not
distinct Persons). How in the Trinity another and another Person
(distinct Persons) not another and another substance (distinct
substances)? <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) Because there is
one Person of the Father, another <span id="page_141">p. 141</span>
<span id="iii.xiv-Page_141"></span>of the Son, another of the Holy
Ghost; <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) but yet there is not
another and another nature (distinct natures) but one and the same
nature. How in the Saviour another and another substance, not another
and another Person (two distinct substances, not two distinct Persons)?
Because there is one substance of the Godhead, another of the manhood.
But yet the Godhead and the manhood are not another and another Person
(two distinct Persons), but one and the same Christ, one and the same
Son of God, and one and the same Person of one and the same Christ and
Son of God, in like manner as in man the flesh is one thing and the soul
another, but one and the same man, both soul and flesh. In Peter and
Paul the soul is one thing, the flesh another; yet there are not two
Peters,—one soul, the other flesh, or two Pauls, one soul, the other
flesh,—but one and the same Peter, and one and the same Paul, consisting
each of two diverse natures, soul and body. Thus, then, in one and the
same Christ there are two substances, one divine, the other human; one
of (ex) God the Father, the other of (ex) the Virgin Mother; one
co-eternal with and co-equal with the Father, the other temporal and
inferior to the Father; one consubstantial with his Father, the other,
consubstantial with his Mother, but one and the same Christ in both
substances. There is not, therefore, one Christ God, the other man, not
one uncreated, the other created; not one impassible, the other
passible; not one equal to the Father, the other inferior to the Father;
not one of his Father (ex), the other of his Mother (ex), but one and
the same Christ, God and man, the same uncreated and created, the same
unchangeable and incapable of suffering, the same acquainted by
experience with both change and suffering, the same equal to the Father
and inferior to the Father, the same begotten of the Father before time,
(“before the world”), the same born of his mother in time (“in the
world”), <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) perfect God, perfect
Man. In God supreme divinity, in man perfect humanity. Perfect humanity,
I say, forasmuch as it hath both soul and flesh; the flesh, very flesh;
our flesh, his mother’s flesh; the soul, intellectual, endowed with mind
and reason. There is then in Christ the Word, the soul, the flesh; but
the whole is one Christ, one Son of God, and one our Saviour and
Redeemer: One, not by I know not what corruptible confusion of Godhead
and manhood, but by a certain entire and singular unity of Person. For
the conjunction hath not converted and changed the one nature into the
other, (which is the characteristic error of the Arians), but rather
hath in such wise compacted both into one, that while there always
remains in Christ the singularity of one and the self-same Person, there
abides eternally withal the characteristic property of each nature;
whence it follows, that neither doth God (i.e., the divine nature) ever
begin to be body, nor doth the body ever cease to be body. The which may
be illustrated in human nature: for not only in the present life, but in
the future also, each individual man will consist of soul and body; nor
will his body ever be converted into soul, or his soul into body; but
while each individual man will live for ever, the distinction between
the two substances will continue in each individual man for ever. So
likewise in Christ each substance will for ever retain its own
characteristic property, yet without prejudice to the unity of Person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_467"></span>[140:468](2110255.htm#fr_467) <span
id="iii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p3"></span> Unum Christum Jesum non duos, eundemque
Deum pariter atque Hominem confitetur. Compare the Athanasian Creed,
“Est ergo fides recta et credamus et confiteamur, quia Dominus Noster
Jesus Christus. Dei Filius, Deus pariter et Homo est.”

<span id="fn_468"></span>[140:469](2110255.htm#fr_468) <span
id="iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p6"></span> In Trinitate alius atque alius, non aliud
atque aliud. In Salvatore aliud atque aliud, non alius atque alius.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[140:470](2110255.htm#fr_469) <span
id="iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p7"></span> Aliud atque aliud, non alius atque alius.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[141:471](2110255.htm#fr_470) <span
id="iii.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p8"></span> Quia scilicet alia est Persona Patris,
alia Filii, alia Spiritus Sancti sed tamen Patris et Filii et Spiritus
Sancti non alia et alia sed una cadunque natura. So the Athanasian
Creed, “Alia est enim Persona Patris, alia Filii, alia Spiritus Sancti,
sed Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti una est Divinitas, etc.” The
coincidence between the whole of this context and the Athanasian Creed
is very observable, though the agreement is not always exact to the very
letter.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[141:472](2110255.htm#fr_471) <span
id="iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p9"></span> Idem ex Patre ante sæcula genitus, Idem in
sæculo ex matre generatus. Compare the Athanasian Creed, “Deus est ex
substantia Patris ante sæcula genitus; Homo ex substantia Matris in
sæculo natus.” See Appendix I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Jesus Christ Man in Truth, not in
Semblance.](2110256)
