[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110670)  [Next](2110672.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p1"></span>Of covetousness, which is something
outside our nature, and of the difference between it and those faults
which are natural to us.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.viii-p2.1"></span>Covetousness</span> and anger, although
they are not of the same character (for the former is something outside
our nature, while the latter seems to have as it were its seed plot
within us) yet they spring up in the same way, as in most instances they
find the reasons for their being stirred in something outside of us. For
often men who are still rather weak complain that they have fallen into
these sins through irritation and the instigation of others, and are
plunged headlong into the passions of anger and covetousness by the
provocation of other people. But that covetousness is something outside
our nature, we can clearly see from this; viz., that it is proved not to
have its first starting point inside us, nor does it originate in what
contributes to keeping body and soul together, and to the existence of
life. For it is plain that nothing belongs to the actual needs and
necessities of our common life except our daily meat and drink: but
everything else, with whatever zeal and care we preserve it, is shown to
be something distinct from the wants of man by the needs of life itself.
And so this temptation, as being something outside our nature, only
attacks those monks who are but lukewarm and built on a bad foundation,
whereas those which are natural to us do not cease from troubling even
the best of monks and those who dwell in solitude. And so far is this
shown to be true, that we find that there are some nations who are
altogether free from this passion of covetousness, because they have
never by use and custom received into themselves this fault and
infirmity. And we believe that the old world before the flood was for
long ages ignorant of the madness of this desire. And in the case of
each one of us who makes his renunciation of the world a thorough one,
we know that it is extirpated without any difficulty, if, that is, a man
gives up all his property, and seeks the monastic discipline in such a
way as not to allow himself to keep a single farthing. And we can find
thousands of men to bear witness to this, who in a single moment have
given up all their property, and have so thoroughly eradicated this
passion as not to be in the slightest degree troubled by it afterwards,
though all their life long they have to fight against gluttony, and
cannot be safe from it without striving with the utmost watchfulness of
heart and bodily abstinence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. How dejection and accidie generally arise without any
external provocation, as in the case of other faults.](2110672.md)
