[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110701)  [Next](2110703) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p1"></span>Of the two kinds of trials, which come
upon us in a three-fold way.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p2.1"></span>Well</span> then, though we say that trial
is twofold, i.e., in prosperity and in adversity, yet you must know that
all men are tried in three different ways. Often for their probation,
sometimes for their improvement, and in some cases because their sins
deserve it. For their probation indeed, as we read that the blessed
Abraham and Job and many of the saints endured countless tribulations;
or this which is said to the people in Deuteronomy by Moses: “And thou
shalt remember all the way through which the Lord thy God hath brought
thee for forty years through the desert, to afflict thee and to prove
thee, and that the things that were in thy heart might be made known,
whether thou wouldst keep His Commandments or no:” <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397) and this which we find in the
Psalms: “I proved thee at the waters of strife.” <span
id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398) To Job also: “Thinkest thou that I
have spoken for any other cause than that thou mightest be seen to be
righteous?” <span id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399) But for
improvement, when God chastens his righteous ones for some small and
venial sins, or to raise them to a higher state of purity, and delivers
them over to various trials, that He may purge away all their unclean
thoughts, and, to use the prophet’s word, the “dross,” which he sees to
have collected in their secret parts, and may thus transmit them like
pure gold, to the judgment to come, as He allows nothing to remain in
them for the fire of judgment to discover when hereafter it searches
them with penal torments according to this saying: “Many are the
tribulations of the righteous.” <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400) And: “My son, neglect not the
discipline of the Lord, neither be thou wearied whilst thou art rebuked
by Him. For whom the Lord loveth He chastiseth, and scourgeth every son
whom He receiveth. For what son is there whom the father doth not
correct? But if ye are without chastisement, whereof all are partakers,
then are ye bastards, and <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-Page_358"></span>not sons.” <span
id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401) And in the Apocalypse: “Those whom
I love, I reprove and chasten.” <span
id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402) To whom under the figure of
Jerusalem the following words are spoken by Jeremiah, in the person of
God: “For I will utterly consume all the nations among which I scattered
thee: but I will not utterly consume thee: but I will chastise thee in
judgment, that thou mayest not seem to thyself innocent.” <span
id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403) And for this life-giving cleansing
David prays when he says: “Prove me, O Lord, and try me; turn my reins
and my heart.” <span id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404) Isaiah also,
well knowing the value of this trial, says “O Lord, correct us but with
judgment: not in Thine anger.” <span
id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405) And again: “I will give thanks to
thee, O Lord, for thou wast angry with me: Thy wrath is turned away, and
Thou hast comforted me.” <span id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406) But
as a punishment for sins, the blows of trial are inflicted, as where the
Lord threatens that He will send plagues upon the people of Israel: “I
will send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the fury of creatures that
trail upon the ground:” <span id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407) and
“In vain have I struck your children: they have not received
correction.” <span id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408) In the Psalms
also: “Many are the scourges of the sinners:” <span
id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409) and in the gospel: “Behold thou art
made whole: now sin no more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee.” <span
id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410) We find, it is true, a fourth way
also in which we know on the authority of Scripture that some sufferings
are brought upon us simply for the manifestation of the glory of God and
His works, according to these words of the gospel: “Neither did this man
sin nor his parents, but that the works of God might be manifested in
him:” <span id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411) and again: “This
sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God that the Son of God
may be glorified by it.” <span id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412)
There are also other sorts of vengeance, with which some who have
overpassed the bounds of wickedness are smitten in this life, as we read
that Dathan and Abiram or Korah were punished, or above all, those of
whom the Apostle speaks: “Wherefore God gave them up to vile passions
and a reprobate mind:” <span id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413) and
this must be counted worse than all other punishments. For of these the
Psalmist says: “They are not in the labours of men; neither shall they
be scourged like other men.” <span id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414)
For they are not worthy of being healed by the visitation of the Lord
which gives life, and by plagues in this world, as “in despair they have
given themselves over to lasciviousness, unto the working of all error
unto uncleanness,” <span id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415) and as by
hardening their hearts, and by growing accustomed and used to sin they
have got beyond cleansing in this brief life and punishment in the
present world: men, who are thus reproved by the holy word of the
prophet: “I destroyed some of you, as God destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah,
and you were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet you returned
not to Me, saith the Lord,” <span id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416)
and Jeremiah: “I have killed and destroyed thy people, and yet they are
not returned from their ways.” <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417) And again: “Thou hast smitten them
and they have not grieved: Thou hast bruised them and they refused to
receive correction: they have made their faces harder than the rock,
they have refused to return.” <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418)
And the prophet seeing that all the remedies of this life will have been
applied in vain for their healing, and already as it were despairing of
their life, declares: “The bellows have failed in the fire, the founder
hath melted in vain: for their wicked deeds are not consumed. Call them
reprobate silver, for the Lord hath rejected them.” <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419) And the Lord thus laments that to
no purpose has He applied this salutary cleansing by fire to those who
are hardened in their sins, in the person of Jerusalem crusted all over
with the rust of her sins, when He says: “set it empty upon burning
coals, that it may be hot, and the brass thereof may be melted; and let
the filth of it be melted in the midst thereof. Great pains have been
taken, and the great rust thereof is not gone out, no not even by fire.
Thy uncleanness is execrable: because I desired to cleanse thee, and
thou art not cleansed from thy filthiness.” <span
id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420) Wherefore like a skilful physician,
who has tried all saving cures, and sees there is no remedy left which
can be applied to their disease, the Lord is in a manner overcome by
their iniquities and is obliged to desist from that kindly chastisement
of His, and so denounces them saying: “I will no longer be angry with
thee, and thy jealousy has departed from thee.” <span
id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421) But of others, whose heart has not
grown hard by continuance in sin, and who do not stand in need of that
most severe and (if I may so call it) caustic remedy, but for whose
salvation the instruction of the life-giving word is sufficient—of <span
id="page_359">p. 359</span> <span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-Page_359"></span>them
it is said: “I will improve them by hearing of their suffering.” <span
id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422) We are well aware that there are
other reasons also of the punishment and vengeance which is inflicted on
those who have sinned grievously—not to expiate their crimes, nor wipe
out the deserts of their sins, but that the living may be put in fear
and amend their lives. And these we plainly see were inflicted on
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and Baasha the son of Ahiah, and Ahab and
Jezebel, when the Divine reproof thus declares: “Behold, I will bring
evil upon thee, and will cut down thy posterity, and will kill of Ahab
every male, and him that is shut up and the last in Israel. And I will
make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat and like the
house of Baasha the son of Ahiah: for that which thou hast done to
provoke Me to anger, and for making Israel to sin. The dogs also shall
eat Jezebel in the field of Jezreel. If Ahab die in the city, the dogs
shall eat him: but if he die in the field the birds of the air shall eat
him,” <span id="fr_1423"></span>[1424](#fn_1423) and this which is
threatened as the greatest threat of all: “Thy dead body shall not be
brought to the sepulchre of thy fathers.” <span
id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424) It was not that this short and
momentary punishment would suffice to purge away the blasphemous
inventions of him who first made the golden calves and led to the
lasting sin of the people, and their wicked separation from the Lord,—or
the countless and disgraceful profanities of those others, but it was
that by their example the fear of those punishments which they dreaded
might fall on others also, who, as they thought little of the future or
even disbelieved in it altogether, would only be moved by consideration
of things present; and that owing to this proof of His severity they
might acknowledge that there is no lack of care for the affairs of men,
and for their daily doings, in the majesty of God on high, and so
through that which they greatly feared might the more clearly see in God
the rewarder of all their deeds. We find, it is true, that even for
lighter faults some men have received the same sentence of death in this
world, as that with which those men were punished who, as we said
before, were the authors of a blasphemous falling away: as happened in
the case of the man who gathered sticks on the Sabbath, <span
id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425) and in that of Ananias and
Sapphira, who through the sin of unbelief kept back some portion of
their goods: not that the guilt of their sins was equal, but because
they were the first found out in a new kind of transgression, and so it
was right that as they had given to others an example of sin, so also
they should give them an example of punishment and of fear, that anyone,
who should attempt to copy them, might know that (even if his punishment
were postponed in this life) he would be punished in the same way that
they were at the trial of the judgment hereafter. And, since in our
desire to run through the different kinds of trials and punishments we
seem to have wandered somewhat from our subject, on which we were saying
that the perfect man will always remain steadfast in either kind of
trial, now let us return to it once more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[357:1398](2110702.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p3"></span> [Deut. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[357:1399](2110702.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p4"></span> [Psa.
81.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[357:1400](2110702.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p5"></span> [Job xl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p5.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[357:1401](2110702.htm#fr_1400) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p6"></span> [Psa.
34.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[358:1402](2110702.htm#fr_1401) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p7"></span> [Heb. xii.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[358:1403](2110702.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p8"></span> [Rev. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[358:1404](2110702.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p9"></span> [Jer. xxx.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[358:1405](2110702.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p10"></span> [Psa.
26.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[358:1406](2110702.htm#fr_1405) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p11"></span> The passage is not from Isaiah, but
from [Jer. x. 24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[358:1407](2110702.htm#fr_1406) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p12"></span> [Is. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[358:1408](2110702.htm#fr_1407) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p13"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[358:1409](2110702.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p14"></span> [Jer. ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[358:1410](2110702.htm#fr_1409) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p15"></span> [Psa.
32.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[358:1411](2110702.htm#fr_1410) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p16"></span> S. [John v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[358:1412](2110702.htm#fr_1411) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p17"></span> S. [John ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[358:1413](2110702.htm#fr_1412) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p18"></span> S. [John xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[358:1414](2110702.htm#fr_1413) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p19"></span> [Rom.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[358:1415](2110702.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p20"></span> [Psa.
73.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[358:1416](2110702.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p21"></span> [Eph. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[358:1417](2110702.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p22"></span> [Amos iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[358:1418](2110702.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p23"></span> [Jer. xv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[358:1419](2110702.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p24"></span> [Jer. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[358:1420](2110702.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p25"></span> [Jer.
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[358:1421](2110702.htm#fr_1420) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p26"></span> [Ezek. xxiv.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[358:1422](2110702.htm#fr_1421) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p27"></span> [Ezek. xvi.
42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[359:1423](2110702.htm#fr_1422) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p28"></span> [Hos. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p28.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[359:1424](2110702.htm#fr_1423) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p29"></span> [1 Kings xxi.
21-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[359:1425](2110702.htm#fr_1424) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p30"></span> [1 Kings xiii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[359:1426](2110702.htm#fr_1425) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p31"></span> Cf. [Numb. xv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xi-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. How the upright man ought to be like a stamp not of
wax but of hard steel.](2110703)
