[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110229)  [Next](2110231.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xli"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xli-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLI.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xli-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xli-p1.1"></span>Accordingly</span>, the emperor orders a
Synod to assemble at Ariminum, a city of Italy, and instructs Taurus the
prefect, not to let them separate, after they were once assembled, until
they should agree as to one faith, at the same time promising him the
consulship, if he carried the affair to a successful termination.
Imperial <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375.md) officers, therefore,
being sent through Illyria, Italy, Africa, and the two Gauls, four
hundred and rather more Western bishops were summoned or compelled to
assemble at Ariminum; and for all of these the emperor had ordered
provisions <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376.md) and lodgings to be
provided. But that appeared unseemly to the men of our part of the
world, that is, to the Aquitanians, the Gauls, and Britons, so that
refusing the public supplies, they preferred to live at their own
expense. Three only of those from Britain, through want of means of
their own, made use of the public bounty, after having refused
contributions offered by the rest; for they thought it more dutiful to
burden the public treasury than individuals. I have heard that Gavidius,
our bishop, was accustomed to refer to this conduct in a censuring sort
of way, but I would be inclined to judge far otherwise; and I hold it
matter of admiration that the bishops had nothing of their own, while
they did not accept assistance from others rather than from the public
treasury, so that they burdened nobody. In both points, they thus
furnished us with noble example. Nothing worthy of mention is recorded
of the others; but I return to the subject in hand. After all the
bishops had been collected together, as we have said, a separation of
parties took place. Our friends <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377.md)
take possession of the church, while the Arians select, as a place for
prayer, a temple which was then intentionally standing empty. But these
did not amount to more than eighty persons: the rest belonged to our
party. Well, after frequent meetings had been held, nothing was really
<span id="page_117">p. 117</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xli-Page_117"></span>accomplished, our friends continuing
in the faith, and the others not abandoning their unfaithfulness. At
length it was resolved to send ten deputies to the emperor, that he
might learn what was the faith or opinion of the parties, and might know
that there could be no peace with heretics. The Arians do the same
thing, and send a like number of deputies, who should contend with our
friends in the presence of the emperor. But on the part of our people,
young men of but little learning and little prudence had been selected;
while, on the side of the Arians, old men were sent, skillful and
abounding in talent, thoroughly imbued, too, with their old unfaithful
doctrines; and these easily got the upper hand with the prince. But our
friends had been specially charged not to enter into any kind of
communion with the Arians, and to reserve every point, in its entirety,
for discussion in a Synod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_375"></span>[116:376](2110230.htm#fr_375.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xli-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xli-p2"></span> “magistris officialibus”: Halm reads
“magistri.”

<span id="fn_376"></span>[116:377](2110230.htm#fr_376.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xli-p3"></span> “annonas et cellaria.”

<span id="fn_377"></span>[116:378](2110230.htm#fr_377.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xli-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xli-p4"></span> Of course, the Catholics, or
orthodox.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLII.](2110231.md)
