[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110795)  [Next](2110797.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.x.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxvi-p1"></span>Of the different causes of conviction.

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.x.xxvi-p2.1"></span>But</span> who is able, with whatever
experience he may be endowed, to give a sufficient account of the
varieties and reasons and grounds of conviction, by which the mind is
inflamed and set on fire and incited to pure and most fervent prayers?
And of these we will now by way of specimen set forth a few, as far as
we can by God’s enlightenment recollect them. For sometimes a verse of
any one of the Psalms gives us an occasion of ardent prayer while we are
singing. Sometimes the harmonious modulation of a brother’s voice stirs
up the minds of dullards to intense supplication. We know also that the
enunciation and the reverence of the chanter adds greatly to the fervour
of those who stand by. Moreover the exhortation of a perfect man, and a
spiritual conference has often raised the affections of those present to
the richest prayer. We know too that by the death of a brother or some
one dear to us, we are no less carried away to full conviction. The
recollection also of our coldness and carelessness has sometimes aroused
in us a healthful fervour of spirit. And in this way no one can doubt
that numberless opportunities are not wanting, by which through God’s
grace the coldness and sleepiness of our minds can be shaken off.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. Of the different sorts of conviction.](2110797.md)
