[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110149)  [Next](2110151.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xvi-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xvi-p1.1"></span>Then</span> Moses, exulting in the safety
of his own people, and in the destruction of the enemy, by such a
miracle, <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278.md) sang a song of praise
to God, and the whole multitude, both of males and females, took part in
it. But, after they had entered the desert, and advanced a journey of
three days, want of water distressed them; and, when it was found, it
proved of no use on <span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.xvi-Page_78"></span>account of its bitterness. And then for
the first time the stubbornness of the impatient people showed itself,
and burst forth against Moses; when, as instructed by God, he cast some
wood into the waters, and its power was such that it rendered the taste
of the fluid sweet. Thence advancing, the multitude found at Elim twelve
fountains of waters, with seventy palm-trees, and there they encamped.
Again the people, complaining of famine, heaped reproaches upon Moses,
and longed for the slavery of Egypt, accompanied as it was with
abundance to please their appetite, when a flock of quails was divinely
sent, and filled the camp. Besides, on the following day, those who had
gone forth from the camp perceived that the ground was covered with a
sort of pods, <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md) the appearance of
which was like a coriander-seed of snowy whiteness, as we often see the
earth in the winter months covered with the hoar-frost that has been
spread over it. Then the people were informed, through Moses, that this
bread had been sent them by the gift of God; that every one should
gather in vessels prepared for the purpose only so much of it as would
be sufficient for each, according to their number, during one day; but
that on the sixth day they should gather double, because it was not
lawful to collect it on the Sabbath. The people, however, as they were
never prone to obedience, did not, in accordance with human nature,
restrain their desires, providing in their stores not merely for one,
but also for the following day. But that which was thus laid up swarmed
with worms, while its fetid odor was dreadful, yet that which was laid
up on the sixth day with a view to the Sabbath remained quite untainted.
The Hebrews made use of this food for forty years; its taste was very
like that of honey; and its name is handed down as being *manna*.
Moreover, as an abiding witness to the divine gift, Moses is related to
have laid up a full gomer of it in a golden vessel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_278"></span>[77:279](2110150.htm#fr_278.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xvi-p2"></span> “Virtute.”

<span id="fn_279"></span>[78:280](2110150.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xvi-p3"></span> This is a somewhat strange description
of the manna. Hornius remarks upon it that there may be a reference to
the dew in which the Hebrews believed the manna to have been enveloped,
but that seems a far-fetched explanation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.](2110151.md)
