[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110235)  [Next](2110237.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlvii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xlvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLVII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlvii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>So</span>, then, after many
controversies among them, which are not worthy of mention, a Synod was
assembled at Saragossa, at which even the Aquitanian bishops were
present. But the heretics did not venture to submit themselves to the
judgment of the council; sentence, however, was passed against them in
their absence, and Instantius and Salvianus, bishops, with Helpidius and
Priscillian, laymen, were condemned. It was also added that if any one
should admit the <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlvii-Page_120"></span>condemned persons to communion, he
should understand that the same sentence would be pronounced against
himself. And the duty was entrusted to Ithacius, bishop of Sossuba, of
seeing that the decree of the bishops was brought to the knowledge of
all, and that Hyginus especially should be excluded from communion, who,
though he had been the first to commence open proceedings against the
heretics, had afterwards fallen away shamefully and admitted them to
communion. In the meantime, Instantius and Salvianus, having been
condemned by the judgment of the priests, appoint as bishop in the town
of Arles, Priscillian, a layman indeed, but the leader in all these
troubles, and who had been condemned along with themselves in the Synod
at Saragossa. This they did with the view of adding to their strength,
doubtless imagining that, if they armed with sacerdotal authority a man
of bold and subtle character, they would find themselves in a safer
position. But then Ydacius and Ithacius pressed forward their measures
more ardently, in the belief that the mischief might be suppressed at
its beginning. With unwise counsels, however, they applied to secular
judges, that by their decrees and prosecutions the heretics might be
expelled from the cities. Accordingly, after many disgraceful squabbles,
a rescript was, on the entreaty of Ydacius, obtained from Gratianus, who
was then emperor, in virtue of which all heretics were enjoined not only
to leave churches or cities, but to be driven forth beyond all the
territory under <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388.md) his
jurisdiction. When this edict became known, the Gnostics, distrusting
their own affairs, did not venture to oppose the judgment, but those of
them who bore the name of bishops gave way of their own accord, while
fear scattered the rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_388"></span>[120:389](2110236.htm#fr_388.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlvii-p2"></span> The text has merely “extra omnes
terras.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII.](2110237.md)
