[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110225)  [Next](2110227) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxvii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxvii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>When</span>, after an interval of some
time had elapsed, Athanasius, finding that Marcellus was by no means
sound in the faith, suspended him from communion. And he had this degree
of modesty, that, being censured by the judgment of so great a man, he
voluntarily gave way. But though at a former period innocent, yet
confessedly afterwards becoming heretical, it may be allowed to conclude
that he was really then guilty when judgment was pronounced regarding
him. The Arians, then, finding an opportunity of that kind, conspire to
subvert altogether the decrees of the Synod of Sardes. For a certain
coloring of right seemed to be furnished them in this fact, that a
favorable judgment had as unjustly been formed on the side of
Athanasius, as Marcellus had been improperly acquitted, since now, even
in the opinion of Athanasius himself, he was deemed a heretic. For
Marcellus had stood forward as an upholder of the Sabellian
heresy. <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) But Photinus had already
brought forward a new heresy, differing indeed from Sabellius with
respect to the union of the divine persons, but proclaiming that Christ
had his beginning in Mary. The Arians, therefore, with cunning design,
mix up what was harmless with what was blameworthy, and embrace, under
the same judgment, the condemnation of Photinus, and Marcellus, and
Athanasius. They undoubtedly did this with the view of leading the minds
of the ignorant to conclude, that those had not judged incorrectly
regarding Athanasius, who, it was admitted, had expressed a well-based
opinion respecting Marcellus and Photinus. At that time, however, the
Arians concealed their treachery; and not daring openly to proclaim
their erroneous doctrines, they professed themselves Catholics. They
thought that their first great object should be to get Athanasius turned
out of the church, who had always presented a wall of opposition to
their endeavors, and they hoped that, if he were removed, the rest would
pass over to their evil <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) opinion.
Now, that part of the bishops which followed the Arians accepted the
condemnation of Athanasius with delight. Another part, constrained by
fear and faction, yielded to the wish of the Arian party; and only a
few, to <span id="page_115">p. 115</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxvii-Page_115"></span>whom the true faith was dearer than
any other consideration, refused to accept their unjust judgment. Among
these was Paulinus, the bishop of Treves. It is related that he, when a
letter on the subject was placed before him, thus wrote, that he gave
his consent to the condemnation of Photinus and Marcellus, but did not
approve that of Athanasius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_369"></span>[114:370](2110226.htm#fr_369) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxvii-p2"></span> As Epiphanius remarks, Sabellius
taught that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were all the same person,
only under different appellations.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[114:371](2110226.htm#fr_370) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxvii-p3"></span> “libidinem.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII.](2110227)
