[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110183)  [Next](2110185) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.l"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.l-p0.1"></span>Chapter L.

<span id="ii.vi.i.l-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.l-p1.1"></span>To</span> him succeeded Ezekias his son, a
man very unlike his father in character. For, in the beginning of his
reign, urging the people and the priests to the worship of God, he
discoursed to them in many words, showing how often, after being
chastened by the Lord, they had obtained mercy, and how the ten tribes,
having been at last carried away into captivity, as had lately happened,
were now paying the penalty of their impiety. He added that their duty
was carefully to be on their guard lest they should deserve to suffer
the same things. Thus, the <span id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.l-Page_95"></span>minds of all being turned to religion, he
appointed the Levites and all the priests to offer sacrifices according
to the law, and arranged that the Passover, which had for a long time
been neglected, should be celebrated. And when the holy day was at hand,
he proclaimed the special day of assembly by messengers sent throughout
all the land, so that, if any had remained in Samaria, after the removal
of the ten tribes, they might gather together for the sacred observance.
Thus, in a very full assemblage, the sacred day was spent with public
rejoicing, and, after a long interval, the proper religious rites were
restored by means of Ezekias. He then carried on military affairs with
the same diligence with which he had attended to divine things, and
defeated the Philistines in frequent battles; until Sennacherim, king of
the Assyrians, made war against him, having entered his territories with
a large army; and then, when the country had been laid waste without any
opposition, he laid siege to the city. For Ezekias, being inferior in
numbers, did not venture to come to an engagement with him, but kept
himself safe within the walls. The king of Assyria, thundering at the
gates, threatened destruction, and demanded surrender, exclaiming that
in vain did Ezekias put his trust in God, for that he rather had taken
up arms by the appointment of God; and that the conqueror of all
nations, as well as the overthrower of Samaria could not be escaped,
unless the king secured his own safety by a speedy surrender. In this
state of affairs, Ezekias, trusting in God, consulted the prophet
Isaiah, and from his answer he learned that there would be no danger
from the enemy, and that the divine assistance would not fail him. And,
in fact, not long after, Tarraca, king of Ethiopia, invaded the kingdom
of the Assyrians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LI.](2110185)
