[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110972)  [Next](2110974) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.iii-p1"></span>Abbot John’s answer why he had left
the desert.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>The</span> system of the anchorites,
which you are surprised at my leaving, I not only neither reject nor
refuse, but rather embrace and regard with the utmost veneration: in
which system, and after I had passed thirty years living in a Cœnobium,
I rejoice that I have also spent twenty more, so that I can never be
accused of sloth among those who tried it in a half-hearted way. But
because its purity, of which I had had some slight experience, was
sometimes soiled by the presence of anxiety about carnal matters, it
seemed better to return to the Cœnobium to secure a readier attainment
of an easier aim undertaken, and less danger from venturing on the
higher life of the humble solitary. <span
id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) For it is better to seem earnest
with smaller promises than careless in larger ones. And therefore if
possibly I bring forward anything somewhat arrogantly and indeed
somewhat too freely, I beg that you will not think it due to the sin of
boasting but rather to my desire for your edification; and that, as I
think that, when you ask so earnestly, nothing of the truth should be
kept back from you, you will set it down to love rather than to
boasting. For I think that some instruction may be given to you if I lay
aside my humility, and simply lay bare the whole truth about my aim. For
I trust that I shall not incur any reproach of vainglory from you
because of the freedom of my words, nor any charge of falsehood from my
conscience because of any suppression of the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[490:2107](2110973.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.iii-p3"></span> The true reading, as given by
Petschenig, appears to be the following: *Et minus de præsumptæ
sublimioris professionis humilitate periculum*. It is probably on
account of its difficulty that *humilitate* has been altered into
*difficultate*, as in the text of Gazet (the two *humilitate
difficultate* are found together in some <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>mss.</span>). But the fact appears to be
that *humilitas* is here used for the life of an anchorite, as in
Conference XXIV. ix., where Abbot Abraham uses the expression
*districtionem hujus humilitatis*. The word is also used in a similar
sense in Conf. I. xx. and XI. ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Of the excellence which the aforesaid old man showed
in the system of the anchorites.](2110974)
