[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110653)  [Next](2110655.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xiii-p1"></span>Of the advantage of the delay which
results from the struggle between flesh and spirit.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.xiii-p2.1"></span>But</span> from the differences which this
conflict causes, there arises a delay that is so far advantageous to us,
and from this struggle an adjournment that is for our good, so that
while through the resistance of the material body we are hindered from
carrying out those things which we have wickedly conceived with our
minds, we are sometimes recalled to a better mind either by penitence
springing up, or by some better thoughts which usually come to us when
delay in carrying out things, and time for reflection intervene. Lastly,
those who, as we know, are not prevented from carrying out the desires
of their free will by any hindrances of the flesh, I mean devils and
spiritual wickednesses, these, since they have fallen from a higher and
angelical state, we see are in a worse plight than men, much in as much
as (owing to the fact that opportunity is always present to gratify
their desires) they are not delayed from irrevocably performing whatever
evil they have imagined because as their mind is quick to conceive it,
so their substance is ready and free to carry it out; and while a short
and easy method is given them of doing what they wish, no salutary
second thoughts come in to amend their wicked intention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Of the incurable depravity of spiritual
wickednesses.](2110655.md)
