[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110731)  [Next](2110733) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.viii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxiii-p1"></span>Of the diminished power of the
devils.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.viii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>But</span> we have thoroughly
discovered both by our own experience and by the testimony of the Elders
that the devils have not now the same power as they had formerly during
the early days of the anchorites, when yet there were only a few monks
living in the desert. For such was their fierceness that it was with
difficulty that a few very steadfast men, and those advanced in years
were able to endure a life of solitude. Since in the actual monasteries
where eight or ten men used to live, their violence attacked them so and
their assaults were experienced so frequently, and so visibly, that they
did not dare all to go to bed at once by night, but took turns and while
some snatched a little sleep, others kept watch and devoted themselves
to Psalms and prayer and reading. And when the wants of nature compelled
them to sleep, they awoke the others, and committed to them in like
manner the duty of keeping watch over those who were going to bed.
Whence we cannot doubt that one of two things has brought about this
result not only in the case of us who seem to be fairly strong from the
experience which our age gives us, but also in the case of younger men
as well. For either the malice of the devils has been beaten back by the
power of the cross penetrating even to the desert, and by its grace
which shines everywhere; or else our carelessness makes them relax
something of their first onslaught, as they scorn to attack us with the
same energy with which they formerly raged against those most admirable
soldiers of Christ; and by this deceit and ceasing from open attacks
they do us still more damage. For we see that some have fallen into so
sluggish a condition that they have to be coaxed by too gentle
exhortations for fear lest they should forsake their cells and fall into
more dangerous troubles, and wander and stray about and be entangled in
what I would call grosser sins; and it is thought that a great thing is
got from them if they can even with some listlessness remain in the
desert, and the Elders often say to them as a great relief: Stop in your
cells, and eat and drink and sleep as much as you like, <span
id="fr_1488"></span>[1489](#fn_1488) if only you will stay in them
always.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[370:1489](2110732.htm#fr_1488) <span
id="iv.iv.viii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxiii-p3"></span> So centuries later it is told of
a Jesuit father that when one wanted to relax the strictness of his
fast, he replied, “Eat an ox, but be a Christian.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. Of the way in which the devils prepare for
themselves an entrance into the bodies of those whom they are going to
possess.](2110733)
