[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110871)  [Next](2110873) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.v.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.v.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.v.v.xii-p1"></span>A question how we can attain to
forgetfulness of the cares of this world.

<span id="iv.v.v.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.v.xii-p2.1"></span>Upon</span> this I was at first moved by a
secret emotion, and then groaned deeply and said, All these things which
you have set forth so fully have affected me with still greater despair
than that which I had previously endured: as besides those general
captivities of the soul whereby I doubt not that weak people are smitten
from without, a special hindrance to salvation is added by that
knowledge of literature which I seem already to have in some slight
measure attained, in which the efforts of my tutor, or my attention to
continual reading have so weakened me that now my mind is filled with
those songs of the poets so that even at the hour of prayer it is
thinking about those trifling fables, and the stories of battles with
which from its earliest infancy it was stored by its childish lessons:
and when singing Psalms or asking forgiveness of sins either some wanton
recollection of the poems intrudes itself or the images of heroes
fighting presents itself before the eyes, and an imagination of such
phantoms is always tricking me and does not suffer my soul to aspire to
an insight into things above, so that this cannot be got rid of by my
daily lamentations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Of the method by which we can remove the dross from
our memory.](2110873)
