[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110568)  [Next](2110570.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p1"></span>Of the question of Abbot Moses, who
asked what was the goal and what the end of the monk.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>All</span> the arts and sciences, said he,
have some goal or mark; and end or aim of their own, on which the
diligent pursuer of each art has his eye, and so endures all sorts of
toils and dangers and losses, cheerfully and with equanimity, e.g., the
farmer, shunning neither at one time the scorching heat of the sun, nor
at another the frost and cold, cleaves the earth unweariedly, and again
and again subjects the clods of his field to his ploughshare, while he
keeps before him his goal; viz., by diligent labour to break it up small
like fine sand, and to clear it of all briers, and free it from all
weeds, as he believes that in no other way can he gain his ultimate end,
which is to secure a good harvest, and a large crop; on which he can
either live himself free from care, or can increase his possessions.
Again, when his barn is well stocked he is quite ready to empty it, and
with incessant labour to commit the seed to the crumbling furrow,
thinking nothing of the present lessening of his stores in view of the
future harvest. Those men too who are engaged in mercantile pursuits,
have no dread of the uncertainties and chances of the ocean, and fear no
risks, while an eager hope urges them forward to their aim of gain.
Moreover those who are inflamed with the ambition of military life,
while they look forward to their aim of honours and power take no notice
of danger and destruction in their wanderings, and are not crushed by
present losses and wars, while they are eager to obtain the end of some
honour held out to them. And our profession too has its own goal and
end, for which we undergo all sorts of toils not merely without
weariness but actually with delight; on account of which the want of
food in fasting is no trial to us, the weariness of our vigils becomes a
delight; reading and constant meditation on the Scriptures does not pall
upon us; and further incessant toil, and self-denial, and the privation
of all things, and the horrors also of this vast desert have no terrors
for us. And doubtless for this it was that you yourselves despised the
love of <span id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ii.ii-Page_296"></span>kinsfolk, and scorned your fatherland,
and the delights of this world, and passed through so many countries, in
order that you might come to us, plain and simple folk as we are, living
in this wretched state in the desert. Wherefore, said he, answer and
tell me what is the goal and end, which incite you to endure all these
things so cheerfully.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of our reply.](2110570.md)
