[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110554)  [Next](2110556) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.xii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxiv-p1"></span>Who are attacked by spiritual and
who by carnal pride.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.xii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Thus</span> much let it suffice to have
spoken, as far as, by God’s help, our slender ability was able,
concerning spiritual pride of which we have said that it attacks
advanced Christians. And this kind of pride is not familiar to or
experienced by most men, because the majority do not aim at attaining
perfect purity of heart, so as to arrive at the stage of these
conflicts; nor have they secured any purification from the preceding
faults of which we have here explained both the character and the
remedies in separate books. But it generally attacks those only who have
conquered the former faults and have already almost arrived at the top
of the tree in respect of the virtues. And because our most crafty enemy
has not been able to destroy them through a carnal fall, he endeavours
to cast them down and overthrow them by a spiritual catastrophe, trying
by this to rob them of the prizes of their ancient rewards secured as
they were with great labour. But as for us, who are still entangled in
earthly passions, he never deigns to tempt us in this fashion, but
overthrows us by a coarser and what I called a carnal pride. And
therefore I think it well, as I promised, to say a few things about this
kind of pride by which we and men of our stamp are usually affected, and
the minds especially of younger men and beginners are endangered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. A description of carnal pride, and of the evils
which it produces in the soul of a monk.](2110556)
