[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110069)  [Next](2110071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>You</span> have conquered, O Gaul,” said
Postumianus, “you have conquered, although certainly not me, who am, on
the contrary, an upholder of Martin, and who have always known and
believed all these things about that man; but you have conquered all the
eremites and anchorites. For no one of them, like your friend, or rather
our friend, Martin, ruled over deaths of all <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) kinds. And Sulpitius there justly
compared him to the apostles and prophets, inasmuch as the power of his
faith, and the works accomplished by his power, bear witness that he
was, in all points, like them. But go on, I beg of you, although we can
hear nothing more striking than we have heard—still, go on, O Gaul, to
set forth what still remains of what you have to say concerning Martin.
For the mind is eager to know even the least and commonest of his
doings, since there is no doubt that the least of his actions surpass
the greatest deeds of others.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p3"></span>“I will do so,” replies the Gaul, “but I
did not myself witness what I am about to relate, for it took place
before I became an associate of Martin’s; still, the fact is well known,
having been spread through the world by the accounts given by faithful
brethren, who were present on the occasion. Well, just about the time
when he first became a bishop, a necessity arose for his visiting the
imperial <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) court. Valentinian, the
elder, then was at the head of affairs. When he came to know that Martin
was asking for things which he did not incline to grant, he ordered him
to be kept from entering the doors of the palace. Besides his own unkind
and haughty temper, his wife Arriana had urged him to this course, and
had wholly alienated him from the holy man, so that he should not show
him the regard which was due to him. Martin, accordingly, when he had
once and again endeavored to procure an interview with the haughty
prince, had recourse to his well-known weapons—he clothes himself in
sackcloth, scatters ashes upon his person, abstains from food and drink,
and gives himself, night and day, to continuous prayer. On the seventh
day, an angel appeared to him, and tells him to go with confidence to
the palace, for that the royal doors, although closed against him, would
open of their own accord, and that the haughty spirit of the emperor
would be softened. Martin, therefore, being encouraged by the address of
the angel who thus appeared to him, and trusting to his assistance, went
to the palace. The doors stood open, and no one opposed his <span
id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.v-Page_41"></span>entrance;
so that, going in, he came at last into the presence of the king,
without any one seeking to hinder him. The king, however, seeing him at
a distance as he approached, and gnashing his teeth that he had been
admitted, did not, by any means, condescend to rise up as Martin
advanced, until fire covered the royal seat, and until the flames seized
on a part of the royal person. In this way the haughty monarch is driven
from his throne, and, much against his will, rises up to receive Martin.
He even gave many embraces to the man whom he had formerly determined to
despise, and, coming to a better frame of mind, he confessed that he
perceived the exercise of Divine power; without waiting even to listen
to the requests of Martin, he granted all he desired before being asked.
Afterwards the king often invited the holy man both to conferences and
entertainments; and, in the end, when he was about to depart, offered
him many presents, which, however, the blessed man, jealously
maintaining his own poverty, totally refused, as he did on all similar
occasions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_116"></span>[40:117](2110070.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p2"></span> “mortibus.”

<span id="fn_117"></span>[40:118](2110070.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="ii.iv.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii.v-p4"></span> “adire comitatum”: this is a common
meaning of *comitatus* in writers of the period.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.](2110071.md)
