[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110762)  [Next](2110764.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ix.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xix-p1"></span>Of the fact that devils cannot prevail
at all against men unless they have first secured possession of their
minds.

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ix.xix-p2.1"></span>And</span> when in their astonishment at
this they came straight to Abbot Antony and disclosed the extent of
their attacks and the reason of them and their plots, they dissembled
their jealousy and asked that they might forthwith be made Christians.
But when he had asked of them the day when the assault was made, he
declared that at that time he had been afflicted with the most bitter
pangs of thought. And by this experience the blessed Antony proved and
established the opinion which we expressed yesterday in our Conference,
that demons cannot possibly find an entrance into the mind or body of
anyone, nor have they the power of overwhelming the soul of anyone,
unless they have first deprived it of all holy thoughts, and made it
empty and free from spiritual meditation. But you must know that unclean
spirits are obedient to men in two ways. For either they are by divine
grace and power subject to the holiness of the faithful, or they are
captivated by the sacrifices of sinners, and certain charms, and are
flattered by them as their worshippers. And the Pharisees too were led
astray by this notion and fancied that by this device even the Lord the
Saviour gave commands to devils, and said “By Beelzebub the prince of
the devils He casteth out devils,” in accordance with that plan by which
they knew that their own magicians and enchanters—by invoking his name
and offering sacrifices, with which they know he is pleased and
delighted—have as his servants power even over the devils who are
subject to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. A question about the fallen angels who are said in
Genesis to have had intercourse with the daughters of men.](2110764.md)
