[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110562)  [Next](2110564.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxxii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.xii.xxxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXII.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxxii-p1"></span>How pride which is so destructive
of all virtues can itself be destroyed by true humility.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxxii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.xii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> the Christian athlete
who strives lawfully in the spiritual combat and desires to be crowned
by the Lord, should endeavour by every means to destroy this most fierce
beast, which is destructive of all virtues, knowing that as long as this
remains in his breast he not only will never be free from all kinds of
evils, but even if he seems to have any good qualities, will lose them
by its malign influence. For no structure (so to speak) of virtue can
possibly be raised in our soul unless first the foundations of true
humility are laid in our heart, which being securely laid may be able to
bear the weight of perfection and love upon them in such a way that, as
we have said, we may first show to our brethren true humility from the
very bottom of our heart, in nothing acquiescing in making them sad or
in injuring them: and this we cannot possibly manage unless true
self-denial, which consists in stripping and depriving ourselves of all
our possessions, is implanted in us by the love of Christ. Next the yoke
of obedience and subjection must be taken up in simplicity of heart
without any pretence, so that, except for the commands of the Abbot, no
will of our own is alive in us. But this can only be ensured in the case
of one who considers himself not only dead to this world, but also
unwise and a fool; and performs without any discussion whatever is
enjoined him by his seniors, believing it to be divine and enjoined from
heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII. Remedies against the evil of pride.](2110564.md)
