[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110014)  [Next](2110016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p1"></span>Martin demolishes an Altar consecrated to
a Robber.

<span id="ii.ii.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xii-p2.1"></span>But</span> let me proceed to a description of
other excellences which Martin displayed as a bishop. There was, not far
from the town, a place very close to the monastery, which a false human
opinion had consecrated, on the supposition that some martyrs had been
buried together there. For it was also believed that an altar had been
placed there by former bishops. But Martin, not inclined to give a hasty
belief to things uncertain, often asked from those who were his elders,
whether among the presbyters or clerics, that the name of the martyr, or
the time when he suffered, should be made known to him. He did so, he
said, because he had great scruples on these points, inasmuch as no
steady tradition respecting them had come down from antiquity. Having,
therefore, for a time kept away from the place, by no means wishing to
lessen the religious veneration with which it was regarded, because he
was as yet uncertain, but, at the same time not lending his authority to
the opinion of the multitude, lest a mere superstition should obtain a
firmer footing, he one day went out to the place, taking a few brethren
with him as companions. There standing above the very sepulchre, Martin
prayed to the Lord that he would reveal, who the man in question was,
and what was his character or desert. Next turning to the left-hand
side, he sees standing very near a shade of a mean and cruel appearance.
Martin commands him to tell his name and character. Upon this, he
declares his name, and confesses his guilt. He says that he had been a
robber, and that he was beheaded on account of his crimes; that he had
been honored simply by an error of the multitude; that he had nothing in
common with the martyrs, since glory was their portion, while punishment
exacted its penalties from him. Those who stood by heard, in a wonderful
way, the voice of the speaker, but they beheld no person. Then Martin
made known what he had seen, and ordered the altar which had been there
to be removed, and thus he delivered the people from the error of that
superstition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Martin causes the Bearers of a Dead Body to
stop.](2110016.md)
