[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110045)  [Next](2110047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.ix"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="ii.iv.i.ix-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.ix-p1.1"></span>But</span> as to familiarities which take
place between virgins and monks, or even clerics, how true and how
courageous were his words! And, on account of these, he is said not to
stand high in favor with certain people whom I am unwilling to name.
For, as our Belgian friend is angry that we were accused of too great
fondness for eating, so those people, again, are said to express their
rage when they find it written in that little work,—‘The virgin despises
her true unmarried brother, and seeks a stranger.’”

<span id="ii.iv.i.ix-p2"></span>Upon this I exclaim, “You are going too
far, my Gallic friend: take heed lest some one who perhaps owns to these
things, hear what you are saying, and begin to hold you, along with
Hieronymus, in no great affection. For, since you are a learned <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) man, not unreasonably will I admonish you
in the verse of that comic poet who says,—‘Submission procures friends,
while truth gives rise to hatred.’ Let rather, Postumianus, your
discourse to us about the East, so well begun, now be resumed.”

<span id="ii.iv.i.ix-p4"></span>“Well,” says he, “as I had commenced to
relate, I stayed with Hieronymus six months, who carried on an unceasing
warfare against the wicked, and a perpetual struggle in opposition to
the deadly hatred of ungodly men. The heretics hate him, because he
never desists from attacking them; the clerics hate him, because he
assails their life and crimes. But beyond doubt, all the good admire and
love him; for those people are out of their senses, who suppose that he
is a heretic. Let me tell the truth on this point, which is that the
knowledge of the man is Catholic, and that his doctrine is sound. He is
always occupied in reading, always at his books with his whole heart: he
takes no rest day or night; he is perpetually either reading or writing
something. In fact, had I not been resolved in mind, and had promised to
God first to visit <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) the desert
previously referred to, I should have grudged to depart even for the
shortest time from so great a man. Handing over, then, and entrusting to
him all my possessions and my whole family, which having followed me
against my own inclination, kept me in a state of embarrassment, and
thus being in a sort of way delivered from a heavy burden, and restored
to freedom of action, I returned to Alexandria, and having visited the
brethren there I set out from the place for upper Thebais, that is for
the farthest off confines of Egypt. For a great multitude of monks were
said to inhabit the widely extending solitudes of that wilderness. But
here it would be tedious, were I to seek to narrate all the things which
I witnessed: I shall only touch lightly on a few points.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[28:97](2110046.htm#fr_96) <span
id="ii.iv.i.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.ix-p3"></span> “scholasticus.”

<span id="fn_97"></span>[28:98](2110046.htm#fr_97) <span
id="ii.iv.i.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.ix-p5"></span> “propositam eremum.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.](2110047)
