[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110966)  [Next](2110968.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.ii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xiv-p1"></span>Of the example of patience given by a
certain religious woman.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>Of</span> this patience then I want to
give you at least two examples: one of a certain religious woman, who
aimed at the virtue of patience so eagerly that she not only did not
avoid the assaults of temptation, but actually made for herself
occasions of trouble that she might not cease to be tried more often.
For this woman as she was living at Alexandria and was born of no mean
ancestors, and was serving the Lord religiously in the house which had
been left to her by her parents, came to Athanasius the Bishop, of
blessed memory, and entreated him to give her some other widow to
support, who was being provided for at the expense of the Church. And,
to give her petition in her own words: “Give me,” she said, “one of the
sisters to look after.” When then the Bishop had commended the woman’s
purpose because he saw that she was very ready for a work of a mercy, he
ordered a widow to be chosen out of the whole number, who was preferred
to all the rest for the goodness of her character, and her grave and
well-regulated life, for fear lest her wish to be liberal might be
overcome by the fault of the recipient of her bounty, and she who sought
gain out of the poor might be disgusted at her bad character and so
suffer an injury to her faith. And when the woman was brought home, she
ministered to her with all kinds of service, and found out her excellent
modesty and gentleness, and saw that every minute she was honoured by
thanks from her for her kind offices, and so after a few days she came
back to the aforesaid Bishop, and said: I asked you to bid that a woman
be given to me for me to support and to serve with obedient
complaisance. And when he, not yet understanding the woman’s object and
desire, thought that her petition had been neglected by the
deceitfulness of the superior, and inquired not without some anger in
his mind, what was the reason of the delay, at once he discovered that a
widow who was better than all the rest had been assigned to her, and so
he secretly gave orders that the one who was the worst of all should be
given to her, the one, I mean, who surpassed in anger and quarrelling
and wine-bibbing and talkativeness all who were under the power of these
faults. And when she was only too easily found and given to her, she
began to keep her at home, and to minister to her with the same care as
to the former widow, or even more attentively, and this was all the
thanks which she got from her for her services; viz., to be constantly
tried by unworthy wrongs and continually annoyed by her by reproaches
and upbraiding, as she complained of her, and chid her with spiteful and
disparaging remarks, because she had asked for her from the Bishop not
for her refreshment but rather for her torment and annoyance, and had
taken her away from rest to labour instead of from labour to rest. When
then her continual re<span id="page_486">p. 486</span> <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xiv-Page_486"></span>proaches broke out so far that the
wanton woman did not restrain herself from laying hands on her, the
other only redoubled her services in still humbler offices, and learnt
to overcome the vixen not by resisting her, but by subjecting herself
still more humbly, so that, when provoked by all kinds of indignities,
she might smooth down the madness of the shrew by gentleness and
kindness. And when she had been thoroughly strengthened by these
exercises, and had attained the perfect virtue of the patience she had
longed for, she came to the aforesaid Bishop to thank him for his
decision and choice as well as for the blessing of her exercise, because
he had at last as she wished provided her with a most worthy mistress
for her patience, strengthened daily by whose constant annoyance as by
some oil for wrestling, she had arrived at complete patience of mind;
and, at last, said she, you have given me one to support, for the former
one rather honoured and refreshed me by her services. This may be
sufficient to have told about the female sex, that by this tale we may
not only be edified, but even confounded, as we cannot maintain our
patience unless we are like wild beasts removed in caves and cells.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Of the example of patience given by Abbot
Paphnutius.](2110968.md)
