[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110085)  [Next](2110087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>I am</span> enraged in heart, believe me,
and, through vexation, I seem to lose my senses: do Christian men not
believe in the miraculous powers of Martin, which the demons
acknowledged?

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p2"></span>“The monastery of the blessed man was
at two miles’ distance from the city; but if, as often as he was to come
to the church, he only had set his foot outside the threshold of his
cell, one could perceive the possessed roaring through the whole church,
and the bands of guilty <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) ones
trembling as if their judge were coming, so that the groanings of the
demons announced the approach of the bishop to the clerics, who were not
previously aware that he was coming. I saw a certain man snatched up
into the air on the approach of Martin, and suspended there with his
hands stretched upwards, so that he could in no way touch the ground
with his feet. But if at any time Martin undertook the duty of
exorcising the demons, he touched no one with his hands, and reproached
no one in words, as a multitude of expressions is generally rolled forth
by the clerics; but the possessed, being brought up to <span
id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-Page_49"></span>him, he
ordered all others to depart, and the doors being bolted, clothed in
sackcloth and sprinkled with ashes, he stretched himself on the ground
in the midst of the church, and turned to prayer. Then truly might one
behold the wretched beings tortured with various results—some hanging,
as it were, from a cloud, with their feet turned upwards, and yet their
garments did not fall down over their faces, lest the part of their body
which was exposed should give rise to shame; while in another part of
the church one could see them tortured without any question being
addressed to them, and confessing their crimes. They revealed their
names, too, of their own accord; one acknowledged that he was Jupiter,
and another that he was Mercury. Finally, one could see all the servants
of the devil suffering agony, along with their master, so that we could
not help acknowledging that in Martin there was fulfilled that which is
written that ‘the saints shall judge angels.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[48:133](2110086.htm#fr_132) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p3"></span> “agmina damnanda.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.](2110087)
