[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110252)  [Next](2110254.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iii.xii-p1"></span>Examples from Church History, confirming
the words of Moses,—Nestorius, Photinus, Apollinaris.

<span id="iii.xii-p2"></span>\[29.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xii-p2.1"></span>Here</span>, perhaps, some one will require us
to illustrate the words of holy Moses by examples from Church History.
The demand is a fair one, nor shall it wait long for satisfaction.

<span id="iii.xii-p3"></span>For to take first a very recent and very
plain case: what sort of trial, think we, was that which the Church had
experience of the other day, when that unhappy Nestorius, <span
id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461.md) all at once metamorphosed from a sheep
into a wolf, began to make havoc of the flock of Christ, while as yet a
large proportion of those whom he was devouring believed him to be a
sheep, and consequently were the more exposed to his attacks? For who
would readily suppose him to be in error, who was known to have been
elected by the high choice of the Emperor, and to be held in the
greatest esteem by the priesthood? who would readily suppose him to be
in error, who, greatly beloved by the holy brethren, and in high favor
with the populace, expounded the Scriptures in public daily, and
confuted the pestilent errors both of Jews and Heathens? Who could
choose but believe that his teaching was Orthodox, his preaching
Orthodox, his belief Orthodox, who, that he might open the way to one
heresy of his own, was zealously inveighing against the blasphemies of
all heresies? But this was the very thing which Moses says: “The Lord
your God doth try you that He may know whether you love Him or not.”

<span id="iii.xii-p5"></span>\[30.\] Leaving Nestorius, in whom there
was always more that men admired than they were profited by, more of
show than of reality, whom natural ability, rather than divine grace,
magnified, for a time in the opinion of the common people, let us pass
on to speak of those who, being persons of great attainments and of much
industry, proved no small trial to Catholics. Such, for instance, was
Photinus, in Pannonia, <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462.md) who, in
the memory <span id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="iii.xii-Page_139"></span>of our fathers, is said to have been a
trial to the Church of Sirmium, where, when he had been raised to the
priesthood with universal approbation, and had discharged the office for
some time as a Catholic, all of a sudden, like that evil prophet or
dreamer of dreams whom Moses refers to, he began to persuade the people
whom God had intrusted, to his charge, to follow “strange gods,” that
is, strange errors, which before they knew not. But there was nothing
unusual in this: the mischief of the matter was, that for the
perpetration of so great wickedness he availed himself of no ordinary
helps. For he was of great natural ability and of powerful eloquence,
and had a wealth of learning, disputing and writing copiously and
forcibly in both languages, as his books which remain, composed partly
in Greek, partly in Latin, testify. But happily the sheep of Christ
committed to him, vigilant and wary for the Catholic faith, quickly
turned their eyes to the premonitory words of Moses, and, though
admiring the eloquence of their prophet and pastor, were not blind to
the trial. For from thenceforward they began to flee from him as a wolf,
whom formerly they had followed as the ram of the flock.

<span id="iii.xii-p7"></span>\[31.\] Nor is it only in the instance of
Photinus that we learn the danger of this trial to the Church, and are
admonished withal of the need of double diligence in guarding the faith.
Apollinaris <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463.md) holds out a like
warning. For he gave rise to great burning questions and sore
perplexities among his disciples, the Church’s authority drawing them
one way, their Master’s influence the opposite; so that, wavering and
tossed hither and thither between the two, they were at a loss what
course to take.

<span id="iii.xii-p9"></span>But perhaps he was a person of no weight of
character. On the contrary, he was so eminent and so highly esteemed
that his word would only too readily be taken on whatsoever subject. For
what could exceed his acuteness, his adroitness, his learning? How many
heresies did he, in many volumes, annihilate! How many errors, hostile
to the faith, did he confute! A proof of which is that most noble and
vast work, of not less than thirty books, in which, with a great mass of
arguments, he repelled the insane calumnies of Porphyry. <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464.md) It would take a long time to enumerate
all his works, which assuredly would have placed him on a level with the
very chief of the Church’s builders, if that profane lust of heretical
curiosity had not led him to devise I know not what novelty which as
though through the contagion of a sort of leprosy both defiled all his
labours, and caused his teachings to be pronounced the Church’s trial
instead of the Church’s edification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_461"></span>[138:462](2110253.htm#fr_461.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p4"></span> Nestorius was a native of Germanicia, a
town in the patriarchate of Antioch, of which Church he became a
Presbyter. On the See of Constantinople becoming vacant by the death of
Sisinnius, the Emperor Theodosius sent for him and caused him to be
consecrated Archbishop. He was at first extremely popular, and so
eloquent that people said of him (what was much to be said of a
successor of Chrysostom), that there had never before been such a
bishop. He was condemned by the Council of Ephesus, in 431. The emperor,
after ordering him to return to the monastery to which he formally
belonged, eventually banished him to the great Oasis, whence he was
harried from place to place till death put an end to his sufferings, in
440. *Evagrius*, I. 7.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[138:463](2110253.htm#fr_462.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p6"></span> Photinus, bishop of Sirmium in Pannonia,
was a native of Galatia, and a disciple of Marcellus of Ancyra. Bishop
Pearson (on the Creed, Art. 11) has an elaborate note, in which he
collects together many notices of him left by the ancients. These agree
with Vincentius in representing him as a man of extraordinary ability
and of consummate eloquence. His heresy consisted in the denial of our
blessed Lord’s divine nature, whom he regarded as man, and nothing more,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xii-p6.1"></span>ψιλὸς
ἄνθρωπος</span>, and as having had no existence before his birth of the
Virgin. He was condemned in several synods, the fifth of which, a
Council of the Western bishops, held at Sirmium, in 350, deposed him.
But in spite of the deposition, so great was his popularity, that he
could not even yet be removed. The following year however he was by
another council, held at the same place, again condemned, and sent into
banishment. He died in Galatia in 377. See Cave, *Hist. Lit*., who
refers with praise to a learned dissertation on Photinus by Larroque.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[139:464](2110253.htm#fr_463.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p8"></span> Apollinaris the younger (a contemporary of
Photinus), bishop of Laodicea in Syria, was one of the most
distinguished men of the age in which he lived. Epiphanius (*Hær*.
lxxvii. 2), referring to his fall into heresy, says that when it first
began to be spoken of, people would hardly credit it, so great was the
estimation in which he was held. His heresy, which consisted in the
denial of the verity of our Lord’s human nature, the Divine <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.xii-p8.1"></span>Word</span> supplying the
place of the rational soul, and in the assertion that his flesh was not
derived from the Virgin, but was brought down from heaven, was condemned
by the Council of Constantinople, in 381 (Canon I.). It was in reference
to the latter form of it that the clause “of the Holy Ghost and the
Virgin Mary” was inserted in the Nicene Creed.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[139:465](2110253.htm#fr_464.md) <span
id="iii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p10"></span> This work of which St. Jerome speaks in
high terms (*de Viris Illustr*., c. 104), has not come down to us, nor
indeed have his other writings, except in fragments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. A fuller account of the Errors of Photinus,
Apollinaris and Nestorius.](2110254.md)
