[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110211)  [Next](2110213.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>At</span> that time Judah besieged the
Syrians who were posted in the citadel. They, being sore pressed with
famine and want of all things, sent messengers to the king to implore
assistance. Accordingly, Eupator came to their aid with a hundred
thousand infantry and twenty thousand cavalry, while elephants marched
in front of his line, causing immense terror to the onlookers. Then
Judah, abandoning the siege, went to meet the king, and routed the
Syrians in the first battle. The king begged for peace, which,
because <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347.md) he, with his treacherous
disposition, made a bad use of, vengeance followed his treachery. For
Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, who, we have said above, was handed over
as a hostage to the Romans, when he heard that Antiochus had departed,
begged that they would send him to take possession of the kingdom. And
when this was refused to him, he secretly fled from Rome, came into
Syria, and seized the supreme power, having slain the son of Antiochus,
who had reigned one year and six months. It was during his reign that
the Jews first begged the friendship of the Roman people, and alliance
with them; and the embassy to this effect having been kindly received,
they were, by a decree of the senate, styled allies and friends. In the
meantime Demetrius was, by means of his generals, carrying on war
against Judah. And first the army was led by a certain man named
Bacchides, and by Alcimus, a Jew; Nicanor, being afterwards placed at
the head of the war, fell in battle. Then Bacchides and Alcimus,
recovering power, and having increased their forces, fought against
Judah. The Syrians, turning out victorious in that battle, cruelly
abused their victory. The Hebrews elect Jonathan, the brother of Judah,
in his place. In the meantime, Alcimus, after he had fearfully desolated
Jerusalem, dies; Bacchides, being thus deprived of his ally, returns to
the king. Then, after an interval of two years, Bacchides again made war
upon the Jews, and being beaten, he <span id="page_109">p. 109</span>
<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxiii-Page_109"></span>begged for peace. This was
granted him certain conditions, to the effect that he should give up the
deserters and prisoners, along with all that he had taken in war.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_347"></span>[108:348](2110212.htm#fr_347.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxiii-p2"></span> The text is here in utter
confusion; we have followed that suggested by Vorstius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV.](2110213.md)
