[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110153)  [Next](2110155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xx"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XX.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xx-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xx-p1.1"></span>Then</span> follows the book of Leviticus,
in which the precepts bearing upon sacrifice are set forth; commandments
also are added to the law formerly given; and almost the whole is full
of instructions connected with the priests. If any one wishes to become
acquainted with these, he will obtain fuller information from that
source. For we, keeping within the limits of the work undertaken, touch
upon the history only. The tribe of Levi, then, being set apart for the
priesthood, the rest of the tribes were numbered, and were found to
amount to six hundred and three thousand five hundred persons. <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) When, therefore, the people made use
of the manna for food, as we have related above, even amid so many and
so great kindnesses of God, showing themselves, as ever, ungrateful,
they longed after the worthless viands to which they had been accustomed
in Egypt. Then the Lord brought an enormous supply of quails into the
camp; and as they were eagerly tearing these to pieces, as soon as their
lips touched the flesh, they perished. There was indeed on that day a
great destruction in the camp, so that twenty and three thousand men are
said to have died. Thus the people were punished by the very food which
they desired. Thence the company went forward, and came to Faran; and
Moses was instructed by the Lord that the land was now near, the
possession of which the Lord had promised them. Spies, accordingly,
having been sent into it, they report that it was a land blessed with
all abundance, but that the nations were powerful, and the towns
fortified with immense walls. When this was made known to the people,
fear seized the minds of all; and to such a pitch of wickedness did they
come, that, despising the authority of Moses, they prepared to appoint
for themselves a leader, under whose guidance they might return to
Egypt. Then Joshua and Caleb, who had been of the number of the spies,
rent their garments with tears, and implored the people not to believe
the spies relating such terrors; for that they themselves had been with
them, and had found nothing dreadful in that country; and that it
behooved them to trust the promises of God, that these enemies would
rather become their prey than prove their destruction. But that
stiff-necked race, setting themselves against every good advice, rushed
upon them to destroy them. And the Lord, angry on account of these
things, exposed a part of the people to be slain by the enemy, while the
spies were slain for having excited fear among the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_285"></span>[80:286](2110154.htm#fr_285) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xx-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xx-p2"></span> The text here varies: we have followed
Halm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI.](2110155)
