[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110246)  [Next](2110248.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span>The Example set us by the Martyrs, whom no
force could hinder from defending the Faith of their Predecessors.

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>\[12.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p2.1"></span>But</span> it may be, we invent these charges
out of hatred to novelty and zeal for antiquity. Whoever is disposed to
listen to such an insinuation, let him at least believe the blessed
Ambrose, who, deploring the acerbity of the time, says, in the second
book of his work addressed to the Emperor Gratian: <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434.md) “Enough now, O God Almighty! have we
expiated with our own ruin, with our own blood, the slaughter of
Confessors, the banishment of priests, and the wickedness of such
extreme impiety. It is clear, beyond question, that they who have
violated the faith cannot remain in safety.”

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span>And again in the third book of the same
work, <span id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435.md) “Let us observe the
precepts of our predecessors, and not transgress with rude rashness the
landmarks which we have inherited from them. That sealed Book of
Prophecy no Elders, no Powers, no Angels, no Archangels, dared to open.
To Christ alone was reserved the prerogative of explaining it. <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436.md) Who of us may dare to unseal the
Sacerdotal Book sealed by Confessors, and consecrated already by the
martyrdom of numbers, which they who had been compelled by force to
unseal afterwards resealed, condemning the fraud which had been
practised upon them; while they who had not ventured to tamper with it
proved themselves Confessors and martyrs? How can we deny the faith of
those whose victory we proclaim?”

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>\[13.\] We proclaim it truly, O venerable
Ambrose, we proclaim it, and applaud and admire. For who is there so
demented, who, though not able to overtake, does not at least earnestly
desire to follow those whom no force could deter from defending the
faith of their ancestors, no threats, no blandishments, not life, not
death, not the palace, not the Imperial Guards, not the Emperor, not the
empire itself, not men, not demons?—whom, I say, as a recompense for
their steadfastness in adhering to religious antiquity, the Lord counted
worthy of so great a reward, that by their instrumentality He restored
churches which had been destroyed, quickened with new life peoples who
were spiritually dead, replaced on the heads of priests the crowns which
had been torn from them, washed out those abominable, I will not say
letters, but blotches (*non literas, sed lituras*) of novel impiety,
with a fountain of believing tears, which God opened in the hearts of
the bishops?—lastly, when almost the whole world was overwhelmed by a
ruthless tempest of unlooked for heresy, recalled it from novel
misbelief to the ancient faith, from the madness of novelty to the
soundness of antiquity, from the blindness of novelty to pristine light?

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span>\[14.\] But in this divine virtue, as we may
call it, exhibited by these Confessors, we must note especially that the
defence which they then undertook in appealing to the Ancient Church,
was the defence, not of a part, but of the whole body. For it was not
right that men of such eminence should uphold with so huge an effort the
vague and conflicting notions of one or two men, or should exert
themselves in the defence of some ill-advised combination of some petty
province; but adhering to the decrees and definitions of the universal
priesthood of Holy Church, the heirs of Apostolic and Catholic truth,
they chose rather to deliver up themselves than to betray the faith of
universality and antiquity. For which cause they were deemed worthy of
so great glory as not only to be accounted Confessors, but rightly, and
deservedly to be accounted foremost among Confessors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_434"></span>[134:435](2110247.htm#fr_434.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span> St. Ambrose. *De Fide*, l. 2, c. 15, § 141.
See also *St. Jerome* adv. *Luciferianos*, § 19.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[134:436](2110247.htm#fr_435.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span> *Ibid*. l. 3, § 128. St. Ambrose speaks of
the Gothic war as a judgment upon Valens, both for his Arianism and for
his persecution of the Catholics. He had permitted the Goths to cross
the Danube, and settle in Thrace and the adjoining parts, with the
understanding that they should embrace Christianity in its Arian form.
They had now turned against him, and Gratian was on the eve of setting
out to carry aid to him. St. Ambrose’s book, *De Fide*, was written to
confirm Gratian in the Catholic faith, in view especially of the Arian
influence to which he might be subjected in his intercourse with Valens.
Valens was killed the following year, 378, at the battle of Adrianople.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[134:437](2110247.htm#fr_436.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span> [Rev. v.
1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.vi-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The example of Pope Stephen in resisting the
Iteration of Baptism.](2110248.md)
