[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110589)  [Next](2110591) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xxiii-p1"></span>Of the discourse of the teacher in
regard to the merits of his hearers.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>At</span> this the old man seeing that
we were astonished, and inflamed at the words of his discourse with an
insatiable desire, stopped <span id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ii.xxiii-Page_307"></span>his speech for a little in
consequence of our admiration and earnestness, and presently added:
Since your zeal, my sons, has led to so long a discussion, and a sort of
fire supplies keener zest to our conference in proportion to your
earnestness, as from this very thing I can clearly see that you are
truly thirsting after teaching about perfection, I want still to say
something to you on the excellence of discrimination and grace which
rules and holds the field among all virtues, and not merely to prove its
value and usefulness by daily instances of it, but also from former
deliberations and opinions of the fathers. For I remember that
frequently when men were asking me with sighs and tears for a discourse
of this kind, and I myself was anxious to give them some teaching I
could not possibly manage it, and not merely my thoughts but even my
very power of speech failed me so that I could not find how to send them
away with even some slight consolation. And by these signs we clearly
see that the grace of the Lord inspires the speakers with words
according to the deserts and zeal of the hearers. And because the very
short night which is before us does not allow me to finish the
discourse, let us the rather give it up to bodily rest, in which the
whole of it will have to be spent, if a reasonable portion is refused,
and let us reserve the complete scheme of the discourse for unbroken
consideration on a future day or night. For it is right for the best
counsellors on discretion to show the diligence of their minds in the
first place in this, and to prove whether they are or can be possessors
of it by this evidence and patience, so that in treating of that virtue
which is the mother of moderation they may by no means fall into the
vice which is opposite to it; viz., that of undue length, by their
actions and deeds destroying the force of the system and nature which
they recommend in word. In regard then to this most excellent
discretion, on which we still propose to inquire, so far as the Lord
gives us power, it may in the first instance be a good thing, when we
are disputing about its excellence and the moderation which we know
exists in it as the first of virtues, not to allow ourselves to exceed
the due limit of the discussion and of our time.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xxiii-p3"></span>And so with this the blessed Moses
put a stop to our talk, and urged us, eager though we were and hanging
on his lips, to go off to bed for a little, advising us to lie down on
the same mats on which we were sitting, and to put our bundles <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) under our heads instead of pillows,
as these being tied evenly to thicker leaves of papyrus collected in
long and slender bundles, six feet apart, at one time provide the
brethren when sitting at service with a very low seat instead of a
footstool, at another time being put under their necks when they go to
bed furnish a support for their heads, that is not too hard, but
comfortable and just right. For which uses of the monks these things are
considered especially fit and suitable not only because they are
somewhat soft, and prepared at little cost of money and labour, as the
papyrus grows everywhere along the banks of the Nile, but also because
they are of a convenient stuff and light enough to be removed or fetched
as need may require. And so at last at the bidding of the old man we
settled ourselves down to sleep in deep stillness, both excited with
delight at the conference we had held, and also buoyed up with hope of
the promised discussion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[307:1159](2110590.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="iv.iv.ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xxiii-p4"></span> Embrimium. The word is possibly of
Egyptian origin. It occurs also in Cyril in Vita S. Euthymii Abbatt, n.
90, and in Apophthegm, Patrum num. 7, and is possibly the same word as
“Ebymium,” which occurs in the Rule of Pachomius, c. xiv. See Ducange,
*sub voce*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference II. Second Conference of Abbot Moses.](2110591)
