[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110461)  [Next](2110463) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.viii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xiv-p1"></span>Of reconciliation with our brother.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.viii.xiv-p2.1"></span>And</span> because we often spurn the
brethren who are injured and saddened, and despise them, and say that
they were not hurt by any fault of ours, the Healer of souls, who knows
all secrets, wishing utterly to eradicate all opportunities of anger
from our hearts, not only commands us to forgive if we have been
wronged, and to be reconciled with our brothers, and keep no
recollection of wrong or injuries against them, but He also gives a
similar charge, that in case we are aware that they have anything
against us, whether justly or unjustly, we should leave our gift, that
is, postpone our prayers, and hasten first to offer satisfaction to
them; and so when our brother’s cure is first effected, we may bring the
offering of our prayers without blemish. For the common Lord of all does
not care so much for our homage as to lose in one what He gains in
another, through displeasure being allowed to reign in us. For in any
one’s loss He suffers some loss, who desires and looks for the salvation
of all His servants in one and the same way. And therefore our prayer
will lose its effect, if our brother has anything against us, just as
much as if we were cherishing feelings of bitterness against him in a
swelling and wrathful spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. How the Old Law would root out anger not only from
the actions but from the thoughts.](2110463)
