[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110196)  [Next](2110198.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.viii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>Him</span> Cyrus, his grandson by his
daughter, expelled from the kingdom, having used the arms of the
Persians for the purpose; and hence the chief power was transferred to
the Persians. The Babylonians also fell under his power and government.
It happened at the beginning of his reign that, by the issue of public
edicts, he gave permission to the Jews to return into their own country;
and he also restored the sacred vessels which Nabuchodonosor had carried
away from the temple at Jerusalem. Accordingly, a few then returned into
Judæa; as to the others, we have not been able to discover whether the
desire of returning, or the power of doing so, was wanting. There was at
that time among the Babylonians a brazen image of Belus, a very ancient
king, whom Virgil also has mentioned. <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md) This having been deemed sacred by the
superstition of the people, Cyrus also had been accustomed to worship,
being deceived by the trickery of its priests. They affirmed that the
image ate and drank, while they themselves secretly carried off the
daily portion which was offered to the idol. Cyrus, then, being on
intimate terms with Daniel, asked him why he did not worship the image,
since it was a manifest symbol of the living God, as consuming those
things which were offered to it. Daniel, laughing at the mistake of the
man, replied that it could not possibly be the case, that that work of
brass—mere insensate matter—could use either meat or drink. The king,
therefore, ordered the priests to be called (they were about seventy in
number); and, bringing terror to bear upon them, he reprovingly asked
them who was in the way of consuming what was offered, since Daniel, a
man distinguished for his wisdom, maintained that that could not be done
by an insensate image. Then they, trusting in their ready-made trick,
ordered the usual offering to be made, and the temple to be sealed up by
the king, on the understanding that, unless on the following day the
whole offering were found to have been consumed, they should suffer
death, while, on the opposite being discovered, the same fate awaited
Daniel. Accordingly, the temple was sealed up by the signet of the king;
but Daniel had previously, without the knowledge of the priests, covered
the floor of it with ashes, so that their footprints might betray the
clandestine approaches of those who entered. The king, then, having
entered the temple on the following day, perceived that those things had
been taken away, which he had ordered to be served up to the idol. Then
Daniel lays open the secret fraud by the betraying footprints, showing
that the priests, with their wives and children, had entered the temple
by a hole opened from below, and had devoured those things which were
served up to the idol. Accordingly, all of them were put to death by the
order of the king, while the temple and image were submitted to the
power of Daniel, and were destroyed at his command.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_336"></span>[100:337](2110197.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.viii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.viii-p2"></span> The reference is to *Æn*. I. 729,
but Sigonius and others have suspected the words as being a gloss. They
are, however, probably genuine. Virgil’s words are,—

<span id="ii.vi.ii.viii-p3"></span>“Hic regina gravem gemmis auroque
poposcit

<span id="ii.vi.ii.viii-p4"></span>Implevitque mero paternam, quam Belus
et omnes

<span id="ii.vi.ii.viii-p5"></span>A Belo soliti; tum facta silentia
tectis.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.](2110198.md)
