[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110595)  [Next](2110597) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.v-p1"></span>Of the death of the old man Heron.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.v-p2.1"></span>And</span> to support this judgment
delivered of old by the blessed Antony and the other fathers by a modern
instance, as we promised to do, remember what you lately saw happen
before your very eyes, I mean, how the old man Heron, <span
id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175) only a very few days ago was cast
down by an illusion of the devil from the heights to the depths, a man
whom we remember to have lived for fifty years in this desert and to
have preserved a strict continence with especial severity, and who aimed
at the secrecy of solitude with marvellous fervour beyond all those who
dwell here. By what device then or by what method was he deluded by the
deceiver after so many labours, and falling by a most grievous downfall
struck with profound grief all those who live in this desert? Was it not
because, having too little of the virtue of discretion he preferred to
be guided by his own judgment rather than to obey the counsels and
conference of the brethren and the regulations of the elders? Since he
ever practised incessant abstinence and fasting with such severity, and
persisted in the secrecy of solitude and a monastic cell so constantly
that not even the observance of the Easter festival could ever persuade
him to join in the feast with the brethren: when in accordance with the
annual observance, all the brethren remained in the church and he alone
would not join them for fear lest he might seem to relax in some degree
from his purpose by taking only a little pulse. And deceived by this
presumption he received with the utmost reverence an angel of Satan as
an angel of light and with blind slavishness obeyed his commands and
cast himself down a well, so deep that the eye could not pierce its
depths, nothing doubting of the promise of the angel who had assured him
that the merits of his virtues and labours were such that he could not
possibly run any risk. And that he might prove the truth of this most
certainly by experimenting on his own safety, in the dead of night he
was deluded enough to cast himself into the above mentioned well, to
prove indeed the great merit of his virtue if he should come out thence
unhurt. And when by great efforts on the part of the brethren he had
been got out already almost dead, on the third day afterward he expired,
and what was still worse, persisted in his obstinate delusion so that
not even the experience of his death could persuade him that he had been
deceived by the craft of devils. Wherefore in spite of the merits of his
great labours and the number of years which he had spent in the desert
those who with compassion and the greatest kindness pitied his end,
could hardly obtain from Abbot Paphnutius <span
id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176) that he should not be reckoned
among suicides, and be deemed unworthy of the memorial and oblation for
those at rest. <span id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[310:1176](2110596.htm#fr_1175) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.v-p3"></span> Gazæus thinks that this is a different
person from the man of the same name mentioned by Palladius, Hist. Laus.
c. xxxii.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[310:1177](2110596.htm#fr_1176) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.v-p4"></span> On Paphnutius see the note on III. i.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[310:1178](2110596.htm#fr_1177) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.v-p5"></span> *Pausantium*, i.e., those at rest. The
word is used for the departed in a similar way in the 6th Canon of the
Council of Aurelia (Orleans) <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.v-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 511. “Quando recitantur
pausantium nomina.” And the phrase “Pausat in pace” is occasionally
found in sepulchral inscriptions. Inscr. Boldetti Cimeter. p. 399;
Inscr. Maff. Gall. Antiq. p. 55.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of the destruction of two brethren for lack of
discretion.](2110597)
