[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110134)  [Next](2110136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.i"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="ii.vi.i.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.i-p1.1"></span>I address</span> myself to give a condensed
account of those things which are set forth in the sacred Scriptures
from the beginning of the world and to tell of them, with distinction of
dates and according to <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) their
importance, down to period within our own remembrance. Many who were
anxious to become acquainted with divine things by means of a
compendious treatise, have eagerly entreated me to undertake this work.
I, seeking to carry out their wish, have not spared my labor, and have
thus succeeded in comprising in two short books things which elsewhere
filled many volumes. At the same time, in studying brevity, I have
omitted hardly any of the facts. Moreover, it seemed to me not out of
place that, after I had run through the sacred history down to the
crucifixion of Christ, and the doings of the Apostles, I should add an
account of events which subsequently took place. I am, therefore, to
tell of the destruction of Jerusalem, the persecutions of the Christian
people, the times of peace which followed, and of all things again
thrown into confusion by the intestine dangers of the churches. But I
will not shrink from confessing that, wherever reason required, I have
made use of profane historians to fix dates and preserve the series of
events unbroken, and have taken out of these what was wanting to a
complete knowledge of the facts, that I might both instruct the ignorant
and carry conviction to the learned. Nevertheless, as to those things
which I have condensed from the sacred books, I do not wish so to
present myself as an author to my readers, that they, neglecting the
source from which my materials have been derived, should be satisfied
with what I have written. My aim is that one who is already familiar
with the original should recognize here what he has read there; for all
the mysteries of divine things cannot be brought out except from the
fountain-head itself. I shall now enter upon my narrative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_246"></span>[71:247](2110135.htm#fr_246) <span
id="ii.vi.i.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.i-p2"></span> “carptim”: such seems to be the meaning
of the word here, as Sigonius has noted. His words are “Carptim—profecto
innuit se non singulas res eodem modo persecuturum, sed quæ memoratu
digniores visæ fuerint, selecturum.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](2110136)
