[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110172)  [Next](2110174.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxix"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxix-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Solomon</span> in the beginning of his
reign surrounded the city with a wall. To him while asleep God appeared
standing by him, and gave him the choice of whatever things he desired.
But he asked that nothing more than wisdom should be granted him,
deeming all other things of little value. Accordingly, when he arose
from sleep, taking his stand before the sanctuary of God, he gave a
proof of the wisdom which had been bestowed upon him by God. For two
women who dwelt in one house, having given birth to male children at the
same time, and one of these having died in the night three days
afterwards, the mother of the dead child, while the other woman slept,
insidiously substituted her child, and took away the living one. Then
there arose an altercation between them, and the matter was at length
brought before the king. As no witness was forthcoming, it was a
difficult matter to give a judgment between both denying guilt. Then
Solomon, in the exercise of his gift of divine wisdom, ordered the child
to be slain and its body to be divided between the two doubtful
claimants. Well, when one of them acquiesced in this judgment, but the
other wished rather to give up the boy than that he should be cut in
pieces, Solomon, concluding from the feeling displayed by this woman
that she was the true mother, adjudged the child to her. The bystanders
could not repress their admiration at this decision, since he had in
such a way brought out the hidden truth by his sagacity. Accordingly,
the kings of the neighboring nations, out of admiration for his ability
and wisdom, courted his friendship and alliance, being prepared to carry
out his commands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL.](2110174.md)
