[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110093)  [Next](2110095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>But</span> clearly, as we experienced, he
repaired, with manifold interest, his grace, which had been diminished
for a time. I saw afterwards a possessed person brought to him at the
gate <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) of the monastery; and that,
before the man touched the threshold, he was cured.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p3"></span>“I lately heard one testifying that,
when he was sailing on the Tuscan Sea, following that course which leads
to Rome, whirlwinds having suddenly arisen, all on board were in extreme
peril of their lives. In these circumstances, a certain Egyptian
merchant, who was not yet a Christian, cried out, ‘Save us, O God of
Martin,’ upon which the tempest was immediately stilled, and they held
their desired course, while the pacified ocean continued in perfect
tranquillity.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p4"></span>“Lycontius, a believing man belonging
to the lieutenants, when a violent disease was afflicting his family,
and sick bodies were lying all through his house in sad proof of
unheard-of calamity, implored the help of Martin by a letter. At this
time the blessed man declared that the thing asked was difficult to be
obtained, for he knew in his spirit that that house was then being
scourged by Divine appointment. Yet he did not give up an unbroken
course of prayer and fasting for seven whole days and as many nights, so
that he at last obtained that which he aimed at in his supplications.
Speedily, Lycontius, having experienced the Divine kindness, flew to
him, at once reporting the fact and giving thanks, that his house had
been delivered from all danger. He also offered a hundred pounds of
silver, which the blessed man neither rejected nor accepted; but before
the amount of money touched the threshold of the monastery, he had,
without hesitation, destined it for the redemption of captives. And when
it was suggested to him by the brethren, that some portion of it should
be reserved for the expenses of the monastery, since it was difficult
for all of them to obtain necessary food, while many of them were sorely
in need of clothing, he replied, ‘Let the church both feed and clothe
us, as long as we do not appear to have provided, in any way, for our
own wants.’

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p5"></span>“There occur to my mind at this point
many miracles of that illustrious man, which it is more easy for us to
admire than to narrate. You all doubtless recognize the truth of what I
say: there are many doings of his which cannot be set forth in words.
For instance, there is the following, which I rather think cannot be
related by us just as it took place. A certain one of the brethren (you
are not ignorant of his name, but his person must be concealed, lest we
should cause shame to a godly man),—a certain one, I say, having found
abundance of coals for his stove, drew a stool to himself, and was
sitting, with outspread legs and exposed person, beside that fire, when
Martin at once perceived that an improper thing was done under the
sacred roof, and cried out with a loud voice, ‘Who, by exposing his
person, is dishonoring our habitation?’ When our brother heard this, and
felt from his own conscience, that it was he who was rebuked, he
immediately ran to us almost in a fainting condition, and acknowledged
his shame; which was done, how<span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-Page_53"></span>ever, only through the forth-putting
of the power of Martin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[52:138](2110094.htm#fr_137) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p2"></span> “Pseudothyrum”: Halm prefers the
form “pseudoforum,” but the meaning is the same.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.](2110095)
