[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110318)  [Next](2110320) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p1"></span>How throughout all the East the
services of Tierce, Sext, and None are ended with only three Psalms and
prayers each; and the reason why these spiritual offices are assigned
more particularly to those hours.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so in the monasteries of
Palestine and Mesopotamia and all the East the services of the
above-mentioned hours are ended each day with three Psalms apiece, so
that constant prayers may be offered to God at the appointed times, and
yet, the spiritual duties being completed with due moderation, the
necessary offices of work may not be in any way interfered with: for at
these three seasons we know that Daniel the prophet also poured forth
his prayers to God day by day in his chamber with the windows
open. <span id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718) Nor is it without good
reasons that these times are more particularly assigned to religious
offices, since at them what completed the promises and summed up our
salvation was fulfilled. For we can show that at the third hour the Holy
Spirit, who had been of old promised by the prophets, descended in the
first instance on the Apostles assembled together for prayer. For when
in their astonishment at the speaking with tongues, which proceeded from
them through the outpouring of the Holy Ghost upon them, the unbelieving
people of the Jews mocked and said that they were full of new wine, then
Peter, standing up in the midst of them, said: “Men of Israel, and all
ye who dwell at Jerusalem, let this be known unto you, and consider my
words. For these men are not, as ye imagine, drunk, since it is the
third hour of the day; but this is that which was spoken by the prophet
Joel: and it shall come to pass in the last days, saith the Lord, I will
pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions and your old men
shall dream dreams. And indeed upon my servants and my handmaids in
those days I will pour out of my Spirit, and they shall prophesy.” <span
id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719) And all of this was fulfilled at the
third hour, when the Holy Spirit, announced before by the prophets, came
at that hour and abode upon the Apostles. But at the sixth hour the
spotless Sacrifice, our Lord and Saviour, was offered up to the Father,
and, ascending the cross for the salvation of the whole world, made
atonement for the sins of mankind, and, despoiling principalities and
powers, led them away openly; and all of us who were liable to death and
bound by the debt of the handwriting that could not be paid, He freed,
by taking it away out of the midst and affixing it to His cross for a
trophy. <span id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720) At the same hour, too,
to Peter, in an ecstasy of mind, there was divinely revealed both the
calling of the Gentiles by the letting down of the Gospel vessel from
heaven, and also the cleansing of all the living creatures contained in
it, when a voice came to him and said to him: “Rise, Peter; kill and
eat;” <span id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721) which vessel, let down
from heaven by the four corners, is plainly seen to signify nothing else
than the Gospel. For although, as it is divided by the fourfold
narrative of the Evangelists, it seems to have “four corners” (or
beginnings), yet the body of the Gospel is but one; embracing, as it
does, the birth as well as the Godhead, and the miracles as well as the
passion of one and the same Christ. Excellently, too, it says not “of
linen” but “*as* if of linen.” For linen signifies death. Since, then,
our Lord’s death and passion were not undergone by the law of human
nature, but of His own free will, it says “as if of linen.” For when
dead according to the flesh He was not dead according to the spirit,
because “His soul was not left in hell, neither <span id="page_214">p.
214</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-Page_214"></span>did His flesh see
corruption.” <span id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722) And again He says:
“No man taketh My life from Me but I lay it down of Myself. I have power
to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.” <span
id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723) And so in this vessel of the Gospels
let down from heaven, that is written by the Holy Ghost, all the nations
which were formerly outside the observance of the law and reckoned as
unclean now flow together through belief in the faith that they may to
their salvation be turned away from the worship of idols and be
serviceable for health-giving food, and are brought to Peter and
cleansed by the voice of the Lord. But at the ninth hour, penetrating to
hades, He there by the brightness of His splendour extinguished the
indescribable darkness of hell, and, bursting its brazen gates and
breaking the iron bars brought away with Him to the skies the captive
band of saints which was there shut up and detained in the darkness of
inexorable hell, <span id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724) and, by taking
away the fiery sword, restored to paradise its original inhabitants by
his pious confession. At the same hour, too, Cornelius, the centurion,
continuing with his customary devotion in his prayers, is made aware
through the converse of the angel with him that his prayers and alms are
remembered before the Lord, and at the ninth hour the mystery <span
id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725) of the calling of the Gentiles is
clearly shown to him, which had been revealed to Peter in his ecstasy of
mind at the sixth hour. In another passage, too, in the Acts of the
Apostles, we are told as follows about the same time: “But Peter and
John went up into the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth
hour.” <span id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726) And by these notices it
is clearly proved that these hours were not without good reason
consecrated with religious services by holy and apostolic men, and ought
to be observed in like manner by us, who, unless we are compelled, as it
were, by some rule to discharge these pious offices at least at stated
times, either through sloth or through forgetfulness, or being absorbed
in business, spend the whole day without engaging in prayer. But
concerning the evening sacrifices what is to be said, since even in the
Old Testament these are ordered to be offered continually by the law of
Moses? For that the morning whole-burnt offerings and evening sacrifices
were offered every day continually in the temple, although with
figurative offerings, we can show from that which is sung by David: “Let
my prayer be set forth in Thy sight as the incense, and let the lifting
up of my hands be an evening sacrifice,” <span
id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727) in which place we can understand it in
a still higher sense of that true evening sacrifice which was given by
the Lord our Saviour in the evening to the Apostles at the Supper, when
He instituted the holy mysteries of the Church, and of that evening
sacrifice which He Himself, on the following day, in the end of the
ages, offered up to the Father by the lifting up of His hands for the
salvation of the whole world; which spreading forth of His hands on the
Cross is quite correctly called a “lifting up.” For when we were all
lying in hades He raised us to heaven, according to the word of His own
promise when He says: “When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw
all men unto Me.” <span id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728) But concerning
Mattins, that also teaches us which it is customary every day to sing at
it: “O God, my God, to Thee do I watch at break of day;” and “I will
meditate on Thee in the morning;” and “I prevented the dawning of the
day and cried;” and again, “Mine eyes to Thee have prevented the
morning, that I might meditate on Thy words.” <span
id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729) At these hours too that householder in
the Gospel hired labourers into his vineyard. For thus also is he
described as having hired them in the early morning, which time denotes
the Mattin office; then at the third hour; then at the sixth; after
this, at the ninth; and last of all, at the eleventh, <span
id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730) by which the hour of the lamps <span
id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731) is denoted. <span
id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_718"></span>[213:719](2110319.htm#fr_718) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p3"></span> Cf. [Daniel vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[213:720](2110319.htm#fr_719) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p4"></span> [Acts ii.
14-18](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[213:721](2110319.htm#fr_720) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p5"></span> The whole passage is alluding to
[Col. 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>, which runs as follows in the Vulgate:
“Delens quad adversum nos erat chirograffum decretis, quod erat
contrarium nobis, et ipse tulit de medio, affigens illud cruci,
expolians principatus et potestates traduxit confidenter, palam
triumphans illos in semet ipso.”

<span id="fn_721"></span>[213:722](2110319.htm#fr_721) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p6"></span> [Acts x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p6.1"></span> *sq*.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[214:723](2110319.htm#fr_722) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p7"></span> [Psa.
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[214:724](2110319.htm#fr_723) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p8"></span> S. [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[214:725](2110319.htm#fr_724) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p9"></span> The belief that by the descent into
hell our Lord released some who were there detained was almost, if not
quite, universal in the early ages, and is recognized by a large number
of the Fathers. It is alluded to by so early a writer as Ignatius (*Ad
Magn*. ix.), and appears in Irenæus (IV. c. xlii.) as a tradition of
those who had seen the Apostles. See also Tertullian, *De Anima*, c.
lv., and a host of later writers.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[214:726](2110319.htm#fr_725) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p10"></span> *Sacramentum*. This word is used
by Cassian, as by other Latin writers, as the regular equivalent of the
Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>μυστήριον</span>, and as such is
applied to sacred *truths* equally with sacred *rites*. See Book V.
xxxiv.: “Sacramenta scriptorum;” Conferences IX. xxxiv.: “Sacramentum
resurrectionis Dominicæ.” And again and again the word is used of the
mystery of the Incarnation in the books against Nestorius.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[214:727](2110319.htm#fr_726) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p11"></span> [Acts iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[214:728](2110319.htm#fr_727) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p12"></span> [Psa.
141.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[214:729](2110319.htm#fr_728) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p13"></span> S. [John xii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[214:730](2110319.htm#fr_729) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p14"></span> [Ps.
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007), [Ps.
119:147](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#147),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>. In both East and West [Psa.
63](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p14.2"></span> has from very early times been used as
a morning hymn. See the Apost. Constitutions II. lix., VIII. xxxvii. In
the East it is still one of the fixed Psalms at Lauds, as it is also in
the West, according to the Roman use. But in Cassian’s time it had
apparently been transferred from Lauds to Prime. See below, c. vi.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[214:731](2110319.htm#fr_730) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p15"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[214:732](2110319.htm#fr_731) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p16"></span> *Lucernaris hora*; i e., the hour
for Vespers, which is sometimes called lucernarium or lucernalis. S.
Jerome *in Ps. cxix*. S. Augustine, *Sermo i ad fratres in er*.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[214:733](2110319.htm#fr_732) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p17"></span> It will be noticed that in this
chapter Cassian alludes to five offices: (1) A morning office; (2) the
third hour; (3) the sixth; (4) the ninth; and (5) Vespers; and gives the
grounds for their observance. Similar grounds are given by Cyprian, *De
Orat. Dominica sub fine*: “For upon the disciples, at the third hour,
the Holy Spirit descended, who fulfilled the grace of the Lord’s
promise. Moreover at the sixth hour, Peter, going up to the housetop,
was instructed as well by the sign as by the word of God, admonishing
him to receive all to the grace of salvation, whereas he was previously
doubtful of the receiving of the Gentiles to baptism. And from the sixth
hour to the ninth the Lord, being crucified, washed away our sins by His
blood; and that He might redeem and quicken us, He then accomplished His
victory by His passion. But for us, beloved brethren besides the hours
of prayer observed of old, both the times and the sacraments have now
increased in number. For we must also pray in the morning, that the
Lord’s resurrection may be celebrated by morning prayer.…Also at the
sun-setting and decline of day we must pray again. For since Christ is
the true Sun and the true Day, as the worldly sun and day depart, when
we pray and ask that light may return to us again, we pray for the
advent of Christ, which shall give us the grace of everlasting light.”
Cf. also S. Basil, *The Greater Monastic Rules*, Q. xxxvii., where the
same subject is discussed, and *Apost. Const*. Book VIII. c. xxxiv. In
later times the Seven Canonical Hours were all connected with the events
of our Lord’s Passion, and supposed to commemorate His sufferings, as
the following stanzas show:—

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p18"></span>At *Mattins* bound, at *Prime*
reviled,

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p19"></span>Condemned to death at *Tierce,*

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p20"></span>Nailed to the Cross at *Sext*, at
*Nones*

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p21"></span>His blessed side they pierce.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p22"></span>They take Him down at
*Vesper-tide*,

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p23"></span>In grave at *Compline* lay;

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p24"></span>Who thenceforth bids His Church
observe

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iii-p25"></span>Her sevenfold hours alway.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. How the Mattin office was not appointed by an ancient
tradition but was started in our own day for a definite
reason.](2110320)
