[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110960)  [Next](2110962.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.viii-p1"></span>Of a fourth sort of monks.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>There</span> is however another and a
fourth kind, which we have lately seen springing up among those who
flatter themselves with the appearance and form of anchorites, and who
in their early days seem in a brief fervour to seek the perfection of
the Cœnobium, but presently cool off, and, as they dislike to put an end
to their former habits and faults, and are not satisfied to bear the
yoke of humility and patience any longer, and scorn to be in subjection
to the rule of the Elders, look out for separate cells and want to
remain by themselves alone, that as they are provoked by nobody they may
be regarded by men as patient, gentle, and humble: and, this
arrangement, or rather this lukewarmness never suffers those, of whom it
has once got hold, to approach to perfection. For in this way their
faults are not merely not rooted up, but actually grow worse, while they
are excited by no one, like some deadly and internal poison which the
more it is concealed, so much the more deeply does it creep in and cause
an incurable disease to the sick person. For out of respect for each
man’s own cell no one ventures to reprove the faults of a solitary,
which he would rather have ignored than cured. Moreover virtues are
created not by hiding faults but by driving them out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. A question as to what is the difference between a
Cœnobium and a monastery.](2110962.md)
