[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110791)  [Next](2110793) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.x.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxii-p1"></span>Of the clause: “Forgive us our debts,
etc.”

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxii-p2"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.x.xxii-p2.1"></span>And</span> forgive us our debts as we also
forgive our debtors.” O unspeakable mercy of God, which has not only
given us a form of prayer and taught us a system of life acceptable to
Him, and by the requirements of the form given, in which He charged us
always to pray, has torn up the roots of both anger and sorrow, but also
gives to those who pray an opportunity and reveals to them a way by
which they may move a merciful and kindly judgment of God to be
pronounced over them and which somehow gives us a power by which we can
moderate the sentence of our Judge, drawing Him to forgive our offences
by the example of our forgiveness: when we say to Him: “Forgive us as we
also forgive.” And so without anxiety and in confidence from this prayer
a man may ask for pardon of his own offences, if he has been forgiving
towards his own debtors, and not towards those of his Lord. For some of
us, which is very bad, are inclined to show ourselves calm and most
merciful in regard to those things which are done to God’s detriment,
however great the crimes may be, but to be found most hard and
inexorable exactors of debts to ourselves even in the case of the most
trifling wrongs. Whoever then does not from his heart forgive his
brother who has offended him, by this prayer calls down upon himself not
forgiveness but condemnation, and by his own profession asks that he
himself may be judged more severely, saying: Forgive me as I also have
forgiven. And if he is repaid according to his own request, what else
will follow but that he will be punished after his own example with
implacable wrath and a sentence that cannot be remitted? And so if we
want to be judged mercifully, we ought also to be merciful towards those
who have sinned against us. For only so much will be remitted to us, as
we have remitted to those who have injured us however spitefully. And
some dreading this, when this prayer is chanted by all the people in
church, silently omit this clause, for fear lest they may seem by their
own utterance to bind themselves rather than to excuse themselves, as
they do not understand that it is in vain that they try to offer these
quibbles to the Judge of all men, who has willed to show us beforehand
how He will judge His suppliants. For as He does not wish to be found
harsh and inexorable towards them, He has marked out the manner of His
judgment, that just as we desire to be judged by Him, so we should also
judge our brethren, if they have wronged us in anything, for “he shall
have judgment without mercy who hath shown no mercy.” <span
id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[395:1615](2110792.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="iv.iv.x.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxii-p3"></span> S. [James ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.x.xxii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. Of the clause: “Lead us not into
temptation.“](2110793)
