[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110987)  [Next](2110989.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iv.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iv.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.vi.iv.i-p1"></span>Of the humility of Abbot Pinufius, and
of his hiding-place.

<span id="iv.vi.iv.i-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iv.i-p2.1"></span>Now</span> that I am going to relate the
precepts of that excellent and remarkable man, Abbot Pinufius, on the
end of penitence, I fancy that I can dispose of a very large part of my
material, if out of consideration lest I weary my reader, I here pass
over in silence the praise of his humility, which I touched on in a
brief discourse in the fourth book of the Institutes, <span
id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116.md) which was entitled “Of the rules to
be observed by renunciants,” especially as many who have no knowledge of
that work, may happen to read this, and then all the authority <span
id="page_497">p. 497</span> <span id="iv.vi.iv.i-Page_497"></span>of the
utterances will be weakened if there is no account of the virtues of the
speaker. For this man when he was presiding as Abbot and Presbyter over
a large Cœnobium not far from Panephysis, a city, as was there said, of
Egypt, and when all that province had praised him to the skies for his
virtues and miracles, so that he already seemed to himself to have
received the reward of his labours in the remuneration of the praise of
men, as he was afraid lest the emptiness of popular favour, which he
especially disliked, might interfere with the fruits of an eternal
reward, he secretly fled from his monastery and made his way to the
furthest recesses of the monks of Tabennæ, <span
id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117.md) where he chose not the solitude of
the desert, not that freedom from care of which the life of one alone
affords, which even those who are imperfect and who cannot endure the
effort which obedience requires in the Cœnobium, sometimes seek after
with proud presumption, but he chose to submit himself to a most famous
monastery. Where, however, that he might not be betrayed by any signs of
his dress, he clothed himself in a secular garb, and lay before the
doors with tears, as is the custom there, for many days, and clinging to
the knees of all after being daily repulsed by those who to test his
purpose said that now in extreme old age he was seeking this holy life
not in sincerity, but driven by the lack of food, at last he obtained
admission, and there he was told off to help a young brother who had
been given the charge of a garden, and when he not only fulfilled with
such marvellous and holy humility everything which his chief ordered him
or which the care of the work entrusted to him demanded, but also
performed in stealthy labour by night certain necessary offices which
were avoided by the rest out of disgust for them, so that when morning
dawned, all the congregation was delighted at such useful works but knew
not their author; and when he had passed nearly three years there
rejoicing in the labours, which he had desired, but to which he was so
unfairly subjected, it happened that a certain brother known to him came
there from the same parts of Egypt from which he himself had come. And
this man for a time hesitated because the meanness of his clothes and of
his office prevented him from readily recognizing him at once, but after
looking very closely at him, fell at his feet, and first astonished all
the brethren, and afterwards, when he betrayed his name, which the fame
of his special sanctity had made known to them also, he smote them with
sorrow and compunction because they had told off a man of his virtues
and a priest to such mean offices. But he, shedding copious tears, and
charging the accident of his betrayal to the serious envy of the devil,
was brought in honourable custody by his brethren surrounding him to the
monastery; and after that he had stayed there for a short time, he was
once more troubled by the respect shown to his dignity and rank, and
stealthily embarked on board ship and sailed to the Palestinian province
of Syria, where he was received as a beginner and a novice in the house
of that monastery in which we were living, and was charged by the Abbot
to stop in our cell. But not even there could his virtues and merits
long remain secret. For he was discovered and betrayed in the same way,
and brought back to his own monastery with the utmost honour and
respect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[496:2117](2110988.htm#fr_2116.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.i-p3"></span> Cf. Institutes IV. c. xxx., xxxi.
Nothing further is known of Pinufius than what we gather from these
passages of Cassian.

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[497:2118](2110988.htm#fr_2117.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iv.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv.i-p4"></span> On Tabennæ or Tabenna see the note on
the Institutes IV. i.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Of our coming to him.](2110989.md)
