[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110944)  [Next](2110946.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p1"></span>The evidence of Scripture on changes
of determination.

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p2.1"></span>It</span> is impossible for us briefly to
run through everything. For who could count up almost all the patriarchs
and numberless saints, some of whom for the preservation of life, others
out of desire for a blessing, others out of pity, others to conceal some
secret, others out of zeal for God, others in searching for the <span
id="page_470">p. 470</span> <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-Page_470"></span>truth, became, so to speak, patrons
of lying? And as all cannot be enumerated, so all ought not to be
altogether passed over. For piety forced the blessed Joseph to raise a
false charge against his brethren even with an oath by the life of the
king, saying: “Ye are spies: to see the nakedness of the land are ye
come;” and below: “send,” says he, “one of you, and bring your brothers
hither: but ye shall be kept here until your words are made manifest
whether ye speak the truth or no: but if not, by the life of Pharaoh, ye
are spies.” <span id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048.md) For if he had not
out of pity alarmed them by this lie, he would not have been able to see
again his father and his brother, nor to preserve them in their great
danger of starvation, nor to free the conscience of his brethren from
the guilt of selling him. The act then of striking his brethren with
fear by means of a lie was not so reprehensible as was it a holy and
laudable act to urge his enemies and seekers to a salutary penitence by
means of a feigned danger. Finally when they were weighed down by the
odium of the very serious accusation, they were conscience-stricken not
at the charge falsely raised against them, but at the thought of their
earlier crime, and said to one another: “We suffer this rightly because
we sinned against our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul
when he asked us and we did not hearken to him: wherefore all this
trouble hath come upon us.” <span id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049.md)
And this confession, we think, expiated by most salutary humility their
terrible sin not only against their brother, against whom they had
sinned with wicked cruelty, but also against God. What about Solomon,
who in his first judgment manifested the gift of wisdom, which he had
received of God, only by making use of falsehood? For in order to get at
the truth which was hidden by the woman’s lie, even he used the help of
a lie most cunningly invented, saying: “Bring me a sword and divide the
living child into two parts, and give the one half to the one and the
other half to the other.” And when this pretended cruelty stirred the
heart of the true mother, but was received with approval by her who was
not the true mother, then at last by this most sagacious discovery of
the truth he pronounced the judgment which every one has felt to have
been inspired by God, saying: “Give her the living child and slay it
not: she is the mother of it.” <span
id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050.md) Further we are more fully taught by
other passages of Scripture as well that we neither can nor should carry
out everything which we determine either with peace or disturbance of
mind, as we often hear that holy men and angels and even Almighty God
Himself have changed what they had decided upon. For the blessed David
determined and confirmed it by an oath, saying: “May God do so and add
more to the foes of David if I leave of all that belong unto Nabal until
the morning a single male.” And presently when Abigail his wife
interceded and intreated for him, he gave up his threats, lightened the
sentence, and preferred to be regarded as a breaker of his word rather
than to keep his pledged oath by cruelly executing it, saying: “As the
Lord liveth, if thou hadst not quickly come to meet me there had not
been left to Nabal by the morning light a single male.” <span
id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051.md) And as we do not hold that his
readiness to take a rash oath (which resulted from his anger and
disturbance of mind) ought to be copied by us, so we do think that the
pardon and revision of his determination is to be followed. The “chosen
vessel,” in writing to the Corinthians, promises unconditionally to
return, saying: “But I will come to you when I pass through Macedonia:
for I will pass through Macedonia. But I will stay or even pass the
winter with you that you may conduct me whithersoever I shall go. For I
do not want only to see you in passing: for I hope to stay with you for
some time.” <span id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052.md) And this fact he
remembers in the Second Epistle, thus: “And in this confidence I was
minded first to come unto you, that ye might receive a second favour,
and by you to pass into Macedonia and again to come to you from
Macedonia and by you be conducted to Judæa.” But a better plan suggested
itself and he plainly admits that he is not going to fulfil what he had
promised. “When then,” says he, “I purposed this, did I use
light-mindedness? or the things that I think, do I think after the
flesh, that there should be with me yea, yea, and nay, nay?” Lastly, he
declares even with the affirmation of an oath, why it was that he
preferred to put on one side his pledged word rather than by his
presence to bring a burden and grief to his disciples: “But I call God
to witness against my soul that it was to spare you that I came not as
far as Corinth. For I determined this with myself that I would not come
unto you in sorrow.” <span id="fr_2053"></span>[2054](#fn_2053.md) Though
when the angels had refused to enter the house of Lot at Sodom, saying
to him: “We will not enter but will remain in the street,” they were
presently forced by his prayers to change their determination, as
Scripture subjoins: “And Lot constrained them, and they turned in to
him.” <span id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054.md) And <span
id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-Page_471"></span>certainly if they knew that they
would turn in to him, they refused his request with a sham excuse: but
if their excuse was a real one, then they are clearly shown to have
changed their mind. And certainly we hold that the Holy Spirit inserted
this in the sacred volume for no other reason but to teach us by their
examples that we ought not to cling obstinately to our own
determinations, but to subject them to our will, and so to keep our
judgment free from all the chains of law that it may be ready to follow
the call of good counsel in any direction, and may not delay or refuse
to pass without any delay to whatever a sound discretion may find to be
the better choice. And to rise to still higher instances, when king
Hezekiah was lying on his bed and afflicted with grievous sickness the
prophet Isaiah addressed him in the person of God, and said: “Thus saith
the Lord: set thine house in order for thou shalt die and not live. And
Hezekiah,” it says, “turned his face to the wall and prayed to the Lord
and said: I beseech thee, O Lord, remember how I have walked before Thee
in truth and with a perfect heart, and how I have done what was right in
Thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.” After which it was again said to
him: “Go, return, and speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying: Thus
saith the Lord God of David thy father: I have heard thy prayer, I have
seen thy tears: and behold, I will add to thy days fifteen years: and I
will deliver thee out of the hand of the king of the Assyrians, and I
will defend this city for thy sake and for my servant David’s
sake.” <span id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055.md) What can be clearer
than this proof that out of consideration for mercy and goodness the
Lord would rather break His word and instead of the pre-arranged limit
of death extend the life of him who prayed, for fifteen years, rather
than be found inexorable because of His unchangeable decree? In the same
way too the Divine sentence says to the men of Nineveh: “Yet three days,
and Nineveh shall be overthrown;” <span
id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056.md) and presently this stern and abrupt
sentence is softened by their penitence and fasting, and is turned to
the side of mercy with goodness that is easy to be intreated. But if any
one maintains that the Lord had threatened the destruction of their city
(while He foreknew that they would be converted) for this reason, that
He might incite them to a salutary penitence, it follows that those who
are set over their brethren may, if need arises, without any blame for
telling lies, threaten those who need improvement with severer treatment
than they are really going to inflict. But if one says that God revoked
that severe sentence in consideration of their penitence, according to
what he says by Ezekiel: “If I say to the wicked, Thou shalt surely die:
and he becomes penitent for his sin, and doeth judgment and justice, he
shall surely live, he shall not die;” <span
id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057.md) we are similarly taught that we
ought not obstinately to stick to our determination, but that we should
with gentle pity soften down the threats which necessity called forth.
And that we may not fancy that the Lord granted this specially to the
Ninevites, He continually affirms by Jeremiah that He will do the same
in general towards all, and promises that without delay He will change
His sentence in accordance with our deserts; saying: “I will suddenly
speak against a nation and against a kingdom to root out and to pull
down and to destroy it. If that nation repent of the evil, which I have
spoken against it, I also will repent of the evil which I thought to do
to them. And I will suddenly speak of a nation and a kingdom, to build
up and to plant it. If it shall do evil in My sight, that it obey not My
voice: I will repent of the good that I thought to do to it.” To Ezekiel
also: “Leave out not a word, if so be they will hearken and be converted
every one from his evil way: that I may repent Me of the evil that I
thought to do to them for the wickedness of their doings.” <span
id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058.md) And by these passages it is
declared that we ought not obstinately to stick to our decisions, but to
modify them with reason and judgment, and that better courses should
always be adopted and preferred, and that we should turn without any
delay to that course which is considered the more profitable. For this
above all that invaluable sentence teaches us, because though each man’s
end is known beforehand to Him before his birth, yet somehow He so
orders all things by a plan and method for all, and with regard to man’s
disposition, that He decides on everything not by the mere exercise of
His power, nor according to the ineffable knowledge which His Prescience
possesses, but according to the present actions of men, and rejects or
draws to Himself each one, and daily either grants or withholds His
grace. And that this is so the election of Saul also shows us, of whose
miserable end the foreknowledge of God certainly could not be ignorant,
and yet He chose him out of so many thousands of Israel and anointed him
king, rewarding the then existing merits of his life, and not
considering the sin of his coming fall, so that after he became <span
id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-Page_472"></span>reprobate, God complains almost in
human terms and, with man’s feelings, as if He repented of his choice,
saying: “It repenteth Me that I have appointed Saul king: for he hath
forsaken Me, and hath not performed My words;” and again: “But Samuel
was grieved for Saul because the Lord repented that He had made Saul
king over Israel.” <span id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059.md) Finally
this that He afterwards executed, that the Lord also declares by the
prophet Ezekiel that He will by His daily judgment do with all men,
saying: “Yea, if I shall say to the righteous that he shall surely live,
and he trusting in his righteousness commit iniquity: all his
righteousness shall be forgotten, and in his iniquity which he hath
committed, in the same he shall die. And if I shall say to the wicked:
Thou shalt surely die; and if he repent of his sin and do judgment and
righteousness, and if that wicked man restore the pledge and render what
he hath robbed, and walk in the commandments of life, and do no
righteous thing, he shall surely live, he shall not die. None of his
sins which he hath committed shall be imputed unto him.” <span
id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060.md) Finally, when the Lord would for
their speedy fall turn away His merciful countenance from the people,
whom He had chosen out of all nations, the giver of the law interposes
on their behalf and cries out: “I beseech Thee, O Lord, this people have
sinned a great sin; they have made for themselves gods of gold; and now
if Thou forgivest their sin, forgive it; but if not, blot me out of Thy
book which Thou hast written. To whom the Lord answered: If any man hath
sinned before Me, I will blot him out of My book.” <span
id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061.md) David also, when complaining in
prophetic spirit of Judas and the Lord’s persecutors, says: “Let them be
blotted out of the book of the living;” and because they did not deserve
to come to saving penitence because of the guilt of their great sin, he
subjoins: “And let them not be written among the righteous.” <span
id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062.md) Finally in the case of Judas
himself the meaning of the prophetic curse was clearly fulfilled, for
when his deadly sin was completed, he killed himself by hanging, that he
might not after his name was blotted out be converted and repent and
deserve to be once more written among the righteous in heaven. We must
therefore not doubt that at the time when he was chosen by Christ and
obtained a place in the Apostolate, the name of Judas was written in the
book of the living, and that he heard as well as the rest the words:
“Rejoice not because the devils are subject unto you, but rejoice
because your names are written in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063.md) But because he was corrupted by the
plague of covetousness and had his name struck out from that heavenly
list, it is suitably said of him and of men like him by the prophet: “O
Lord, let all those that forsake Thee be confounded. Let them that
depart from Thee be written in the earth, because they have forsaken the
Lord, the vein of living waters.” And elsewhere: “They shall not be in
the counsel of My people, nor shall they be written in the writing of
the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of
Israel.” <span id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[470:2049](2110945.htm#fr_2048.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p3"></span> [Gen.
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#009.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[470:2050](2110945.htm#fr_2049.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p4"></span> [Gen.
42.21](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[470:2051](2110945.htm#fr_2050.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p5"></span> [1 Kings iii.
24-27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[470:2052](2110945.htm#fr_2051.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p6"></span> [1 Sam.
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#022.md),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[470:2053](2110945.htm#fr_2052.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p7"></span> [1 Cor.
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[470:2054](2110945.htm#fr_2053.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p8"></span> [2 Cor.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#015.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023.md), [2 Cor.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[470:2055](2110945.htm#fr_2054.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p9"></span> [Gen.
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[471:2056](2110945.htm#fr_2055.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p10"></span> [2 Kings xx.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[471:2057](2110945.htm#fr_2056.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p11"></span> [Jonah iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p11.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[471:2058](2110945.htm#fr_2057.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p12"></span> [Ezek.
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[471:2059](2110945.htm#fr_2058.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p13"></span> [Jer.
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#010.md), [Jer.
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[472:2060](2110945.htm#fr_2059.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p14"></span> [1 Sam.
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011.md),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[472:2061](2110945.htm#fr_2060.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p15"></span> [Ezek. xxxiii.
13-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[472:2062](2110945.htm#fr_2061.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p16"></span> [Exod. xxxii.
31-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[472:2063](2110945.htm#fr_2062.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p17"></span> [Psa.
69.29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[472:2064](2110945.htm#fr_2063.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p18"></span> S. [Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[472:2065](2110945.htm#fr_2064.md) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p19"></span> [Jer.
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#013.md), [Ezek.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxv-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI. How saintly men cannot be hard and
obstinate.](2110946.md)
