[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110021)  [Next](2110023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xix"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p1"></span>Martin performs Various Miracles.

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xix-p2.1"></span>In</span> the meanwhile, as a sudden report
had troubled the city as to the movement and inroad of the barbarians,
Martin orders a possessed person to be set before him, and commanded him
to declare whether this message was true or not. Then he confessed that
there were sixteen demons who had spread this report among the people,
in order that by the fear thus excited, Martin might have to flee from
the city, but that, in fact, nothing was less in the minds of the
barbarians than to make any inroad. When the unclean spirit thus
acknowledged these things in the midst of the church, the city was set
free from the fear and tumult which had at the time been felt.

<span id="ii.ii.xix-p3"></span>At Paris, again, when Martin was entering
the gate of the city, with large crowds attending him, he gave a kiss to
a leper, of miserable appearance, while all shuddered at seeing him do
so; and Martin blessed him, with the result that he was instantly
cleansed from all his misery. On the following day, the man appearing in
the church with a healthy skin, gave thanks for the soundness of body
which he had recovered. This fact, too, ought not to be passed over in
silence, that threads from Martin’s garment, or such as had been plucked
from the sackcloth which he wore, wrought frequent miracles upon those
who were sick. For, by either being tied round the fingers or placed
about the neck, they very often drove away diseases from the afflicted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. A Letter of Martin effects a Cure, with Other
Miracles.](2110023)
