[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110155)  [Next](2110157.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxii-p1.1"></span>After</span> the death of Moses, the chief
power passed into the hands of Joshua the son of Nun, for Moses had
appointed him his successor, being a man very like himself in the good
qualities which he displayed. Now, at the commencement of his rule, he
sent messengers through the camp to instruct the people to make ready
supplies of corn, and announces that they should march on the third day.
But the river Jordan, a very powerful stream, hindered their crossing,
because they did not have a supply of vessels for the occasion, and the
stream could not be crossed by fords, as it was then rushing on in full
flood. He, therefore, orders the ark to be carried forward by the
priests, and that they should take their stand against the current of
the river. On this being done, Jordan is said to have been divided, and
thus the army was led over on dry ground. There was in these places a
town called Jericho, fortified with very strong walls, and not easy to
be taken, either by storm or blockade. But Joshua, putting his trust in
God, did not attack the city either by arms or force; he simply ordered
the ark of God to be carried round the walls, while the priests walked
before the ark, and sounded trumpets. But when the ark had been carried
round seven times, the walls and the towers fell; and the city was
plundered and burnt. Then Joshua is said to have addressed the Lord,
and <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md) to have called down a curse
upon any one who should attempt to restore the town which had thus by
divine help been demolished. Next, the army was led against Geth, and an
ambuscade having been placed behind the city, Joshua, pretending fear,
fled before the enemy. On seeing this, those who were in the town,
opening the gates, began to press upon the enemy giving way. Thus, the
men who were in ambush took the city, and all the inhabitants were
slain, without one escaping: the king also was taken, and suffered
capital punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_287"></span>[81:288](2110156.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxii-p2"></span> Some words have here been lost, but
are conjecturally supplied in the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII.](2110157.md)
