[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110272)  [Next](2110274) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.

<span id="iii.xxxii-p1"></span>The Constancy of the Ephesine Fathers in
driving away Novelty and maintaining Antiquity.

<span id="iii.xxxii-p2"></span>\[81.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>After</span> the preceding we added also the
sentence of blessed Cyril, which is contained in these same
Ecclesiastical Proceedings. For when the Epistle of Capreolus, <span
id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) bishop of Carthage, had been read,
wherein he earnestly intreats that novelty may be driven away and
antiquity maintained, Cyril made and carried the proposal, which it may
not be out of place to insert here: For says he, at the close of the
proceedings, “Let the Epistle of Capreolus also, the reverend and very
religious bishop of Carthage, which has been read, be inserted in the
acts. His mind is obvious, for he intreats that the doctrines of the
ancient faith be confirmed, such as are novel, wantonly devised, and
impiously promulgated, reprobated and condemned.” All the bishops cried
out, “These are the words of all; this we all say, this we all desire.”
What mean “the words of all,” what mean “the desires of all,” but that
what has been handed down from antiquity should be retained, what has
been newly devised, rejected with disdain?

<span id="iii.xxxii-p4"></span>\[82.\] Next we expressed our admiration
of the humility and sanctity of that Council, such that, though the
number of priests was so great, almost the more part of them
metropolitans, so erudite, so learned, that almost all were capable of
taking part in doctrinal discussions, whom the very circumstance of
their being assembled for the purpose, might seem to embolden to make
some determination on their own authority, yet they innovated nothing,
presumed nothing, arrogated to themselves absolutely nothing, but used
all possible care to hand down nothing to posterity but what they had
themselves received from their Fathers. And not only did they dispose
satisfactorily of the matter presently in hand, but they also set an
example to those who should come after them, how they also should adhere
to the determinations of sacred antiquity, and condemn the devices of
profane novelty.

<span id="iii.xxxii-p5"></span>\[83.\] We inveighed also against the
wicked presumption of Nestorius in boasting that he was the first and
the only one who understood holy Scripture, and that all those teachers
were ignorant, who before him had expounded the sacred oracles,
forsooth, the whole body of priests, the whole body of Confessors and
martyrs, of whom some had published commentaries upon the Law of God,
others had agreed with them in their comments, or had acquiesced in
them. In a word, he confidently asserted that the whole Church was even
now in error, and always had been in error, in that, as it seemed to
him, it had followed, and was following, ignorant and misguided
teachers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_520"></span>[155:521](2110273.htm#fr_520) <span
id="iii.xxxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxii-p3"></span> The letter of Capreolus is given in
Labbe’s *Concilia*, vol. 3, col. 529 *sqq*. The Emperor Theodosius had
written to Augustine, requiring his presence at the Council which he had
summoned to meet at Ephesus in the matter of Nestorius. But Augustine
having died while the letter was on its way, it was brought to
Capreolus, bishop of Carthage and Metropolitan. Capreolus would have
summoned a meeting of the African bishops, that they might appoint a
delegate to represent them at the Council; but the presence of the
hostile Vandals, who were laying waste the country in all directions,
made it impossible for the bishops to travel to any place of meeting.
Capreolus therefore could do no more than send his deacon Besula to
represent him and the African Church, bearing with him the letter
referred to in the text. The letter, after having been read before the
Council, both in the original Latin and in a Greek translation, was, on
the motion of Cyril, inserted in the acts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII. The zeal of Celestine and Sixtus, bishops of Rome,
in opposing Novelty.](2110274)
