[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110258)  [Next](2110260.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="iii.xviii-p1"></span>The Error of Origen a great Trial to the
Church.

<span id="iii.xviii-p2"></span>\[42.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xviii-p2.1"></span>We</span> said above that in the Church of
God the teacher’s error is the people’s trial, a trial by so much the
greater in proportion to the greater learning of the erring teacher.
This we showed first by the authority of Scripture, and then by
instances from Church History, of persons who having at one time had the
reputation of being sound in the faith, eventually either fell away to
some sect already in existence, or else founded a heresy of their own.
An important fact truly, useful to be learnt, and necessary to be
remembered, and to be illustrated and enforced again and again, by
example upon example, in order that all true Catholics may understand
that it behoves them with the Church to receive Teachers, not with
Teachers to desert the faith of the Church.

<span id="iii.xviii-p3"></span>\[43.\] My belief is, that among many
instances of this sort of trial which might be produced, there is not
one to be compared with that of Origen, <span
id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480.md) in whom there were <span
id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span id="iii.xviii-Page_144"></span>many
things so excellent, so unique, so admirable, that antecedently any one
would readily deem that implicit faith was to be placed all his
assertions. For if the conversation and manner of life carry authority,
great was his industry, great his modesty, his patience, his endurance;
if his descent or his erudition, what more noble than his birth of a
house rendered illustrious by martyrdom? Afterwards, when in the cause
of Christ he had been deprived not only of his father, but also of all
his property, he attained so high a standard in the midst of the straits
of holy poverty, that he suffered several times, it is said, as a
Confessor. Nor were these the only circumstances connected with him, all
of which afterwards proved an occasion of trial. He had a genius so
powerful, so profound, so acute, so elegant, that there was hardly any
one whom he did not very far surpass. The splendour of his learning, and
of his erudition generally, was such that there were few points of
divine philosophy, hardly any of human which he did not thoroughly
master. When Greek had yielded to his industry, he made himself a
proficient in Hebrew. What shall I say of his eloquence, the style of
which was so charming, so soft, so sweet, that honey rather than words
seemed to flow from his mouth! What subjects were there, however
difficult, which he did not render clear and perspicuous by the force of
his reasoning? What undertakings, however hard to accomplish, which he
did not make to appear most easy? But perhaps his assertions rested
simply on ingeniously woven argumentation?  On the contrary, no teacher
ever used more proofs drawn from Scripture. Then I suppose he wrote
little? No man more, so that, if I mistake not, his writings not only
cannot all be read through, they cannot all be found; <span
id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481.md) for that nothing might be wanting to
his opportunities of obtaining knowledge, he had the additional
advantage of a life greatly prolonged. <span
id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482.md) But perhaps he was not particularly
happy in his disciples? Who ever more so? From his school came forth
doctors, priests, confessors, martyrs, without number. <span
id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483.md) Then who can express how much he was
admired by all, how great his renown, how wide his influence? Who was
there whose religion was at all above the common standard that did not
hasten to him from the ends of the earth? What Christian did not
reverence him almost as a prophet; what philosopher as a master? How
great was the veneration with which he was regarded, not only by private
persons, but also by the Court, is declared by the histories which
relate how he was sent for by the mother of the Emperor Alexander, <span
id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484.md) moved by the heavenly wisdom with the
love of which she, as he, was inflamed. To this also his letters bear
witness, which, with the authority which he assumed as a Christian
Teacher, he wrote to the Emperor Philip, <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485.md) the first Roman prince that was a
Christian. As to his incredible learning, if any one is unwilling to
receive the testimony of Christians at our hands, let him at least
accept that of heathens at the hands of philosophers. For that impious
Porphyry says that when he was little more than a boy, incited by his
fame, he went to Alexandria, and there saw him, then an old man, but a
man evidently of so great attainments, that he had reached the summit of
universal knowledge.

<span id="iii.xviii-p10"></span>\[44.\] Time would fail me to recount,
even in a very small measure, the excellencies of this man, all of
which, nevertheless, not only contributed to the glory of religion, but
also increased the magnitude of the trial. For who in the world would
lightly desert a man of so great genius, so great learning, so great
influence, and would not rather adopt that saying, That he would rather
be wrong with Origen, than be right with others. <span
id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486.md)

<span id="iii.xviii-p12"></span>What shall I say more? The result was
that very many were led astray from the integrity of the faith, not by
any human excellencies of this so great man, this so great doctor, this
so great prophet, but, as the event showed, by the too perilous trial
which he proved to be. Hence it came to pass, that this Origen, such and
so great as he was, wantonly abusing the grace of God, rashly following
the bent of his own genius, and placing overmuch confidence in himself,
making light account of the ancient simplicity of the Christian
religion, presuming that he knew more than all the world besides,
de<span id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="iii.xviii-Page_145"></span>spising the traditions of the Church and
the determinations of the ancients, and interpreting certain passages of
Scripture in a novel way, deserved for himself the warning given to the
Church of God, as applicable in his case as in that of others, “If there
arise a prophet in the midst of thee,”… “thou shalt not hearken to the
words of that prophet,”…“because the Lord your God doth make trial of
you, whether you love Him or not.” <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487.md) Truly, thus of a sudden to seduce the
Church which was devoted to him, and hung upon him through admiration of
his genius, his learning, his eloquence, his manner of life and
influence, while she had no fear, no suspicion for herself,—thus, I say,
to seduce the Church, slowly and little by little, from the old religion
to a new profaneness, was not only a trial, but a great trial. <span
id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488.md)

<span id="iii.xviii-p15"></span>\[45.\] But some one will say, Origen’s
books have been corrupted. I do not deny it; nay, I grant it readily.
For that such is the case has been handed down both orally and in
writing, not only by Catholics, but by heretics as well. But the point
is, that though himself be not, yet books published under his name are,
a great trial, which, abounding in many hurtful blasphemies, are both
read and delighted in, not as being some one else’s, but as being
believed to be his, so that, although there was no error in Origen’s
original meaning, yet Origen’s authority appears to be an effectual
cause in leading people to embrace error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_480"></span>[143:481](2110259.htm#fr_480.md) <span
id="iii.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p4"></span> Origen was born of Christian parents, at
Alexandria, about the year 186. His father, Leonidas, suffered martyrdom
in the persecution under Severus, in 202; and the family estate having
been confiscated, his mother, with six younger children, became
dependent upon him for her support. At the age of eighteen he was
appointed by the bishop Demetrius over the Catechetical School of
Alexandria, the duties of which place he discharged with eminent ability
and success. He remained a layman till the age of forty-three, when he
was admitted to priest’s orders at Cæsarea, greatly to the displeasure
of Demetrius, by whose hand, according to the Church’s rule, the office
ought to have been conferred, and he was in consequence banished from
Alexandria. Returning to Cæsarea, he taught there with great reputation,
and had many eminent persons among his disciples. He suffered much in
the Decian persecution in 250, when he was thrown into prison and
subjected to severe tortures. His works, as Vincentius says, were very
numerous, including among them the Hexapla, a revised edition of the
Hebrew Scriptures and of the Septuagint version, together with three
other versions, the Hebrew being set forth in both Hebrew and Greek
characters. His writings were corrupted in many instances, so that, as
Vincentius says, opinions were often imputed to him which he would not
have acknowledged. He died in his sixty-ninth year at Tyre, and was
buried there.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[144:482](2110259.htm#fr_481.md) <span
id="iii.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p5"></span> “Quis nostrum,” says St. Jerome, “potest
tanta legere quanta ille conscripsit.”—*Hieron. ad Pam. et Occan*.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[144:483](2110259.htm#fr_482.md) <span
id="iii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p6"></span> He died, as was said in the preceding
note, in his sixty-ninth year.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[144:484](2110259.htm#fr_483.md) <span
id="iii.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p7"></span> Among these were Gregory Thaumaturgus,
Bishop of NeoCæsarea in Pontus, and Firmilian, Bishop of Cæsarea in
Cappadocia.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[144:485](2110259.htm#fr_484.md) <span
id="iii.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p8"></span> Mammea.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[144:486](2110259.htm#fr_485.md) <span
id="iii.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p9"></span> These are St. Jerome’s words, from whose
book, *De Viris illustribus* c. 54, Vincentius’s account of Origen is
taken. The vexed question of Philip’s claim to be ranked as a Christian
is discussed by Tillemont.—*<span id="iii.xviii-p9.1"></span>Histoire
des Empereurs*, T. iii. pp. 494 *sqq*.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[144:487](2110259.htm#fr_486.md) <span
id="iii.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p11"></span> Errare malo cum Platone quam cum istis
vera sentire.—Cicero, *Tuscul. Quæst*. 1.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[145:488](2110259.htm#fr_487.md) <span
id="iii.xviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p13"></span> [Deuteronomy xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[145:489](2110259.htm#fr_488.md) <span
id="iii.xviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p14"></span> “The great Origen died after his many
labors in peace. His immediate pupils were saints and rulers in the
Church. He has the praise of St. Athanasius, St. Basil, and St. Gregory
Nazianzen, and furnishes materials to St. Ambrose and St. Hilary; yet,
as time proceeded a definite heterodoxy was the growing result of his
theology, and at length, three hundred years after his death, he was
condemned, and, as has generally been considered, in an Œcumenical
Council.”—<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xviii-p14.1"></span>Newman</span> on *Development*, p. 85, First
Edition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Tertullian a great Trial to the Church.](2110260.md)
