[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110052)  [Next](2110054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xvi-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xvi-p1.1"></span>There</span> was also an illustrious name
of another anchorite in those regions, a man who dwelt in that part of
the desert which is about Syene. This man, when first he betook himself
to the wilderness, intended to live on the roots of plants which the
sand here and there produces, of a very sweet and delicious flavor; but
being ignorant of the nature of the herbs, he often gathered those which
were of a deadly character. And, indeed, it was not easy to discriminate
between the kind of the roots by the mere taste, since all were equally
sweet, but many of them, of a less known nature, contained within them a
deadly poison. When, therefore, the poison within tormented him on
eating these, and all his vitals were tortured with terrific pains,
while frequent vomitings, attended by excruciating agonies, were
shattering the very citadel of life, his stomach being completely
exhausted, he was in utter terror of all that had to be eaten for
sustaining existence. Having thus fasted for seven days, he was almost
at the point of death when a wild animal called an Ibex came up to him.
To this creature standing by him, he offered a bundle of plants which he
had collected on the previous day, yet had not ventured to touch; but
the beast, casting aside with its mouth those which were poisonous,
picked out such as it knew to be harmless. In this way, that holy man,
taught by its conduct what he ought to eat, and what to reject, both
escaped the danger of dying of hunger and of being poisoned by the
plants. But it would be tedious to relate all the facts which we have
either had personal knowledge of, or have heard from others, respecting
those who inhabit the desert. I spent a whole year, and nearly seven
months more, of set purpose, within these solitudes, being, however,
rather an admirer of the virtues of others, than myself making any
attempt to manifest the extraordinary endurance which they displayed.
For the greater part of the time I lived with the old man whom I have
mentioned, who possessed the well and the ox.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.](2110054.md)
