[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110491)  [Next](2110493.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.x.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.x.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.iii.x.vii-p1"></span>Testimonies from the Apostle
concerning the spirit of accidie.

<span id="iv.iii.x.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.x.vii-p2.1"></span>The</span> blessed Apostle, like a true
and spiritual physician, either seeing this disease, which springs from
the spirit of accidie, already creeping in, or foreseeing, through the
revelation of the Holy Spirit, that it would arise among monks, is quick
to anticipate it by the healing medicines of his directions. For in
writing to the Thessalonians, and at first, like a skilful and excellent
physician, applying to the infirmity of his patients the soothing and
gentle remedy of his words, and beginning with charity, and praising
them in that point, that <span id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967.md) this
deadly wound, having been treated with a milder remedy, might lose its
angry festering and more easily bear severer treatment, he says: “But
concerning brotherly charity ye have no need that I write to you: for
you yourselves are taught of God to love one another. For this ye do
toward all the brethren in the whole of Macedonia.” <span
id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968.md) He first began with the soothing
application of praise, and made their ears submissive and ready for the
remedy of the healing words. Then he proceeds: “But we ask you,
brethren, to abound more.” Thus far he soothes them with kind and gentle
words; for fear lest he should find them not yet prepared to receive
their perfect cure.  Why is it that you ask, O Apostle, that they may
abound more in charity, of which you had said above, “But concerning
brotherly charity we have no need to write to you”? And why is it
necessary that you should say to them: “But we ask you to abound more,”
when they did not need to be written to at all on this matter?
especially as you add the reason why they do not need it, saying, “For
you yourselves have been taught of God to love one another.” And you add
a third thing still more important: that not only have they been taught
of God, but also that they fulfil in deed that which they are taught.
“For ye do this,” he says, not to one or two, but “to all the brethren;”
and not to your own citizens and friends only, but “in the whole of
Macedonia.” Tell us then, I pray, why it is that you so particularly
begin with this. Again he proceeds, “But we ask you, brethren, to abound
the more.” And with difficulty at last he breaks out into that at which
he was driving before: “and that ye take pains to be quiet.” He gave the
first aim. Then he adds a second, “and to do your own business;” and a
third as well: “and work with your own hands, as we commanded you;” a
fourth: “and to walk honestly towards those that are without;” a fifth:
“and to covet no man’s goods.” Lo, we can see through that hesitation,
which made him with these preludes put off uttering what his mind was
full of: “And that ye take pains to be quiet;” i.e., that you stop in
your cells, and be not disturbed by rumours, which generally spring from
the wishes and gossip of idle persons, and so yourselves disturb others.
<span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="iv.iii.x.vii-Page_269"></span>And, “to do your own business,” you
should not want to require curiously of the world’s actions, or,
examining the lives of others, want to spend your strength, not on
bettering yourselves and aiming at virtue, but on depreciating your
brethren. “And work with your own hands, as we charged you;” to secure
that which he had warned them above not to do; i.e., that they should
not be restless and anxious about other people’s affairs, nor walk
dishonestly towards those without, nor covet another man’s goods, he now
adds and says, “and work with your own hands, as we charged you.” For he
has clearly shown that leisure the reason why those things were done
which he blamed above. For no one can be restless or anxious about other
people’s affairs, but one who is not satisfied to apply himself to the
work of his own hands. He adds also a fourth evil, which springs also
from this leisure, i.e., that they should not walk dishonestly: when he
says: “And that ye walk honestly towards those without.” He cannot
possibly walk honestly, even among those who are men of this world, who
is not content to cling to the seclusion of his cell and the work of his
own hands; but he is sure to be dishonest, while he seeks his needful
food; and to take pains to flatter, to follow up news and gossip, to
seek for opportunities for chattering and stories by means of which he
may gain a footing and obtain an entrance into the houses of others.
“And that you should not covet another man’s goods.” He is sure to look
with envious eyes on another’s gifts and boons, who does not care to
secure sufficient for his daily food by the dutiful and peaceful labour
of his hands. You see what conditions, and how serious and shameful
ones, spring solely from the malady of leisure. Lastly, those very
people, whom in his first Epistle he had treated with the gentle
application of his words, in his second Epistle he endeavours to heal
with severer and sterner remedies, as those who had not profited by more
gentle treatment; and he no longer applies the treatment of gentle
words, no mild and kindly expressions, as these, “But we ask you,
brethren,” but “We adjure you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye withdraw from every brother that walketh
disorderly.” <span id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969.md) There he asks; here
he adjures. There is the kindness of one who is persuading; here the
sternness of one protesting and threatening. “We adjure you, brethren:”
because, when we first asked you, you scorned to listen; now at least
obey our threats. And this adjuration he renders terrible, not by his
bare word, but by the imprecation of the name of our Lord Jesus Christ:
for fear lest they might again scorn it, as merely man’s word, and think
that it was not of much importance. And forthwith, like a well-skilled
physician with festering limbs, to which he could not apply the remedy
of a mild treatment, he tries to cure by an incision with a spiritual
knife, saying, “that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that
walketh disorderly, and not according to the tradition which ye received
of us.” And so he bids them withdraw from those who will not make time
for work, and to cut them off like limbs tainted with the festering
sores of leisure: lest the malady of idleness, like some deadly
contagion, might infect even the healthy portion of their limbs, by the
gradual advance of infection. And when he is going to speak of those who
will not work with their own hands and eat their bread in quietness,
from whom he urges them to withdraw, hear with what reproaches he brands
them at starting. First he calls them “disorderly,” and “not walking
according to the tradition.” In other words, he stigmatizes them as
obstinate, since they will not walk according to his appointment; and
“dishonest,” i.e., not keeping to the right and proper times for going
out, and visiting, and talking. For a disorderly person is sure to be
subject to all those faults. “And not according to the tradition which
they received from us.” And in this he stamps them as in some sort
rebellious, and despisers, who scorned to keep the tradition which they
had received from him, and would not follow that which they not only
remembered that the master had taught in word, but which they knew that
he had performed in deed. “For you yourselves know how ye ought to be
followers of us.” He heaps up an immense pile of censure when he asserts
that they did not observe that which was still in their memory, and
which not only had they learned by verbal instruction, but also had
received by the incitement of his example in working.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_967"></span>[268:968](2110492.htm#fr_967.md) <span
id="iv.iii.x.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x.vii-p3"></span> *Quousque* is used as equivalent to
*donec*, again in Conf. XXIII. xii.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[268:969](2110492.htm#fr_968.md) <span
id="iv.iii.x.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x.vii-p4"></span> [1 Thess.
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.x.vii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[269:970](2110492.htm#fr_969.md) <span
id="iv.iii.x.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x.vii-p5"></span> [2 Thess. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.x.vii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. That he is sure to be restless who will not be
content with the work of his own hands.](2110493.md)
