[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110061)  [Next](2110063.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.xxv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xxv-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xxv-p1.1"></span>For</span>, if it is worthy of admiration
that the flames did not touch that Egyptian of whom you have spoken,
Martin also not infrequently proved his power over fire. If you remind
us that the savagery of wild beasts was conquered by, and yielded to,
the anchorites, Martin, for his part, was accustomed to keep in check
both the fury of wild beasts and the poison of serpents. But, if you
bring forward for comparison him who cured those possessed of unclean
spirits, by the authority of his word, or even through the
instrumentality of threads from his dress, there are many proofs that
Martin was not, even in this respect, inferior. Nay, should you have
recourse to him, who, covered with his own hair instead of a garment,
was thought to be visited by angels, with Martin angels were wont to
hold daily discourse. Moreover, he bore so unconquerable a spirit
against vanity and boastfulness, that no one more determinedly disdained
these vices, and that, although he often, while absent, cured those who
were filled with unclean spirits, and issued his commands not only to
courtiers or prefects, but also to kings themselves. This was indeed a
very small thing amid his other virtues, but I should wish you to
believe that no one ever contended more earnestly than he did against
not only vanity, but also the causes and the occasions of vanity. I
shall also mention what is indeed a small point, but should not be
passed over, because it is to the credit of a man who, being possessed
of the highest power, manifested such a pious desire to show his regard
for the blessed Martin. I remember, then, that Vincentius the prefect,
an illustrious man, and one of the most eminent in all Gaul for every
kind of virtue, when he had occasion to be in the vicinity of Tours,
often begged of Martin that he would allow him to stay with him in the
monastery. In making this request, he brought forward the example of
Saint Ambrose, the bishop, who was generally spoken of at that time as
being in the habit of entertaining both consuls and prefects. But
Martin, with deeper judgment, refused so to act, lest by so doing some
vanity and inflation of spirit might steal upon him. You, therefore,
must acknowledge that there existed in Martin the virtues of all those
men whom you have mentioned, but there were not found in all of them the
virtues by which Martin was distinguished.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI.](2110063.md)
