[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110001)  [Next](2110003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.i"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_1"></span>

## <span id="ii.i-p0.1"></span>Life and Writings of Sulpitius Severus.

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>Sulpitius</span> (or Sulpicius) <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.i-p1.2"></span>Severus</span> was born in
Aquitania about <span class="sc"><span id="ii.i-p1.3"></span>a.d.</span>
363, and died, as is generally supposed, in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p1.4"></span>a.d.</span> 420. He was thus a contemporary of the
two great Fathers of the Church, St. Jerome and St. Augustine. The
former refers to him in his Commentary on the 36th chapter of Ezekiel as
“our friend Severus.” St. Augustine, again, having occasion to allude to
him in his 205th letter, describes him as “a man excelling in learning
and wisdom.” Sulpitius belonged to an illustrious family. He was very
carefully educated, and devoted himself in his early years to the
practice of oratory. He acquired a high reputation at the bar; but,
while yet in the prime of life, he resolved to leave it, and seek, in
company with some pious friends, contentment and peace in a life of
retirement and religious exercises. The immediate occasion of this
resolution was the premature death of his wife, whom he had married at
an early age, and to whom he was deeply attached. His abandonment of the
pleasures and pursuits of the world took place about <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.i-p1.5"></span>a.d.</span> 392; and,
notwithstanding all the entreaties and expostulations of his father, he
continued, from that date to his death, to lead a life of the strictest
seclusion. Becoming a Presbyter of the Church, he attached himself to
St. Martin of Tours, for whom he ever afterwards cherished the
profoundest admiration and affection, and whose extraordinary career he
has traced with a loving pen in by far the most interesting of his
works.

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>It is stated by some ancient writers that
Sulpitius ultimately incurred the charge of heresy, having, to some
extent, embraced Pelagian opinions. And there have not been wanting
those in modern times who thought they could detect traces of such
errors in his works. But it seems to us that there is no ground for any
such conclusion. Sulpitius constantly presents himself to us as a most
strenuous upholder of “catholic” or “orthodox” doctrines. It is evident
that his whole heart was engaged in the love and maintenance of these
doctrines: he counts as his “friends” those only who consistently
adhered to them; and, while by no means in favor of bitterly prosecuting
or severely punishing “heretics,” he shrunk with abhorrence from all
thought of communion with them. Perhaps the most striking impression we
receive from a perusal of his writings is his *sincerity*. We may often
feel that he is over-credulous in his acceptance of the miraculous; and
we may lament his narrowness in clinging so tenaciously to mere
ecclesiastical formulæ; but we are always impressed with the genuineness
of his convictions, and with his fervent desire to bring what he
believed to be truth under the attention of his readers.

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span>The style of Sulpitius is, upon the whole,
marked by a considerable degree of classical purity and clearness. He
has been called “the Christian Sallust,” and there are not a few obvious
resemblances between the two writers. But some passages occur in
Sulpitius which are almost, if not entirely, unintelligible. This is
owing partly to the uncertainty of the text, and partly to the use of
terms which had sprung up since classical times, and the exact import of
which it is impossible to determine. In executing our version of this
author (now for the first time, we believe, translated into English), we
have had constantly before us the editions of Sigonius (1609), of
Hornius (1664), of Vorstius (1709), and of Halm (1866). We have also
consulted a very old French translation of the *Historia Sacra*,
published at Rouen in 1580.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="ii.i-Page_2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span>The order in which we have arranged the
writings of Sulpitius is as follows:—

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span>1. Life of St. Martin.

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span>2. Letters (undoubted).

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span>3. Dialogues.

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span>4. Letters (doubtful).

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span>5. Sacred History.

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span>By far the most attractive of these works are
those bearing on the life and achievements of St. Martin. Sulpitius
delights to return again and again to this wonderful man, and cannot
find language sufficiently strong in which to extol his merits. Hence,
not only in the professed *Life*, but also in the *Letters* and
*Dialogues*, we have him brought very fully before us. The reader will
find near the beginning of the *Vita* as translated by us, a note
bearing upon the solemn asseverations of Sulpitius as to the reality of
the miracles which Martin performed.

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span>Most of the *Letters* here given are deemed
spurious by Halm, the latest editor of our author. He has, nevertheless,
included the whole of them in his edition, and we have thought it
desirable to follow his example in our translation.

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span>The *Sacred History* of Sulpitius has for its
object to present a compendious history of the world from the Creation
down to the year <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p12.1"></span>a.d.</span> 400. The first and longer portion of
the work is simply an abridgment of the Scripture narrative. The latter
part is more interesting and valuable, as it deals with events lying
outside of Scripture, and respecting which we are glad to obtain
information from all available sources. Unfortunately, however,
Sulpitius is not always a trustworthy authority. His inaccuracies in the
first part of his work are very numerous, and will be found pointed out
in our version.

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span>The following are some of the *Estimates*
which have been formed of our author.

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>Paulinus, a contemporary of Sulpitius, and
bishop of Nola, addressed to him about fifty letters, in the fifth of
which he thus writes: “It certainly would not have been given to thee to
draw up an account of Martin, unless by a pure heart thou hadst rendered
thy mouth worthy of uttering his sacred praises. Thou art blessed,
therefore, of the Lord, inasmuch as thou hast been able, in worthy
style, and with proper feeling, to complete the history of so great a
priest, and so illustrious a confessor. Blessed, too, is he, in
accordance with his merits, who has obtained a historian worthy of his
faith and of his life; and who has become consecrated to the Divine
glory by his own virtues, and to human memory by thy narrative regarding
him.”

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span>Gennadius (died <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.i-p15.1"></span>a.d.</span> 496), in his “Catalogue of
illustrious men,” says: “The Presbyter Severus, whose cognomen was
Sulpitius, belonged to the province of Aquitania. He was a man
distinguished both for his family and learning, and was remarkable for
his love of poverty and humility. He was also a great friend of some
holy men, such as Martin, bishop of Tours, and Paulinus, bishop of Nola;
and his works are by no means to be neglected.”

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span>In modern times, J. J. Scaliger has said of
Sulpitius, “He is the purest of all the ecclesiastical writers.” And
Vossius, referring to some remarks of Baronius on Sulpitius, says: “I
differ from him (Baronius) in this, that, without sufficient care, he
calls Gennadius the contemporary of Severus, since Gennadius flourished
seventy years, more or less, after Severus. For he dedicated his book
‘On Faith’ (as he himself tells us) to Pope Gelasius, who became bishop
of Rome in <span class="sc"><span id="ii.i-p16.1"></span>a.d.</span>
492. But he greatly extols the holiness of Sulpitius; and in the Roman
martyrology his memory (i.e. of Sulpitius) is celebrated on the 29th of
January.”

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span>Archdeacon Farrar has recently remarked
concerning Martin and Sulpitius, “Owing partly to the eloquent and
facile style of his (Martin’s) biographer, Sulpicius Severus, his name
was known from Armenia to Egypt more widely than that of any other monk
or bishop of his day.”—*Lives of the Fathers*, i. 628.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Life of St. Martin.](2110003)
