[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110902)  [Next](2110904) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.vii.xii"></span> <span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="iv.v.vii.xii-Page_454"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.vii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.v.vii.xii-p1"></span>Why inferiors should not be despised
in Conference.

<span id="iv.v.vii.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.vii.xii-p2.1"></span>For</span> it often happens either by an
illusion of the devil or by the occurrence of a human mistake (by which
every man in this life is liable to be deceived) that sometimes one who
is keener in intellect and more learned, gets some wrong notion in his
head, while he who is duller in wits and of less worth, conceives the
matter better and more truly. And therefore no one, however learned he
may be, should persuade himself in his empty vanity that he cannot
require conference with another. For even if no deception of the devil
blinds his judgment, yet he cannot avoid the noxious snares of pride and
conceit. For who can arrogate this to himself without great danger, when
the chosen vessel in whom, as he maintained, Christ Himself spoke,
declares that he went up to Jerusalem simply and solely for this reason,
that he might in a secret discussion confer with his fellow-Apostles on
the gospel which he preached to the gentiles by the revelation and
co-operation of the Lord? By which fact we are shown that we ought not
only by these precepts to preserve unanimity and harmony, but that we
need not fear any crafts of the devil opposing us, or snares of his
illusions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. How love does not only belong to God but is
God.](2110904)
