[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110266)  [Next](2110268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p1"></span>Heretics appeal to Scripture that they may
more easily succeed in deceiving.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p2"></span>\[64.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>Here</span>, possibly, some one may ask, Do
heretics also appeal to Scripture? They do indeed, and with a vengeance;
for you may see them scamper through every single book of Holy
Scripture,—through the books of Moses, the books of Kings, the Psalms,
the Epistles, the Gospels, the Prophets. Whether among their own people,
or among strangers, in private or in public, in speaking or in writing,
at convivial meetings, or in the streets, hardly ever do they bring
forward anything of their own which they do not endeavour to shelter
under words of Scripture. Read the works of Paul of Samosata, of
Priscillian, of Eunomius, of Jovinian, and the rest of those pests, and
you will see an infinite heap of instances, hardly a single page, which
does not bristle with plausible quotations from the New Testament or the
Old.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p3"></span>\[65.\] But the more secretly they conceal
themselves under shelter of the Divine Law, so much the more are they to
be feared and guarded against. For they know that the evil stench of
their doctrine will hardly find acceptance with any one if it be exhaled
pure and simple. They sprinkle it over, therefore, with the perfume of
heavenly language, in order that one who would be ready to despise human
error, may hesitate to condemn divine words. They do, in fact, what
nurses do when they would prepare some bitter draught for children; they
smear the edge of the cup all round with honey, that the unsuspecting
child, having first tasted the sweet, may have no fear of the bitter. So
too do these act, who disguise poisonous herbs and noxious juices under
the names of medicines, so that no one almost, when he reads the label,
suspects the poison.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p4"></span>\[66.\] It was for this reason that the
Saviour cried, “Beware of false prophets who come to you in sheep’s
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.” <span
id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) What is meant by “sheep’s clothing”?
What but the words which prophets and apostles with the guilelessness of
sheep wove beforehand as fleeces, for that immaculate Lamb which taketh
away the sin of the world? What are the ravening wolves? What but the
savage and rabid glosses of heretics, who continually infest the
Church’s folds, and tear in pieces the flock of Christ wherever they are
able? But that they may with more successful guile steal upon the
unsuspecting sheep, retaining the ferocity of the wolf, they put off his
appearance, and wrap themselves, so to say, in the language of the
Divine Law, as in a fleece, so that one, having felt the softness of
wool, may have no dread of the wolf’s fangs. But what saith the Saviour?
“By their fruits ye shall know them;” that is, when they have begun not
only to quote those divine words, but also to expound them, not as yet
only to make a boast of them as on their side, but also to interpret
them, then will that bitterness, that acerbity, that rage, be
understood; then will the ill-savour of that novel <span
id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span id="iii.xxvi-Page_151"></span>poison
be perceived, then will those profane novelties be disclosed, then may
you see first the hedge broken through, then the landmarks of the
Fathers removed, then the Catholic faith assailed, then the doctrine of
the Church torn in pieces.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p6"></span>\[67.\] Such were they whom the Apostle
Paul rebukes in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians, when he says,
“For of this sort are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into apostles of Christ.” <span
id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) The apostles brought forward instances
from Holy Scripture; these men did the same. The apostles cited the
authority of the Psalms; these men did so likewise. The apostles brought
forward passages from the prophets; these men still did the same. But
when they began to interpret in different senses the passages which both
had agreed in appealing to, then were discerned the guileless from the
crafty, the genuine from the counterfeit, the straight from the crooked,
then, in one word, the true apostles from the false apostles. “And no
wonder,” he says, “for Satan himself transforms himself into an angel of
light. It is no marvel then if his servants are transformed as the
servants of righteousness.” Therefore, according to the authority of the
Apostle Paul, as often as either false apostles or false teachers cite
passages from the Divine Law, by means of which, misinterpreted, they
seek to prop up their own errors, there is no doubt that they are
following the cunning devices of their father, which assuredly he would
never have devised, but that he knew that where he could fraudulently
and by stealth introduce error, there is no easier way of effecting his
impious purpose than by pretending the authority of Holy Scripture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_505"></span>[150:506](2110267.htm#fr_505) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p5"></span> [Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="iii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[151:507](2110267.htm#fr_506) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p7"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#012)<span id="iii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI. Heretics, in quoting Scripture, follow the example
of the Devil.](2110268)
