[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110009)  [Next](2110011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p1"></span>The Devil throws himself in the Way of
Martin.

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>Martin</span>, then, having gone on from
thence, after he had passed Milan, the devil met him in the way, having
assumed the form of a man. The devil first asked him to what place he
was going. Martin having answered him to the effect that he was minded
to go whithersoever the Lord called him, the devil said to him,
“Wherever you go, or whatever you attempt, the devil will resist you.”
Then Martin, replying to him in the prophetical word, said, “The Lord is
my helper; I will not fear what man can do unto me.” <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) Upon this, his enemy immediately vanished
out of his sight; and thus, as he had intended in his heart and mind, he
set free his mother from the errors of heathenism, though his father
continued to cleave to its evils. However, he saved many by his example.

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p4"></span>After this, when the Arian heresy had
spread through the whole world, and was especially powerful in Illyria,
and when he, almost single-handed, was fighting most strenuously against
the treachery of the priests, and had been subjected to many punishments
(for he was publicly scourged, and at last was compelled to leave the
city), again betaking himself to Italy, and having found the Church in
the two divisions of Gaul in a distracted condition through the
departure also of the holy Hilarius, whom the violence of the heretics
had driven into exile, he established a monastery for himself at Milan.
There, too, Auxentius, the originator and leader of the Arians, bitterly
persecuted him; and, after he had assailed him with many injuries,
violently expelled him from the city. Thinking, therefore, that it was
necessary to yield to circumstances, he withdrew to the island
Gallinaria, <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) with a certain
presbyter as his companion, a man of distinguished excellences. Here he
subsisted for some time on the roots of plants; and, while doing so, he
took for food hellebore, which is, as people say, a poisonous kind of
grass. But when he perceived the strength of the poison increasing
within him, and death now nearly at hand, he warded off the imminent
danger by means of prayer, and immediately all his pains were put to
flight. And not long after having discovered that, through penitence on
the part of the king, permission to return had been granted to holy
Hilarius, he made an effort to meet him at Rome, and, with this view,
set out for that city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[7:15](2110010.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="ii.ii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p3"></span> Comp. [Ps. cxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[7:16](2110010.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="ii.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.vii-p5"></span> An island near Albium Ingaunum—the
modern Allenga, on the gulf of Genoa. The island was so named from
abounding in fowls in a half tamed state. It still bears the name of
Gallinaria.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Martin restores a Catechumen to Life.](2110011.md)
