[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110267)  [Next](2110269) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxvii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p1"></span>Heretics, in quoting Scripture, follow
the example of the Devil.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p2"></span>\[68.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>But</span> some one will say, What proof have
we that the Devil is wont to appeal to Holy Scripture? Let him read the
Gospels wherein it is written, “Then the Devil took Him (the Lord the
Saviour) and set Him upon a pinnacle of the Temple, and said unto Him:
If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down, for it is written, He
shall give His angels charge concerning thee, that they may keep thee in
all thy ways: In their hands they shall bear thee up, lest perchance
thou dash thy foot against a stone.” <span
id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) What sort of treatment must men,
insignificant wretches that they are, look for at the hands of him who
assailed even the Lord of Glory with quotations from Scripture? “If thou
be the Son of God,” saith he, “cast thyself down.” Wherefore? “For,”
saith he, “it is written.” It behoves us to pay special attention to
this passage and bear it in mind, that, warned by so important an
instance of Evangelical authority, we may be assured beyond doubt, when
we find people alleging passages from the Apostles or Prophets against
the Catholic Faith, that the Devil speaks through their mouths. For as
then the Head spoke to the Head, so now also the members speak to the
members, the members of the Devil to the members of Christ, misbelievers
to believers, sacrilegious to religious, in one word, Heretics to
Catholics.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p4"></span>\[69.\] But what do they say? “If thou be
the Son of God, cast thyself down;” that is, If thou wouldst be a son of
God, and wouldst receive the inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven, cast
thyself down; that is, cast thyself down from the doctrine and tradition
of that sublime Church, which is imagined to be nothing less than the
very temple of God. And if one should ask one of the heretics who gives
this advice, How do you prove? What ground have you, for saying, that I
ought to cast away the universal and ancient faith of the Catholic
Church? he has the answer ready, “For it is written;” and forthwith he
produces a thousand testimonies, a thousand examples, a thousand
authorities from the Law, from the Psalms, from the apostles, from the
Prophets, by means of which, interpreted on a new and wrong principle,
the unhappy soul may be precipitated from the height of Catholic truth
to the lowest abyss of heresy. Then, with the accompanying promises, the
heretics are wont marvellously to beguile the incautious. For they dare
to teach and promise, that in their church, that is, in the conventicle
of their communion, there is a certain great and special and altogether
personal grace of God, so that whosoever pertain to their number,
without any labour, without any effort, without any industry, even
though they neither ask, nor seek, nor knock, have such a dispensation
from God, that, borne up by angel hands, that is, preserved by the
protection of angels, it is impossible they should ever dash their feet
against a stone, that is, that they should ever be offended. <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_507"></span>[151:508](2110268.htm#fr_507) <span
id="iii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p3"></span> [Matt. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005)<span id="iii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[151:509](2110268.htm#fr_508) <span
id="iii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p5"></span> See Appendix II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. What Rule is to be observed in the Interpretation
of Scripture.](2110269)
