[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110889)  [Next](2110891.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.vi.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.vi.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.v.vi.x-p1"></span>A revelation on the trial of perfect
chastity.

<span id="iv.v.vi.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.vi.x-p2.1"></span>And</span> to prove this that we have said
both by the testimony of the ancients and divine oracles, we had better
bring forward in his own words and experience what the blessed
Paphnutius <span id="fr_1959"></span>[1960](#fn_1959.md) felt on the
subject of admiration of miracles and the grace of purity, or rather
what he learnt from the revelation of an angel. For this man had been
famous for many years for his signal strictness so that he fancied that
he was completely free from the snares of carnal concupiscence because
he felt himself superior to all the attacks of the demons with whom he
had fought openly and for a long while; and when some holy men had come
to him, he was preparing for them a porridge of lentiles which they call
Athera, <span id="fr_1960"></span>[1961](#fn_1960.md) and his hand, as it
happened, was burnt in the oven, by a flame that darted up. And when
this happened he was much mortified and began silently to consider with
himself, and ask why was not the fire at peace with me, when my more
serious contests with demons have ceased? or how will that unquenchable
fire which searches out the deserts of all pass me by in that dread day
of judgment, and fail to detain me, if this trivial temporal fire from
without has not spared me? And as he was troubled by thoughts of this
kind and vexation a sudden sleep overcame him and an angel of the Lord
came to him and said: “Paphnutius, why are you vexed because that
earthly fire is not yet at peace with you, while there still remains in
your members some disturbance of carnal motions that is not completely
removed? For as long as the roots of this flourish within you, they will
not suffer that material fire to be at peace with you.  And certainly
you could not feel it harmless unless you found by such proofs as these
that all these internal motions within you were destroyed. Go, take a
naked and most beautiful virgin, and if while you hold her you find that
the peace of your heart remains steadfast, and that carnal heat is still
and quiet within you, then the touch of this visible flame also shall
pass over you gently and without harming you as it did over the three
children in Babylon.” And so the Elder was impressed by this revelation
and did not try the dangers of the experiment divinely shown to him, but
asked his own conscience and examined the purity of his heart; and,
guessing that the weight of purity was not yet sufficient to outweigh
the force of this trial, it is no wonder, said he, if when the battles
with unclean spirits come upon me, I still feel the flames of the fire,
which I used to think of less importance than the savage attacks of
demons, still raging against me. Since it is a greater virtue and a
grander grace to extinguish the inward lust of the flesh than by the
sign of the Lord <span id="fr_1961"></span>[1962](#fn_1961.md) and the
power of the might of the Most High to subdue the wicked demons which
rush upon one from without, or to drive them by invoking the Divine name
from the bodies which they have possessed. So far Abbot Nesteros,
finishing the account of the true working of the gifts of grace
accompanied us to the cell of the Elder Joseph which was nearly six
miles distant from his, as we were eager for instruction in his
doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1959"></span>[449:1960](2110890.htm#fr_1959.md) <span
id="iv.v.vi.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi.x-p3"></span> Cf. the note on the Conferences III. i.

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[449:1961](2110890.htm#fr_1960.md) <span
id="iv.v.vi.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi.x-p4"></span> *Athera*. This is noticed by Pliny
(Hist. Nat. xxii. 25, 57, § 121) as the Egyptian name for a decoction
made from grain.

<span id="fn_1961"></span>[449:1962](2110890.htm#fr_1961.md) <span
id="iv.v.vi.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi.x-p5"></span> i.e. the sign of the cross.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference XVI. The First Conference of Abbot Joseph. On
Friendship.](2110891.md)
