[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110077)  [Next](2110079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii"></span> <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-Page_45"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>But</span> in what I am now about to
narrate, I possess you, Sulpitius” (here he looked at me) “as a
fellow-witness. One day, I and Sulpitius there were watching before
Martin’s door, and had already sat in silence for several hours. We did
so with deep reverence and awe, as if we were carrying out a watch
prescribed to us before the tent of an angel; while, all the time, the
door of his cell being closed, he did not know that we were there.
Meanwhile, we heard the sound of people conversing, and by and by we
were filled with a kind of awe and amazement, for we could not help
perceiving that something divine was going on. After nearly two hours,
Martin comes out to us; and then our friend Sulpitius (for no one was
accustomed to speak to him more familiarly) began to entreat him to make
known to us, piously enquiring on the subject, what meant that sort of
Divine awe which we confessed we had both felt, and with whom he had
been conversing in his cell. We added that, as we stood before the door,
we had undoubtedly heard a feeble sound of people talking, but had
scarcely understood it. Then he after a long delay (but there was really
nothing which Sulpitius could not extort from him even against his will:
I am about to relate things somewhat difficult of belief, but, as Christ
is my witness, I lie not, unless any one is so impious as to think that
Martin himself lied) said: ‘I will tell *you*, but I beg you will not
speak of it to any one else. Agnes, Thecla, and Mary were there with
me.’ He proceeded to describe to us the face and general aspect of each.
And he acknowledged that, not merely on that day, but frequently, he
received visits from them. Nor did he deny that Peter also and Paul, the
Apostles, were pretty frequently seen by him. Moreover, he was in the
habit of rebuking the demons by their special names, according as they
severally came to him. He found Mercury a cause of special annoyance,
while he said that Jupiter was stupid and doltish. I am aware that these
things seemed incredible even to many who dwelt in the same monastery;
and far less can I expect that all who simply hear of them will believe
them. For unless Martin had lived such an inestimable life, and
displayed such excellence, he would by no means be regarded among us as
having been endowed with so great glory. And yet it is not at all
wonderful that human infirmity doubted concerning the works of Martin,
when we see that many at the present day do not even believe the
Gospels. But we have ourselves had personal knowledge and experience,
that angels often appeared and spoke familiarly with Martin. As bearing
upon this, I am to narrate a matter, of small importance indeed, but
still I will state it. A synod, composed of bishops, was held at
Nemausus, and while he had refused to attend it, he was nevertheless
desirous of knowing what was done at it. It so happened that our friend
Sulpitius was then on board ship with him, but, as was his custom, he
kept his place at a distance from the rest, in a retired part of the
vessel. There an angel announced to him what had taken place in the
synod. And when, afterwards, we carefully enquired into the time at
which the council was held, we found, beyond all doubt, that that was
the very day of the council, and that those things were there decreed by
the bishops which the angel had announced to Martin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV.](2110079)
