[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110543)  [Next](2110545) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.xii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xiii-p1"></span>The teaching of the elders on the
method of acquiring purity.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.xii.xiii-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> it is now time to
produce, in the very words in which they hand it down, the opinion of
the Fathers; viz., of those who have not painted the way of perfection
and its character in high-sounding words, but rather, possessing it in
deed and truth, and in the virtue of their spirit, have passed it on by
their own experience and sure example. And so they say that no one can
be altogether cleansed from carnal sins, unless he has realized that all
his labours and efforts are insufficient for so great and perfect an
end; and unless, taught, not by the system handed down to him, but by
his feelings and virtues and his own experience, he recognizes that it
can only be gained by the mercy and assistance of God. For in order to
acquire such splendid and lofty prizes of purity and perfection, however
great may be the efforts of fastings and vigils and readings and
solitude and retirement applied to it, they will not be sufficient to
secure it by the merits of the actual efforts and toil. For a man’s own
efforts and human exertions will never make up for the lack of the
divine gift, unless it is granted by divine compassion in answer to his
prayer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. That the help of God is given to those who
labour.](2110545)
