[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110557)  [Next](2110559) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-p1"></span>A description of the faults which
spring from the evil of pride.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>The</span> mind then that is hardened
by such feelings, and which begins with this miserable coldness is sure
to go daily from bad to worse and to conclude its life with a more
hideous end: and while it takes delight in its former desires, and is
overcome, as the apostle says, by impious avarice (as he says of it “and
covetousness, which is idolatry, or the worship of idols,” and again
“the love of money,” says he, “is the root of all evils” <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[1079](#fn_1078) ) can never admit into the heart
the true and unfeigned humility of Christ, while the man boasts himself
of his high birth, or is puffed up by his position in the world (which
he has forsaken in body but not in mind) or is proud of his wealth which
he retains to his own destruction; and because of this he is no longer
content to endure the yoke of the monastery, or to be instructed by the
teaching of any of the elders, and not only objects to observe any rule
of subjection or obedience, but will not even listen to teaching about
perfection; and such dislike of spiritual talk grows up in his heart
that if such a conversation should happen to arise, he cannot keep his
eyes fixed on one spot, but his gaze wanders blankly about here and
there, and his eyes shift hither and thither, as the custom is. Instead
of wholesome coughs, he spits from a dry throat: he coughs on purpose
without any need, he drums with his fingers, and twiddles them and
scribbles like a man writing: and all his limbs fidget so that while the
spiritual conversation is proceeding, you would think that he was
sitting on thorns, and those very sharp ones, or in the midst of a mass
of worms: and if the conversation turns in all simplicity on something
which is for the good of the hearers, he thinks that it is brought
forward for his especial benefit. And all the time that the examination
of the spiritual life is proceeding, he is taken up with his own
suspicious thoughts, and is not on the watch for something to take home
for his good, but is anxiously seeking the reason why anything is said,
or is quietly turning over in his mind, how he can raise objections to
it, so that he cannot at all take in any of those things which are so
admirably brought forward, or be done any good to by them. And so the
result is that the spiritual conference is not merely of no use to him,
but is positively injurious, and becomes to him an occasion of greater
sin. For while he is conscience stricken and fancies that everything is
being aimed at him he hardens himself more stubbornly in the obstinacy
of his heart, and is more keenly affected by the stings of his wrath:
then afterwards his voice is loud, his talk harsh, his answers bitter
and noisy, his gait lordly and capricious; his tongue too ready, he is
forward in conversation and no friend to silence except when he is
nursing in his heart some bitterness against a brother, and his silence
denotes not compunction or humility, but pride and wrath: so that one
can hardly say which is the more objectionable in him, that unrestrained
and boisterous merriment, or this dreadful and deadly solemnity. <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[1080](#fn_1079) For in the former we see
inopportune chattering, light and frivolous laughter, unrestrained and
undisciplined mirth. In the latter a silence that is full of wrath and
deadly; and which simply arises from the desire to prolong as long as
possible the rancorous feelings which are nourished in silence against
some brother, and not from the wish to obtain from it the virtues of
humility and patience. <span id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-Page_289"></span>And as the man who is a victim to
passion readily makes everybody else miserable and is ashamed to
apologize to the brother whom he has wronged, so when the brother offers
to do so to him, he rejects it with scorn. And not only is he not
touched or softened by the advances of his brother; but is the rather
made more angry because his brother anticipates him in humility. And
that wholesome humiliation and apology, which generally puts an end to
the devil’s temptation, becomes to him an occasion of a worse outbreak.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[288:1079](2110558.htm#fr_1078) <span
id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-p3"></span> [Col.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005), [1 Tim.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[288:1080](2110558.htm#fr_1079) <span
id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxvii-p4"></span> *Serietas* (Petschenig):
*Taciturnitas* (Gazæus).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII. On the pride of a certain brother.](2110559)
