[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110255)  [Next](2110257.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iii.xv-p1"></span>Jesus Christ Man in Truth, not in Semblance.

<span id="iii.xv-p2"></span>\[38.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xv-p2.1"></span>But</span> when we use the word “Person,” and
say that God became man by means of a Person, there is reason to fear
that our meaning may be taken to be, that God the Word assumed our
nature merely in imitation, and performed the actions of man, being man
not in reality, but only in semblance, just as in a theatre, one man
within a brief space represents several persons, not one of whom himself
is. For when one undertakes to sustain the part of another, he performs
the offices, or does the acts, of the person whose part he sustains, but
he is not himself that person. So, to take an illustration from secular
life and one in high favour with the Manichees, when a tragedian
represents a priest or a king, he is not really a priest or a king. For,
as soon as the play is over, the person or character whom he represented
ceases to be. God forbid that we should have anything to do with such
nefarious and wicked mockery. Be it the infatuation of the Manichees,
those preachers of hallucination, who say that the Son of God, God, was
not a human person really and truly, but that He counterfeited the
person of a man in feigned conversation and manner of life.

<span id="iii.xv-p3"></span>\[39.\] But the Catholic Faith teaches that
the Word of God became man in such wise, that He took upon Him our
nature, not feign<span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="iii.xv-Page_142"></span>edly and in semblance, but in reality and
truth, and performed human actions, not as though He were imitating the
actions of another, but as performing His own, and as being in reality
the person whose part He sustained. Just as we ourselves also, when we
speak, reason, live, subsist, do not imitate men, but are men. Peter and
John, for instance, were men, not by imitation, but by being men in
reality. Paul did not counterfeit an apostle, or feign himself to be
Paul, but was an apostle, was Paul. So, also, that which God the Word
did, in His condescension, in assuming and having flesh, in speaking,
acting, and suffering, through the instrumentality of flesh, yet without
any marring of His own divine nature, came in one word to this:—He did
not imitate or feign Himself to be perfect man, but He shewed Himself to
be very man in reality and truth. Therefore, as the soul united to the
flesh, but yet not changed into flesh, does not imitate man, but is man,
and man not feignedly but substantially, so also God the Word, without
any conversion of Himself, in uniting Himself to man, became man, not by
confusion, not by imitation, but by actually being and subsisting. Away
then, once and for all, with the notion of His Person as of an assumed
fictitious character, where always what is is one thing, what is
counterfeited another, where the man who acts never is the man whose
part he acts. God forbid that we should believe God the Word to have
taken upon Himself the person of a man in this illusory way. Rather let
us acknowledge that while His own unchangeable substance remained, and
while He took upon Himself the nature of perfect man, Himself actually
was flesh, Himself actually was man, Himself actually was personally
man; not feignedly, but in truth, not in imitation, but in substance;
not, finally, so as to cease to be when the performance was over, but so
as to be, and continue to be substantially and permanently. <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_472"></span>[142:473](2110256.htm#fr_472.md) <span
id="iii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p4"></span> The word “Person” is used in this and the
preceding section in a way which might seem at variance with Catholic
truth. Christ did not assume the Person of a man; but, being God, He
united in his one divine Person, the Godhead and the Manhood. This
Vincentius himself teaches most explicitly. But his object here is to
show that our blessed Lord, while conversant among us as man, and being
to all appearance man, did not *personate* man, but was man in deed and
in truth. The misconception against which Vincentius seeks to guard
arises from the ambiguity of the Latin *Persona*, an ambiguity which is
not continued in our derived word *Person*. *Persona* signifies not only
*Person*, in our sense of the word, but also an *assumed character*.
Though however we have not this sense in *Person*, we have it in
*Personate*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. The Union of the Divine with the Human Nature took
place in the very Conception of the Virgin. The appellation “The Mother
of God.”](2110257.md)
