[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110145)  [Next](2110147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xii"></span> <span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.xii-Page_76"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xii-p1.1"></span>In</span> the mean time, affairs having
been well settled in Egypt to meet the famine, a grievous want of corn
began to distress the world. Jacob, constrained by this necessity, sent
his sons into Egypt, keeping only Benjamin with himself at home. Joseph,
then, being at the head of affairs, and having complete power over the
corn-supplies, his brothers come to him, and pay the same honor to him
as to a king. He, when he saw them, craftily concealed his recognition
of them, and accused them of having come as enemies, subtly to spy out
the land. But he was annoyed that he did not see among them his brother
Benjamin. Matters, then, are brought to this point, that they promised
he should be present, specially that he might be asked whether they had
entered Egypt for the purpose of spying out the land. In order to secure
the fulfillment of this promise, Symeon was retained as hostage, while
to them corn was given freely. Accordingly, they returned, bringing
Benjamin with them as had been arranged. Then Joseph made himself known
to his brothers to the shame of these evil-deservers. Thus, he sent them
home again, laden with corn, and presented with many gifts, forewarning
them that there were still five years of famine to come, and advising
them to come down with their father, their children, and their whole
connections to Egypt. So Jacob went down to Egypt, to the great joy of
the Egyptians and of the king himself, while he was tenderly welcomed by
his son. That took place in the hundred and thirtieth year of the life
of Jacob, and one thousand three hundred and sixty years <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) after the deluge. But from the time
when Abraham settled in the land of the Canaanites, to that when Jacob
entered Egypt, there are to be reckoned two hundred and fifteen years.
After this, Jacob, in the seventeenth year of his residence in Egypt,
suffering severely from illness, entreated Joseph to see his remains
placed in the tomb. Then Joseph presented his sons to be blessed; <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) and when this had been done, but so
that he set the younger before the elder as to the value of the blessing
given, Jacob then blessed all his sons in order. He died at the age of
one hundred and forty-seven years. His funeral was of a most imposing
character, and Joseph laid his remains in the tomb of his fathers. He
continued to treat his brothers with kindness, although, after the death
of their father, they felt alarmed from a consciousness of the wrong
they had done. Joseph himself died in his one hundred and tenth year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_270"></span>[76:271](2110146.htm#fr_270) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xii-p2"></span> The chronology of the LXX is, as
usual, here followed.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[76:272](2110146.htm#fr_271) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xii-p3"></span> The original is, “quibus benedictis,
cum tamen benedictionis merito majori minorem præposuisset, filios omnes
benedictione lustravit.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.](2110147)
