[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110319)  [Next](2110321.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iv"></span> <span id="page_215">p. 215</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iv-Page_215"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p1"></span>How the Mattin office was not
appointed by an ancient tradition but was started in our own day for a
definite reason.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>But</span> you must know that this
Mattins, which is now very generally observed in Western countries, was
appointed as a canonical office in our own day, and also in our own
monastery, where our Lord Jesus Christ was born of a Virgin and deigned
to submit to growth in infancy as man, and where by His Grace He
supported our own infancy, still tender in religion, and, as it were,
fed with milk. <span id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733.md) For up till that
time we find that when this office of Mattins (which is generally
celebrated after a short interval after the Psalms and prayers of
Nocturns in the monasteries of Gaul) was finished, together with the
daily vigils, the remaining hours were assigned by our Elders to bodily
refreshment. But when some rather carelessly abused this indulgence and
prolonged their time for sleep too long, as they were not obliged by the
requirements of any service to leave their cells or rise from their beds
till the third hour; and when, as well as losing their labour, they were
drowsy from excess of sleep in the daytime, when they ought to have been
applying themselves to some duties, (especially on those days when an
unusually oppressive weariness was caused by their keeping watch from
the evening till the approach of morning), a complaint was brought to
the Elders by some of the brethren who were ardent in spirit and in no
slight measure disturbed by this carelessness, and it was determined by
them after long discussion and anxious consideration that up till
sunrise, when they could without harm be ready to read or to undertake
manual labour, time for rest should be given to their wearied bodies,
and after this they should all be summoned to the observance of this
service and should rise from their beds, and by reciting three Psalms
and prayers (after the order anciently fixed for the observance of
Tierce and Sext, to signify the confession of the Trinity) <span
id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734.md) should at the same time by an uniform
arrangement put an end to their sleep and make a beginning to their
work. And this form, although it may seem to have arisen out of an
accident and to have been appointed within recent memory for the reason
given above, yet it clearly makes up according to the letter that number
which the blessed David indicates (although it can be taken
spiritually): “Seven times a day do I praise Thee because of Thy
righteous judgments.” <span id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735.md) For by the
addition of this service we certainly hold these spiritual assemblies
seven times a day, and are shown to sing praises to God seven times in
it. <span id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736.md) Lastly, though this same
form, starting from the East, has most beneficially spread to these
parts, yet still in some long-established monasteries in the East, which
will not brook the slightest violation of the old rules of the Fathers,
it seems never to have been introduced. <span
id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_733"></span>[215:734](2110320.htm#fr_733.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p3"></span> The allusion is to the monastery at
Bethlehem, where Cassian had himself been educated. See the
introduction.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[215:735](2110320.htm#fr_734.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p4"></span> *Trinæ confessionis exemplo*. The
words appear to mean that the three Psalms used at these offices are
significant of the Persons of the Holy Trinity. So somewhat similarly
Cyprian (on the Lord’s Prayer) speaks of the third, sixth, and ninth
hours being observed as a sacrament of the Trinity.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[215:736](2110320.htm#fr_735.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p5"></span> [Psa.
119.164](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#164.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[215:737](2110320.htm#fr_736.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p6"></span> This second “Mattins” of which
Cassian has been speaking is the service which the later Church called
Prime, Cassian’s first Mattins corresponding to Lauds, and his Nocturns,
or “Vigiliæ,” to Mattins. Thus the “seven hours” are made up as follows:
(1) Nocturns or Mattins, (2) Lauds, (3) Prime, (4) Tierce, (5) Sext, (6
None, (7) Vespers. Compline, it will be noticed, had not yet been
introduced. This appears for the first time in the Rule of S. Benedict
(c. xvi.), a century later. By its introduction the “day hours” were
made up to seven Nocturns belonging strictly to the night, and answering
to the Psalmist’s words, “At *midnight* will I rise to give thanks to
Thee.” [Ps. cxix. 62](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#062.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[215:738](2110320.htm#fr_737.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p7"></span> The introduction of Prime appears to
have been very gradual even in the West, for, though an office for it is
prescribed in S. Benedict (c. xix.), yet there is no mention of it in
the Rule of Cæsarius of Arles for monks nor in that of Isidore of
Seville, and it is omitted by Cassiodorus in his enumeration of the
seven hours observed by the monks. After Benedict the next to mention it
appears to be Aurelius, a successor of Cæsarius at Arles, and by degrees
it made its way to universal adoption in the West. In the Greek Church
the office for it is said continuously with Lauds (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>τὸ ὄρθρον</span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. How they ought not to go back to bed again after the
Mattin prayers.](2110321.md)
