[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110244)  [Next](2110246.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span>What is to be done if one or more dissent
from the rest.

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>\[7.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv-p2.1"></span>What</span> then will a Catholic Christian do,
if a small portion of the Church have cut itself off from the communion
of the universal faith? What, surely, but prefer the soundness of the
whole body to the unsoundness of a pestilent and corrupt member? What,
if some novel contagion seek to infect not merely an insignificant
portion of the Church, but the whole? Then it will be his care to cleave
to antiquity, which at this day cannot possibly be seduced by any fraud
of novelty.

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span>\[8.\] But what, if in antiquity itself
there be found error on the part of two or three men, or at any rate of
a city or even of a province? Then it will be his care by all means, to
prefer the decrees, if such there be, of an ancient General Council to
the rashness and ignorance of a few. But what, if some error should
spring up on which no such decree is found to bear? Then he must collate
and consult and interrogate the opinions of the ancients, of those,
namely, who, though living in divers times and places, yet continuing in
the communion and faith of the one Catholic Church, stand forth
acknowledged and approved authorities: and whatsoever he shall ascertain
to have been held, written, taught, not by one or two of these only, but
<span id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span id="iii.iv-Page_133"></span>by
all, equally, with one consent, openly, frequently, persistently, that
he must understand that he himself also is to believe without any doubt
or hesitation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The evil resulting from the bringing in of Novel
Doctrine shown in the instances of the Donatists and Arians.](2110246.md)
