[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110794)  [Next](2110796) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.x.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxv-p1"></span>Of the character of the sublimer
prayer.

<span id="iv.iv.x.xxv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.x.xxv-p2.1"></span>This</span> prayer then though it seems to
contain all the fulness of perfection, as being what was originated and
appointed by the Lord’s own authority, yet lifts those to whom it
belongs to that still higher condition of which we spoke above, and
carries them on by a loftier stage to that ardent prayer which is known
and tried by but very few, and which to speak more truly is ineffable;
which transcends all human thoughts, and is distinguished, I will not
say by any sound of the voice, but by no movement of the tongue, or
utterance of words, but which the mind enlightened by the infusion of
that heavenly light describes in no human and confined language, but
pours forth richly as from copious fountain in an accumulation of
thoughts, and ineffably utters to God, expressing in the shortest
possible space of time such great things that the mind when it returns
to its usual condition cannot easily utter or relate. And this condition
our Lord also similarly prefigured by the form of those supplications
which, when he retired alone in the mountain He is said to have poured
forth in silence, and when being in an agony of prayer He shed forth
even drops of blood, as an example of a purpose which it is hard to
imitate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI. Of the different causes of conviction.](2110796)
