[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110622)  [Next](2110624.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iv.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.v-p1"></span>How the first of these calls is of no
use to a sluggard, and the last is no hindrance to one who is in
earnest.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.v-p2.1"></span>Of</span> these three calls then, although
the two former may seem to rest on better principles, yet sometimes we
find that even by the third grade, which seems the lowest and the
coldest, men have been made perfect and most earnest in spirit, and have
become like those who made an admirable beginning in approaching the
Lord’s service, and passed the rest of their lives also in most laudable
fervour of spirit: and again we find that from the higher grade very
many have grown cold, and often have come to a miserable end. And just
as it was no hindrance to the former class that they seemed to be
converted not of their own free will, but by force and compulsion, in as
much as the loving kindness of the Lord secured for them the opportunity
for repentance, so too to the latter it was of no avail that the early
days of their conversion were so bright, because they were not careful
to bring the remainder of their life to a suitable end. For in the case
of Abbot Moses, <span id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205.md) who lived in
a spot in the wilderness called Calamus, <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206.md) nothing was wanting to his merits
and perfect bliss, in consequence of the fact that he was driven to flee
to the monastery through fear of death, which was hanging over him
because of a murder; for he made such use of his compulsory conversion
that with ready zeal he turned it into a voluntary one and climbed the
topmost heights of perfection. As also on the other hand; to very many,
whose names I ought not to mention, it has been of no avail that they
entered on the Lord’s service with better beginning than this, as
afterwards sloth and hardness of heart crept over them, and they fell
into a dangerous state of torpor, and the bottomless pit of death, an
instance of which we see clearly indicated in the call of the Apostles.
For of what good was it to Judas that he had of his own free will
embraced the highest grade of the Apostolate in the same way in which
Peter and the rest of the Apostles had been summoned, as he allowed the
splendid beginning of his call to terminate in a ruinous end of cupidity
and covetousness, and as a cruel murderer even rushed into the betrayal
of the Lord? Or what hindrance was it to Paul that he was suddenly
blinded, and seemed to be drawn against his will into the way of
salvation, as afterwards he followed the Lord with complete fervour of
soul, and having begun by compulsion completed it by a free and
voluntary devotion, and terminated with a magnificent end a life that
was rendered glorious by such great deeds? Everything therefore depends
upon the end; in which one who was consecrated by a noble conversion at
the outset may through carelessness turn out a failure, and one who was
compelled by necessity to adopt the monastic life may through fear of
God and earnestness be made perfect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[321:1206](2110623.htm#fr_1205.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.v-p3"></span> Moses. This Abbot is possibly a
different person from the author of the first two Conferences, who had
in his youth been a pupil of Antony; whereas the one here mentioned only
took the monastic life out of fear of death on a charge of murder. He is
mentioned again in Conferences VII. xxvi., XIX. xi., and some account of
him is given in Sozomen H.E. VI. xxix.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[321:1207](2110623.htm#fr_1206.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.v-p4"></span> Calamus, mentioned again in the
Institutes X. xxiv. (where see note), and cf. Conf. VII. xxvi.; XXIV.
iv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. An account of the three sorts of
renunciations.](2110624.md)
