[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110152)  [Next](2110154) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xix"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xix-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xix-p1.1"></span>Moses</span> reported these words of God to
the people, and placed an altar of twelve stones at the foot of the
mountain. Then he again ascended the mountain on which the Lord had
taken his place, bringing with him Aaron, Nabad, and seventy of the
elders. But these were not able to look upon the Lord; nevertheless,
they saw the place <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) in which God
stood, whose form is related to have been wonderful, and his splendor
glorious. Now, Moses, having been called by God, entered the inner cloud
which had gathered round about God, and is related to have remained
there forty days and forty nights. During this time, he was taught in
the words of God about building the tabernacle and the ark, and about
the ritual of sacrifice-things which I, as they were obviously told at
great length, have not thought proper to be inserted in such a concise
work as the present. But as Moses stayed away a long time, since he
spent forty days in the presence of the Lord, the people, despairing of
his return, compelled Aaron to construct images. Then, out of metals
which had been melted together, there came forth the head of a calf. The
people, unmindful of God, having offered sacrifices to this, and given
themselves up to eating and drinking, God, looking upon these things,
would in his righteous indignation, have destroyed the wicked people,
had he not been entreated by Moses’ not to do so. But Moses, on his
return, bringing down the two tables of stone which had been written by
the hand of God, and seeing the people devoted to luxury and sacrilege,
broke the tables, thinking the nation unworthy of having the law of the
Lord delivered to them. He then called around himself the Levites, who
had been assailed with many insults, and commanded them to smite the
people with drawn swords. In this onset twenty-three thousand <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) men are said to have been slain. Then
Moses set up the tabernacle outside the camp; and, as often <span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="ii.vi.i.xix-Page_80"></span>as he
entered it, the pillar of cloud was observed to stand before the door;
and God spoke, face to face, with Moses. But when Moses entreated that
he might see the Lord in his peculiar majesty, he was answered that the
form of God could not be seen by mortal eyes; yet it was allowed to see
his back parts; and the tables which Moses had formerly broken were
constructed afresh. And Moses is reported, during this conference with
God, to have stayed forty days with the Lord. Moreover, when he
descended from the mountain, bringing with him the tables, his face
shone with so great brightness, that the people were not able to look
upon him. It was arranged, therefore, that when he was to make known to
them the commands of God, he covered his face with a veil, and thus
spoke to the people in the words of God. In this part of the history an
account is given <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) of the
tabernacle, and the building of its inner parts. Which having been
finished, the cloud descended from above, and so overshadowed the
tabernacle that it prevented Moses himself from entering. These are the
principal matters contained in the two books of Genesis and Exodus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_282"></span>[79:283](2110153.htm#fr_282) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xix-p2"></span> The Hebrew text is here different.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[79:284](2110153.htm#fr_283) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xix-p3"></span> Curiously enough, our author here
reads, “twenty-three thousand,” in opposition alike to the Greek and
Hebrew text, both of which have “three thousand.”

<span id="fn_284"></span>[80:285](2110153.htm#fr_284) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xix-p4"></span> Halm here reads “referetur,” but
“refertur,” another reading, seems preferable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.](2110154)
