[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110819)  [Next](2110821) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.xi.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xiii-p1"></span>On the lightness of thoughts.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.xi.xiii-p2.1"></span>For</span> when the mind has taken in the
meaning of a passage in any Psalm, this insensibly slips <span
id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xi.xiii-Page_409"></span>away from it, and ignorantly and
thoughtlessly it passes on to a text of some other Scripture. And when
it has begun to consider this with itself, while it is still not
thoroughly explored, the recollection of some other passage springs up,
and shuts out the consideration of the former subject. From this too it
is transferred to some other, by the entrance of some fresh
consideration, and the soul always turns about from Psalm to Psalm and
jumps from a passage in the Gospels to read one in the Epistles, and
from this passes on to the prophetic writings, and thence is carried to
some spiritual history, and so it wanders about vaguely and uncertainly
through the whole body of the Scriptures, unable, as it may choose,
either to reject or keep hold of anything, or to finish anything by
fully considering and examining it, and so becomes only a toucher or
taster of spiritual meanings, not an author and possessor of them. And
so the mind, as it is always light and wandering, is distracted even in
time of service by all sorts of things, as if it were intoxicated, and
does not perform any office properly. For instance, while it is praying,
it is recalling some Psalm or passage of Scripture. While it is
chanting, it is thinking about something else besides what the text of
the Psalm itself contains. When it repeats a passage of Scripture, it is
thinking about something that has to be done, or remembering something
that has been done. And in this way it takes in and rejects nothing in a
disciplined and proper way, and seems to be driven about by random
incursions, without the power either of retaining what it likes or
lingering over it. It is then well for us before everything else to know
how we can properly perform these spiritual offices, and keep firm hold
of this particular verse which you have given us as a formula, so that
the rise and fall of our feelings may not be in a state of fluctuation
from their own lightness, but may lie under our own control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The answer how we can gain stability of heart or of
thoughts.](2110821)
