[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110411)  [Next](2110413.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.v.xxxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxix-p1"></span>Of the device of a certain old man
by which some work was found for Abbot Simeon when he had nothing to do.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.v.xxxix-p2.1"></span>When</span> a brother who was very dear
to us, Simeon by name, a man utterly ignorant of Greek, had come from
the region of Italy, one of the elders, anxious to show to him, as he
was a stranger, a work of charity, with some pretence of the benefit
being mutual, asked him why he sat doing nothing in his cell, guessing
from this that he would not be able to stay much longer in it both
because of the roving thoughts which idleness produces and because of
his want of the necessities of life; well knowing that no one can endure
the assaults made in solitude, but one who is contented to procure food
for himself by the labour of his hands. And when the other replied that
he could not do or manage any of the things which were usually done by
the brethren there, except write a good hand, if any one in Egypt wanted
a Latin book for his use, then he at length seized the opportunity to
secure the long wished for work of charity, under colour of its being a
mutual benefit; and said, “From God this opportunity comes, for I was
just looking for some one to write out for me the Epistles <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872.md) in Latin; for I have a brother who is
bound in the chains of military service, and is a good Latin scholar, to
whom I want to send something from Scripture for him to read for his
edification.” And so when Simeon gratefully took this as an opportunity
offered to him by God, the old man also gladly seized the pretext, under
colour of which he could freely carry out his work of charity, and at
once not only brought him as a matter of business everything he could
want for a whole year, but also conveyed to him parchment and everything
requisite for writing, and received afterwards the manuscript, which was
not of the slightest use (since in those parts they were all utterly
ignorant of this language), and did no good to anybody except that which
resulted from this device and large outlay, as the one, without shame or
confusion, procured his necessary food and sustenance by the reward of
his work and labour, and the other carried out his kindness and bounty
as it were by the compulsion of a debt: securing for himself a more
abundant reward proportioned to the zeal with which he procured for his
foreign brother not only his necessary food, but materials for writing,
and an opportunity of work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_872"></span>[247:873](2110412.htm#fr_872.md) <span
id="iv.iii.v.xxxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxix-p3"></span> *Apostolus*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL. Of the boys who when bringing to a sick man some
figs, died in the desert from hunger, without having tasted
them.](2110413.md)
