[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110094)  [Next](2110096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Again</span>, on a certain day, after he
had sat down on that wooden seat of his (which you all know), placed in
the small open court which surrounded his abode, he perceived two demons
sitting on the lofty rock which overhangs the monastery. He then heard
them, in eager and gladsome tones, utter the following invitation, ‘Come
hither, Brictio, come hither, Brictio.’ I believe they perceived the
miserable man approaching from a distance, being conscious how great
frenzy of spirit they had excited within him. Nor is there any delay:
Brictio rushes in in absolute fury; and there, full of madness, he
vomits forth a thousand reproaches against Martin. For he had been
reproved by him on the previous day, because he who had possessed
nothing before he entered the clerical office, having, in fact, been
brought up in the monastery by Martin himself, was now keeping horses
and purchasing slaves. For at that time, he was accused by many of not
only having bought boys belonging to barbarous nations, but girls also
of a comely appearance. The miserable man, moved with bitter rage on
account of these things, and, as I believe, chiefly instigated by the
impulse received from those demons, made such an onset upon Martin as
scarcely to refrain from laying hands upon him. The holy man, on his
part, with a placid countenance and a tranquil mind, endeavored by
gentle words to restrain the madness of the unhappy wretch. But the
spirit of wickedness so prevailed within him, that not even his own
mind, at best a very vain one, was under his control. With trembling
lips, and a changing countenance, pale with rage, he rolled forth the
words of sin, asserting that he was a holier man than Martin who had
brought him up, inasmuch as from his earliest years he had grown up in
the monastery amid the sacred institutions of the Church, while Martin
had at first, as he could not deny, been tarnished with the life of a
soldier, and had now entirely sunk into dotage by means of his baseless
superstitions, and ridiculous fancies about visions. After he had
uttered many things like these, and others of a still more bitter
nature, which it is better not to mention, going out, at length, when
his rage was satisfied he seemed to feel as if he had completely
vindicated his conduct. But with rapid steps he rushed back by the way
he had gone out, the demons having, I believe, been, in the meantime,
driven from his heart by the prayers of Martin, and he was now brought
back to repentance. Speedily, then, he returns, and throws himself at
the feet of Martin, begging for pardon and confessing his error, while,
at length restored to a better mind, he acknowledges that he had been
under the influence of a demon. It was no difficult business for Martin
to forgive the suppliant. And then the holy man explained both to him
and to us all, how he had seen him driven on by demons, and declared
that he was not moved by the reproaches which had been heaped upon him;
for they had, in fact, rather injured the man who uttered them. And
subsequently, when this same Brictio was often accused before him of
many and great crimes, Martin could not be induced to remove him from
the presbyterate, lest he should be suspected of revenging the injury
done to himself, while he often repeated this saying: ‘If Christ bore
with Judas, why should not I bear with Brictio?’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.](2110096.md)
