[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110683)  [Next](2110685.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xxi-p1"></span>Of the lasting character of gluttony
as described to some philosophers.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xxi-p2.1"></span>For</span> the nature of this fault was
admirably expressed under cover of the following puzzle by one of the
Elders in a discussion with some philosophers, who thought that they
might chaff him like a country bumpkin because of his Christian
simplicity. “My father,” said he, “left me in the clutches of a great
many creditors. All the others I have paid in full, and have freed
myself from all their pressing claims; but one I cannot satisfy even by
a daily payment.” And when they could not see the meaning of the puzzle,
and urgently begged him to explain it: “I was,” said he, “in my natural
condition, encompassed by a great many faults. But when God inspired me
with the longing to be free, I renounced this world, and at the same
time gave up all my property which I had inherited from my father, and
so I satisfied them all like pressing creditors, and freed myself
entirely from them. But I was never able altogether to get rid of the
incentives to gluttony. For though I reduce the quantity of food which I
take to the smallest possible amount, yet I cannot avoid the force of
its daily solicitations, but must be perpetually ‘dunned’ by it, and be
making as it were interminable payments by continually satisfying it,
and pay never ending toll at its demand.” Then they declared that this
man, whom they had till now despised as a booby and a country bumpkin,
had thoroughly grasped the first principles of philosophy, i.e.,
training in ethics, and they marvelled that he could by the light of
nature have learnt that which no schooling in this world could have
taught him, while they themselves with all their efforts and long course
of training had not learnt this. This is enough on gluttony in
particular. Now let us return to the discourse in which we had begun to
consider the general relation of our faults to each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. How it was that God foretold to Abraham that Israel
would have to drive out ten nations.](2110685.md)
