[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110218)  [Next](2110220) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxx"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXX.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxx-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>So</span> then, after the departure of
Nero, Galba seized the government; and ere long, on Galba being slain,
Otho secured it. Then Vitellius from Gaul, trusting to the armies which
he commanded, entered the city, and having killed Otho, assumed the
sovereignty. This afterwards passed to Vespasian, and although that was
accomplished by evil means, yet it had the good effect of rescuing the
state from the hands of the wicked. While Vespasian was besieging
Jerusalem, he took possession of the imperial power; and as the fashion
is, he was saluted as emperor by the army, with a diadem placed upon his
head. He made his son Titus, Cæsar; and assigned him a portion of the
forces, along with the task of continuing the siege of Jerusalem.
Vespasian set out for Rome, and was received with the greatest favor by
the senate and people; and Vitellius having killed himself, his hold of
the sovereign power was fully confirmed. The Jews, meanwhile, being
closely besieged, as no chance either of peace or surrender was allowed
them, were at length perishing from famine, and the streets began
everywhere to be filled with dead bodies, for the duty of burying them
could no longer be performed. Moreover, they ventured on eating all
things of the most abominable nature, and did not even abstain from
human bodies, except those which putrefaction had already laid hold of
and thus excluded from use as food. The Romans, accordingly, rushed in
upon the exhausted defenders of the city. And it so happened that the
whole multitude from the country, and from other towns of Judæa, had
then assembled for the day of the Passover: doubtless, because it
pleased God that the impious race should be given over to destruction at
the very time of the year at which they had crucified the Lord. The
Pharisees for a time maintained their ground most boldly in defense of
the temple, and at length, with minds obstinately bent on death, they,
of their own accord, committed themselves to the flames. The number of
those who suffered death is related to have been eleven hundred
thousand, and one hundred thousand were taken captive and sold. Titus is
said, after calling a council, to have first deliberated whether he
should destroy the temple, a structure of such extraordinary work. For
it seemed good to some that a sacred edifice, distinguished above all
human achievements, ought not to be destroyed, inasmuch as, if
preserved, it would furnish an evidence of Roman moderation, but, if
destroyed, would serve for a perpetual proof of Roman cruelty. But on
the opposite side, others and Titus himself thought that the temple
ought specially to be overthrown, in order that the religion of the Jews
and of the Christians might more thoroughly be subverted; for that these
religions, although contrary to each other, had nevertheless proceeded
from the same authors; that the Christians had sprung up from among the
Jews; and that, if the root were extirpated, the offshoot would speedily
perish. Thus, according to the divine will, the minds of all being
inflamed, the temple was destroyed, three hundred and thirty-one years
ago. And this last overthrow of the temple, and final captivity of the
Jews, by which, being exiles from their native land, they are beheld
scattered through the whole world, furnish a daily demonstration to the
world, that they have been punished on no other account than for the
impious hands which they laid upon Christ. For though on other occasions
they were often given over to captivity <span id="page_112">p.
112</span> <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxx-Page_112"></span>on account of their
sins, yet they never paid the penalty of slavery beyond a period of
seventy years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI.](2110220)
