[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110983)  [Next](2110985) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p1"></span>The answer on their remedies.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>John</span>: For those who are anxious
for the cure of their ailments a saving remedy is sure not to be
wanting, and therefore remedies should be sought by the same means that
the signs of each fault are discovered. For as we have said that the
faults of men’s ordinary life are not wanting to solitaries, so we do
not deny that all zeal for virtue, and all the means of healing are at
the disposal of all those who are cut off from men’s ordinary life. When
then anyone discovers by those <span id="page_495">p. 495</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-Page_495"></span>signs which we described above, that
he is attacked by outbreaks of impatience or anger, he should always
practise himself in the opposite and contrary things, and by setting
before himself all sorts of injuries and wrongs, as if offered to him by
somebody else, accustom his mind to submit with perfect humility to
everything that wickedness can bring upon him; and by often representing
to himself all kinds of rough and intolerable things, continually
consider with all sorrow of heart with what gentleness he ought to meet
them. And, by thus looking at the sufferings of all the saints, or
indeed at those of the Lord Himself, he will admit that the various
reproaches as well as punishments are less than he deserves, and prepare
himself to endure all kinds of griefs. And when occasionally he has been
recalled by some invitation to the assembly of the brethren—a thing
which cannot but happen every now and then even to the strictest inmates
of the desert,—if he finds that his mind is silently disturbed even for
trifles, he should like some stern censor of his secret emotions charge
himself with all those various hard wrongs, to the perfect endurance of
which he was training himself by his daily meditations, and blaming and
chiding himself as follows, say My good man, are you the fellow who
while training yourself in the practising ground of solitude, ventured
most determinedly to think that you would get the better of all bad
qualities, and who just now, when you were representing to yourself not
only all sorts of bitter reproaches, but also intolerable punishments,
fancied that you were pretty strong and able to stand against all
storms? How is it that that unconquered patience of yours is upset by
the first trial even of a light word? How is it that even a gentle
breeze has shaken that house of yours which you fancied was built so
strongly on the solid rock? Where is that which you announced when
during a time of peace you were in your foolish confidence longing for
war? “I am ready, and am not troubled;” and this which you used often to
say with the prophet: “Prove me, O Lord, and try me: search out my reins
and my heart;” and: “prove me, O Lord, and know my heart: question me
and know my paths; and see if there be any way of wickedness in
me.” <span id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) How has a tiny ghost of
an enemy frightened your grand preparations for war? With such
reproaches and remorse a man should condemn himself and not allow the
sudden temptation which has upset him to go unpunished, but by
chastising his flesh with a severer penalty of fasting and vigils; and,
by punishing his sin of lightness of mind by continual pains of
self-restraint, he should while living in solitude consume in this fire
of practice what he ought to have thoroughly driven out in the life of
the Cœnobium. This at any rate we must firmly and resolutely hold to in
order to secure a lasting and unbroken patience; viz., that for us, to
whom by the Divine law not merely vengeance for, but even the
recollection of injuries is forbidden, it is not permissible to be
roused to anger because of some loss or annoyance. For what greater
injury can happen to the soul than for it, owing to some sudden
blindness from rage, to lose the brightness of the true and eternal
light and to fail of the sight of Him “Who is meek and lowly of
heart?” <span id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) What I ask could be
more dangerous or awkward than for a man to lose his power of judging of
goodness, and his standard and rule of true discernment, and for one in
his sober senses to do what even a drunken man, and a fool would not be
pardoned for doing? One then who carefully considers these and other
injuries of the same kind, will readily endure and disregard not only
all kinds of losses, but also whatever wrongs and punishments can be
inflicted by the cruellest of men, as he will hold that there is nothing
more damaging than anger, nor more valuable than peace of mind and
unbroken purity of heart, for the sake of which we should think nothing
of the advantages not merely of carnal matters but also of those things
which appear to be spiritual, if they cannot be gained or done without
some disturbance of this tranquillity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[495:2115](2110984.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p3"></span> [Ps.
119:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060), [Ps.
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002), [Ps.
139:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#024)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[495:2116](2110984.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p4"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. A question whether chastity ought to be ascertained
just as the other feelings.](2110985)
