[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110273)  [Next](2110275) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXII.

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p1"></span>The zeal of Celestine and Sixtus,
bishops of Rome, in opposing Novelty.

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p2"></span>\[84.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>The</span> foregoing would be enough and
very much more than enough, to crush and annihilate every profane
novelty. But yet that nothing might be wanting to such completeness of
proof, we added, at the close, the twofold authority of the Apostolic
See, first, that of holy Pope Sixtus, the venerable prelate who now
adorns the Roman Church; and secondly that of his predecessor, Pope
Celestine of blessed memory, which same we think it necessary to insert
here also.

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p3"></span>Holy Pope Sixtus <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) then says in an Epistle which he wrote
on Nestorius’s matter to the bishop of Antioch, “Therefore, because, as
the Apostle says, the faith is one,—evidently the faith which has
obtained hitherto,—let <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="iii.xxxiii-Page_156"></span>us believe the things that are to be
said, and say the things that are to be held.” What are the things that
are to be believed and to be said? He goes on: “Let no license be
allowed to novelty, because it is not fit that any addition should be
made to antiquity. Let not the clear faith and belief of our forefathers
be fouled by any muddy admixture.” A truly apostolic sentiment! He
enhances the belief of the Fathers by the epithet of clearness; profane
novelties he calls muddy.

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p5"></span>\[85.\] Holy Pope Celestine also
expresses himself in like manner and to the same effect. For in the
Epistle which he wrote to the priests of Gaul, charging them with
connivance with error, in that by their silence they failed in their
duty to the ancient faith, and allowed profane novelties to spring up,
he says: “We are deservedly to blame if we encourage error by silence.
Therefore rebuke these people. Restrain their liberty of preaching.” But
here some one may doubt who they are whose liberty to preach as they
list he forbids,—the preachers of antiquity or the devisers of novelty.
Let himself tell us; let himself resolve the reader’s doubt. For he goes
on: “If the case be so (that is, if the case be so as certain persons
complain to me touching your cities and provinces, that by your hurtful
dissimulation you cause them to consent to certain novelties), if the
case be so, let novelty cease to assail antiquity.” This, then, was the
sentence of blessed Celestine, not that antiquity should cease to
subvert novelty, but that novelty should cease to assail
antiquity. <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_521"></span>[155:522](2110274.htm#fr_521) <span
id="iii.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p4"></span> Sixtus III. See the Epistle in Labbe’s
*Concilia*, T. iii. Col. 1262<span id="iii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[156:523](2110274.htm#fr_522) <span
id="iii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p6"></span> Celestine’s letter will be found in the
appendix to Vol. x., Part II., of St. Augustine’s Works, col. 2403,
Paris 1838. See the remarks on Vincentius’s mode of dealing with
Celestine’s letter, Appendix III.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII. The Children of the Catholic Church ought to
adhere to the Faith of their Fathers and die for it.](2110275)
