[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110200)  [Next](2110202.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>At</span> this period of time we think
Esther and Judith lived, but I confess that I cannot easily perceive
with what kings especially I should connect the actions of their lives.
For, while Esther is said to have lived under King Artaxerxes, I find
that there were two Persian kings of that name, and there is much
hesitation in concluding to which of these her date is to be assigned.
However, it has seemed preferable to me to connect the history of Esther
with that Artaxerxes under whom Jerusalem was restored, because it is
not likely that, if she had lived under the former Artaxerxes, whose
times Esdras has given an account of, he would have made no mention of
such an illustrious woman. This is all the more convincing since we know
<span id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xii-Page_103"></span>that the building of the temple was
(as we have related above) prohibited by that Artaxerxes and Esther
would not have allowed that had she then been united with him in
marriage. But I will now repeat what things she accomplished. There was
at that time a certain Vastis connected with the king in marriage, a
woman of marvelous beauty. Being accustomed to extol her loveliness to
all, he one day, when he was giving a public entertainment, ordered the
queen to attend for the purpose of exhibiting her beauty. But she, more
prudent than the foolish king, and being too modest to make a show of
her person before the eyes of men, refused compliance with his orders.
His savage mind was enraged by this insult, and he drove her forth, both
from her condition of marriage with him and from the palace.
Consequently, when a young woman was sought after to take her place as
the wife of the king, Esther was found to excel all others in beauty.
She being a Jewess of the tribe of Benjamin, and an orphan, without
father or mother, had been brought up by her cousin-german, <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md) Mardochæus. On being espoused to the
king, she, by the instructions of him who had brought her up, concealed
her nation and fatherland, and was also admonished by him not to become
forgetful of her ancestral traditions, nor, though as a captive she had
entered into marriage with a foreigner, to take part in the food of the
heathen. Thus, then, being united to the king, she, in a short time, as
was to be expected, easily captivated his whole mind by the power of her
beauty, so that, equalizing her with himself in the emblem of sovereign
power, he presented her with a purple robe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_341"></span>[103:342](2110201.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xii-p2"></span> “patruele patre”: words which have
much perplexed the editors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.](2110202.md)
