[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110239)  [Next](2110241.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.li"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.li-p0.1"></span>Chapter LI.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.li-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.li-p1.1"></span>But</span> Ithacius, seeing how much
ill-will it would excite against him among the bishops, if he should
stand forth as accuser also at the last trial on a capital charge (for
it was requisite that the trial should be repeated), withdrew from the
prosecution. His cunning, however, in thus acting was in vain, as the
mischief was already accomplished. Well, a certain Patricius, an
advocate connected with the treasury, was then appointed accuser by
Maximus. Accordingly, under him as prosecutor, Priscillian was condemned
to death, and along with him, Felicissimus and Armenius, who, when they
were clerics, had lately adopted the cause of Priscillian, and revolted
from the Catholics. Latronianus, too, and Euchrotia were beheaded.
Instantius, who, as we have said above, had been condemned by the
bishops, was transported to the island of Sylina <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394.md) which lies beyond Britain. A process
was then instituted against the others in trials which followed, and
Asarivus, and Aurelius the deacon, were condemned to be beheaded, while
Tiberianus was deprived of his goods, and banished <span
id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="ii.vi.ii.li-Page_122"></span>to
the island of Sylina. Tertullus, Potamius, and Joannes, as being persons
of less consideration, and worthy of some merciful treatment, inasmuch
as before the trial they had made a confession, both as to themselves
and their confederates, were sentenced to a temporary banishment into
Gaul. In this sort of way, men who were most unworthy of the light of
day, were, in order that they might serve as a terrible example to
others, either put to death or punished with exile. That conduct <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395.md) which he had at first defended by his
right of appeal to the tribunals, and by regard to the public good,
Ithacius, harassed <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396.md) with
invectives, and at last overcome, threw the blame of upon those, by
whose direction and counsels he had effected his object. Yet he was the
only one of all of them who was thrust out of the episcopate. For
Ydacius, although less guilty, had voluntarily resigned his bishopric:
that was wisely and respectfully done, had he not afterward spoiled the
credit of such a step by endeavoring to recover the position which had
been lost. Well, after the death of Priscillian, not only was the heresy
not suppressed, which, under him, as its author, had burst forth, but
acquiring strength, it became more widely spread. For his followers who
had previously honored him as a saint, subsequently began to reverence
him as a martyr. The bodies of those who had been put to death were
conveyed to Spain, and their funerals were celebrated with great pomp.
Nay, it came to be thought the highest exercise of religion to swear by
Priscillian. But between them and our friends, a perpetual war of
quarreling has been kept up. And that conflict, after being sustained
for fifteen years with horrible dissension, could not by any means be
set at rest. And now all things were seen to be disturbed and confused
by the discord, especially of the bishops, while everything was
corrupted by them through their hatred, partiality, fear, faithlessness,
envy, factiousness, lust, avarice, pride, sleepiness, and inactivity. In
a word, a large number were striving with insane plans and obstinate
inclinations against a few giving wise counsel: while, in the meantime,
the people of God, and all the excellent of the earth were exposed to
mockery and insult.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_394"></span>[121:395](2110240.htm#fr_394.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.li-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.li-p2"></span> Halm prefers the form “Sylinancim” to
“Sylinam.” The reference is probably to the Scilly Isles.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[122:396](2110240.htm#fr_395.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.li-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.li-p3"></span> The meaning seems to be, that Ithacius
being blamed for bringing accusations against his brethren, at first
defended his conduct by an appeal to the laws and the public weal, both
of which justified the prosecution of heretics; but being at last driven
from this position, he turned round and cast the blame upon those for
whom he had acted.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[122:397](2110240.htm#fr_396.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.li-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.li-p4"></span> Some read “solitus,” instead of
“sollicitus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Commonitory of Vincent of Lérins, For the Antiquity and
Universality of the Catholic Faith Against the Profane Novelties of All
Heresies.](2110241.md)
