[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110755)  [Next](2110757.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ix.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xii-p1"></span>Of the crowd of the devils, and the
disturbance which they always raise in our atmosphere.

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ix.xii-p2.1"></span>But</span> the atmosphere which extends
between heaven and earth is ever filled with a thick crowd of spirits,
which do not fly about in it quietly or idly, so that most fortunately
the divine providence has withdrawn them from human sight. For through
fear of their attacks, or horror at the forms, into which they transform
and turn themselves at will, men would either be driven out of their
wits by an insufferable dread, and faint away, from inability to look on
such things with bodily eyes, or else would daily grow worse and worse,
and be corrupted by their constant example and by imitating them, and
thus there would arise a sort of dangerous familiarity and deadly
intercourse between men and the unclean powers of the air, whereas those
crimes which are now committed among men, are concealed either by walls
and enclosures or by distance and space, or by some shame and confusion:
but if they could always look on them with open face, they would be
stimulated to a greater pitch of insanity, as there would not be a
single moment in which they would see them desist from their <span
id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="iv.iv.ix.xii-Page_380"></span>wickedness, since no bodily weariness,
or occupation in business or care for their daily food (as in our case)
forces them sometimes even against their will to desist from the
purposes they have begun to carry out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Of the fact that opposing powers turn the attack,
which they aim at men, even against each other.](2110757.md)
