[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110253)  [Next](2110255.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iii.xiii-p1"></span>A fuller account of the Errors of
Photinus, Apollinaris and Nestorius.

<span id="iii.xiii-p2"></span>\[32.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>Here</span>, possibly, I may be asked for some
account of the above mentioned heresies; those, namely, of Nestorius,
Apollinaris, and Photinus. This, indeed, does not belong to the matter
in hand: for our object is not to enlarge upon the errors of
individuals, but to produce instances of a few, in whom the
applicability of Moses’ words may be evidently and clearly seen; that is
to say, that if at any time some Master in the Church, himself also a
prophet in interpreting the mysteries of the prophets, should attempt to
introduce some novel doctrine into the Church of God, Divine Providence
permits this to happen in order to try us. It will be useful, therefore,
by way of digression, to give a brief account of the opinions of the
above-named heretics, Photinus, Apollinaris, Nestorius.

<span id="iii.xiii-p3"></span>\[33.\] The heresy of Photinus, then, is
as follows: He says that God is singular and sole, and is to be regarded
as the Jews regarded Him. He denies the completeness of the Trinity, and
does not believe that there is any Person of God the Word, or any Person
of the Holy Ghost. Christ he affirms to be a mere man, whose original
was from Mary. Hence he insists with the utmost obstinacy that we are to
render worship only to the Person of God the Father, and that we are to
honour Christ as man only. This is the doctrine of Photinus.

<span id="iii.xiii-p4"></span>\[34.\] Apollinaris, affecting to agree
with the Church as to the unity of the Trinity, though <span
id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span id="iii.xiii-Page_140"></span>not this
even with entire soundness of belief, <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465.md) as to the Incarnation of the Lord,
blasphemes openly. For he says that the flesh of our Saviour was either
altogether devoid of a human soul, or, at all events, was devoid of a
rational soul. Moreover, he says that this same flesh of the Lord was
not received from the flesh of the holy Virgin Mary, but came down from
heaven into the Virgin; and, ever wavering and undecided, he preaches
one while that it was co-eternal with God the Word, another that it was
made of the divine nature of the Word. For, denying that there are two
substances in Christ, one divine, the other human, one from the Father,
the other from his mother, he holds that the very nature of the Word was
divided, as though one part of it remained in God, the other was
converted into flesh: so that whereas the truth says that of two
substances there is one Christ, he affirms, contrary to the truth, that
of the one divinity of Christ there are become two substances. This,
then, is the doctrine of Apollinaris.

<span id="iii.xiii-p6"></span>\[35.\] Nestorius, whose disease is of an
opposite kind, while pretending that he holds two distinct substances in
Christ, brings in of a sudden two Persons, and with unheard of
wickedness would have two sons of God, two Christs,—one, God, the other,
man, one, begotten of his Father, the other, born of his mother. For
which reason he maintains that Saint Mary ought to be called, not
*Theotocos* (the mother of God), but *Christotocos* (the mother of
Christ), seeing that she gave birth not to the Christ who is God, but to
the Christ who is man. But if any one supposes that in his writings he
speaks of one Christ, and preaches one Person of Christ, let him not
lightly credit it. For either this is a crafty device, that by means of
good he may the more easily persuade evil, according to that of the
apostle, “That which is good was made death to me,” <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466.md) —either, I say, he craftily affects in
some places in his writings to believe one Christ and one Person of
Christ, or else he says that after the Virgin had brought forth, the two
Persons were united into one Christ, though at the time of her
conception or parturition, and for some short time afterwards, there
were two Christs; so that forsooth, though Christ was born at first an
ordinary man and nothing more, and not as yet associated in unity of
Person with the Word of God, yet afterwards the Person of the Word
assuming descended upon Him; and though now the Person assumed remains
in the glory of God, yet once there would seem to have been no
difference between Him and all other men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_465"></span>[140:466](2110254.htm#fr_465.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p5"></span> “Et hoc ipsum non plena fidei
sanitate.”—The Cambridge Ed., 1687, with Baluzius’s notes appended,
reads, “et hoc ipsum plena fidei sanctitate.”

<span id="fn_466"></span>[140:467](2110254.htm#fr_466.md) <span
id="iii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p7"></span> [Rom. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The Catholic Doctrine of the Trinity and the
Incarnation explained.](2110255.md)
