[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110817)  [Next](2110819) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p1"></span>Of the perfection of prayer to which we
can rise by the system described.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p2.1"></span>This</span>, this is the formula which the
mind should unceasingly cling to until, strengthened by the constant use
of it and by continual meditation, it casts off and rejects the rich and
full material of all manner of thoughts and restricts itself to the
poverty of this one verse, and so arrives with ready ease at that
beatitude of the gospel, which holds the first place among the other
beatitudes: for He says “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven.” <span id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675) And
so one who becomes grandly poor by a poverty of this sort will fulfil
this saying of the prophet: “The poor and needy shall praise the name of
the Lord.” <span id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676) And indeed what
greater or holier poverty can there be than that of one who knowing that
he has no defence and no strength of his own, asks for daily help from
another’s bounty, and as he is aware that every single moment his life
and substance depend on Divine assistance, professes himself not without
reason the Lord’s bedesman, and cries to Him daily in prayer: “But I am
poor and needy: the Lord helpeth me.” <span
id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677) And so by the illumination of God
Himself he mounts to that manifold knowledge of Him and begins
henceforward to be nourished on sublimer and still more sacred
mysteries, in accordance with these words of the prophet: “The high
hills are a refuge for the stags, the rocks for the <span
id="page_408">p. 408</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-Page_408"></span>hedgehogs,” <span
id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678) which is very fairly applied in the
sense we have given, because whosoever continues in simplicity and
innocence is not injurious or offensive to any one, but being content
with his own simple condition endeavours simply to defend himself from
being spoiled by his foes, and becomes a sort of spiritual hedgehog and
is protected by the continual shield of that rock of the gospel, i.e.,
being sheltered by the recollection of the Lord’s passion and by
ceaseless meditation on the verse given above he escapes the snares of
his opposing enemies. And of these spiritual hedgehogs we read in
Proverbs as follows: “And the hedgehogs are a feeble folk, who have made
their homes in the rocks.” <span id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679)
And indeed what is feebler than a Christian, what is weaker than a monk,
who is not only not permitted any vengeance for wrongs done to him but
is actually not allowed to suffer even a slight and silent feeling of
irritation to spring up within? But whoever advances from this condition
and not only secures the simplicity of innocence, but is also shielded
by the virtue of discretion, becomes an exterminator of deadly serpents,
and has Satan crushed beneath his feet, and by his quickness of mind
answers to the figure of the reasonable stag, this man will feed on the
mountains of the prophets and Apostles, i.e., on their highest and
loftiest mysteries. And thriving on this pasture continually, he will
take in to himself all the thoughts of the Psalms and will begin to sing
them in such a way that he will utter them with the deepest emotion of
heart not as if they were the compositions of the Psalmist, but rather
as if they were his own utterances and his very own prayer; and will
certainly take them as aimed at himself, and will recognize that their
words were not only fulfilled formerly by or in the person of the
prophet, but that they are fulfilled and carried out daily in his own
case. For then the Holy Scriptures lie open to us with greater clearness
and as it were their very veins and marrow are exposed, when our
experience not only perceives but actually anticipates their meaning,
and the sense of the words is revealed to us not by an exposition of
them but by practical proof. For if we have experience of the very state
of mind in which each Psalm was sung and written, we become like their
authors and anticipate the meaning rather than follow it, i.e.,
gathering the force of the words before we really know them, we remember
what has happened to us, and what is happening in daily assaults when
the thoughts of them come over us, and while we sing them we call to
mind all that our carelessness has brought upon us, or our earnestness
has secured, or Divine Providence has granted or the promptings of the
foe have deprived us of, or slippery and subtle forgetfulness has
carried off, or human weakness has brought about, or thoughtless
ignorance has cheated us of. For all these feelings we find expressed in
the Psalms so that by seeing whatever happens as in a very clear mirror
we understand it better, and so instructed by our feelings as our
teachers we lay hold of it as something not merely heard but actually
seen, and, as if it were not committed to memory, but implanted in the
very nature of things, we are affected from the very bottom of the
heart, so that we get at its meaning not by reading the text but by
experience anticipating it. And so our mind will reach that
incorruptible prayer to which in our former treatise, as the Lord
vouchsafed to grant, the scheme of our Conference mounted, and this is
not merely not engaged in gazing on any image, but is actually
distinguished by the use of no words or utterances; but with the purpose
of the mind all on fire, is produced through ecstasy of heart by some
unaccountable keenness of spirit, and the mind being thus affected
without the aid of the senses or any visible material pours it forth to
God with groanings and sighs that cannot be uttered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[407:1676](2110818.htm#fr_1675) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p3"></span> S. [Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[407:1677](2110818.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p4"></span> [Psa.
74.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[407:1678](2110818.htm#fr_1677) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p5"></span> [Psa.
40.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p5.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[408:1679](2110818.htm#fr_1678) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p6"></span> [Psa.
104.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[408:1680](2110818.htm#fr_1679) <span
id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p7"></span> [Prov. xxx.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.xi.xi-p7.1"></span>
(LXX.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. A question as to how spiritual thoughts can be
retained without losing them.](2110819)
