[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110533)  [Next](2110535.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.xii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.iii-p1"></span>How pride is equally destructive of
all virtues.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.xii.iii-p2.1"></span>There</span> is then no other fault
which is so destructive of all virtues, and robs and despoils a man of
all righteousness and holiness, as this evil of pride, which like some
pestilential disease attacks the whole man, and, not content to damage
one part or one limb only, injures the entire body by its deadly
influence, and endeavours to cast down by a most fatal fall, and destroy
those who were already at the top of the tree of the virtues. For every
other fault is satisfied within its own bounds and limits, and though it
clouds other virtues as well, yet it is in the main directed against one
only, and specially attacks and assaults that. And so (to make my
meaning clearer) gluttony, i.e., the appetites of the belly and the
pleasures of the palate, is destructive of strict temperance: lust
stains purity, anger destroys patience: so that sometimes a man who is
in bondage to some one sin is not altogether wanting in other virtues:
but being simply deprived of that one virtue which in the struggle
yields to the vice which is its rival and opposed to it, can to some
extent preserve his other virtues: but this one when once it has taken
possession of some unfortunate soul, like some most brutal tyrant, when
the lofty citadel of the virtues has been taken, utterly destroys and
lays waste the whole city; and levelling with the ground of vices the
once high walls of saintliness, and confusing them together, it allows
no shadow of freedom henceforth to survive in the soul subject to it.
And in proportion as it was originally the richer, so now will the yoke
of servitude be the severer, through which by its cruel ravages it will
strip the soul it has subdued of all its powers of virtue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. How by reason of pride Lucifer was turned from an
archangel into a devil.](2110535.md)
