[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110591)  [Next](2110593) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.i-p1"></span>Abbot Moses’ introduction on the grace
of discretion.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.i-p2.1"></span>And</span> so when we had enjoyed our
morning sleep, when to our delight the dawn of light again shone upon
us, and we had begun to ask once more for his promised talk, the blessed
Moses thus began: As I see you inflamed with such an eager desire, that
I do not believe that that very short interval of quiet which I wanted
to subtract from our spiritual conference and devote to bodily rest, has
been of any use for the repose of your bodies, on me too a greater
anxiety presses when I take note of your zeal. For I must give the
greater care and devotion in paying my debt, in proportion as I see that
you ask for it the more earnestly, according to that saying: “When thou
sittest to eat with a ruler consider diligently what is put before thee,
and put forth thine hand, knowing that thou oughtest to prepare such
things.” <span id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159) Wherefore as we are
going <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iii.i-Page_308"></span>to speak of the excellent quality of
discretion and the virtue of it, on which subject our discourse of last
night had entered at the termination of our discussion, we think it
desirable first to establish its excellence by the opinions of the
fathers, that when it has been shown what our predecessors thought and
said about it, then we may bring forward some ancient and modern
shipwrecks and mischances of various people, who were destroyed and
hopelessly ruined because they paid but little attention to it, and then
as well as we can we must treat of its advantages and uses: after a
discussion of which we shall know better how we ought to seek after it
and practise it, by the consideration of the importance of its value and
grace. For it is no ordinary virtue nor one which can be freely gained
by merely human efforts, unless they are aided by the Divine blessing,
for we read that this is also reckoned among the noblest gifts of the
Spirit by the Apostle: “To one is given by the Spirit the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, to another
faith by the same Spirit, to another the gift of healing by the same
Spirit,” and shortly after, “to another the discerning of spirits.” Then
after the complete catalogue of spiritual gifts he subjoins: “But all
these worketh one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man
severally as He will.” <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160) You
see then that the gift of discretion is no earthly thing and no slight
matter, but the greatest prize of divine grace. And unless a monk has
pursued it with all zeal, and secured a power of discerning with
unerring judgment the spirits that rise up in him, he is sure to go
wrong, as if in the darkness of night and dense blackness, and not
merely to fall down dangerous pits and precipices, but also to make
frequent mistakes in matters that are plain and straightforward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[307:1160](2110592.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.i-p3"></span> [Prov.
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.iii.i-p3.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[308:1161](2110592.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.i-p4"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
8-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.i-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. What discretion alone can give a monk; and a
discourse of the blessed Antony on this subject.](2110593)
