[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110673)  [Next](2110675) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p1"></span>Of the origin and character of each of
these faults.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>And</span> now, to speak about each kind of
fault separately: of gluttony there are three sorts: (1) that which
drives a monk to eat before the proper and stated times; (2) that which
cares about filling the belly and gorging it with all kinds of food, and
(3) that which is on the lookout for dainties and delicacies. And these
three sorts give a monk no little trouble, unless he tries to free
himself from all of them with the same care and scrupulousness. For just
as one should never venture to break one’s fast before the right time so
we must utterly avoid all greediness in eating, and the choice and
dainty preparation of our food: for from these three causes different
but extremely dangerous conditions of the soul arise. For from the first
there springs up dislike of the monastery, and thence there grows up
disgust and intolerance of the life there, and this is sure to be soon
followed by withdrawal and speedy departure from it. By the second there
are kindled the fiery darts of luxury and lasciviousness. The third also
weaves the entangling meshes of covetousness for the nets of its
prisoners, and ever hinders monks from following the perfect
self-abnegation of Christ. And when there are traces of this passion in
us we can recognize them by this; viz., if we are kept to dine by one of
the brethren we are not content to eat our food with the relish which he
has prepared and offers to us, but take the unpar<span id="page_344">p.
344</span> <span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-Page_344"></span>donable liberty of
asking to have something else poured over it or added to it, a thing
which we should never do for three reasons: (1) because the monastic
mind ought always to be accustomed to practise endurance and abstinence,
and like the Apostle, to learn to be content in whatever state he
is. <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328) For one who is upset by
taking an unsavoury morsel once and in a way, and who cannot even for a
short time overcome the delicacy of his appetite will never succeed in
curbing the secret and more important desires of the body; (2) because
it sometimes happens that at the time our host is out of that particular
thing which we ask for, and we make him feel ashamed of the wants and
bareness of his table, by exposing his poverty which he would rather was
only known to God; (3) because sometimes other people do not care about
the relish which we ask for, and so it turns out that we are annoying
most of them while intent on satisfying the desires of our own palate.
And on this account we must by all means avoid such a liberty. Of
fornication there are three sorts: (1) that which is accomplished by
sexual intercourse; (2) that which takes place without touching a woman,
for which we read that Onan the son of the patriarch Judah was smitten
by the Lord; and which is termed by Scripture uncleanness: of which the
Apostle says: “But I say to the unmarried and to widows, that it is good
for them if they abide even as I. But if they do not contain let them
marry: for it is better to marry than to burn;” <span
id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329) (3) that which is conceived in
heart and mind, of which the Lord says in the gospel: “Whosoever looketh
on a woman to lust after her hath already committed adultery with her in
his heart.” <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330) And these three
kinds the blessed Apostle tells us must be stamped out in one and the
same way. “Mortify,” says he, “your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, lust, etc.” <span
id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) And again of two of them he says to
the Ephesians: “Let fornication and uncleanness be not so much as named
among you:” and once more: “But know this that no fornicator or unclean
person, or covetous person who is an idolater hath inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and of God.” <span
id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332) And just as these three must be
avoided by us with equal care, so they one and all shut us out and
exclude us equally from the kingdom of Christ. Of covetousness there are
three kinds: (1) That which hinders renunciants from allowing themselves
of be stripped of their goods and property; (2) that which draws us to
resume with excessive eagerness the possession of those things which we
have given away and distributed to the poor; (3) that which leads a man
to covet and procure what he never previously possessed. Of anger there
are three kinds: one which rages within, which is called in Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p7.2"></span>θυμός</span>; another
which breaks out in word and deed and action, which they term <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p7.3"></span>ὀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p7.4"></span>ργή</span>: of which
the Apostle speaks, saying “But now do ye lay aside all anger and
indignation;” <span id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) the third,
which is not like those in boiling over and being done with in an hour,
but which lasts for days and long periods, which is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p8.2"></span>μῆνις</span>. And all
these three must be condemned by us with equal horror. Of dejection
there are two kinds: one, that which springs up when anger has died
down, or is the result of some loss we have incurred or of some purpose
which has been hindered and interfered with; the other, that which comes
from unreasonable anxiety of mind or from despair. Of accidie there are
two kinds: one of which sends those affected by it to sleep; while the
other makes them forsake their cell and flee away. Of vainglory,
although it takes various forms and shapes, and is divided into
different classes, yet there are two main kinds: (1) when we are puffed
up about carnal things and things visible, and (2) when we are inflamed
with the desire of vain praise for things spiritual and unseen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[344:1329](2110674.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p3"></span> Cf. [Phil. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[344:1330](2110674.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[344:1331](2110674.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p5"></span> S. [Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[344:1332](2110674.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p6"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[344:1333](2110674.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p7"></span> [Eph. v.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[344:1334](2110674.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p7.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p8"></span> [Col. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. How vainglory may be useful to us.](2110675)
