[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110982)  [Next](2110984) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xiii-p1"></span>A question how a man can be cured
who has entered on solitude without having his faults eradicated.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>Germanus</span>: We very clearly and
plainly see the proofs by which the signs of infirmities are inferred,
and the method of discerning diseases, i.e., how the faults which are
concealed in us can be detected: for our every day experience and the
daily motions of our thoughts show us all these as they have been
stated. It remains then that as the proofs and causes of our maladies
have been exposed to us in a most clear way so their remedies and cures
may also be shown. For no one can doubt that one who has first
discovered the grounds and beginnings of ailments, with the approving
witness of the conscience of those affected, can best discourse on their
remedies. And so though the teaching of your holiness has laid bare the
secrets of our wounds whereby we venture to have some hope of a remedy,
because so clear a diagnosis of the disease gives promise of the hope of
a cure, yet because, as you say, the first elements of salvation are
acquired in the Cœnobium, and men cannot be in a sound condition in
solitude, unless they have first been healed by the medicine of the
Cœnobium, we have fallen again into a dangerous state of despair lest as
we left the Cœnobium in an imperfect condition we may not now that we
are in the desert succeed in becoming perfect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The answer on their remedies.](2110984)
