[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110412)  [Next](2110414) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v.xl"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.v.xl-p0.1"></span>Chapter XL.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xl-p1"></span>Of the boys who when bringing to a sick
man some figs, died in the desert from hunger, without having tasted
them.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xl-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.v.xl-p2.1"></span>But</span> since in the section in which we
proposed to say something about the strictness of fasting and
abstinence, kindly acts and deeds of charity seem to have been
intermingled, again returning to our design we will insert in this
little book a noteworthy deed of some who were boys in years though not
in their feelings. For when, to their great surprise, some one had
brought to Abbot John, the steward in the desert of Scete, some figs
from Libya Mareotis, <span id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) as being a
thing never before seen in those districts,—(John) who had the
management of the church in the days of the blessed Presbyter
Paphnutius, <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874) by whom it had been
intrusted to him, at once sent them by the hands of two lads to an old
man who was laid up in ill health in the further parts of the desert,
and who lived about eighteen miles from the church. And when they had
received the fruit, and set off for the cell of the above-mentioned old
man, they lost the right path altogether—a thing which there easily
happens even to elders—as a thick fog suddenly came on. And when all day
and night they had wandered about the trackless waste of the desert, and
could not possibly find the sick man’s cell, worn out at last both by
weariness from their journey, and from hunger and thirst, they bent
their knees and gave up their souls to God in the very act of prayer.
And afterwards, when they had been for a <span id="page_248">p.
248</span> <span id="iv.iii.v.xl-Page_248"></span>long while sought for
by the marks of their footsteps which in those sandy regions are
impressed as if on snow, until a thin coating of sand blown about even
by a slight breeze covers them up again, it was found that they had
preserved the figs untouched, just as they had received them; choosing
rather to give up their lives, than their fidelity to their charge, and
to lose their life on earth than to violate the commands of their
senior.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_873"></span>[247:874](2110413.htm#fr_873) <span
id="iv.iii.v.xl-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v.xl-p3"></span> The Mareotic nome is the district
round Lake Mareotis, a lake in the north of the delta bordering upon the
Libyan desert (the modern *Birket el Mariout*), and running parallel to
the Mediterranean, from which it is separated by a long and narrow ridge
of sand.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[247:875](2110413.htm#fr_874) <span
id="iv.iii.v.xl-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v.xl-p4"></span> On Paphnutius see the note on the
Conference III. i.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI. The saying of Abbot Macarius of the behaviour of a
monk as one who was to live for a long while, and as one who was daily
at the point of death.](2110414)
