[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110734)  [Next](2110736.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p1"></span>Of the death of the prophet who was
led astray, and of the infirmity of the Abbot Paul, with which he was
visited for the sake of his cleansing.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>And</span> we see clear instance of
this in the case of that prophet and man of God in the third book of
Kings, who was straightway destroyed by a lion for a single fault of
disobedience, in which he was implicated not of set purpose nor by the
fault of his own will but by the enticement of another, as the Scripture
speaks thus of him: “It is the man of God, who was disobedient to the
mouth of the Lord, and the Lord delivered him to the lion, and it tare
him according to the word of the Lord, which He spake.” <span
id="fr_1490"></span>[1491](#fn_1490.md) In which case the punishment of the
present offence and carelessness together with the reward of his
righteousness, for which the Lord gave over his prophet in this world to
the destroyer, are shown by the moderation and abstinence of the beast
of prey, as that most savage creature did not dare even to taste the
carcass that was given over to him. And of the same thing a very clear
and plain proof has been given in our own days in the case of the Abbots
Paul and Moses who lived in a spot in this desert called Calamus, <span
id="fr_1491"></span>[1492](#fn_1491.md) for the former had formerly dwelt
in the wilderness which is hard by the city of Panephysis, <span
id="fr_1492"></span>[1493](#fn_1492.md) which we know had only recently
been made a wilderness by an inundation of salt water; which whenever
the north wind blew, was driven from the marshes and spreading over the
adjacent fields covered the face of the whole district, so as to make
the ancient villages, which on this very account had been deserted by
all their inhabitants, look like islands. Here, then, the Abbot Paul had
made such progress in purity of heart in the stillness and silence of
the desert, that he did not suffer, I will not say a woman’s face, but
even the clothes of one of that sex to appear in his sight. For when as
he was going to the cell of one of the Elders together with Abbot
Archebius <span id="fr_1493"></span>[1494](#fn_1493.md) who lived in the
same desert, by accident a woman met him, he was so disgusted at meeting
her that he dropped the business of his friendly visit which he had
taken in hand and dashed back again to his own monastery with greater
speed than a man would flee from the face of a lion or terrible dragon;
so that he was not moved even by the shouts and prayers of the aforesaid
Abbot Archebius who called him back to <span id="page_372">p. 372</span>
<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-Page_372"></span>go on with the journey they
had undertaken to ask the old man what they had proposed to do. But
though this was done in his eagerness for chastity and desire for
purity, yet because it was done not according to knowledge, and because
the observance of discipline, and the methods of proper strictness were
overstrained, for he imagined that not merely familiarity with a woman
(which is the real harm,) but even the very form of that sex was to be
execrated, he was forthwith overtaken by such a punishment that his
whole body was struck with paralysis, and none of his limbs were able to
perform their proper functions, since not merely his hands and feet, but
even the movements of the tongue, which enables us to frame our words,
(were affected) and his very ears lost the sense of hearing, so that
there was left in him nothing more of his manhood than an immovable and
insensible figure. But he was reduced to such a condition that the
utmost care of men was unable to minister to his infirmity, but only the
tender service of women could attend to his wants: for when he was taken
to a convent of holy virgins, food and drink, which he could not ask for
even by signs, were brought to him by female attendants, and for the
performance of all that nature required he was ministered to by the same
service for nearly four years, i.e., to the end of his life. And though
he was affected by such weakness of all his members that none of his
limbs retained their keen power of motion and feeling, nevertheless such
grace of goodness proceeded from him that when sick persons were
anointed with the oil which had touched what should be called his corpse
rather than his body, they were instantly healed of all diseases, so
that as regards his own malady it was made clearly and plainly evident
even to unbelievers that the infirmity of all his limbs was caused by
the providence and love of the Lord, and that the grace of these
healings was granted by the power of the Holy Ghost as a witness of his
purity and a manifestation of his merits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[371:1491](2110735.htm#fr_1490.md) <span
id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p3"></span> [1 Kings xiii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[371:1492](2110735.htm#fr_1491.md) <span
id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p4"></span> Cf. on the Institutes X. xxiv.

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[371:1493](2110735.htm#fr_1492.md) <span
id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p5"></span> Cf. on the Institutes IV. xxx.

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[371:1494](2110735.htm#fr_1493.md) <span
id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii.xxvi-p6"></span> On Archebius cf. the note on XI.
ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. On the temptation of Abbot Moses.](2110736.md)
