[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110814)  [Next](2110816) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xi.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.xi.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.viii-p1"></span>A question on the training in
perfection by which we can arrive at perpetual recollection of God.

<span id="iv.iv.xi.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.xi.viii-p2.1"></span>Germanus</span>: The extent of our
bewilderment at our wondering awe at the former Conference, because of
which we came back again, increases still more. For in proportion as by
the incitements of this teaching we are fired with the desire of perfect
bliss, so do we fall back into greater despair, as we know not how to
seek or obtain training for such lofty heights. Wherefore we entreat
that you will patiently allow us (for it must perhaps be set forth and
unfolded with a good deal of talk) to explain what while sitting in the
cell we had begun to revolve in a lengthy meditation, although we know
that your holiness is not at all troubled by the infirmities of the
weak, which even for this reason should be openly set forth, that what
is out of place in them may receive correction. Our notion then is that
the perfection of any art or system of training must begin with some
simple rudiments, and grow accustomed first to somewhat easy and tender
beginnings, so that being nourished and trained little by little by a
sort of reasonable milk, it may grow up and so by degrees and step by
step mount up from the lowest depths to the heights: and when by these
means it has entered on the plainer principles and so to speak passed
the gates of the entrance of the profession, it will consequently arrive
without difficulty at the inmost shrine and lofty heights of perfection.
For how could any boy manage to pronounce the simplest union of
syllables unless he had first carefully learnt the letters of the
alphabet? Or how can any one learn to read quickly, who is still unfit
to connect together short and simple sentences? But by what means will
one who is ill instructed in the science of grammar attain eloquence in
rhetoric or the knowledge of philosophy? Wherefore for this highest
learning also, by which we are taught even to cleave to God, I have no
doubt that there are some foundations of the system, which must first be
firmly laid and afterwards the towering heights of perfection may be
placed and raised upon them. And we have a slight idea that these are
its first principles; viz., that we should first learn by what
meditations God may be grasped and contemplated, and next that we should
manage to keep a very firm hold of this topic whatever it is which we do
not doubt is the height of all perfection. And therefore we want you to
show us some material for this recollection, by which we may conceive
and ever keep the idea of God in the mind, so that by always keeping it
before our eyes, when we find that we have dropped away from Him, we may
at once be able to recover ourselves and return thither and may succeed
in laying hold of it again without any delay from wandering around the
subject and searching for it. For it happens that when we have wandered
away from our spiritual speculations and have come back to ourselves as
if waking from <span id="page_405">p. 405</span> <span
id="iv.iv.xi.viii-Page_405"></span>a deadly sleep, and, being thoroughly
roused, look for the subject matter, by which we may be able to revive
that spiritual recollection which has been destroyed, we are hindered by
the delay of the actual search before we find it, and are once more
drawn aside from our endeavour, and before the spiritual insight is
brought about, the purpose of heart which had been conceived, has
disappeared. And this trouble is certain to happen to us for this reason
because we do not keep something special firmly set before our eyes like
some principle to which the wandering thoughts may be recalled after
many digressions and varied excursions; and, if I may use the
expression, after long storms enter a quiet haven. And so it comes to
pass that as the mind is constantly hindered by this want of knowledge
and difficulty, and is always tossed about vaguely, and as if
intoxicated, among various matters, and cannot even retain firm hold for
any length of time of anything spiritual which has occurred to it by
chance rather than of set purpose: while, as it is always receiving one
thing after another, it does not notice either their beginning and
origin or even their end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The answer on the efficacy of understanding, which is
gained by experience.](2110816)
