[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110016)  [Next](2110018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="ii.ii.xiv-p1"></span>Martin escapes from a Falling Pine-tree.

<span id="ii.ii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>Again</span>, when in a certain village he
had demolished a very ancient temple, and had set about cutting down a
pine-tree, which stood close to the temple, the chief priest of that
place, and a crowd of other heathens began to oppose him. And these
people, though, under the influence of the Lord, they had been quiet
while the temple was being overthrown, could not patiently allow the
tree to be cut down. Martin carefully instructed them that there was
nothing sacred in the trunk of a tree, and urged them rather to honor
God whom he himself served. He added that there was a moral necessity
why that tree should be cut down, because it had been dedicated to a
demon. Then one of them who was bolder than the others says, “If you
have any trust in thy God, whom you say you worship, we ourselves will
cut down this tree, and be it your part to receive it when falling; for
if, as you declare, your Lord is with you, you will escape all injury.”
Then Martin, courageously trusting in the Lord, promises that he would
do what had been asked. Upon this, all that crowd of heathen agreed to
the condition named; for they held the loss of their tree a small
matter, if only they got the enemy of their religion buried beneath its
fall. Accordingly, since that pine-tree was hanging over in one
direction, so that there was no doubt to what side it would fall on
being cut, Martin, having been bound, is, in accordance with the
decision of these pagans, placed in that spot where, as no one doubted,
the tree was about to fall. They began, therefore, to cut down their own
tree, with great glee and joyfulness, while there was at some distance a
great multitude of wondering spectators. And now the pine-tree began to
totter, and to threaten its <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) own
ruin by falling. The monks at a distance grew pale, and, terrified by
the danger ever coming nearer, had lost all hope and confidence,
expecting only the death of Martin. But he, trusting in the Lord, and
waiting courageously, when now the falling pine had uttered its expiring
crash, while it was now falling, while it was just rushing upon him,
simply holding up his hand against it, he put in its way the sign of
salvation. Then, indeed, after the manner of a spinning-top (one might
have thought it driven <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) back.md), it
swept round to the opposite side, to such a degree that it almost
crushed the rustics, who had taken their places there in what was deemed
a safe spot. Then truly, a shout being raised to heaven, the heathen
were amazed by the miracle, while the monks wept for joy; and the name
of Christ was in common extolled by all. The well-known result was that
on that day salvation came to that region. For there was hardly one of
that immense multitude of heathens who did not express a desire for the
imposition of hands, and abandoning his impious errors, made a
profession of faith in the Lord Jesus. Certainly, before the times of
Martin, very few, nay, almost none, in those regions had received the
name of Christ; but through his virtues and example that name has
prevailed to such an extent, that now there is no place thereabouts
which is not filled either with very crowded churches or monasteries.
For wherever he destroyed heathen temples, there he used immediately to
build either churches or monasteries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[10:28](2110017.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="ii.ii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xiv-p3"></span> Perhaps “suam” here stands for “ejus,”
as in other passages of our author. The meaning will then be, “and to
threaten his (Martin’s) destruction by falling.”

<span id="fn_28"></span>[10:29](2110017.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="ii.ii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xiv-p4"></span> It seems better to preserve the
parenthesis than to translate the words as they stand in Halm’s text,
“tum vero—velut turbinis modo retro actam putares—diversam in partem
ruit.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Martin destroys Heathen Temples and
Altars.](2110018.md)
