[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110128)  [Next](2110130.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.iv"></span>

### <span id="ii.v.iv-p0.1"></span>Letter IV.

#### <span id="ii.v.iv-p0.2"></span>To the Same, on His Wisdom and Gentleness.

<span id="ii.v.iv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p1.1"></span>The</span> faithful exponent of our holy
religion so arranges all things that no place be found in future for
transgressors:  for what else do you, for instance, promise us by so
great sanctity of character, than that, all errors being laid aside, we
should lead a blessed life? In this matter, I see that the greatest
praise befits thy virtues, because you have changed even an uninstructed
mind by your exhortations, and drawn it over to an excellent condition.
But it would not seem so wonderful, if you had simply strengthened
educated minds by instilling wisdom into them; for intelligent men have
a sort of relationship to devotion, but rustic natures are not easily
won over to the side of severity. <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) Just as those who shape the forms of
animals out of stone, undertake a business of a pretty difficult kind,
when they strike very hard rocks with their chisels, while those who
make their attempts on substances of a softer nature feel that their
hands are aided by the ease of fashioning these materials, and it is
deemed proper that the labor of the workman; when difficult, should be
held in the highest honor, so, Sir, singular commendation ought so be
given to you, because you have made unpolished and rustic minds, set
free from the darkness of sin, both to think what is human, and to
understand what is divine.

<span id="ii.v.iv-p3"></span>No less is Xenocrates, by far the most
learned of the philosophers, held in estimation, who succeeded by severe
exhortations in having luxury conquered. For when a certain Polemo,
heavy with wine, staggered openly out of a nocturnal revel at the time
when his hearers were flocking to the school of Xenocrates, he, too,
entered the place, and impudently took his seat among the crowd of
disciples, in that dress in which he had come forth from the banquet. A
chaplet of flowers covered his head, and yet he did not feel ashamed
that he would seem unlike all the others, because, in truth, indulgence
in a long drinking-bout had upset his brains, which are the seat of
reason. As the rest of those there present began to murmur grievously,
because so unsuitable a hearer had found his way in among a multitude of
men of letters, the master himself was not in the slightest degree
disturbed, but, on the contrary, began to discourse on the science of
morals, and the laws of moderation. And so powerful proved the influence
of the teacher that the mind of that impudent intruder was persuaded to
the love of modesty. First of all, then, Polemo, in utter confusion,
took off the chaplet from his head, and professed himself a disciple.
And in course of time he conformed himself so thoroughly to the duties
implied in dignity, and surrendered himself so entirely to the
exhibition of modesty, that a glorious amendment of character threw a
cloak over the habits of his former life. Now we admire this very thing
in your instructions, that, without the use of any threats, and without
having recourse to terrors of any kind, you have turned infatuated minds
to the worship of God; so that even a badly ordered intellect should
believe it preferable <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md) to live
well and happily with all, rather than to hold unrighteous opinions with
a few.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_235"></span>[68:236](2110129.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p2"></span> “crudelitati,” which, as Clericus remarks,
must here be equivalent to *severitati*.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[68:237](2110129.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p4"></span> “rectissimum,” where *rectius* might have
been expected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter V. To an Unknown Person, Entreating Him to Deal Gently
with His Brother.](2110130.md)
