[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110237)  [Next](2110239.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlix"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLIX.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-p1.1"></span>But</span> the power, not the will, to
resist, failed Ithacius; for the heretics had won over by bribes
Voluentius, the proconsul, and thus consolidated their own power.
Moreover, Ithacius was put on his trial, by these men as being a
disturber of the churches, and he having been ordered as the result of a
fierce prosecution, to be carried off <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391.md) as a prisoner, fled in terror into
Gaul, where he betook himself to Gregory the prefect. He, after he
learned what had taken place, orders the authors of these tumults to be
brought before himself, and makes a report on all that had occurred to
the emperor, in order that he might close against the heretics every
means of flattery or bribery. But that was done in vain; because,
through the licentiousness and power of a few, all things were there to
be purchased. Accordingly, the heretics by their artifices, having
presented Macedonius with a large sum of money, secure that, by the
imperial authority, the hearing of the trial was taken from the prefect,
and transferred to the lieutenant in Spain. By that time, the Spaniards
had ceased to have a proconsul as ruler, and officials were sent by the
Master to bring back to Spain Ithacius who was then living at Treves.
He, however, craftily escaped them, and being subsequently defended by
the bishop Pritannius, he set them at <span id="page_121">p. 121</span>
<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-Page_121"></span>defiance. Then, too, a
faint <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392.md) rumor had spread that
Maximus had assumed imperial power in Britain, and would, in a short
time, make an incursion into Gaul. Accordingly, Ithacius then resolved,
although his affairs were in a ticklish state, to wait the arrival of
the new emperor; and that, in the meantime, no step should on his part
be taken. When therefore Maximus, as victor, entered the town of the
Treveri, he poured forth entreaties full of ill-will and accusations
against Priscillian and his confederates. The emperor influenced by
these statements sent letters to the prefect of Gaul and to the
lieutenant in Spain, ordering that all whom that disgraceful <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393.md) heresy had affected should be brought
to a Synod at Bordeaux. Accordingly, Instantius and Priscillian were
escorted thither and, of these, Instantius was enjoined to plead his
cause; and after he was found unable to clear himself, he was pronounced
unworthy of the office of a bishop. But Priscillian, in order that he
might avoid being heard by the bishops, appealed to the emperor. And
that was permitted to be done through the want of resolution on the part
of our friends, who ought either to have passed a sentence even against
one who resisted it, or, if they were regarded as themselves suspicious
persons, should have reserved the hearing for other bishops, and should
not have transferred to the emperor a cause involving such manifest
offences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_391"></span>[120:392](2110238.htm#fr_391.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-p2"></span> This appears to be the meaning, but
the text is obscure.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[121:393](2110238.htm#fr_392.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-p3"></span> “clemens”: some read “Clementen,”
and join it with “Maximum.”

<span id="fn_393"></span>[121:394](2110238.htm#fr_393.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlix-p4"></span> “labes illa.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter L.](2110239.md)
