[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110587)  [Next](2110589.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ii.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xxi-p1"></span>Of the illusion of Abbot John.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>In</span> this manner we have heard that
Abbot John who lived at Lycon, <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156.md) was recently deceived. For when his
body was exhausted and failing as he had put off taking food during a
fast of two days, on the third day while he was on his way to take some
refreshment the devil came in the shape of a filthy Ethiopian, and
falling at his feet, cried “Pardon me because I appointed this labour
for you.” And so that great man, who was so perfect in the matter of
discretion, understood that under pretence of an abstinence practised
unsuitably, he was deceived by the craft of the devil, and engaged in a
fast of such a character as to affect his worn out body with a weariness
that was unnecessary, indeed that was harmful to the spirit; as he was
deceived by a counterfeit coin, and, while he paid respect to the image
of the true king upon it, was not sufficiently alive to the question
whether it was rightly cut and stamped. But the last duty of this “good
money-changer,” which, as we mentioned before, concerns the examination
of the weight, will be fulfilled, if whenever our thoughts suggest that
anything is to be done, we scrupulously think it over, and, laying it in
the scales of our breast, weigh it with the most exact balance, whether
it be full of good for all, or heavy with the fear of God: or entire and
sound in meaning; or whether it be light with human display or some
conceit of novelty, or whether the pride of foolish vain glory has not
diminished or lessened the weight of its merit. And so straightway
weighing them in the public balance, i.e., testing them by the acts and
proofs of the Apostles and Prophets let us hold them as it were entire
and perfect and of full weight, or else with all care and diligence
reject them as imperfect and counterfeit, and of insufficient weight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[306:1157](2110588.htm#fr_1156.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.xxi-p3"></span> On this John of Lycon or Lycopolis
see the note on Inst. IV. xxiii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. Of the fourfold method of discrimination.](2110589.md)
