[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110959)  [Next](2110961) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p1"></span>Of the origin of the Sarabaites and
their mode of life.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>And</span> while the Christian religion
was rejoicing in these two orders of monks though this system had begun
by degrees to deteriorate, there arose afterwards that disgusting and
unfaithful kind of monks; or rather, that baleful plant revived and
sprang up again which when it first shot up in the persons of Ananias
and Sapphira in the early Church was cut off by the severity of the
Apostle Peter—a kind which among monks has been for a long while
considered detestable and execrable, and which was adopted by no one any
more, so long as there remained stamped on the memory of the faithful
the dread of that very severe sentence, in which the blessed Apostle not
merely refused to allow the aforesaid originators of the novel crime to
be cured by penitence or any amends, but actually destroyed that most
dangerous germ by their speedy death. When then that precedent, which
was punished with Apostolical severity in the case of Ananias and
Sapphira had by degrees faded from the minds of some, owing to long
carelessness and forgetfulness from lapse of time, there arose the race
of Sarabaites, who owing to the fact that they have broken away from the
congregations of the Cœnobites and each look after their own affairs,
are rightly named in the Egyptian language Sarabaites, <span
id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078) and these spring from the number of
those, whom we have mentioned, who wanted to imitate rather than truly
to aim at Evangelical perfection, urged thereto by rivalry or by the
praises of those who preferred the complete poverty of Christ to all
manner of riches. These then while in their feeble mind they make a
pretence of the greatest goodness and are forced by necessity to join
this order, while they are anxious to be reckoned by the name of monks
without emulating their pursuits, in no sort of way practise discipline,
or are subject to the will of the Elders, or, taught by their
traditions, learn to govern their own wills or take up and properly
learn any rule of sound discretion; but making their renunciation only
as a public profession, i.e., before the face of men, either continue in
their homes devoted to the same occupations as before, though dignified
by this title, or building cells for themselves and calling them
monasteries remain in them perfectly free and their own masters, never
submitting to the precepts of the gospel, which forbid them to be busied
with any anxiety for the day’s food, or troubles about domestic matters:
commands which those alone fulfil with no unbelieving doubt, who have
freed themselves from all the goods of this world and subjected
themselves to the superiors of the Cœnobia so that they cannot admit
that they are at all their own masters. But those who, as we said, shirk
the severity of the monastery, and live two or three together in their
cells, not satisfied to be under the charge and rule of an Abbot, but
arranging chiefly for this; viz., that they may get rid of the yoke of
the Elders and have liberty to carry out their wishes and go and wander
where they will, and do what they like, these men are more taken up both
day and night in daily business than those who live in the Cœnobia, but
not with the same faith and purpose. For these Sarabaites do it not to
submit the fruits of their labours to the will of the steward, but to
procure money to lay by. And see what a difference there is between
them. For the others think nothing of the morrow, and offer to God the
most acceptable fruits of their toil: while these extend their faithless
anxiety not only to the morrow, but even to the space of many years, and
so fancy that God is either false or impotent as He either could not or
would not grant them the promised supply of food and clothing. The one
seek this in all their prayers; viz., that they may gain <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p3.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p3.3"></span>κτημοσύνην</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p3.4"></span>,</span> i.e., the
deprivation of all things, and lasting poverty: the other that they may
secure a rich quantity of all sorts of supplies. The one eagerly strive
to go beyond the fixed rule of daily work that whatever is not wanted
for the sacred purposes of the monastery, may be distributed at the will
of the Abbot either among the prisons, or in the guest-chamber or in the
infirmary or to the poor; the others that whatever the day’s gorge
leaves over, may be useful for extravagant wants or else laid by through
the sin of covetousness. Lastly, if we grant that what has been
collected by them with no good design, may be disposed of in better ways
than we have men <span id="page_483">p. 483</span> <span
id="iv.vi.ii.vii-Page_483"></span>tioned, yet not even thus do they rise
to the merits of goodness and perfection. For the others bring in such
returns to the monastery, and daily report to them, and continue in such
humility and subjection that they are deprived of their rights over what
they gain by their own efforts, just as they are of their rights over
themselves, as they constantly renew the fervour of their original act
of renunciation, while they daily deprive themselves of the fruits of
their labours: but these are puffed up by the fact that they are
bestowing something on the poor, and daily fall headlong into sin. The
one party are by patience and the strictness whereby they continue
devoutly in the order which they have once embraced, so as never to
fulfil their own will, crucified daily to this world and made living
martyrs; the others are cast down into hell by the lukewarmness of their
purpose. These two sorts of monks then vie with each other in almost
equal numbers in this province; but in other provinces, which the need
of the Catholic faith compelled me to visit, we have found that this
third class of Sarabaites flourishes and is almost the only one, since
in the time of Lucius who was a Bishop of Arian misbelief <span
id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079) in the reign of Valens, while we
carried alms <span id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080) to our brethren;
viz., those from Egypt and the Thebaid, who had been consigned to the
mines of Pontus and Armenia <span id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081)
for their steadfastness in the Catholic faith, though we found the
system of Cœnobia in some cities few and far between, yet we never made
out that even the name of anchorites was heard among them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[482:2079](2110960.htm#fr_2078) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p3"></span> Sarabaites, this third sort of monks
whom Cassian here paints in such dark colours, are spoken of by S.
Jerome (Ep. xxii.<span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p3.1"></span> ad Eustochium)
under the name of Remoboth. The origin of both names is obscure, but
Jerome and Cassian are quite at one in their scorn for these pretended
monks. S. Benedict begins his monastic rule by describing the four kinds
of monks, cœnobites, anchorites, sarabaites, and a fourth class to which
he gives the name of “gyrovagi,” i e., wandering monks; these must be
those of whom Cassian speaks below in c. viii. without giving them any
definite name. See further Bingham, Antiquities VII. ii., and the
Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, Art. Sarabaites.

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[483:2080](2110960.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p4"></span> Lucius took the lead of the Arian
party at Alexandria after the murder of George of Cappadocia in 361, and
was put forward by his party as the candidate for the see which they
regarded as vacant. In 373, after the death of Athanasius, he was forced
upon the reluctant Church of Alexandria by the Arian Emperor Valens, and
according to Gregory Nazianzen a fresh persecution of the orthodox party
at once began; and to this it is that Piamun alludes in the text.

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[483:2081](2110960.htm#fr_2080) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p5"></span> *Diaconia*. The word is used again by
Cassian for almsgiving in Conf. XXI. i., viii., ix., and cf. Gregory the
Great, Ep. xxii.<span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p5.1"></span>, and compare <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p5.2"></span>εἰς διακονίαν</span>
in [Acts xi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p5.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[483:2082](2110960.htm#fr_2081) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.vii-p6"></span> To work in the mines was a punishment
to which the Confessors were frequently subjected in the time of
persecution: Cf. the prayer in the Liturgy of S. Mark that God would
have mercy on those in prison or in the mines, etc. *Hammond’s
Liturgies*, p. 181.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of a fourth sort of monks.](2110961)
