[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110181)  [Next](2110183.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xlviii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xlviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLVIII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xlviii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xlviii-p1.1"></span>The</span> remarkable faith of the
Ninevites is related to have been manifested about these times. That
town, founded of old by Assure, the son of Sem, was the capital of the
kingdom of the Assyrians. It was then full of a multitude of
inhabitants, sustaining one hundred and twenty thousand men, and
abounding in wickedness, as is usually the case among a vast concourse
of people. God, moved by their sinfulness, commanded the prophet Jonah
to go from Judæa, and denounce destruction upon the city, as Sodom and
Gomorrah had of old been consumed by fire from heaven. But the prophet
declined that office of preaching, not out of contumacy, but from
foresight, which enabled him to behold God reconciled through the
repentance of the people; and he embarked on board a ship which was
bound for Tharsus, in a very different direction. But, after they had
gone forth into the deep, the sailors, constrained by the violence of
the sea, inquired by means of the lot who was the cause of that
suffering. And when the lot fell upon Jonah, he was cast into the sea,
to be, as it were, a sacrifice for stilling the tempest, and he was
seized and swallowed by a whale—a monster of the deep. Cast out three
days afterwards on the shores of the <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323.md) Ninevites, he preached as he had been
commanded, namely that the city would be destroyed in three <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324.md) days, as a punishment for the sins of
the people. The voice of the prophet was listened to, not in a
hypocritical fashion, as at Sodom of old; and immediately by the order,
and after the example, of the king, the whole people, and even those
infants newly born, are commanded to abstain from meat and drink: the
very beasts of burden in the place, and animals of different kinds,
being forced by hunger and thirst, presented an appearance of those who
lamented along with the human inhabitants. In this way, the threatened
evil was averted. To Jonah, complaining to God, that his words had not
been fulfilled, it was answered that pardon could never be denied to the
penitent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_323"></span>[94:324](2110182.htm#fr_323.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xlviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xlviii-p2"></span> Surely a blunder; for, as has been
well asked, how could Jonah, who was swallowed by a whale in the
Mediterranean, have been cast out by the fish on the shores of the
Ninevites? The Hebrew text has simply “the dryland.”

<span id="fn_324"></span>[94:325](2110182.htm#fr_324.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xlviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xlviii-p3"></span> After the Greek; the Hebrew has
“forty days.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIX.](2110183.md)
