[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110570)  [Next](2110572) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.iv-p1"></span>Of Abbot Moses’ question on the
aforesaid statement.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>To</span> which he replied: Good, you have
spoken cleverly of the (ultimate) end. But what should be our
(immediate) goal or mark, by constantly sticking close to which we can
gain our end, you ought first to know. And when we frankly confessed our
ignorance, he proceeded: The first thing, as I said, in all the arts and
sciences is to have some goal, i.e., a mark for the mind, and constant
mental purpose, for unless a man keeps this before him with all
diligence and persistence, he will never succeed in arriving at the
ultimate aim and the gain which he desires. For, as I said, the farmer
who has for his aim to live free from care and with plenty, while his
crops are springing has this as his immediate object and goal; viz., to
keep his field clear from all brambles, and weeds, and does not fancy
that he can otherwise ensure wealth and a peaceful end, unless he first
secures by some plan of work and hope that which he is anxious to
obtain. The business man too does not lay aside the desire of procuring
wares, by means of which he may more profitably amass riches, because he
would desire gain to no purpose, unless he chose the road which leads to
it: and those men who are anxious to be decorated with the honours of
this world, first make up their minds to what duties and conditions they
must devote themselves, that in the regular course of hope they may
succeed in gaining the honours they desire. And so the end of our way of
life is indeed the kingdom of God. But what is the (immediate) goal you
must earnestly ask, for if it is not in the same way discovered by us,
we shall strive and wear ourselves out to no purpose, because a man who
is travelling in a wrong direction, has all the trouble and gets none of
the good of his journey. And when we stood gaping at this remark, the
old man proceeded: The end of our profession indeed, as I said, is the
kingdom of God or the kingdom of heaven: but the immediate aim or goal,
is purity of heart, without which no one can gain that end: fixing our
gaze then steadily on this goal, as if on a definite mark, let us direct
our course as straight towards it as possible, and if our thoughts
wander somewhat from this, let us revert to our gaze upon it, and check
them accurately as by a sure standard, which will always bring back all
our efforts to this one mark, and will show at once if our mind has
wandered ever so little from the direction marked out for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. A comparison with a man who is trying to hit a
mark.](2110572)
