[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110655)  [Next](2110657) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.xv"></span> <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v.xv-Page_336"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xv-p1"></span>Of the value of the lust of the flesh
against the spirit in our case.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.xv-p2.1"></span>To</span> begin with, because it is an
immediate reproof of our sloth and carelessness, and like some energetic
schoolmaster who never allows us to deviate from the line of strict
discipline, and if our carelessness has ever so little exceeded the
limits of due gravity which become it, it immediately excites us by the
stimulus of desire, and chides us and recalls us to due moderation.
Secondly, because, in the matter of chastity and perfect purity, when by
God’s grace we see that we have been for some time kept from carnal
pollution, in order that we may not imagine that we can no longer be
disturbed by the motions of the flesh and thereby be elated and puffed
up in our secret hearts as if we no longer bore about the corruption of
the flesh, it humbles and checks us, and reminds us by its pricks that
we are but men. <span id="fr_1303"></span>[1304](#fn_1303) For as we
ordinarily fall without much thought into other kinds of sins and those
worse and more harmful, and are not so easily ashamed of committing
them, so in this particular one the conscience is especially humbled,
and by means of this illusion it is stung by the recollection of
passions that have been neglected, as it sees clearly that it is
rendered unclean by natural emotions, of which it knew nothing while it
was still more unclean through spiritual sins; and so coming back at
once to the cure of its former sluggishness, it is warned both that it
ought not to trust in the attainments of purity in the past, which it
sees to be lost by ever so small a falling away from the Lord, and also
that it cannot attain the gift of this purity except by God’s grace
alone, since actual experience somehow or other teaches us that if we
are anxious to reach abiding perfection of heart we must constantly
endeavour to obtain the virtue of humility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[336:1304](2110656.htm#fr_1303) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xv-p3"></span> *Suo nos rursum quamvis quieto ac
simplici visitans fluxu*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Of the excitements of the flesh, without the
humiliation of which we should fall more grievously.](2110657)
