[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110527)  [Next](2110529.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xi.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.xi.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="iv.iii.xi.xvii-p1"></span>How faults cannot be cured unless
their roots and causes have been discovered.

<span id="iv.iii.xi.xvii-p2"></span>I <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.xi.xvii-p2.1"></span>thought</span> it well to insert these
things in this little work of mine, that we might learn, not only by
reason, but also by examples, about the force of temptations and the
order of the sins which hurt an unfortunate soul, and so might be more
careful in avoiding the snares and manifold deceits of the enemy. For
these things are indiscriminately brought forward by the Egyptian
fathers, that by telling them, as those who are still enduring them,
they may disclose and lay bare the combats with all the vices, which
they actually do suffer, and those which the younger ones are sure to
suffer; so that, when they explain the illusions arising from all the
passions, those who are but beginners and fervent in spirit may know the
secret of their struggles, and seeing them as in a glass, may learn both
the causes of the sins by which they are troubled, and the remedies for
them, and instructed beforehand concerning the approach of future
struggles, may be taught how they ought to guard against them, or to
meet them and to fight with them. As clever physicians are accustomed
not only to heal already existing diseases, but also by a wise skill to
seek to obviate future ones, and to prevent them by their prescriptions
and healing draughts, so these true physicians of the soul, by means of
spiritual conferences, like some celestial antidote, destroy beforehand
those maladies of the soul which would arise, and do not allow them to
gain a footing in the minds of the juniors, as they unfold to them the
causes of the passions which threaten them, and the remedies which will
heal them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. How a monk ought to avoid women and
bishops.](2110529.md)
