[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110619)  [Next](2110621.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iv.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ii-p1"></span>Of the discourse of the same old man,
and our reply to it.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>As</span> then we were anxious to learn
from his teaching, we came in some agitation to his cell towards
evening. And after a short silence he began to commend our undertaking,
because we had left our homes, and had visited so many countries out of
love for the Lord, and were endeavouring with all our might to endure
want and the trials of the desert, and to imitate their severe life,
which even those who had been born and bred in the same state of want
and penury, could scarcely put up with; and we replied that we had come
for his teaching and instruction in order that we might be to some
extent initiated in the customs of so great a man, and in that
perfection which we had known from many evidences to exist in him, not
that we might be honoured by any commendations to which we had no right,
or be puffed up with any elation of mind, (with which we were sometimes
exercised in our own cells at the suggestion of our enemy) in
consequence of any words of his. Wherefore we begged him rather to lay
before us what would make us humble and contrite, and not what would
flatter us and puff us up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The statement of Abbot Paphnutius on the three kinds
of vocations, and the three sorts of renunciations.](2110621.md)
