[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110639)  [Next](2110641.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p1"></span>The answer; viz., that our free will
always has need of the help of the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p2.1"></span>Paphnutius</span>: You have shrewdly
enough noticed how it is said “If they would have hearkened to Me:” but
have not sufficiently considered either who it is who speaks to one who
does or does not hearken; or what follows: “I should soon have put down
their enemies, and laid My hand on those that trouble them.” <span
id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283.md) Let no one then try by a false
interpretation to twist that which we brought forward to prove that
nothing can be done without the Lord, nor take it in support of free
will, in such a way as to try to take away from man the grace of God and
His daily oversight, through this test: “But My people did not hear My
voice,” and again: “If My people would have hearkened unto Me, and if
Israel would have walked in My ways, etc.:” but let him consider that
just as the power of free will is evidenced by the disobedience of the
people, so the daily oversight <span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-Page_330"></span>of God who declares and admonishes
him is also shown. For where He says “If My people would have hearkened
unto Me” He clearly implies that He had spoken to them before. And this
the Lord was wont to do not only by means of the written law, but also
by daily exhortations, as this which is given by Isaiah: “All day long
have I stretched forth My hands to a disobedient and gain-saying
people.” <span id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284.md) Both points then can
be supported from this passage, where it says: “If My people would have
hearkened, and if Israel had walked in My ways, I should soon have put
down their enemies, and laid My hand on those that trouble them.” For
just as free will is shown by the disobedience of the people, so the
government of God and His assistance is made clear by the beginning and
end of the verse, where He implies that He had spoken to them before,
and that afterwards He would put down their enemies, if they would have
hearkened unto Him. For we have no wish to do away with man’s free will
by what we have said, but only to establish the fact that the assistance
and grace of God are necessary to it every day and hour. When he had
instructed us with this discourse Abbot Paphnutius dismissed us from his
cell before midnight in a state of contrition rather than of liveliness;
insisting on this as the chief lesson in his discourse; viz., that when
we fancied that by making perfect the first renunciation (which we were
endeavouring to do with all our powers), we could climb the heights of
perfection, we should make the discovery that we had not yet even begun
to dream of the heights to which a monk can rise, since after we had
learnt some few things about the second renunciation, we should find out
that we had not before this even heard a word of the third stage, in
which all perfection is comprised, and which in many ways far exceeds
these lower ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[329:1284](2110640.htm#fr_1283.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p3"></span> [Psa.
81.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[330:1285](2110640.htm#fr_1284.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p4"></span> [Is. lxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.xxii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference IV. Conference of Abbot Daniel. On the Lust of the
Flesh and of the Spirit.](2110641.md)
