[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110968)  [Next](2110970.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p1"></span>On the perfection of patience.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p2"></span>A <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>twofold</span> reason however led me to
relate this fact, first that we may weigh this steadfastness and
constancy of the man, and as we are attacked by less serious wiles of
the enemy, may the better secure a greater feeling of calmness and
patience, secondly that we may with resolute decision hold that we
cannot be safe from the storms of temptation and assaults of the devil
if we make all the protection for our patience and all our confidence
consist not in the strength of our inner man but in the doors of our
cell or the recesses of the desert, and companionship of the saints, or
the safeguard of anything else outside us. For unless our mind is
strengthened by the power of His protection Who says in the gospel “the
kingdom of God is within you,” <span
id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092.md) in vain do we fancy that we can
defeat the plots of our airy foe by the aid of men who are living with
us, or that we can avoid them by distance of place, or exclude them by
the protection of walls. For though none of these things was wanting to
Saint Paphnutius yet the tempter did not fail to find a way of access
against him to attack him; nor did the encircling walls, or the solitude
of the desert or the merits of all those saints in the congregation
repulse that most foul spirit. But because the holy servant of God had
fixed the hope of his heart not on those external things but on Him Who
is the judge of all secrets, he could not be moved even by the
machinations of such an assault as that. On the other hand did not the
man whom envy had hurried into so grievous a sin enjoy the benefit of
solitude and the protection of a retired dwelling, and intercourse with
the blessed Abbot and Presbyter Isidore and other saints? And yet
because the storm raised by the devil found him upon the sand, it not
only drove in his house but actually overturned it. We need not then
seek for our peace in externals, nor fancy that another person’s
patience can be of any use to the faults of our impatience. For just as
“the kingdom of God is within you,” so “a man’s foes are they of his own
household.” <span id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093.md) For no one is
more my enemy than my own heart which is truly the one of my household
closest to me. And therefore if we are careful, we cannot possibly be
injured by intestine enemies. For where those of our own household are
not opposed to us, there also the kingdom of God is secured in peace of
heart. For if you diligently investigate the matter, I cannot be injured
by any man however spiteful, if I do not fight against myself with
warlike heart. But if I am injured, the fault is not owing to the
other’s attack, but to my own impatience. For as strong and solid food
is good for a man in good health, so it is bad for a sick one. But it
cannot hurt the man who takes it, unless the weakness of its recipient
gives it its power to hurt. If then any similar temptation ever arises
among brethren, we need never be shaken out of the even tenor of our
ways and give an opening to the blasphemous snarls of men living in the
world, nor wonder that some bad and detestable men have secretly found
their way into the number of the saints, because so long as we are
trodden down and trampled in the threshing floor of this world, the
chaff which is destined for eternal fire is quite sure to be mingled
with the choicest of the wheat. Finally if we bear in mind that Satan
was chosen among the angels, and Judas among the apostles, and Nicholas
the <span id="page_488">p. 488</span> <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-Page_488"></span>author of a detestable heresy among
the deacons, it will be no wonder that the basest of men are found among
the ranks of the saints. For although some maintain that this Nicholas
was not the same man who was chosen for the work of the ministry by the
Apostles, <span id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094.md) nevertheless they
cannot deny that he was of the number of the disciples, all of whom were
clearly of such a character and so perfect as those few whom we can now
with difficulty discover in the Cœnobia. Let us then bring forward not
the fall of the above-mentioned brother, who fell in the desert with so
grievous a collapse, nor that horrible stain which he afterwards wiped
out by the copious tears of his penitence, but the example of the
blessed Paphnutius; and let us not be destroyed by the ruin of the
former, whose ingrained sin of envy was increased and made worse by his
affected piety, but let us imitate with all our might the humility of
the latter, which in his case was no sudden production of the quiet of
the desert, but had been gained among men, and was consummated and
perfected by solitude. However you should know that the evil of envy is
harder to be cured than other faults, for I should almost say that a man
whom it has once tainted with the mischief of its poison is without a
remedy. For it is the plague of which it is figuratively said by the
prophet: “Behold I will send among you serpents, basilisks, against
which there is no charm: and they shall bite you.” <span
id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095.md) Rightly then are the stings of envy
compared by the prophet to the deadly poison of basilisks, as by it the
first author of all poisons and their chief perished and died. For he
slew himself before him of whom he was envious, and destroyed himself
before that he poured forth the poison of death against man: for “by the
envy of the devil death entered into the world: they therefore who are
on his side follow him.” <span id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096.md) For
just as he who was the first to be corrupted by the plague of that evil,
admitted no remedy of penitence, nor any healing plaster, so those also
who have given themselves up to be smitten by the same pricks, exclude
all the aid of the sacred charmer, because as they are tormented not by
the faults but by the prosperity of those of whom they are jealous, they
are ashamed to display the real truth and look out for some external
unnecessary and trifling causes of offence: and of these, because they
are altogether false, vain is the hope of cure, while the deadly poison
which they will not produce is lurking in their veins. Of which the
wisest of men has fitly said: “If a serpent bite without hissing, there
is no supply for the charmer.” <span
id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097.md) For those are silent bites, to
which alone the medicine of the wise is no succour. For that evil is so
far incurable that it is made worse by attentions, it is increased by
services, is irritated by presents, because as the same Solomon says:
“envy endures nothing.” <span id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098.md) For
just in proportion as another has made progress in humble submission or
in the virtue of patience or in the merit of munificence, so is a man
excited by worse pricks of envy, because he desires nothing less than
the ruin or death of the man whom he envies. Lastly no submission on the
part of their harmless brother could soften the envy of the eleven
patriarchs, so that Scripture relates of them: “But his brothers envied
him because his father loved him, and they could not speak peaceably
unto him” <span id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099.md) until their
jealousy, which would not listen to any entreaties on the part of their
obedient and submissive brother, desired his death, and would scarcely
be satisfied with the sin of selling a brother. It is plain then that
envy is worse than all faults, and harder to get rid of, as it is
inflamed by those remedies by which the others are destroyed. For, for
example, a man who is grieved by a loss that has been caused to him, is
healed by a liberal compensation: one who is sore owing to a wrong done
to him, is appeased by humble satisfaction being made. What can you do
with one who is the more offended by the very fact that he sees you
humbler and kinder, who is not aroused to anger by any greed which can
be appeased by a bribe; or by any injurious attack or love of vengeance,
which is overcome by obsequious services; but is only irritated by
another’s success and happiness? But who is there who in order to
satisfy one who envies him, would wish to fall from his good fortune, or
to lose his prosperity or to be involved in some calamity? Wherefore we
must constantly implore the divine aid, to which nothing is impossible,
in order that the serpent may not by a single bite of this evil destroy
whatever is flourishing in us, and animated as it were by the life and
quickening power of the Holy Ghost. For the other poisons of serpents,
i.e., carnal sins and faults, in which human frailty is easily entangled
and from which it is as easily purified, show some traces of their
wounds <span id="page_489">p. 489</span> <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-Page_489"></span>in the flesh, whereby although the
earthly body is most dangerously inflamed, yet if any charmer well
skilled in divine incantations applies a cure and antidote or the remedy
of words of salvation, the poisonous evil does not reach to the
everlasting death of the soul. But the poison of envy as if emitted by
the basilisk, destroys the very life of religion and faith, even before
the wound is perceived in the body. For he does not raise himself up
against men, but, in his blasphemy, against God, who carps at nothing in
his brother except his felicity, and so blames no fault of man, but
simply the judgment of God. This then is that “root of bitterness
springing up” <span id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100.md) which raises
itself to heaven and tends to reproaching the very Author Who bestows
good things on man. Nor shall anyone be disturbed because God threatens
to send “serpents, basilisks,” <span
id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101.md) to bite those by whose crimes He is
offended. For although it is certain that God cannot be the author of
envy, yet it is fair and worthy of the divine judgment that, while good
gifts are bestowed on the humble and refused to the proud and reprobate,
those who, as the Apostle says, deserve to be given over “to a reprobate
mind,” <span id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102.md) should be smitten and
consumed by envy sent as it were by Him, according to this passage:
“They have provoked me to jealousy by them that are no gods: and I will
provoke them to jealousy by them that are no nation.” <span
id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103.md)

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p15"></span>By this discourse the blessed Piamun
excited still more keenly our desire in which we had begun to be
promoted from the infant school of the Cœnobium to the second standard
of the anchorites’ life. For it was under his instruction that we made
our first start in solitary living, the knowledge of which we afterwards
followed up more thoroughly in Scete.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[487:2093](2110969.htm#fr_2092.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p3"></span> S. [Luke xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[487:2094](2110969.htm#fr_2093.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p4"></span> S. [Matt. x.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#036.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[488:2095](2110969.htm#fr_2094.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p5"></span> As Cassian here implies, considerable
doubt exists whether the Nicholas from whom the sect of the Nicolaitans
([Rev. ii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>) derive their name was the same person as
Nicholas the last of the seven “deacons” mentioned in [Acts vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p5.2"></span>.
According to Irenæus (Hær. I. xxvi.) the Nicolaitans themselves claimed
him as their founder, and the claim is allowed by Hippolytus (Philos.
vii. § 36), Epiphanius (Hær. I. ii. § 25), and other writers of the
fourth century. Clement of Alexandria however disputes the claim (Strom.
III. iv. and cf. Euseb. H. E. III. xxix.), as does Theodoret (Hær. Tab.
iii. 1).

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[488:2096](2110969.htm#fr_2095.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p6"></span> [Jer. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[488:2097](2110969.htm#fr_2096.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p7"></span> [Wis.
2:24](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[488:2098](2110969.htm#fr_2097.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p8"></span> [Eccl. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[488:2099](2110969.htm#fr_2098.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p9"></span> [Prov. xxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[488:2100](2110969.htm#fr_2099.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p10"></span> [Gen. xxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[489:2101](2110969.htm#fr_2100.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p11"></span> [Heb. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[489:2102](2110969.htm#fr_2101.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p12"></span> [Jer. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[489:2103](2110969.htm#fr_2102.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p13"></span> [Rom. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[489:2104](2110969.htm#fr_2103.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p14"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.vi.ii.xvi-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference XIX. Conference of Abbot John. On the Aim of the
Cœnobite and Hermit.](2110970.md)
