[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110274)  [Next](2110276) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p1"></span>The Children of the Catholic Church ought
to adhere to the Faith of their Fathers and die for it.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p2"></span>\[86.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>Whoever</span> then gainsays these Apostolic
and Catholic determinations, first of all necessarily insults the memory
of holy Celestine, who decreed that novelty should cease to assail
antiquity; and in the next place sets at naught the decision of holy
Sixtus, whose sentence was, “Let no license be allowed to novelty, since
it is not fit that any addition be made to antiquity;” moreover, he
condemns the determination of blessed Cyril, who extolled with high
praise the zeal of the venerable Capreolus, in that he would fain have
the ancient doctrines of the faith confirmed, and novel inventions
condemned; yet more, he tramples upon the Council of Ephesus, that is,
on the decisions of the holy bishops of almost the whole East, who
decreed, under divine guidance, that nothing ought to be believed by
posterity save what the sacred antiquity of the holy Fathers,
consentient in Christ, had held, who with one voice, and with loud
acclaim, testified that these were the words of all, this was the wish
of all, this was the sentence of all, that as almost all heretics before
Nestorius, despising antiquity and upholding novelty, had been
condemned, so Nestorius, the author of novelty and the assailant of
antiquity, should be condemned also. Whose consentient determination,
inspired by the gift of sacred and celestial grace, whoever disapproves
must needs hold the profaneness of Nestorius to have been condemned
unjustly; finally, he despises as vile and worthless the whole Church of
Christ, and its doctors, apostles, and prophets, and especially the
blessed Apostle Paul: he despises the Church, in that she hath never
failed in loyalty to the duty of cherishing and preserving the faith
once for all delivered to her; he despises St. Paul, who wrote, “O
Timothy, guard the deposit intrusted to thee, shunning profane novelties
of words;” <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) and again, “if any
man preach unto you other than ye have received, let him be
accursed.” <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) But if neither
apostolical injunctions nor ecclesiastical decrees may be violated, by
which, in accordance with the sacred consent of universality and
antiquity, all heretics always, and, last of all, Pelagius, Cœlestius,
and Nestorius have been rightly and deservedly condemned, then assuredly
it is incumbent on all Catholics who are anxious to approve themselves
genuine sons of Mother Church, to adhere henceforward to the holy faith
of the holy Fathers, to be wedded to it, to die in it; but as to the
profane novelties of profane men—to detest them, abhor them, oppose
them, give them no quarter.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p5"></span>\[87.\] These matters, handled more at
large in the two preceding Commonitories, I have now put together more
briefly by way of recapitulation, in order that my memory, to aid which
I composed them, may, on the one hand, be refreshed by frequent
reference, and, on the other, may avoid being wearied by prolixity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_523"></span>[156:524](2110275.htm#fr_523) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p3"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[156:525](2110275.htm#fr_524) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p4"></span> [Gal. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix I. Note on Section 41, Page 143.](2110276)
