[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110451)  [Next](2110453.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.viii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.viii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.iv-p1"></span>In what sense we should understand
the passions and human arts which are ascribed to the unchanging and
incorporeal God.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.viii.iv-p2.1"></span>And</span> so as without horrible
profanity these things cannot be understood literally of Him who is
declared by the authority of Holy Scripture to be invisible, ineffable,
incomprehensible, inestimable, simple, and uncompounded, so neither can
the passion of anger and wrath be attributed to that unchangeable nature
without fearful blasphemy. For we ought to see that the limbs signify
the divine powers and boundless operations of God, which can only be
represented to us by the familiar expression of limbs: by the mouth we
should understand that His utterances are meant, which are of His mercy
continually poured into the secret senses of the soul, or which He spoke
among our fathers and the prophets: by the eyes we can understand the
boundless character of His sight with which He sees and looks through
all things, and so nothing is hidden from Him of what is done or can be
done by us, or even thought. By the expression “hands,” we understand
His providence and work, by which He is the creator and author of all
things; the arms are the emblems of His might and government, with which
He upholds, rules and controls all things. And not to speak of other
things, what else does the hoary hair of His head signify but the
eternity and perpetuity of Deity, through which He is without any
beginning, and before all times, and excels all creatures? So then also
when we read of the anger or fury of the Lord, we should take it not
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.viii.iv-p2.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.viii.iv-p2.3"></span>νθρωποπαθῶς</span> ;
i.e., according to an unworthy meaning of human passion, <span
id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925.md) but in a sense worthy of God, who is
free from all passion; so that by this we should understand that He is
the judge and avenger of all the unjust things which are done in this
world; and by reason of these <span id="page_259">p. 259</span> <span
id="iv.iii.viii.iv-Page_259"></span>terms and their meaning we should
dread Him as the terrible rewarder of our deeds, and fear to do anything
against His will. For human nature is wont to fear those whom it knows
to be indignant, and is afraid of offending: as in the case of some most
just judges, avenging wrath is usually feared by those who are tormented
by some accusation of their conscience; not indeed that this passion
exists in the minds of those who are going to judge with perfect equity,
but that, while they so fear, the disposition of the judge towards them
is that which is the precursor of a just and impartial execution of the
law. And this, with whatever kindness and gentleness it may be
conducted, is deemed by those who are justly to be punished to be the
most savage wrath and vehement anger. It would be tedious and outside
the scope of the present work were we to explain all the things which
are spoken metaphorically of God in Holy Scripture, with human figures.
Let it be enough for our present purpose, which is aimed against the sin
of wrath, to have said this that no one may through ignorance draw down
upon himself a cause of this evil and of eternal death, out of those
Scriptures in which he should seek for saintliness and immortality as
the remedies to bring life and salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_925"></span>[258:926](2110452.htm#fr_925.md) <span
id="iv.iii.viii.iv-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii.iv-p3"></span> On the heresy of the
Anthropomorphites see the notes on Conference X. c. ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. How calm a monk ought to be.](2110453.md)
