[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110207)  [Next](2110209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xix"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xix-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>But</span> that the order of the dates may
be correctly preserved, and that it may appear more clearly who this
Antiochus was, we shall enumerate both the names and times of the kings
who came after Alexander in Syria. Well, then, king Alexander having
died, as we have related above, his whole empire was portioned out by
his friends, and was governed for some time by them under the name of
the king. <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) Seleucus, after the
lapse of nine years, was himself styled king in Syria, and reigned
thirty-two years. After him came Antiochus, his son, with a reign of
twenty-one years. Then came Antiochus, the son of Antiochus, who was
surnamed Theus, and he reigned fifteen years. After him, his son <span
id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xix-Page_107"></span>Seleucus, surnamed Callinicus, reigned
twenty-one years. Another Seleucus, the son of Callinicus, reigned three
years. After his death Antiochus, the brother of Callinicus, held Asia
and Syria for thirty-seven years. This is the Antiochus against whom
Lucius Scipio Asiaticus made war; and he, being worsted in the war was
stripped of a part of his empire. He had two sons, Seleucus and
Antiochus, the latter of whom he had given as a hostage to the Romans.
Thus, then, Antiochus the great having died, his younger son Seleucus
obtained the kingdom, under whom, as we have said, Onias the priest had
an accusation brought against him by Simon. Then Antiochus was set free
by the Romans, and there was given in his place as hostage Demetrius,
the son of Seleucus, who was at that time reigning. Seleucus dying in
the twelfth year of his reign, his brother Antiochus, who had been a
hostage at Rome, seized the kingdom. He, five years after the beginning
of his reign, did, as we have shown above, lay waste Jerusalem. For, as
he had to pay a heavy tribute to the Romans, he was almost of necessity
compelled, in order to meet that enormous expense, to provide himself
with money by rapine, and to neglect no opportunity of plundering. Then,
after two years, the Jews being again visited by a similar disaster to
that which they had suffered before, lest it should happen that, driven
on by their numerous miseries, they should commence war, he placed a
garrison in the citadel. Next, with the view of overturning the holy
law, he published an edict, that all, forsaking the traditions of their
ancestors, should live after the manner of the Gentiles. And there were
not wanting those who readily obeyed this profane enactment. Then truly
there was a horrible spectacle presented; through all the cities
sacrifices were publicly offered in the streets, while the sacred
volumes of the law and the prophets were consumed with fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_345"></span>[106:346](2110208.htm#fr_345) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xix-p2"></span> They did not themselves, for a time,
assume the name of king, but, as said above, professed to rule under the
authority of king Arridæus, brother of Alexander.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.](2110209)
