[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110176)  [Next](2110178.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xliii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xliii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLIII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xliii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xliii-p1.1"></span>In</span> the time of his reign, Ahab,
the son of Ambri, was king of the ten tribes, impious above all against
God. For having taken in marriage Jezebel, the daughter of Basa, king of
Sidon, he erected an altar and groves to the idol Bahal, and slew the
prophets of God. At this time, Elijah the prophet by prayer shut up
heaven, that it should not give any rain to the earth, and revealed that
to the king, in order that he, in his impiety, might know himself to be
the cause of the evil. The waters of heaven, therefore, being
restrained, and since the whole country, burned up by the heat of the
sun, did not furnish food either for man or beast, the prophet had even
exposed himself to the side of perishing from hunger. At that time, when
he betook himself to the desert, he depended for life on the ravens
furnishing him with food, while a neighboring rivulet furnished him with
water, until it was dried up. Then, being instructed by God, he went to
the town of Saraptæ, and turned aside to lodge with a widow-woman. And
when, in his hunger, he begged food from her, she complained that she
had only a handful of meal and a little oil, on the consumption of which
she expected death along with her children. <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316.md) But when Elijah promised in the words
of God that neither should the meal lessen in the barrel nor the oil in
the vessel, the woman did not hesitate to believe the prophet demanding
faith, and obtained <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317.md) the
fulfillment of what was promised, since by daily increase as much <span
id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="ii.vi.i.xliii-Page_92"></span>was
added as was day by day taken away. At the same time, Elijah restored to
life the dead son of the same widow. Then, by the command of God, he
went to the king, and having reproved his impiety, he ordered all the
people to be gathered together to himself. When these had hastily
assembled, the priests of the idols and of the groves to the number of
about four hundred and fifty, were also summoned. Then there arose a
dispute between them, Elijah setting forth the honor of God, while they
upheld their own superstitions. At length they agreed that a trial
should be made to this effect, that if fire sent down from heaven should
consume the slain victim of either of them, that religion should be
accepted as the true one which performed the miracle. Accordingly, the
priests, having slain a calf, began to call upon the idol Bahal; and,
after wasting their invocations to no purpose, they tacitly acknowledged
the helplessness of their God. Then Elijah mocked them and said, “Cry
aloud more vehemently, lest perchance he sleeps, and that thus you may
rouse him from the slumber in which he is sunk.” The wretched men could
do nothing but shudder and mutter to themselves, but still they waited
to see what Elijah would do. Well, he slew a calf and laid it upon the
altar, having first of all filled the sacred place with water; and then,
calling upon the name of the Lord, fire fell from heaven in the sight of
all, and consumed alike the water and the victim. Then truly the people,
casting themselves upon the earth, confessed God and execrated the
idols; while finally, by the command of Elijah, the impious priests were
seized, and, being brought down to the brook, were there slain. The
prophet followed the king as he returned from that place; but as
Jezebel, the wife of the king, was devising means for taking his life,
he retired to a more remote spot. There God addressed him, telling him
that there were still seven thousand men who had not given themselves up
to idols. That was to Elijah a marvelous statement, for he had supposed
that he himself was the only one who had kept free from impiety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[91:317](2110177.htm#fr_316.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xliii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xliii-p2"></span> “Cum filiis”: after the Greek: the
Hebrew text speaks of only one son.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[91:318](2110177.htm#fr_317.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xliii-p3"></span> Such seems clearly to be the meaning
of the somewhat strange phrase, “promissorum fidem consecuta est.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV.](2110178.md)
