[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110055)  [Next](2110057.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.xix"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xix-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xix-p1.1"></span>In</span> the same monastery, the fact
which I am about to narrate was said to have occurred within recent
memory. A certain man had come to the same Abbot in like manner with the
former, in order to obtain admission. When the first law of obedience
was placed before him, and he promised an unfailing patience for the
endurance of all things however extreme, it so happened that the Abbot
was holding in his hand a twig of storax already withered. This the
Abbot fixed in the ground, and imposed this work upon the visitor, that
he should continue to water the twig, until (what was against every
natural result) that dry piece of wood should grow green in the sandy
soil. Well, the stranger, being placed under the authority of unbending
law, conveyed water every day on his own shoulders—water which had to be
taken from the river Nile, at almost two miles’ distance. And now, after
a year had run its course, the labor of that workman had not yet ceased,
but there could be no hope of the good success of his undertaking.
However, the grace of obedience continued to be shown in his labor. The
following year also mocked the vain labor of the (by this time) weakened
brother. At length, as the third annual circle was gliding by, while the
workman ceased not, night or day, his labor in watering, the twig began
to show signs of life. I have myself seen a small tree sprung from that
little rod, which, standing at the present day with green branches in
the court of the monastery, as if for a witness of what has been stated,
shows what a reward obedience received, and what a power faith can
exert. But the day would fail me before I could fully enumerate the many
different miracles which have become known to me in connection with the
virtues of the saints.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.](2110057.md)
