[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110022)  [Next](2110024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xx"></span> <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="ii.ii.xx-Page_13"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p1"></span>A Letter of Martin effects a Cure, with
Other Miracles.

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xx-p2.1"></span>Further</span>, Arborius, an ex-prefect, and a
man of a very holy and faithful character, while his daughter was in
agony from the burning fever of a quartan ague, inserted in the bosom of
the girl, at the very paroxysm of the heat, a letter of Martin which
happened to have been brought to him, and immediately the fever was
dispelled. This event had such an influence upon Arborius, that he at
once consecrated the girl to God, and devoted her to perpetual
virginity. Then, proceeding to Martin, he presented the girl to him, as
an obvious living example of his power of working miracles, inasmuch as
she had been cured by him though absent; and he would not suffer her to
be consecrated by any other than Martin, through his placing upon her
the dress characteristic of virginity.

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p3"></span>Paulinus, too, a man who was afterwards to
furnish a striking example of the age, having begun to suffer grievously
in one of his eyes, and when a pretty thick skin <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) having grown over it had already covered
up its pupil, Martin touched his eye with a painter’s brush, and, all
pain being removed, thus restored it to its former soundness. He himself
also, when, by a certain accident, he had fallen out of an upper room,
and tumbling down a broken, uneven stair, had received many wounds, as
he lay in his cell at the point of death, and was tortured with grievous
sufferings, saw in the night an angel appear to him, who washed his
wounds, and applied healing ointment to the bruised members of his body.
As the effect of this, he found himself on the morrow restored to
soundness of health, so that he was not thought to have suffered any
harm. But because it would be tedious to go through everything of this
kind, let these examples suffice, as a few out of a multitude; and let
it be enough that we do not in striking cases \[of miraculous
interposition\] detract from the truth, while, having so many to choose
from, we avoid exciting weariness in the reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[13:33](2110023.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="ii.ii.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.xx-p4"></span> “Nubes,” lit. “a cloud.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. How Martin acted towards the Emperor
Maximus.](2110024.md)
