[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110971)  [Next](2110973.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ii-p1"></span>Of Abbot John’s humility and our
question.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>In</span> this Cœnobium then we found a
very old man named John, whose words and humility we think ought
certainly not to be passed over in silence as in them he excelled all
the saints, as we know that he was especially vigorous in this
perfection, which though it is the mother of all virtues and the surest
foundation of the whole spiritual superstructure, yet is altogether a
stranger to our system. Wherefore it is no wonder that we cannot attain
to the height of those men, as we cannot stand the training of the
Cœnobium I will not say up to old age, but are scarcely content to
endure the yoke of subjection for a couple of years, and at once escape
to enjoy a dangerous liberty, while even for that short time we seem to
be subject to the rule of the Elder not according to any strict rule,
but as our free will directs. When then we had seen this old man in
Abbot Paul’s Cœnobium, we were struck, first by his age and the grace
with which the man was endowed, and with looks fixed on the ground began
to entreat him to vouchsafe to explain to us why he had forsaken the
freedom of the desert and that exalted profession, in which his fame and
celebrity had raised him above others who had adopted the same life, and
why he had chosen to enter under the yoke of the Cœnobium. He said that
as he was unequal to the system of the anchorites and unworthy of the
heights of such perfection, he had gone back to the infant school, that
he might learn to carry out the lessons taught there, according as the
life demanded. And when our entreaties were not satisfied and we refused
to take this humble answer, at last he began as follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Abbot John's answer why he had left the
desert.](2110973.md)
