[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110754)  [Next](2110756.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ix.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xi-p1"></span>The punishment of the deceiver and the
deceived.

<span id="iv.iv.ix.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ix.xi-p2.1"></span>But</span> we ought in this matter, in
order that we may shun evil counsels, to learn a special lesson from the
fact that though the author of the deception was visited with a fitting
punishment and condemnation, yet still the one who was led astray did
not go scot free from punishment, although it was somewhat lighter than
that of him who was the author of the deception. And this we see was
very plainly expressed. For Adam who was deceived, or rather (to use the
Apostle’s words) “was *not* deceived” but, acquiescing in the wishes of
her who was deceived, seems to have come to yield a consent that was
deadly, is only condemned to labour and the sweat of his brow, which is
assigned to him not by means of a curse upon himself, but by means of a
curse upon the ground, and its barrenness. But the woman, who persuaded
him to this, is visited with an increase of anguish, and pains and
sorrow, and also given over to the yoke of perpetual subjection. But the
serpent who was the first to incite them to this offence, is punished by
a lasting curse. Wherefore we should with the utmost care and
circumspection be on our guard against evil counsels, for as they bring
punishment upon their authors, so too they do not suffer those who are
deceived by them to go free from guilt and punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Of the crowd of the devils, and the disturbance
which they always raise in our atmosphere.](2110756.md)
