[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110221)  [Next](2110223.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxiii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxiii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Well</span>, the end of the
persecutions was reached eighty-eight years ago, at which date the
emperors began to be Christians. For Constantine then obtained the
sovereignty, and he was the first Christian of all the Roman rulers. At
that time, it is true, Licinius, who was a rival of Constantine for the
empire, had commanded his soldiers to sacrifice, and was expelling from
the service those who refused to do so. But that is not reckoned among
the persecutions; it was an affair of too little moment to be able to
inflict any wound upon the churches. From that time, we have continued
to enjoy tranquillity; nor do I believe that there will be any further
persecutions, except that which Antichrist will carry on just before the
end of the world. For it has been proclaimed in divine words, that the
world was to be visited by ten afflictions; <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358.md) and since nine of these have already
been endured, the one which remains must be <span id="page_113">p.
113</span> <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxiii-Page_113"></span>the last. During
this period of time, it is marvelous how the Christian religion has
prevailed. For Jerusalem which had presented a horrible mass of ruins
was then adorned with most numerous and magnificent churches. And
Helena, the mother of the emperor Constantine (who reigned along with
her son as Augusta), having a strong desire to behold Jerusalem, cast
down the idols and the temples which were found there; and in course of
time, through the exercise of her royal powers, she erected
churches <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359.md) on the site of the
Lord’s passion, resurrection, and ascension. It is a remarkable fact
that the spot on which the divine footprints had last been left when the
Lord was carried up in a cloud to heaven, could not be joined by a
pavement with the remaining part of the street. For the earth,
unaccustomed to mere human contact, rejected all the appliances laid
upon it, and often threw back the blocks of marble in the faces of those
who were seeking to place them. Moreover, it is an enduring proof of the
soil of that place having been trodden by God, that the footprints are
still to be seen; and although the faith of those who daily flock to
that place, leads them to vie with each other in seeking to carry away
what had been trodden by the feet of the Lord, yet the sand of the place
suffers no injury; and the earth still preserves the same appearance
which it presented of old, as if it had been sealed by the footprints
impressed upon it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_358"></span>[112:359](2110222.htm#fr_358.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxiii-p2"></span> “decem plagis.”

<span id="fn_359"></span>[113:360](2110222.htm#fr_359.md) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxiii-p3"></span> “basilicas”: edifices, which, in
size and grandeur, had some resemblance to a royal palace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV.](2110223.md)
