[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110170)  [Next](2110172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxvii"></span> <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxvii-Page_89"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxvii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Saul</span> having thus been cut off,
David, when the news of his death was brought to him in the land of the
Philistines, is related to have wept, and to have given a marvelous
proof of his affection. He then betook himself to Hebron, a town of
Judæa; and, being there again anointed with the royal oil, received the
title of king. But Abenner, who had been master of the host of King
Saul, despised David, and made Isbaal king, the son of King Saul.
Various battles then took place between the generals of the kings.
Abenner was generally routed; yet in his flight he cut off the brother
of Joab, who had the command of the army on the side of David. Joab, on
account of the sorrow he felt for this, afterwards, when Abenner had
surrendered to King David, ordered him to be murdered, not without
regret on the part of the king, whose honor he had thus tarnished. At
the same time, almost all the older men of the Hebrews conferred on him
by public consent the sovereignty of the whole nation; for during seven
years he had reigned only in Hebron. Thus, he was anointed king for the
third time, being about thirty years of age. He repulsed in successful
battles the Philistines making inroads upon his kingdom. And at that
time, he transferred to Zion the ark of God, which, as I have said
above, was in the town of Cariathiarim. And when he had formed the
intention of building a temple to God, the divine answer was given him
to the effect, that that was reserved for his son. He then conquered the
Philistines in war, subjugated the Moabites, and subdued Syria, imposing
tribute upon it. He brought back with him an enormous amount of booty in
gold and brass. Next, a war arose against the Ammonites on account of
the injury which had been done by their king, Annon. And when the
Syrians again rebelled, having formed a confederacy for war with the
Ammonites, David intrusted the chief command of the war to Joab, the
master of his host, and he himself remained in Jerusalem far from the
scene of strife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII.](2110172)
