[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110168)  [Next](2110170) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xxxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxv-p1.1"></span>The</span> hatred of the king towards him
increased daily, under the influence of jealousy, for the wicked always
persecute the good. He, therefore, commanded his servants and Jonathan
his son, to prepare snares against his life. But Jonathan had even from
the first had a great <span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxv-Page_88"></span>regard and affection for David; and
therefore the king, being taken to task by his son, suppressed the cruel
order he had given. But the wicked are not long good. For, when Saul was
afflicted by a spirit of error, and David stood by him, soothing him
with the harp under his trouble, Saul tried to pierce him with a spear,
and would have done so, had not he rapidly evaded the deadly blow. From
this time forth, the king no longer secretly but openly sought to
compass his death; and David no longer trusted himself in his power. He
fled, and first betook himself to Samuel, then to Abimelech, and finally
fled to the king of Moab. By-and-by, under the instructions of the
prophet Gad, he returned into the land of Judah, and there ran in danger
of his life. At that time, Saul slew Abimelech the priest because he had
received David; and when none of the king’s servants ventured to lay
hands upon the priest, Doeg, the Syrian, fulfilled the cruel duty. After
that, David made for the desert. Thither Saul also followed him, but his
efforts at his destruction were in vain, for God protected him. There
was a cave in the desert, opening with a vast recess. David had thrown
himself into the inner parts of this cave. Saul, not knowing that he was
there, had gone into it for the purpose of taking <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) bodily refreshment, and there,
overcome by sleep, he was resting. When David perceived this, although
all urged him to avail himself of the opportunity, he abstained from
slaying the king, and simply took away his mantle. Presently going out,
he addressed the king from a safe position behind, recounting the
services he had done him, how often he had exposed his life to peril for
the sake of the kingdom, and how last of all, he had not, on the present
occasion, sought to kill him when he was given over to him by God. Upon
hearing these things, Saul confessed his fault, entreated pardon, shed
tears, extolled the piety of David, and blamed his own wickedness, while
he addressed David as king and son. He was so much changed from his
former ferocious character, that no one could now have thought he would
make any further attempt against his son-in-law. But David, who had
thoroughly <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) tested and known his
evil disposition, did not think it safe to put himself in the power of
the king, and kept himself within the desert. Saul, almost mad with
rage, because he was unable to capture his son-in-law, gave in marriage
to one Faltim his daughter Melchol, who, as we have related above, had
been married to David. David fled to the Philistines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_304"></span>[88:305](2110169.htm#fr_304) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxv-p2"></span> “Reficiendi corporis gratia”:
different from the Hebrew text.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[88:306](2110169.htm#fr_305) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xxxv-p3"></span> The text is uncertain, but the
meaning is clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI.](2110170)
