[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110358)  [Next](2110360) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxx"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iv.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXX.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxx-p1"></span>Of the humility of Abbot Pinufius,
who left a very famous Cœnobium over which he presided as Presbyter, and
out of the love of subjection sought a distant monastery where he could
be received as a novice.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxx-p2.1"></span>The</span> limits of the book compel us
to draw to a close; but the virtue of obedience, which holds the first
place among other good qual<span id="page_229">p. 229</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxx-Page_229"></span>ities, will not allow us altogether
to pass over in silence the deeds of those who have excelled by it.
Wherefore aptly combining these two together, I mean, consulting brevity
as well as the wishes and profit of those who are in earnest, we will
only add one example of humility, which, as it was shown by no novice
but one already perfect and an Abbot, may not only instruct the younger,
but also incite the elders to the perfect virtue of humility, as they
read it. Thus we saw Abbot Pinufius <span
id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) who when he was presbyter of a huge
Cœnobium which is in Egypt not far from the city of Panephysis, <span
id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789) was held in honour and respect by all
men out of reverence either for his life or for his age or for his
priesthood; and when he saw that for this reason he could not practise
that humility which he longed for with all the ardour of his
disposition, and had no opportunity of exercising the virtue of
subjection which he desired, he fled secretly from the Cœnobium and
withdrew alone into the furthest parts of the Thebaid, and there laid
aside the habit of the monks and assumed a secular dress, and thus
sought the Cœnobium of Tabenna, which he knew to be the strictest of
all, and in which he fancied that he would not be known owing to the
distance of the spot, or else that he could easily lie hid there in
consequence of the size of the monastery and the number of brethren.
There he remained for a long time at the entrance, and as a suppliant at
the knees of the brethren sought with most earnest prayers to gain
admission. And when he was at last with much scorn admitted as a feeble
old man who had lived all his life in the world, and had asked in his
old age to be allowed to enter a Cœnobium when he could no longer
gratify his passions,—as they said that he was seeking this not for the
sake of religion but because he was compelled by hunger and want, they
gave him the care and management of the garden, as he seemed an old man
and not specially fitted for any particular work. And this he performed
under another and a younger brother who kept him by him as intrusted to
him, and he was so subordinate to him, and cultivated the desired virtue
of humility so obediently that he daily performed with the utmost
diligence not only everything that had to do with the care and
management of the garden, but also all those duties which were looked on
by the other as hard and degrading, and disagreeable. Rising also by
night he did many things secretly, without any one looking on or knowing
it, when darkness concealed him so that no one could discover the author
of the deed. And when he had hidden himself there for three years and
had been sought for high and low by the brethren all through Egypt, he
was at last seen by one who had come from the parts of Egypt, but could
scarcely be recognized owing to the meanness of his dress and the humble
character of the duty he was performing. For he was stooping down and
hoeing the ground for vegetables and bringing dung on his shoulders and
laying it about their roots. And seeing this the brother for a long time
hesitated about recognizing him, but at last he came nearer, and taking
careful note not only of his looks but also of the tone of his voice,
straightway fell at his feet: and at first all who saw it were struck
with the greatest astonishment why he should do this to one who was
looked upon by them as the lowest of all, as being a novice and one who
had but lately forsaken the world: but afterwards they were struck with
still greater wonder when he forthwith announced his name, which was one
that had been well known amongst them also by repute. And all the
brethren asking his pardon for their former ignorance because they had
for so long classed him with the juniors and children, brought him back
to his own Cœnobium, against his will and in tears because by the envy
of the devil he had been cheated out of a worthy mode of life and the
humility which he was rejoicing in having discovered after his long
search, and because he had not succeeded in ending his life in that
state of subjection which he had secured. And so they guarded him with
the utmost care lest he should slip away again in the same sort of way
and escape from them also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_788"></span>[229:789](2110359.htm#fr_788) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxx-p3"></span> Cassian repeats this story in the
Conferences XX. c. i., as an introduction to the Conference “On the End
of Penitence and the Marks of Satisfaction,” which he gives as the work
of the said Abbot Pinufius.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[229:790](2110359.htm#fr_789) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxx-p4"></span> Panephysis is more fully described
in the Conferences VII. xxvi.; XI. iii. It is mentioned by Ptolemy (IV.
v. § 52), but not by any other ancient writers. It was situated in the
Delta between the Champollion with the modern Menzaleh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. How when Abbot Pinufius was brought back to his
monastery he stayed there for a little while and then fled again into
the regions of Syrian Palestine.](2110360)
