[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110974)  [Next](2110976) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p1"></span>Of the advantages of the desert.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.v-p2.1"></span>So</span> long then as owing to the fewness
of those who were then living in the desert, a greater freedom was
afforded to us in a wider expanse of the wilderness, so long as in the
seclusion of larger retreats we were caught up to those celestial
ecstasies, and were not overwhelmed by a great quantity of brethren to
visit us, and thus owing to the necessity of showing hospitality
overburdened in our thoughts by the distractions of great cares, I
frequented with insatiable desire and all my heart the peaceful retreats
of the desert and that life which can only be compared to the bliss of
the angels. But when, as I said, a larger number of the brethren began
to seek a dwelling in that desert, and by cramping the freedom of the
vast wilderness, not only caused that fire of divine contemplation to
grow cold, but also entangled the mind in many ways in the chains of
carnal matters, I determined to carry out my purpose in this system
rather than to grow cold in that sublime mode of life, by providing for
carnal wants; so that, if that liberty and those spiritual ecstasies are
denied me, yet as all care for the morrow is avoided, I may console
myself by fulfilling the precept of the gospel, and what I lose in
sublimity of contemplation, may be made up to me by submission and
obedience. For it is a wretched thing for a man to profess to learn any
art or pursuit, and never to arrive at perfection in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of the conveniences of the Cœnobium.](2110976)
