[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110053)  [Next](2110055.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.xvii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xvii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xvii-p1.1"></span>I visited</span> two monasteries of St.
Anthony, which are at the present day occupied by his disciples. I also
went to that place in which the most blessed Paul, the first of the
eremites, had his abode. I saw the Red Sea and the ridges of Mount
Sinai, the top of which almost touches heaven, and cannot, by any human
effort, be reached. An anchorite was said to live somewhere within its
recesses: and I sought long and much to see him, but was unable to do
so. He had for nearly fifty years been removed from all human
fellowship, and used no clothes, but was covered with bristles growing
on his own body, while, by Divine gift, he knew not of his own
nakedness. As often as any pious men desired to visit him, making
hastily for the pathless wilderness, he shunned all meeting with his
kind. To one man only, about five years before my visit, he was said to
have granted an interview; and I believe that man obtained the favor
through the power of his faith. Amid much talk which the two had
together, the recluse is said to have replied to the question why he
shunned so assiduously all human beings, that the man who was frequently
visited by mortals like himself, could not often be visited by angels.
From this, not without reason, the report had spread, and was accepted
by multitudes, that that holy man enjoyed angelic fellowship. Be this as
it may, I, for my part, departed from Mount Sinai, and returned to the
river Nile, the banks of which, on both sides, I beheld dotted over with
numerous monasteries. I saw that, for the most part, as I have already
said, the monks resided together in companies of a hundred; but it was
well known that so many as two or three thousand sometimes had their
abode in the same villages. Nor indeed would one have any reason to
think that the virtue of the monks there dwelling together in great
numbers, was less than that of those was known to be, who kept
themselves apart from human fellowship. The chief and foremost virtue in
these places, as I have already said, is obedience. In fact, any one
applying for admission is not received by the Abbot of the monastery on
any other condition than that he be first tried and proved; it being
understood that he will never afterwards decline to submit to any
injunction of the Abbot, however arduous and difficult, and though it
may seem something unworthy to be endured.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.](2110055.md)
