[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110571)  [Next](2110573) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p1"></span>A comparison with a man who is trying to
hit a mark.

<span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.v-p2.1"></span>As</span> those, whose business it is to use
weapons of war, whenever they want to show their skill in their art
before a king of this world, try to shoot their arrows or darts into
certain small targets which have the prizes painted on them; for they
know that they cannot in any other way than by the line of their aim
secure the end and the prize they hope for, which they will only then
enjoy when they have been able to hit the mark set before them; but if
it happens to be withdrawn from their sight, however much in their want
of skill their aim may vainly deviate from the straight path, yet they
cannot perceive that they have strayed from the direction of the
intended straight line because they have no distinct mark to prove the
skilfulness of their aim, or to show up its badness: and therefore while
they shoot their missiles idly into space, they cannot see how they have
gone wrong or how utterly at fault they are, since no mark is their
accuser, showing how far they have gone astray from the right direction;
nor can an unsteady look help them to correct and restore the straight
line enjoined on them. So then the end indeed which we have set before
us is, as the Apostle says, eternal life, as he declares, “having indeed
your fruit unto holiness, and the end eternal life;” <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[1088](#fn_1087) but the immediate goal is purity of
heart, which he not unfairly terms “sanctification,” without which the
afore-mentioned end cannot be gained; as if he had said in other words,
having your immediate goal in purity of heart, but the end <span
id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span id="iv.iv.ii.v-Page_297"></span>life
eternal. Of which goal the same blessed Apostle teaches us, and
significantly uses the very term, i.e., <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.v-p3.2"></span>σκοπός</span>, saying as follows,
“Forgetting those things which are behind and reaching forward to those
that are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of the Lord:” <span id="fr_1088"></span>[1089](#fn_1088) which
is more clearly put in Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.ii.v-p4.2"></span>κατὰ σκοπὸν διώκω</span>, i.e., “I press
toward the mark,” as if he said, “With this aim, with which I forget
those things that are behind, i.e., the faults of earlier life, I strive
to reach as the end the heavenly prize.” Whatever then can help to guide
us to this object; viz., purity of heart, we must follow with all our
might, but whatever hinders us from it, we must shun as a dangerous and
hurtful thing. For, for this we do and endure all things, for this we
make light of our kinsfolk, our country, honours, riches, the delights
of this world, and all kinds of pleasures, namely in order that we may
retain a lasting purity of heart. And so when this object is set before
us, we shall always direct our actions and thoughts straight towards the
attainment of it; for if it be not constantly fixed before our eyes, it
will not only make all our toils vain and useless, and force them to be
endured to no purpose and without any reward, but it will also excite
all kinds of thoughts opposed to one another. For the mind, which has no
fixed point to which it may return, and on which it may chiefly fasten,
is sure to rove about from hour to hour and minute to minute in all
sorts of wandering thoughts, and from those things which come to it from
outside, to be constantly changed into that state which first offers
itself to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[296:1088](2110572.htm#fr_1087) <span
id="iv.iv.ii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p3"></span> [Rom. vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#022)<span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[297:1089](2110572.htm#fr_1088) <span
id="iv.iv.ii.v-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p4"></span> [Phil.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.ii.v-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of those who in renouncing the world, aim at
perfection without love.](2110573)
