[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110256)  [Next](2110258.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iii.xvi-p1"></span>The Union of the Divine with the Human
Nature took place in the very Conception of the Virgin. The appellation
“The Mother of God.”

<span id="iii.xvi-p2"></span>\[40.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>This</span> unity of Person, then, in Christ
was not effected after His birth of the Virgin, but was compacted and
perfected in her very womb. For we must take most especial heed that we
confess Christ not only one, but always one. For it were intolerable
blasphemy, if while thou dost confess Him one now, thou shouldst
maintain that once He was not one, but two; one forsooth since His
baptism, but two at His birth. Which monstrous sacrilege we shall
assuredly in no wise avoid unless we acknowledge the manhood united to
the Godhead (but by unity of Person), not from the ascension, or the
resurrection, or the baptism, but even in His mother, even in the womb,
even in the Virgin’s very conception. <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473.md) In consequence of which unity of
Person, both those attributes which are proper to God are ascribed to
man, and those which are proper to the flesh to God, indifferently and
promiscuously. <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474.md) For hence it is
written by divine guidance, on the one hand, that the Son of man came
down from heaven; <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475.md) and on the
other, that the Lord of glory was crucified on earth. <span
id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476.md) Hence it is also that since the Lord’s
flesh was made, since the Lord’s flesh was created, the very Word of God
is said to have been made, the very omniscient Wisdom of God to have
been created, just as prophetically His hands and His feet are described
as having been pierced. <span id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477.md) From
this unity of Person it follows, by reason of a like mystery, that,
since the flesh of the Word was born of an undefiled mother, God the
Word Himself is most Catholicly believed, most impiously denied, to have
been born of the Virgin; which being the case, God forbid that any one
should seek to defraud Holy Mary of her prerogative of divine grace and
her special glory. For by the singular gift of Him who is our Lord and
God, and withal, her own son, she is to be confessed most truly and most
blessedly—The mother of God <span id="page_143">p. 143</span> <span
id="iii.xvi-Page_143"></span>“Theotocos,” but not in the sense in which
it is imagined by a certain impious heresy which maintains, that she is
to be called the Mother of God for no other reason than because she gave
birth to that man who afterwards became God, just as we speak of a woman
as the mother of a priest, or the mother of a bishop, meaning that she
was such, not by giving birth to one already a priest or a bishop, but
by giving birth to one who afterwards became a priest or a bishop. Not
thus, I say, was the holy Mary “Theotocos,” the mother of God, but
rather, as was said before, because in her sacred womb was wrought that
most sacred mystery whereby, on account of the singular and unique unity
of Person, as the Word in flesh is flesh, so Man in God is God. <span
id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_473"></span>[142:474](2110257.htm#fr_473.md) <span
id="iii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p3"></span> If the Son of God had taken to Himself a
man now made and already perfected, it would of necessity follow that
there are in Christ two persons, the one assuming and the other assumed;
whereas, the Son of God did not assume a man’s *person* unto His own,
but a man’s *nature* to His own person, and therefore took *semen*, the
seed of Abraham, the very first original element of our nature, before
it was come to have any personal human subsistence. The flesh, and the
conjunction of the flesh with God, began both in one instant. His making
and taking to Himself our flesh was but one act, so that in Christ there
is no personal subsistence but one, and that from everlasting. By taking
only the nature of man He still continueth one person, and changeth but
the manner of His subsisting, which was before in the mere glory of the
Son of God and is now in the habit of our flesh.—*Hooker, Eccl. Pol.* v.
52, § 3.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[142:475](2110257.htm#fr_474.md) <span
id="iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p4"></span> “A kind of mutual commutation there is,
whereby those concrete names, God and man, when we speak of Christ, do
take interchangeably one another’s room, so that for truth of speech, it
skilleth not, whether we say that the Son of God hath created the world,
and the Son of man by His death hath saved it, or else, that the Son of
man did create, and the Son of God die to save the world. Howbeit, as
oft as we attribute to God what the manhood of Christ claimeth, or to
man what His Deity hath right unto, we understand by the name of God and
the name of man neither the one nor the other nature, but the whole
person of Christ, in whom both natures are.”—*Hooker, Eccl. Polity*, v.
53, § 4. This is technically called “The Communication of Properties,”
*Communicatio idiomatum*.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[142:476](2110257.htm#fr_475.md) <span
id="iii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p5"></span> St. [John iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[142:477](2110257.htm#fr_476.md) <span
id="iii.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p6"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[142:478](2110257.htm#fr_477.md) <span
id="iii.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p7"></span> [Ps. xxii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016.md)<span id="iii.xvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[143:479](2110257.htm#fr_478.md) <span
id="iii.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p8"></span> Sicut Verbum in carne caro, ita Homo in
Deo Deus est. Compare the Athanasian Creed, v. 33, in what is probably
the true reading, “Unus autem, non conversione Divinitatis in carne, sed
assumptione Humanitatis in Deo.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Recapitulation of what was said of the Catholic
Faith and of divers Heresies, Chapters xi-xv.](2110258.md)
