[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110233)  [Next](2110235) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xlv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLV.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlv-p1.1"></span>Thus</span>, then, the Arians, with their
affairs in a very flourishing condition, and everything turning out
according to their wishes, go in a body to Constantinople where the
emperor was. There they found the deputies from the Synod of Seleucia,
and compel them by an exercise of the royal power to follow the example
of the Westerns, and accept that heretical confession of faith. Numbers
who refused were tortured with painful imprisonment and hunger, so that
at length they yielded their conscience captive. But many who resisted
more courageously, being deprived of their bishoprics, were driven into
exile, and others substituted in their place. Thus, the best priests
being either terrified by threats, or driven into exile, all gave way
before the unfaithfulness of a few. Hilarius was there at the time,
having followed the deputies from Seleucia; and as no certain orders had
been given regarding him, he was waiting on the will of the emperor to
see whether perchance he should be ordered to return into banishment.
When he perceived the extreme danger into which the faith had been
brought, inasmuch as the Westerns had been beguiled, and the Easterns
were being overcome by means of wickedness, he, in three papers publicly
presented, begged an audience of the king, in order that he might debate
on points of faith in the presence of his adversaries. But the Arians
opposed that to the utmost extent of their ability. Finally, Hilarius
was ordered to return to Gaul, as being a sower <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) of discord, and a troubler of the
East, while the sentence of exile against him remained uncanceled. But
when he had wandered over almost the whole earth which was infected
<span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlv-Page_119"></span>with the evil of unfaithfulness, his
mind was full of doubt and deeply agitated with the mighty burden of
cares which pressed upon it. Perceiving that it seemed good to many not
to enter into communion with those who had acknowledged the Synod of
Ariminum, he thought the best thing he could do was to bring back all to
repentance and reformation. In frequent councils within Gaul, and while
almost all the bishops publicly owned the error that had been committed,
he condemns the proceedings at Ariminum, and frames anew the faith of
the churches after its pristine form. Saturninus, however, bishop of
Arles, who was, in truth, a very bad man, of an evil and corrupt
character, resisted these sound measures. He was, in fact, a man who,
besides the infamy of being a heretic, was convicted of many unspeakable
crimes, and cast out of the Church. Thus, having lost its leader, the
strength of the party opposed to Hilarius was broken. Paternus also of
Petrocorii, <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) equally infatuated,
and not shrinking from openly professing unfaithfulness, was expelled
from the priesthood: pardon was extended to the others. This fact is
admitted by all, that our regions of Gaul were set free from the guilt
of heresy through the kind efforts of Hilarius alone. But Lucifer, who
was then at Antioch held a very different opinion. For he condemned
those who assembled at Ariminum to such an extent, that he even
separated himself from the communion of those who had received them as
friends, after they had made satisfaction or exhibited penitence.
Whether this resolution of his was right or wrong, I will not take upon
me to say. Paulinus and Rhodanius died in Phrygia; Hilarius died in his
native country in the sixth year after his return.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_382"></span>[118:383](2110234.htm#fr_382) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlv-p2"></span> “seminarium”: lit. seed-plot.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[119:384](2110234.htm#fr_383) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xlv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xlv-p3"></span> The modern *Perigueux*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVI.](2110235)
