[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110144)  [Next](2110146.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xi-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xi-p1.1"></span>About</span> this same time, Judah, the son
of Jacob, took in marriage Sava, <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267.md)
a woman of Canaan. By her he had three sons,—Her, Onan, and Sela. Her
was allied by concubinage <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268.md) to
Thamar. On his death, Onan took his brother’s wife; and he is related to
have been destroyed by God, because he spilled his seed upon the earth.
Then Thamar, assuming the garb of a harlot, united with her
brother-in-law, and bore him two sons. But when she brought them forth,
there was this remarkable fact, that, when on one of the boys being
born, the midwife had bound his hand with a scarlet thread to indicate
which of them was born first, he, drawing back again into the womb of
his mother, was born <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269.md) the last
boy of the two. The names of Fares and Zarah were given to the children.
But Joseph, being kindly treated by the royal governor who had obtained
him for a sum of money, and having been made manager of his house and
family, had drawn the eyes of his master’s wife upon himself through his
remarkable beauty. And as she was madly laboring under that base
passion, she made advances to him oftener than once, and when he would
not yield to her desires, she disgraced him by the imputation of a false
crime, and complained to her husband that he had made an attempt upon
her virtue. Accordingly, Joseph was thrown into prison. There were in
the same place of confinement two of the king’s servants, who made known
their dreams to Joseph, and he, interpreting these as bearing upon the
future, declared that one of them would be put to death, and the other
would be pardoned. And so it came to pass. Well, after the lapse of two
years, the king also had a dream. And when this could not be explained
by the wise men among the Egyptians, that servant of the king who was
liberated from prison informs the king that Joseph was a wonderful
interpreter of dreams. Accordingly, Joseph was brought out of prison,
and interpreted to the king his dream, to this effect, that, for the
next seven years, there would be the greatest fertility in the land; but
in those that followed, famine. The king being alarmed by this terror,
and seeing that there was a divine spirit in Joseph, set him over the
department of food-supply, and made him equal with himself in the
government. Then Joseph, while corn was abundant throughout all Egypt,
gathered together an immense quantity, and, by increasing the number of
granaries, took measures against the future famine. At that time, the
hope and safety of Egypt were placed in him alone. About the same
period, Aseneh bore him two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. He himself, when
he received the chief power from the king, was thirty years old; for he
was sold by his brothers when he was seventeen years of age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_267"></span>[75:268](2110145.htm#fr_267.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xi-p2"></span> Called *Shuah* in A.V.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[75:269](2110145.htm#fr_268.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xi-p3"></span> Or perhaps, rather, *marriage* of a
sort, as appears from what follows.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[75:270](2110145.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xi-p4"></span> A different reading gives, “was born on
the following day.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.](2110146.md)
