[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110408)  [Next](2110410) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.v.xxxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxvi-p1"></span>A description of the desert in
Diolcos, where the anchorites live.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.v.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>And</span> so when we had come, while
still beginners, from the monasteries of Palestine, to a city of Egypt
called Diolcos, <span id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) and were
contemplating a large number of monks bound by the discipline of the
Cœnobium, and trained in that excellent system of monasteries, which is
also the earliest, we were also eager to see with all wisdom of heart
another system as well which is still better, viz.: that of the
anchorites, as we were incited thereto by the praises of it by
everybody. For these men, having first lived for a very long time in
Cœnobia, and having diligently learnt all the rules of patience and
discretion, and acquired the virtues of humility and renunciation, and
having perfectly overcome all their faults, in order to engage in most
fearful conflicts with devils, penetrate the deepest recesses of the
desert. Finding then that men of this sort were living near the river
Nile in a place which is surrounded on one side by the same river, on
the other by the expanse of the sea, and forms an island, habitable by
none but monks seeking such recesses, since the saltness of the soil and
dryness of the sand make it unfit for any cultivation—to these men, I
say, we eagerly hastened, and were beyond measure astonished at their
labours which they endure in the contemplation of the virtues and their
love of solitude. For they are hampered by such a scarcity even of water
that the care and exactness with which they portion it out is such as no
miser would bestow in preserving and hoarding the most precious kind of
wine. For they carry it three miles or even further from the bed of the
above-mentioned river, for all necessary purposes; and the distance,
great as it is, with sandy mountains in between, is doubled by the very
great difficulty of the task.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_870"></span>[246:871](2110409.htm#fr_870) <span
id="iv.iii.v.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxxvi-p3"></span> Diolcos is mentioned again in the
Conferences XVIII. i. Sozomen (VI. xxix.) speaks of two celebrated
monasteries near there presided over by Piamun and John.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII. Of the cells which Abbot Archebius gave up to us
with their furniture.](2110410)
