[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110985)  [Next](2110987.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xvi"></span> <span id="page_496">p. 496</span> <span
id="iv.vi.iii.xvi-Page_496"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xvi-p1"></span>The answer giving the proofs by which
it can be recognized.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>John</span>: Your shrewd question has
anticipated the subject, which even if you had said nothing must have
arisen from our discourse, and therefore I do not doubt that it will be
effectually grasped by your minds, since indeed your sharp wits have
outstripped our instruction. For the puzzle of any question is easily
removed, when the inquiry anticipates the answer, and is the first to
travel along the road which it is to follow. And so to the treatment of
those faults of which we have spoken above, intercourse with other men
is not merely no hindrance, but a considerable help, for the more often
that the outbursts of their impatience are exposed, the more thorough is
the sorrow and compunction which they bring on those who have failed,
and the speedier is the recovery of health which they confer on those
who struggle against them. Wherefore even when we are living in
solitude, though the incentive to irritation and matter for it cannot
arise from men, yet we ought of set purpose to meditate on incitements
to it, that as we are fighting against it with a continual struggle in
our thoughts a speedier cure for it may be found for us. But against the
spirit of fornication the system is different, and the method an altered
one. For as we must deprive the body of opportunities of lust, and
contact with flesh, so we must deprive the mind of the recollection of
it. For it is sufficiently dangerous for bosoms that are still weak and
infirm even to tolerate the slightest recollection of this passion, in
such a way that sometimes at the remembrance of holy women, or in
reading a story in Holy Scripture a stimulus of dangerous excitement is
aroused. For which reason our Elders used deliberately to omit passages
of this kind when any of the juniors were present. However for those who
are perfect and established in the feelings of chastity there can be no
lack of proofs by which they may examine themselves, and establish their
perfect uprightness of heart by the uncorrupted judgment of their own
conscience. There will then be for the man who is thoroughly established
a similar test even in regard to this passion, so that one who is sure
that he has altogether exterminated the roots of this evil may for the
sake of ascertaining his chastity, call up some picture as with a
lascivious mind. But it is by no means proper for such a test to be
attempted by those who are still weak (for to them it will be dangerous
rather than useful), ut conjunctionem femineam et palpationem quodammodo
teneram atque mollissimam corde pertractent. Cum ergo perfecta quis
virtute fundatus ad illecebram blandissimorum tactuum, quos cogitando
confinxerit, nullum mentis assensum, nullam commotionem carnis in se
deprehenderit exagitatam, he will have a very sure proof of his purity,
so that training himself to this steadfast purity he will not only
possess the blessing of chastity and freedom from defilement in his
heart, but even if he is obliged to touch the body of a woman, he will
be horrified at it.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.xvi-p3"></span>With this Abbot John brought his
Conference to an end, as he saw that it was just time for the
refreshment of the ninth hour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference XX. Conference of Abbot Pinufius. On the End of
Penitence and the Marks of Satisfaction.](2110987.md)
