[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110526)  [Next](2110528) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xi.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.xi.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.iii.xi.xvi-p1"></span>Of him whom the superior came upon
and found in his cell, deluded by idle vainglory.

<span id="iv.iii.xi.xvi-p2"></span>I <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.xi.xvi-p2.1"></span>remember</span> an elder, when I was
staying in the desert of Scete, who went to the cell of a certain
brother to pay him a visit, and when he had reached the door heard him
muttering inside, and stood still for a little while, wanting to know
what it was that he was reading from the Bible or repeating by heart (as
is customary) while he was at work. And when this most excellent
eavesdropper diligently applied his ear and listened with some
curiosity, he found that the man was induced by an attack of this spirit
to fancy that he was delivering a stirring sermon to the people. And
when the elder, as he stood still, heard him finish his discourse and
return again to his office, and give out the dismissal of the
catechumens, as the deacon does, <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) then at last he <span
id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xi.xvi-Page_279"></span>knocked at the door, and the man came
out, and met the elder with the customary reverence, and brought him in
and (for his knowledge of what had been his thoughts made him uneasy)
asked him when he had arrived, for fear lest he might have taken some
harm from standing too long at the door: and the old man joking
pleasantly replied, “I only got here while you were giving out the
dismissal of the catechumens.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[278:1016](2110527.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="iv.iii.xi.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi.xvi-p3"></span> *Celebrare velut diaconum
catechumenis missam. Missa* is here used for the dismissal of the
catechumens, which it was the deacon’s office to proclaim. The whole
service was divided into two parts, (1) the mass of the catechumens,
containing the Scripture lessons, sermon, and prayers for the
catechumens; and (2) the mass of the faithful, or the Eucharist proper.
At the end of the first part the deacon warned the catechumens to
depart, in words varying slightly in different churches, but
substantially the same in all, both east and west: e.g. in the Liturgy
of S. Chrysostom the form is “Let all the catechumens depart: let not
any of the catechumens—Let all the faithful—”; in that of S. Mark it is
still briefer: “Look lest any of the catechumens.” The Roman missal does
not now contain this feature, but it was certainly originally found in
it for it is alluded to by Gregory the Great (Dial. Book II. c. xxiii.),
who gives the form as follows: “Si quis non communicat det locum.” It
was also customary in Spain and Gaul, as well as in Africa, being
alluded to by Augustine in Sermon xlix.: “Ecce post sermonen fit missa
catechumenis: manebunt fideles, venietur ad locum orationis.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. How faults cannot be cured unless their roots and
causes have been discovered.](2110528)
