[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110393)  [Next](2110395) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.v.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxi-p1"></span>Of the inward peace of a monk, and of
spiritual abstinence.

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.v.xxi-p2.1"></span>For</span> it is not an external enemy
whom we have to dread. Our foe is shut up within ourselves: an internal
warfare is daily waged by us: and if we are victorious in this, all
external things will be made weak, and everything will be made peaceful
and subdued for the soldier of Christ. We shall have no external enemy
to fear, if what is within is overcome and subdued to the spirit. And
let us not believe that that external fast from visible food alone can
possibly be sufficient for perfection of heart and purity of body unless
with it there has also been united a fast of the soul. For the soul also
has its foods which are harmful, fattened on which, even without
superfluity of meats, it is involved in a downfall of wantonness.
Slander is its food, and indeed one that is very dear to it. A burst of
anger also is its food, even if it be a very slight one; yet supplying
it with miserable food for an hour, and destroying it as well with its
deadly savour. Envy is a food of the mind, corrupting it with its
poisonous juices and never ceasing to make it wretched and miserable at
the prosperity and success of another. Kenodoxia, i.e., vainglory is its
food, which gratifies it with a delicious meal for a time; but
afterwards strips it clear and bare of all virtue, and dismisses it
barren and void of all spiritual fruit, so that it makes it not only
lose the rewards of huge labours, but also makes it incur heavier
punishments. All lust and shifty wanderings of heart are a sort of food
for the soul, nourishing it on harmful meats, but leaving it afterwards
without share of the heavenly bread and of really solid food. If then,
with all the powers we have, we abstain from these in a most holy fast,
our observance of the bodily fast will be both useful and profitable.
For labour of the flesh, when joined with contrition of the spirit, will
produce a sacrifice that is most acceptable to God, and a worthy shrine
of holiness in the pure and undefiled inmost chambers of the heart. But
if, while fasting as far as the body is concerned, we are entangled in
the most dangerous vices of the soul, our humiliation of the flesh will
do us no good whatever, while the most precious part of us is defiled:
since we go wrong through that substance by virtue of which we are made
a shrine of the Holy Ghost. For it is not so much the corruptible flesh
as the clean heart, which is made a shrine for God, and a temple of the
Holy Ghost. We ought therefore, whenever the outward man fasts, to
restrain the inner man <span id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span
id="iv.iii.v.xxi-Page_242"></span>as well from food which is bad for
him: that inner man, namely, which the blessed Apostle above all urges
us to present pure before God, that it may be found worthy to receive
Christ as a guest within, saying “that in the inner man Christ may dwell
in your hearts through faith.” <span id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_860"></span>[242:861](2110394.htm#fr_860) <span
id="iv.iii.v.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v.xxi-p3"></span> [Eph.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.v.xxi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. That we should for this reason practise bodily
abstinence that we may by it attain to a spiritual fast.](2110395)
