[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110020)  [Next](2110022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p1"></span>Martin casts out Several Devils.

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.xviii-p2.1"></span>At</span> the same time the servant of one
Tetradius, a man of proconsular rank, having been laid hold of by a
demon, was tormented with the most miserable results. Martin, therefore,
having been asked to lay his hands on him, ordered the servant to be
brought to him; but the evil spirit could, in no way, be brought forth
from the cell in which he was: he showed himself so fearful, with
ferocious teeth, to those who attempted to draw near. Then Tetradius
throws himself at the feet of the saintly man, imploring that he himself
would go down to the house in which the possessed of the devil was kept.
But Martin then declared that he could not visit the house of an
unconverted heathen. For Tetradius, at that time, was still involved in
the errors of heathenism. He, therefore, pledges his word that if the
demon were driven out of the boy, he would become a Christian. Martin,
then, laying his hand upon the boy, cast the evil spirit out of him. On
seeing this, Tetradius believed in the Lord Jesus, and immediately
became a catechumen, while, not long after, he was baptized; and he
always regarded Martin with extraordinary affection, as having been the
author of his salvation.

<span id="ii.ii.xviii-p3"></span>About the same time, having entered the
dwelling of a certain householder in the same town, he stopped short at
the very threshold, and said, that he perceived a horrible demon in the
courtyard of the house. When Martin ordered it to depart, it laid hold
of a certain member of the family, who was staying in the inner part of
the house; and the poor wretch began at once to rage with his teeth, and
to lacerate whomsoever he met. The house was thrown into disorder; the
family was in confusion; and the people present took to flight. Martin
threw himself in the way of the frenzied creature, and first of all
commanded him to stand still. But when he continued to gnash with his
teeth, and, with gaping mouth, was threatening to bite, Martin inserted
his fingers into his mouth, and said, “If you possess any power, devour
these.” But then, as if red-hot iron had entered his jaws, drawing his
teeth far away he took care not to touch the fingers of the saintly man;
and when he was compelled by punishments and tortures, to flee out of
the possessed body, while he had no power of escaping by the mouth, he
was cast out by means of a defluxion of the belly, leaving disgusting
traces behind him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Martin performs Various Miracles.](2110022.md)
