[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110954)  [Next](2110956) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.ii-p1"></span>The words of Abbot Piamun, how monks
who were novices ought to be taught by the example of their elders.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>Whatever</span> man, my children, is
desirous to attain skill in any art, unless he gives himself up with the
utmost pains and carefulness to the study of that system which he is
anxious to learn, and observes the rules and orders of the best masters
of that work or science, is indulging in a vain hope to reach by idle
wishes any similarity to those whose pains and diligence he avoids
copying. For we know that some have come from your country to these
parts, only to go round the monasteries for the sake of getting to know
the brethren, not meaning to adopt the rules and <span id="page_480">p.
480</span> <span id="iv.vi.ii.ii-Page_480"></span>regulations, for the
sake of which they travelled hither, nor to retire to the cells and aim
at carrying out in action what they had learnt by sight or by teaching.
And these people retained their character and pursuits to which they had
grown accustomed, and, as is thrown in their teeth by some, are held to
have changed their country not for the sake of their profit, but owing
to the need of escaping want. For in the obstinacy of their stubborn
mind, they not only could learn nothing, but actually would not stay any
longer in these parts. For if they changed neither their method of
fasting, nor their scheme of Psalms, nor even the fashion of their
garments, what else could we think that they were after in this country,
except only the supply of their victuals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. How the juniors ought not to discuss the orders of
the seniors.](2110956)
