[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110191)  [Next](2110193) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>Accordingly</span>, as the prophet
interpreted the matter, the image which was seen furnished a
representation of the world. The golden head is the empire of the
Chaldæans; for we have understood that it was the first and wealthiest.
The breast and the arms of silver represent the second kingdom; for
Cyrus, after the Chaldæans and the Medes were conquered, conferred the
empire on the Persians. In the brazen belly it is said that the third
sovereignty was indicated; and we see that this was fulfilled, for
Alexander took the empire from the Persians, and won the sovereignty for
the Macedonians. The iron legs point to a fourth power, and that is
understood of the Roman empire, which is more powerful <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) than all the kingdoms which were
before it. But the fact that the feet were partly of iron and partly
clay, indicates that the Roman empire is to be divided, so as never to
be united. This, too, has been fulfilled, for the Roman state is ruled
not by one emperor but by several, and these are always quarreling among
themselves, either in actual warfare or by factions. Finally, by the
clay and the iron being mixed together, yet never in their substance
thoroughly uniting, are shadowed forth those future mixtures of the
human race which disagree among themselves, though apparently combined.
For it is obvious that the Roman territory is occupied by foreign
nations, or rebels, or that it has been given over to those who have
surrendered themselves under an appearance <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) of peace. And it is also evident that
barbarous nations, and especially Jews, have been commingled with our
armies, cities, and provinces; and we thus behold them living among us,
yet by no means agreeing to adopt our customs. And the prophets declare
that these are the last times. But in the stone cut out without hands,
which broke to pieces the gold, silver, brass, iron, and clay, there is
a figure of Christ. For he, not born under human conditions (since he
was born not of the will of man, but of the will of God), will reduce to
nothing that world in which exist earthly kingdoms, and will establish
another kingdom, incorruptible and everlasting, that is, the future
world, which is prepared for the saints. The faith of some still
hesitates about this point only, while they do not believe about things
yet to come, though they are convinced of the things that are past.
Daniel, then, was presented with many gifts by the king, was set over
Babylon and the whole empire, and was held in the highest honor. By his
influence, Annanias, Azarias, and Misael were also advanced to the
highest dignity and power. About the same time, the remarkable
prophecies of Ezekiel came out, the mystery of future things and of the
resurrection <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) having been
revealed to him. His book is one of great weight, and deserves to be
read with care.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_330"></span>[98:331](2110192.htm#fr_330) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p2"></span> Such is clearly the meaning, but it
is strangely expressed by the words “omnibus ante regnis validissimum.”

<span id="fn_331"></span>[98:332](2110192.htm#fr_331) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p3"></span> The text is here very uncertain and
obscure.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[98:333](2110192.htm#fr_332) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p4"></span> “resurrectionis,” referring probably
not to the rising again of the dead, but to the restoration of the Jews.
See [Ezek. 37](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vi.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](2110193)
