[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110261)  [Next](2110263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XX.

<span id="iii.xxi-p1"></span>The Notes of a true Catholic.

<span id="iii.xxi-p2"></span>\[48.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxi-p2.1"></span>This</span> being the case, he is the true and
genuine Catholic who loves the truth of God, who loves the Church, who
loves the Body of Christ, who esteems divine religion and the Catholic
Faith above every thing, above the authority, above the regard, above
the genius, above the eloquence, above the philosophy, of every man
whatsoever; who sets light by all of these, and continuing steadfast and
established in the faith, resolves that he will believe that, and that
only, which he is sure the Catholic Church has held universally and from
ancient time; but that whatsoever new and unheard-of doctrine he shall
find to have been furtively introduced by some one or another, besides
that of all, or contrary to that of all the saints, this, he will
understand, does not pertain to religion, but is permitted as a trial,
being instructed especially by the words of the blessed Apostle Paul,
who writes thus in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, “There must
needs be heresies, that they who are approved may be made manifest among
you:” <span id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) as though he should say,
This is the reason why the authors of Heresies are not forthwith rooted
up by God, namely, that they who are approved may be made manifest; that
is, that it may be apparent of each individual, how tenacious and
faithful and steadfast he is in his love of the Catholic faith.

<span id="iii.xxi-p4"></span>\[49.\] And in truth, as each novelty
springs up incontinently is discerned the difference between the weight
of the wheat and the lightness of the chaff. Then that which had no
weight to keep it on the floor is without difficulty blown away. For
some at once fly off entirely; others having been only shaken out,
afraid of perishing, wounded, half alive, half dead, are ashamed to
return. They have, in fact swallowed a quantity of poison—not enough to
kill, yet more than can be got rid of; it neither causes death, nor
suffers to live. O wretched condition! With what surging tempestuous
cares are they tossed about! One while, the error being set in motion,
they are hurried whithersoever the wind drives them; another, returning
upon themselves like refluent waves, they are dashed back: one while,
with rash presumption, they give their approval to what seems uncertain;
another, with irrational fear, they are frightened out of their wits at
what is certain, in doubt whither to go, whither to return, what to
seek, what to shun, what to keep, what to throw away.

<span id="iii.xxi-p5"></span>\[50.\] This affliction, indeed, of a
hesitating and miserably vacillating mind is, if they are wise, a
medicine intended for them by God’s compassion. For therefore it is that
outside the most secure harbour of the Catholic Faith, they are tossed
about, beaten, and almost killed, by divers tempestuous cogitations, in
order that they may take in the sails of self-conceit, which, they had
with ill advice unfurled to the blasts of novelty, and may betake
themselves again to, and remain stationary within, the most secure
harbour of their placid and good mother, and may begin by vomiting up
those bitter and turbid floods of error which they had swallowed, that
thenceforward they may be able to drink the streams of fresh and living
water. Let them unlearn well what they had learnt not well, and let them
receive so much of the entire doctrine of the Church as they can
understand: what they cannot understand let them believe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_493"></span>[146:494](2110262.htm#fr_493) <span
id="iii.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p3"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. Exposition of St. Paul's Words.--1 Tim. vi.
20.](2110263)
