[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110893)  [Next](2110895.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.vii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.vii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.v.vii.iii-p1"></span>How friendship is indissoluble.

<span id="iv.v.vii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.vii.iii-p2.1"></span>Among</span> all these then there is one
kind of love which is indissoluble, where the union is owing not to the
favour of a recommendation, or some great kindness or gifts, or the
reason <span id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span
id="iv.v.vii.iii-Page_451"></span>of some bargain, or the necessities of
nature, but simply to similarity of virtue. This, I say, is what is
broken by no chances, what no interval of time or space can sever or
destroy, and what even death itself cannot part. This is true and
unbroken love which grows by means of the double perfection and goodness
of friends, and which, when once its bonds have been entered, no
difference of liking and no disturbing opposition of wishes can sever.
But we have known many set on this purpose, who though they had been
joined together in companionship out of their burning love for Christ,
yet could not maintain it continually and unbrokenly, because although
they relied on a good beginning for their friendship, yet they did not
with one and the same zeal maintain the purpose on which they had
entered, and so there was between them a sort of love only for a while,
for it was not maintained by the goodness of both alike, but by the
patience of the one party, and so although it is held to by the one with
unwearied heroism, yet it is sure to be broken by the pettiness of the
other. For the infirmities of those who are somewhat cold in seeking the
healthy condition of perfection, however patiently they may be borne by
the strong, are yet not put up with by those who are weaker themselves.
For they have implanted within them causes of disturbance which do not
allow them to be at ease, just as those, who are affected by bodily
weakness, generally impute the delicacy of their stomach and weak health
to the carelessness of their cooks and servants, and however carefully
their attendants may serve them, yet nevertheless they ascribe the
grounds of their upset to those who are in good health, as they do not
see that they are really due to the failure of their own health.
Wherefore this, as we said, is the sure and indissoluble union of
friendship, where the tie consists only in likeness in goodness. For
“the Lord maketh men to be of one mind in an house.” <span
id="fr_1965"></span>[1966](#fn_1965.md) And therefore love can only
continue undisturbed in those in whom there is but one purpose and mind
to will and to refuse the same things. And if you also wish to keep this
unbroken, you must be careful that having first got rid of your faults,
you mortify your own desires, and with united zeal and purpose
diligently fulfil that in which the prophet specially delights: “Behold
how good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity.” <span id="fr_1966"></span>[1967](#fn_1966.md) Which should be taken
of unity of spirit rather than of place. For it is of no use for those
who differ in character and purpose to be united in one dwelling, nor is
it an hindrance for those who are grounded on equal goodness to be
separated by distance of place. For with God the union of character, not
of place, joins brethren together in a common dwelling, nor can
unruffled peace ever be maintained where difference of will appears.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[451:1966](2110894.htm#fr_1965.md) <span
id="iv.v.vii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii.iii-p3"></span> [Psa.
68.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.v.vii.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[451:1967](2110894.htm#fr_1966.md) <span
id="iv.v.vii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii.iii-p4"></span> [Psa.
133.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.v.vii.iii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. A question whether anything that is really useful
should be performed even against a brother's wish.](2110895.md)
