[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110323)  [Next](2110325.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p1"></span>Of the Vigil service which is
celebrated on the evening preceding the Sabbath; of its length, and the
manner in which it is observed.

<span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>In</span> the winter time, however,
when the nights are longer, the Vigils, <span
id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744.md) which are celebrated every week on the
evening at the commencing the Sabbath, are arranged by the elders in the
monasteries to last till the fourth cock-crowing, <span id="page_217">p.
217</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-Page_217"></span>for this reason,
viz., that after the watch through the whole night they may, by resting
their bodies for the remaining time of nearly two hours, avoid flagging
through drowsiness the whole day long, and be content with repose for
this short time instead of resting the whole night. And it is proper for
us, too, to observe this with the utmost care, that we may be content
with the sleep which is allowed us after the office of Vigils up to
daybreak,—i.e., till the Mattin Psalms, <span
id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745.md) —and afterwards spend the whole day in
work and necessary duties, lest through weariness from the Vigils, and
feebleness, we might be forced to take by day the sleep which we cut off
from the night, and so be thought not to have cut short our bodily rest
so much as to have changed our time for repose and nightly retirement.
For our feeble flesh could not possibly be defrauded of the whole
night’s rest and yet keep its vigour unshaken throughout the following
day without sleepiness of mind and heaviness of spirit, as it will be
hindered rather than helped by this unless after Vigils are over it
enjoys a short slumber. And, therefore, if, as we have suggested, at
least an hour’s sleep is snatched before daybreak, we shall save all the
hours of Vigils which we have spent all through the night in prayer,
granting to nature what is due to it, and having no necessity of taking
back by day what we have cut off from the night. For a man will
certainly have to give up everything to this flesh if he tries, not in a
rational manner to withhold a part only, but to refuse the whole, and
(to speak candidly) is anxious to cut off not what is superfluous but
what is necessary. Wherefore Vigils have to be made up for with greater
interest if they are prolonged with ill-considered and unreasonable
length till daybreak. And so they divide them into an office in three
parts, that by this variety the effort may be distributed and the
exhaustion of the body relieved by some agreeable relaxation. For when
standing they have sung three Psalms antiphonally, <span
id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746.md) after this, sitting on the ground or
in very low stalls, one of them repeats three Psalms, while the rest
respond, each Psalm being assigned to one of the brethren, who succeed
each other in turn; and to these they add three lessons while still
sitting quietly. And so, by lessening their bodily exertion, they manage
to observe their Vigils with greater attention of mind. <span
id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_744"></span>[216:745](2110324.htm#fr_744.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p3"></span> *Vigiliæ* is here used as the
equivalent of Nocturns.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[217:746](2110324.htm#fr_745.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p4"></span> I.e., the office of Lauds.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[217:747](2110324.htm#fr_746.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p5"></span> *Tria Antiphona*. The word is here
used (as above, II. c. ii.), not in the modern sense of antiphon, but to
denote a Psalm or Psalms sung antiphonally.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[217:748](2110324.htm#fr_747.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p6"></span> In this chapter Cassian describes
two of the different methods of Psalmody employed in the ancient Church:
(1) Antiphonal singing, where the congregation was divided into two
parts, or choirs, which sang alternate verses; (2) the method according
to which one voice alone sang the first part of the verse, and the rest
of the congregation joined in at the close. Both methods are described
in a well-known passage in an Epistle of S. Basil (*Ep. ccvii.<span
id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p6.1"></span>* *ad clericos Neocœs*), where he tells
us that in the morning service, at one time the people divide themselves
into two parties and sing antiphonally to each other (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p6.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p6.3"></span>ντιψάλλουσιν
ἀλλήλοις</span>), while at another time they entrust to one person the
duty of beginning the strain, and the rest respond (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p6.4"></span>ὐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.iii.viii-p6.5"></span>πηχοῦσι</span>).
This latter method seems to have been a very favourite one, the Psalms
which were thus sung being called *Responsoria*. See Isidore, *De
Offic*., i. 8; and compare the *Dictionary of Christian Antiquities*,
Vol. II. p. 1745; and Bingham, *Antiquities*, Book XIV. c. i. A third
method has been already described by Cassian in Book II. c. xi.; viz.,
that called *Tractus*, where the Psalm was executed by a single voice,
while all the rest of the congregation listened.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The reason why a Vigil is appointed as the Sabbath
day dawns, and why a dispensation from fasting is enjoyed on the Sabbath
all through the East.](2110325.md)
