[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110711)  [Next](2110713.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.viii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.viii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.iii-p1"></span>Our answer on the fickle character
of our thoughts.

<span id="iv.iv.viii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.viii.iii-p2.1"></span>The</span> time spent here, and the
dwelling in solitude, and meditation, through which you think that we
ought to have attained perfection of the inner man, has only done this
for us; viz., teach us that which we are unable to be, without making us
what we are trying to be. Nor do we feel that by this knowledge we have
acquired any fixed steadfastness of the purity which we long for, or any
strength and firmness; but only an increase of confusion and shame: for
though our meditation in all our discipline aims at this in our daily
studies, and endeavours from trembling beginnings to reach a sure and
unwavering skill, and to begin to know something of what originally it
knew but vaguely or was altogether ignorant of, and by advancing by sure
steps (so to speak) towards the condition of that discipline, to
habituate itself perfectly to it without any difficulty, I find on the
contrary that while I am struggling in this desire for purity, I have
only got far enough to know what I cannot be. And hence I feel that
nothing but trouble results to me from all this contrition of heart, so
that matter for tears is never wanting, and yet I do not cease to be
what I ought not to be. And so what is the good of having learnt what is
best, if it cannot be attained even when known? for when we have been
feeling that the aim of our heart was directed towards what we purposed,
insensibly the mind returns to its previous wandering thoughts and slips
back with a more violent rush, and is taken up with daily distractions
and incessantly drawn away by numberless things that take it captive, so
that we almost despair of the improvement which we long for, and all
these observances seem useless. Since the mind which every moment
wanders off vaguely, when it is brought back to the fear of God or
spiritual contemplation, before it is established in it, darts off and
strays; and when we have been roused and have discovered that it has
wandered from the purpose set before it, and want to recall it to the
meditation from which it has strayed, and to bind it fast with the
firmest purpose of heart, as if with chains, while we are making the
attempt it slips away from the inmost recesses of the heart swifter than
a snake. Wherefore we being inflamed by daily exercises of this kind,
and yet not seeing that we gain from them any strength and stability in
heart are overcome and in despair driven to this opinion; viz., to
believe that it is from no fault of our own but from a fault of our
nature that these wanderings of mind are found in mankind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The discourse of the old man on the state of the soul
and its excellence.](2110713.md)
