[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110004)  [Next](2110006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p1"></span>Reasons for writing the Life of St.
Martin.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>Most</span> men being vainly devoted to the
pursuit of worldly glory, have, as they imagined, acquired a memorial of
their own names from this source; viz. devoting their pens to the
embellishment of the lives of famous men. This course, although it did
not secure for them a lasting reputation, still has undoubtedly brought
them some fulfilment of the hope they cherished. It has done so, both by
preserving their own memory, though to no purpose, and because, through
their having presented to the world the examples of great men, no small
emulation has been excited in the bosoms of their readers. Yet,
notwithstanding these things, their labors have in no degree borne upon
the blessed and never-ending life to which we look forward. For what has
a glory, destined to perish with the world, profited those men
themselves who have written on mere secular matters? Or what benefit has
posterity derived from reading of Hector as a warrior, or Socrates as an
expounder of philosophy? There can be no profit in such things, since it
is not only folly to imitate the persons referred to, but absolute
madness not to assail them with the utmost severity. For, in truth,
those persons who estimate human life only by present actions, have
consigned their hopes to fables, and their souls to the tomb. In fact,
they gave themselves up to be perpetuated simply in the memory of
mortals, whereas it is the duty of man rather to <span id="page_4">p.
4</span> <span id="ii.ii.ii-Page_4"></span>seek after eternal life than
an eternal memorial and that, not by writing, or fighting, or
philosophizing, but by living a pious, holy, and religious life. This
erroneous conduct of mankind, being enshrined in literature, has
prevailed to such an extent that it has found many who have been emulous
either of the vain philosophy or the foolish excellence which has been
celebrated. For this reason, I think I will accomplish something well
worth the necessary pains, if I write the life of a most holy man, which
shall serve in future as an example to others; by which, indeed, the
readers shall be roused to the pursuit of true knowledge, and heavenly
warfare, and divine virtue. In so doing, we have regard also to our own
advantage, so that we may look for, not a vain remembrance among men,
but an eternal reward from God. For, although we ourselves have not
lived in such a manner that we can serve for an example to others,
nevertheless, we have made it our endeavor that he should not remain
unknown who was a man worthy of imitation. I shall therefore set about
writing the life of St. Martin, and shall narrate both what he did
previous to his episcopate, and what he performed as a bishop. At the
same time, I cannot hope to set forth all that he was or did. Those
excellences of which he alone was conscious are completely unknown,
because, as he did not seek for honor from men, he desired, as much as
he could accomplish it, that his virtues should be concealed. And even
of those which had become known to us, we have omitted a great number,
because we have judged it enough if only the more striking and eminent
should be recorded. At the same time, I had in the interests of readers
to see to it that, no undue amount of instances being set before them
should make them weary of the subject. But I implore those who are to
read what follows to give full faith to the things narrated, and to
believe that I have written nothing of which I had not certain knowledge
and evidence. I should, in fact, have preferred to be silent rather than
to narrate things which are false. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:2](2110005.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p3"></span> This is a remarkable asseveration in view
of the many miraculous accounts which follow. When we remember, on the
one hand, how intimate Sulpitius was with St. Martin, and how strongly,
as in this passage, he avouches the truth of all he narrates, it is
extremely difficult to decide as to the real value of his narrative. It
has been said (*Smith’s Dict*. II. 967) that Sulpitius’ Life of St.
Martinus is “filled with the most puerile fables,” and undoubtedly many
of the stories recorded are of that character. But whether, considering
the close relation in which the two men stood to each other, *all* the
miraculous accounts are to be discredited, must be left to the judgment
of the reader. The following valuable remarks may be quoted on this
interesting question. “Some forty years ago,” writes Dr. Cazenove, “an
audience in Oxford was listening to a professor of modern history (Dr.
Arnold of Rugby), who discussed this subject. After pointing out the
difference between the Gospel miracles and those recorded by
ecclesiastical historians, the lecturer proceeded as follows: ‘Some
appear to be unable to conceive of belief or unbelief, except as having
some ulterior object: “We believe this because we love it: we disbelieve
it because we wish it to be disproved.” There is, however, in minds more
healthfully constituted a belief and a disbelief, founded solely upon
the evidence of the case, arising neither out of partiality, nor out of
prejudice against the supposed conclusions, which may result from its
truth or falsehood. And in such a spirit the historical student will
consider the case of Bede’s and other historians’ miracles. He will, I
think, as a general rule, disbelieve them, for the immense multitude
which he finds recorded, and which, I suppose, no credulity could
believe in, shows sufficiently that on this point there was a total want
of judgment and a blindness of belief generally existing which make the
testimony wholly insufficient; and, while the external evidence in favor
of these alleged miracles is so unsatisfactory, there are, for the most
part, strong internal evidence against them. But with regard to some
miracles, he will see that there is no strong *a priori* improbability
in their occurence, but rather the contrary; as, for instance, when the
first missionaries of the Gospel in a barbarous country are said to have
been assisted by a manifestation of the spirit of power; and, if the
evidence appears to warrant his belief, he will readily and gladly yield
it. And in doing so he will have the countenance of a great man (Burke)
who in his fragment of English history has not hesitated to express the
same sentiments. Nor will he be unwilling, but most thankful, to find
sufficient grounds for believing that not only at the beginning of the
Gospel, but in ages long afterwards, believing prayer has received
extraordinary answers; that it has been heard even in more than it might
have dared to ask for. Yet, again, if the gift of faith—the gift as
distinguished from the grace—of the faith which removes mountains, has
been given to any in later times in remarkable measure the mighty works
which such faith may have wrought cannot be incredible in themselves to
those who remember our Lord’s promise, and if it appears from
satisfactory evidence that they were wrought actually, we shall believe
them,—and believe with joy. Only as it is in most cases impossible to
admit the trustworthiness of the evidence, our minds must remain at the
most in a state of suspense; and I do not know why it is necessary to
come to any positive decision.’”—“The Fathers for English Readers”: *St.
Hilary of Poitiers and St. Martin of Tours*, p. 191.

<span id="ii.ii.ii-p4"></span>On this subject it has lately been said:
“Most, if not all, of the so-called miracles which were supposed to
surround Martin with a blaze of glow were either absolutely and on the
face of them false; or were gross exaggerations of natural events; or
were subjective impressions clothed in objective images; or were the
distortions of credulous rumor; or at the best cannot claim in their
favor a single particle of trustworthy evidence. They cannot be narrated
as though they were actual events. Martin was an eminent bishop but half
of the wonderful deeds attributed to him are unworthy and
absurd.”—Farrar’s *Lives of the Fathers*, I. 644.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Military Service of St. Martin.](2110006)
