[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110247)  [Next](2110249.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span>The example of Pope Stephen in resisting
the Iteration of Baptism.

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>\[15.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vii-p2.1"></span>Great</span> then is the example of these same
blessed men, an example plainly divine, and worthy to be called to mind,
and meditated <span id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span
id="iii.vii-Page_135"></span>upon continually by every true Catholic,
who, like the seven-branched candlestick, shining with the sevenfold
light of the Holy Spirit, showed to posterity how thenceforward the
audaciousness of profane novelty, in all the several rantings of error,
might be crushed by the authority of hallowed antiquity.

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span>Nor is there anything new in this? For it
has always been the case in the Church, that the more a man is under the
influence of religion, so much the more prompt is he to oppose
innovations. Examples there are without number: but to be brief, we will
take one, and that, in preference to others, from the Apostolic
See, <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437.md) so that it may be clearer
than day to every one with how great energy, with how great zeal, with
how great earnestness, the blessed successors of the blessed apostles
have constantly defended the integrity of the religion which they have
once received.

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span>\[16.\] Once on a time then,
Agrippinus, <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438.md) bishop of Carthage,
of venerable memory, held the doctrine—and he was the first who held
it—that Baptism ought to be repeated, contrary to the divine canon,
contrary to the rule of the universal Church, contrary to the customs
and institutions of our ancestors. This innovation drew after it such an
amount of evil, that it not only gave an example of sacrilege to
heretics of all sorts, but proved an occasion of error to certain
Catholics even.

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span>When then all men protested against the
novelty, and the priesthood everywhere, each as his zeal prompted him,
opposed it, Pope Stephen of blessed memory, Prelate of the Apostolic
See, in conjunction indeed with his colleagues but yet himself the
foremost, withstood it, thinking it right, I doubt not, that as he
exceeded all others in the authority of his place, so he should also in
the devotion of his faith. In fine, in an epistle sent at the time to
Africa, he laid down this rule: “Let there be no innovation—nothing but
what has been handed down.” <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439.md) For
that holy and prudent man well knew that true piety admits no other rule
than that whatsoever things have been faithfully received from our
fathers the same are to be faithfully consigned to our children; and
that it is our duty, not to lead religion whither we would, but rather
to follow religion whither it leads; and that it is the part of
Christian modesty and gravity not to hand down our own beliefs or
observances to those who come after us, but to preserve and keep what we
have received from those who went before us. What then was the issue of
the whole matter? What but the usual and customary one? Antiquity was
retained, novelty was rejected.

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span>\[17.\] But it may be, the cause of
innovation at that time lacked patronage. On the contrary, it had in its
favor such powerful talent, such copious eloquence, such a number of
partisans, so much resemblance to truth, such weighty support in
Scripture (only interpreted in a novel and perverse sense), that it
seems to me that that whole conspiracy could not possibly have been
defeated, unless the sole cause of this extraordinary stir, the very
novelty of what was so undertaken, so defended, so belauded, had proved
wanting to it. In the end, what result, under God, had that same African
Council or decree? <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440.md) None
whatever. The whole affair, as though a dream, a fable, a thing of no
possible account, was annulled, cancelled, and trodden underfoot.

<span id="iii.vii-p11"></span>\[18.\] And O marvellous revolution! The
authors of this same doctrine are judged Catholics, the followers
heretics; the teachers are absolved, the disciples condemned; the
writers of the books will be children of the Kingdom, the defenders of
them will have their portion in Hell. For who is so demented as to doubt
that that blessed light among all holy bishops and martyrs, Cyprian,
together with the rest of his colleagues, will reign with Christ; or,
who on the other hand so sacrilegious as to deny that the Donatists and
those other pests, who boast the authority of that council for their
iteration of baptism, will be consigned to eternal fire with the
devil? <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_437"></span>[135:438](2110248.htm#fr_437.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span> “The Apostolic see” (Sedes Apostolica)
here means Rome of course. But the title was not restricted to Rome. It
was common to all sees which could claim an apostle as their Founder.
Thus St. Augustine, suggesting a rule for determining what books are to
be regarded as Canonical, says, “In Canonicis Scripturis Ecclesiarum
Catholicarum quamplurium auctoritatem sequatur, inter quas sane illæ
sint quæ Apostolicas Sedes habere et Epistolas accipere meruerunt.” “Let
him follow the authority of those Catholic Churches which have been
counted worthy to have Apostolic Sees; *i.e*., to have been founded by
Apostles, and to have been the recipients of Apostolic Epistles.”—*De
Doctr. Christiana*, II. § 13. But the title, even in St. Augustine’s
time, had even a wider meaning. “Anciently every bishop’s see was
dignified with the title of Sedes Apostolica, which in those days was no
peculiar title of the bishop of Rome, but given to all bishops in
general, as deriving their origin and counting their succession from the
apostles.”—*Bingham, Antiq*. II., c. 2, § 3.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[135:439](2110248.htm#fr_438.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span> Agrippinus. See note 4, below.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[135:440](2110248.htm#fr_439.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span> Stephen’s letter has not come down to us,
happily perhaps for his credit, judging by the terms in which Cyprian
speaks of it in the letter in which he quotes the passage in the
text.—*Ad Pompeian*, Ep. 74<span id="iii.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[135:441](2110248.htm#fr_440.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p10"></span> The Council held under the presidency of
Cyprian in 256. Its acts are contained in Cyprian’s works, Ed. Fell. pp.
158, etc. An earlier council had been held in the same city in the
beginning of the century under Agrippinus. Both had affirmed the
necessity of rebaptizing heretics, or, as they would rather have said,
of baptizing them. The controversy was set at rest by a decision of the
council of Arles, in 314, which ordered, in its Eighth Canon, that if
the baptism had been administered in the name of the Trinity, converts
should be admitted simply by the imposition of hands that they might
receive the Holy Ghost.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[135:442](2110248.htm#fr_441.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p12"></span> See Hooker’s reference to this
passage.—*Eccles. Poll*. v. 62, § 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. How Heretics, craftily cite obscure passages in
ancient writers in support of their own novelties.](2110249.md)
