[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110503)  [Next](2110505) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.x.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.x.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="iv.iii.x.xix-p1"></span>How we should understand these words:
“It is more blessed to give than to receive.”

<span id="iv.iii.x.xix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.x.xix-p2.1"></span>And</span> he says that this is a command
of the Lord: “For He Himself,” namely the Lord <span id="page_273">p.
273</span> <span id="iv.iii.x.xix-Page_273"></span>Jesus, said he, “said
it is more blessed to give than to receive.” That is, the bounty of the
giver is more blessed than the need of the receiver, where the gift is
not supplied from money that has been kept back through unbelief or
faithlessness, nor from the stored-up treasures of avarice, but is
produced from the fruits of our own labour and honest toil. And so “it
is more blessed to give than to receive,” because while the giver shares
the poverty of the receiver, yet still he is diligent in providing with
pious care by his own toil, not merely enough for his own needs, but
also what he can give to one in want; and so he is adorned with a double
grace, since by giving away all his goods he secures the perfect
abnegation of Christ, and yet by his labour and thought displays the
generosity of the rich; thus honouring God by his honest labours, and
plucking for him the fruits of his righteousness, while another,
enervated by sloth and indolent laziness, proves himself by the saying
of the Apostle unworthy of food, as in defiance of his command he takes
it in idleness, not without the guilt of sin and of obstinacy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Of a lazy brother who tried to persuade others to
leave the monastery.](2110505)
