[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110051)  [Next](2110053.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.xv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xv-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xv-p1.1"></span>But</span> lest this should perchance seem
incredible to any one, I shall mention still greater things. I call
Christ <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) to witness that I invent
nothing, nor will I relate things published by uncertain authors, but
will set forth facts which have been vouched for to me by trustworthy
men.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xv-p3"></span>“Numbers of those persons live in the
desert without any roofs over their heads, whom people call
anchorites. <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md) They subsist on the
roots of plants; they settle nowhere in any fixed place, lest they
should frequently have men visiting them; wherever night compels them
they choose their abode. Well, two monks from Nitria directed their
steps towards a certain man living in this style, and under these
conditions. They did so, although they were from a very different
quarter, because they had heard of his virtues, and because he had
formerly been their dear and intimate friend, while a member of the same
monastery. They sought after him long and much; and at length, in the
seventh month, they found him staying in that far-distant wilderness
which borders upon Memphis. He was said already to have dwelt in these
solitudes for twelve years; but although he shunned intercourse with all
men, yet he did not shrink from meeting these friends; on the contrary,
he yielded himself to their affection for a period of three days. On the
fourth day, when he had gone some distance escorting them in their
return journey, they beheld a lioness of remarkable size coming towards
them. The animal, although meeting with three persons, showed no
uncertainty as to the one she made for, but threw herself down at the
feet of the anchorite: and, lying there with a kind of weeping and
lamentation, she manifested mingled feelings of sorrow and supplication.
The sight affected all, and especially him who perceived that he was
sought for: he therefore sets out, and the others follow him. For the
beast stopping from time to time, and, from time to time looking back,
clearly wished it to be understood that the anchorite should follow
wherever she led. What need is there of many words? We arrived at the
den of the animal, where she, the unfortunate mother, was nourishing
five whelps already grown up, which, as they had come forth with closed
eyes from the womb of their dam, so they had continued in persistent
blindness. Bringing them out, one by one, from the hollow of the rock,
she laid them down at the feet of the anchorite. Then at length the holy
man perceived what the creature desired; and having called upon the name
of God, he touched with his hand the closed eyes of the whelps; and
immediately their blindness ceased, while light, so long denied them,
streamed upon the open eyes of the animals. Thus, those brethren, having
visited the anchorite whom they were desirous of seeing, returned with a
very precious reward for their labor, inasmuch as, having been permitted
to be eye-witnesses of such power, they had beheld the faith of the
saint, and the glory of Christ, to which they will in future bear
testimony. But I have still more marvels to tell: the lioness, after
five days, returned to the man who had done her so great a kindness, and
brought him, as a gift, the skin of an uncommon <span id="page_32">p.
32</span> <span id="ii.iv.i.xv-Page_32"></span>animal. Frequently clad
in this, as if it were a cloak, that holy man did not disdain to receive
that gift through the instrumentality of the best; while, all the time,
he rather regarded Another as being the giver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[31:103](2110052.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="ii.iv.i.xv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.xv-p2"></span> “Fides Christi adest”: lit. “the faith
of Christ is present.”

<span id="fn_103"></span>[31:104](2110052.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="ii.iv.i.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.xv-p4"></span> Also spelt “anchoret”: it means “one
who has retired from the world” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xv-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xv-p4.2"></span>ναχωρέω</span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.](2110053.md)
