[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110465)  [Next](2110467.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.viii.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xviii-p1"></span>Of the zeal with which we should
seek the desert, and of the things in which we make progress there.

<span id="iv.iii.viii.xviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.viii.xviii-p2.1"></span>Further</span>, it is those who are
perfect and purified from all faults who ought to seek the desert, and
when they have thoroughly exterminated all their faults amid the
assembly of the brethren, they should enter it not by way of cowardly
flight, but for the purpose of divine contemplation, and with the desire
of deeper insight into heavenly things, which can only be gained in
solitude by those who are perfect. For whatever faults we bring with us
uncured into the desert, we shall find to remain concealed in us and not
to be got rid of. For just as when the character has been improved,
solitude can lay open to it the purest contemplation, and reveal the
knowledge of spiritual mysteries to its clear gaze, so it generally not
only preserves but intensifies the faults of those who have undergone no
correction. For a man appears to himself to be patient and humble, just
as long as he comes across nobody in intercourse; but he will presently
revert to his former nature, whenever the chance of any sort of passion
occurs: I mean that those faults will at once appear on the surface
which were lying hid, and, like unbridled horses diligently fed up
during too long a time of idleness, dash forth from the barriers the
more eagerly and fiercely, to the destruction of their charioteer. For
when the opportunity for practising them among men is removed, our
faults will more and more increase in us, unless we have first been
purified from them. And the mere shadow of patience, which, when we
mixed with our brethren, we seemed fancifully to possess, at least out
of respect for them and publicity, we lose altogether through sloth and
carelessness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. An illustration to help in forming an opinion on
those who are only patient when they are not tried by any one.](2110467.md)
