[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110927)  [Next](2110929) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.viii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.viii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.v.viii.viii-p1"></span>How those who are perfect ought not
to make any promises absolutely, and whether decisions can be reversed
without sin.

<span id="iv.v.viii.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.viii.viii-p2.1"></span>Joseph</span>: It is good indeed and
right and altogether in accordance with our profession, for us
effectually to perform what we decided to do in the case of any promise.
Wherefore a monk ought not to make any promise hastily, lest he may be
forced to do what he incautiously promised, or if he is kept back by
consideration of a sounder view, appear as a breaker of his promise. But
because at the present moment our purpose is to treat not so much of a
state of health as of the cure of sickness we must with salutary counsel
consider not what you ought to have done in the first instance, but how
you can escape from the rocks of this perilous shipwreck. When then no
chains impede us and no conditions restrict us, in the case of a
comparison of good things, if a choice is proposed, that which is most
advantageous should be preferred: but when some detriment and loss
stands in the way, in a comparison of things to our hurt, that should be
sought which exposes us to the smallest loss. Further, as your assertion
shows, when your heedless promise has brought you to this state that in
either case some serious loss and inconvenience must result to you, the
will in choosing should incline to that side which involves a loss that
is more tolerable, or can be more easily made up for by the remedy of
making amends. If then you think that you will get more good for your
spirit by staying here than what accrued to you from your life in that
monastery, and that the terms of your promise cannot be fulfilled
without the loss of great good, it is better for you to undergo the loss
from a falsehood and an unfulfilled promise (as it is done once for all,
and need not any longer be repeated or be the cause of other sins) than
for you to incur that loss, through which you say that your state of
life would become colder, and which would affect you with a daily and
unceasing injury. For a careless promise is changed in such a way that
it may be pardoned or indeed praised, if it is turned into a better
path, nor need we take it as a failure in consistency, but as a
correction of rashness, whenever a promise that was faulty is corrected.
And all this may be proved by most certain witness from Scripture, that
for many the fulfilment of their promise has led to death, and on the
other hand that for many it has been good and profitable to have refused
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. How it is often better to break one's engagements
than to fulfil them.](2110929)
