[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110620)  [Next](2110622.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.iii"></span> <span id="page_320">p. 320</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iv.iii-Page_320"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iv.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.iii-p1"></span>The statement of Abbot Paphnutius on
the three kinds of vocations, and the three sorts of renunciations.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>Then</span> The Blessed Paphnutius: There
are, said he, three kinds of vocations. And we know that there are three
sorts of renunciations as well, which are necessary to a monk, whatever
his vocation may be. And we ought diligently to examine first the reason
for which we said that there were three kinds of vocations, that when we
are sure that we are summoned to God’s service in the first stage of our
vocation, we may take care that our life is in harmony with the exalted
height to which we are called, for it will be of no use to have made a
good beginning if we do not show forth an end corresponding to it. But
if we feel that only in the last resort have we been dragged away from a
worldly life, then, as it appears that we rest on a less satisfactory
beginning as regards religion, so must we proportionately make the more
earnest endeavours to rouse ourselves with spiritual fervour to make a
better end. It is well too on every ground for us to know secondly the
manner of the threefold renunciations because we shall never be able to
attain perfection, if we are ignorant of it or if we know it, but do not
attempt to carry it out in act.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. An explanation of the three callings.](2110622.md)
