[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110831)  [Next](2110833.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.ii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.v.ii.viii-p1"></span>How greatly those excel who depart
from sin through the feeling of love.

<span id="iv.v.ii.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>For</span> there is a great difference
between one who puts out the fire of sin within him by fear of hell or
hope of future reward, and one who from the feeling of divine love has a
horror of sin itself and of uncleanness, and keeps hold of the virtue of
purity simply from the love and longing for purity, and looks for no
reward from a promise for the future, but, delighted with the knowledge
of good things present, does everything not from regard to punishment
but from delight in virtue. For this condition can neither abuse an
opportunity to sin when all human witnesses are absent, nor be corrupted
by the secret allurements of thoughts, while, keeping in its very marrow
the love of virtue itself, it not only does not admit into the heart
anything that is opposed to it, but actually hates it with the utmost
horror. For it is one thing for a man in his delight at some present
good to hate the stains of sins and of the flesh, and another thing to
check unlawful desires by contemplating the future reward; and it is one
thing to fear present loss and another to dread future punishment.
Lastly it is a much greater thing to be unwilling to forsake good for
good’s own sake, than it is to withhold consent from evil for fear of
evil. For in the former case the good is voluntary, but in the latter it
is constrained and as it were violently forced out of a reluctant party
either by fear of punishment or by greed of reward. For one who abstains
from the allurements of sin owing to fear, will whenever the obstacle of
fear is removed, once more return to what he loves and thus will not
continually acquire any stability in good, nor will he ever rest free
from attacks because he will not secure the sure and lasting peace of
chastity. For where there is the disturbance of warfare there cannot
help being the danger of wounds. For one who is in the midst of the
conflict, even though he is a warrior and by fighting bravely inflicts
frequent and deadly wounds on his foes, must still sometimes be pierced
by the point of the enemy’s sword. But one who has defeated the attack
of sins and is now in the enjoyment of the security of peace, and has
passed on to the love of virtue itself, will keep this condition of good
continually, as he is entirely wrapped up in it, because he believes
that nothing can be worse than the loss of his inmost chastity. For he
deems nothing dearer or more precious than present purity, to whom a
dangerous departure from virtue or a poisonous stain of sin is a
grievous punishment. To such an one, I say, neither will regard for the
presence of another add anything to his goodness nor will solitude take
anything away from it: but as always and everywhere he bears about with
him his conscience as a judge not only of his actions but also of his
thoughts, he will especially try to please it, as he knows that it
cannot be cheated nor deceived, and that he cannot escape it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. That love not only makes sons out of servants, but
also bestows the image and likeness of God.](2110833.md)
