[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110060)  [Next](2110062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xxiv-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Indeed</span>, Postumianus,” replied I,
“while I was listening attentively, all this time, to you talking about
the excellences of the saints, in my secret thoughts I had my mind
turned to my friend Martin, observing on the best of grounds <span
id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="ii.iv.i.xxiv-Page_36"></span>that
all those things which different individuals had done separately, were
easily and entirely accomplished by that one man alone. For, although
you certainly related lofty deeds, I really heard nothing from your lips
(may I say it, without offence to these holy men), in which Martin was
inferior to any one of them. And while I hold that the excellence of no
one of these is ever to be compared with the merits of that man, still
this point ought to be attended to, that it is unfair he should be
compared, on the same terms, with the recluses of the desert, or even
with the anchorites. For they, at freedom from every hindrance, with
heaven only and the angels as witnesses, were clearly instructed to
perform admirable deeds; he, on the other hand, in the midst of crowds
and intercourse with human beings—among quarrelsome clerics, and among
furious bishops, while he was harassed with almost daily scandals on all
sides, nevertheless stood absolutely firm with unconquerable virtue
against all these things, and performed such wonders as not even those
accomplished of whom we have heard that they are, or at one time were,
in the wilderness. But even had they done things equal to his, what
judge would be so unjust as not, on good grounds, to decide that he was
the more powerful? For put the case that he was a soldier who fought on
unfavorable ground, and yet turned out a conqueror, and compare them, in
like manner, to soldiers, who however, contended on equal terms, or even
on favorable terms, with the enemy. What then? Although the victory of
all is one and the same, the glory of all certainly cannot be equal. And
even though you have narrated marvelous things, still you have not
stated that a dead man was recalled to life by any one. In this one
particular undoubtedly, it must be owned that no one is to be compared
with Martin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV.](2110062)
