[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110269)  [Next](2110271.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xxix"></span>

#### <span id="iii.xxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.

<span id="iii.xxix-p1"></span>In what Way, on collating the consentient
opinions of the Ancient Masters, the Novelties of Heretics may be
detected and condemned.

<span id="iii.xxix-p2"></span>\[71.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.xxix-p2.1"></span>And</span> here I perceive that, as a
necessary sequel to the foregoing, I ought to show by examples in what
way, by collating the consentient opinions of the ancient masters, the
profane novelties of heretics may be detected and condemned. Yet in the
investigation of this ancient consent of the holy Fathers we are to
bestow our pains not on every minor question of the Divine Law, but
only, at all events especially, where the Rule of Faith is concerned.
Nor is this way of dealing with heresy to be resorted to always, or in
every instance, but only in the case of those heresies which are new and
recent, and that on their first arising, before they have had time to
deprave the Rules of the Ancient Faith, and before they endeavour, while
the poison spreads and diffuses itself, to corrupt the writings of the
ancients. But heresies already widely diffused and of old standing are
by no means to be thus dealt with, seeing that through lapse of time
they have long had opportunity of corrupting the truth. And therefore,
as to the more ancient schisms or heresies, we ought either to confute
them, if need be, by the sole authority of the Scriptures, or at any
rate, to shun them as having been already of old convicted and condemned
by universal councils of the Catholic Priesthood.

<span id="iii.xxix-p3"></span>\[72.\] Therefore, as soon as the
corruption of each mischievous error begins to break forth, and to
defend itself by filching certain passages of Scripture, and expounding
them fraudulently and deceitfully, forthwith, the opinions of the
ancients in the interpretation of the Canon are to be collected, whereby
the novelty, and consequently the profaneness, whatever it may be, that
arises, may both without any doubt be exposed, and without any
tergiversation be condemned. But the opinions of those Fathers only are
to be used for comparison, who living and teaching, holily, wisely, and
with constancy, in the Catholic faith and communion, were counted worthy
either to die in the faith of Christ, or to suffer death happily for
Christ. Whom yet we are to believe on this condition, that that only is
to be accounted indubitable, certain, established, which either all, or
the more part, have supported and confirmed manifestly, frequently,
persistently, in one and the same sense, forming, as it were, a
consentient council of doctors, all receiving, holding, handing on the
same doctrine. But whatsoever a teacher holds, other than all, or
contrary to all, be he holy and learned, be he a bishop, be he a
Confessor, be he a martyr, let that be regarded as a private fancy of
his own, and be separated from the authority of common, public, general
persuasion, lest, after the sacrilegious custom of heretics and
schismatics, rejecting the ancient truth of the universal Creed, we
follow, at the utmost peril of our eternal salvation, the newly devised
error of one man.

<span id="iii.xxix-p4"></span>\[73.\] Lest any one perchance should
rashly think the holy and Catholic consent of these blessed fathers to
be despised, the Apostle says, in the First Epistle to the Corinthians,
“God hath placed some in the <span id="page_153">p. 153</span> <span
id="iii.xxix-Page_153"></span>Church, first Apostles,” <span
id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509.md) of whom himself was one; “secondly
Prophets,” such as Agabus, of whom we read in the Acts of the
Apostles; <span id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510.md) “then doctors,” who
are now called Homilists, Expositors, <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511.md) whom the same apostle sometimes calls
also “Prophets,” because by them the mysteries of the Prophets are
opened to the people. Whosoever, therefore, shall despise these, who had
their appointment of God in His Church in their several times and
places, when they are unanimous in Christ, in the interpretation of some
one point of Catholic doctrine, despises not man, but God, from whose
unity in the truth, lest any one should vary, the same Apostle earnestly
protests, “I beseech you, brethren, that ye all speak the same thing,
and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.” <span
id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512.md) But if any one dissent from their
unanimous decision, let him listen to the words of the same apostle,
“God is not the God of dissension but of peace;” <span
id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513.md) that is, not of him who departs from
the unity of consent, but of those who remain steadfast in the peace of
consent: “as,” he continues, “I teach in all Churches of the saints,”
that is, of Catholics, which churches are therefore churches of the
saints, because they continue steadfast in the communion of the faith.

<span id="iii.xxix-p10"></span>\[74.\] And lest any one, disregarding
every one else, should arrogantly claim to be listened to himself alone,
himself alone to be believed, the Apostle goes on to say, “Did the word
of God proceed from you, or did it come to you only?” And, lest this
should be thought lightly spoken, he continues, “If any man seem to be a
prophet or a spiritual person, let him acknowledge that the things which
I write unto you are the Lord’s commands.” As to which, unless a man be
a prophet or a spiritual person, that is, a master in spiritual matters,
let him be as observant as possible of impartiality and unity, so as
neither to prefer his own opinions to those of every one besides, nor to
recede from the belief of the whole body. Which injunction, whoso
ignores, shall be himself ignored; <span
id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514.md) that is, he who either does not learn
what he does not know, or treats with contempt what he knows, shall be
ignored, that is, shall be deemed unworthy to be ranked of God with
those who are united to each other by faith, and equalled with each
other by humility, than which I cannot imagine a more terrible evil.
This it is however which, according to the Apostle’s threatening, we see
to have befallen Julian the Pelagian, <span
id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515.md) who either neglected to associate
himself with the belief of his fellow Christians, or presumed to
dissociate himself from it.

<span id="iii.xxix-p13"></span>\[75.\] But it is now time to bring
forward the exemplification which we promised, where and how the
sentences of the holy Fathers have been collected together, so that in
accordance with them, by the decree and authority of a council, the rule
of the Church’s faith may be settled. Which that it may be done the more
conveniently, let this present Commonitory end here, so that the
remainder which is to follow may be begun from a fresh beginning.

<span id="iii.xxix-p14"></span>\[The Second Book of the Commonitory is
lost. Nothing of it remains but the conclusion: in other words, the
recapitulation which follows.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_509"></span>[153:510](2110270.htm#fr_509.md) <span
id="iii.xxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.xxix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[153:511](2110270.htm#fr_510.md) <span
id="iii.xxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p6"></span> [Acts xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.xxix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[153:512](2110270.htm#fr_511.md) <span
id="iii.xxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p7"></span> “Tractatores.” St. Augustine’s Expository
Lectures on St. John’s Gospel are entitled “Tractatus.”

<span id="fn_512"></span>[153:513](2110270.htm#fr_512.md) <span
id="iii.xxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p8"></span> [1 Cor. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xxix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[153:514](2110270.htm#fr_513.md) <span
id="iii.xxix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p9"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033.md)<span id="iii.xxix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[153:515](2110270.htm#fr_514.md) <span
id="iii.xxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p11"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033.md)<span id="iii.xxix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[153:516](2110270.htm#fr_515.md) <span
id="iii.xxix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p12"></span> Julian, bishop of Eclanum, a small town
in Apulia or Campania, was one of nineteen bishops, who, having espoused
the cause of Pelagius, and having refused to subscribe a circular letter
issued by Zosimus, now adopting the decisions of the African Council
(see above note p. 147) were deposed and banished. St. Augustine at his
death left a work against Julian unfinished, “*Opus imperfectum contra
Julianum*,” in which he had been engaged till the sickness of which he
died put an end to his labours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX. Recapitulation.](2110271.md)
