[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110624)  [Next](2110626) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p1"></span>How we can attain perfection in each
of these sorts of renunciations.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> it will not be of much
advantage to us that we have made our first renunciation with the utmost
devotion and faith, if we do not complete the second with the same zeal
and ardour. And so when we have succeeded in this, we shall be able to
arrive at the third as well, in which we go forth from the house of our
former parent, (who, as we know well, was our father from our very
birth, after the old man, when we were “by nature children of wrath, as
others also,” <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211) ) and fix our
whole mental gaze on things celestial. And of this father Scripture says
to Jerusalem which had despised God the true Father, “Thy father was an
Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite;” <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212) and in the gospel we read “Ye are
of your father the devil and the lusts of your father ye love to
do.” <span id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213) And when we have left
him, as we pass from things visible to things unseen we shall be able to
say with the Apostle: “But we know that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle is dissolved we have a habitation from God, a house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens,” <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214) and this also, which we quoted a
little while ago: “But our conversation is in heaven, whence also we
look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus, who will reform the body of our
low estate made like to the body of His glory,” <span
id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215) and this of the blessed David: “For
I am a sojourner upon the earth,” and “a stranger as all my fathers
were;” <span id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216) so that we may in
accordance with the Lord’s word be made like those of whom the Lord
speaks to His Father in the gospel as follows: “They are not of the
world, as I am not of the world,” <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217) and again to the Apostles
themselves: “If ye were of this world, the world would love its own: but
because ye are not of this world, therefore the world hateth you.” <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218) Of this third renunciation then we
shall succeed in reaching the perfection, whenever our soul is sullied
by no stain of carnal coarseness, but, all such having been carefully
eliminated, it has been freed from every earthly quality and desire, and
by constant meditation on things Divine, and spiritual contemplation has
so far passed on to things unseen, that in its earnest seeking after
things above and things spiritual it no longer feels that it is prisoned
in this fragile flesh, and bodily form, but is caught up into such an
ecstasy as not only to hear no words with the outward ear, or to busy
itself with gazing on the forms of things present, but not even to see
things close at hand, or large objects straight before the very eyes.
And of this no one can understand the truth and force, except one who
has made trial of what has been said, under the teaching of experience;
viz., one, the eyes of whose soul the Lord has turned away from all
things present, so that he no longer considers them as things that will
soon pass away, but as things that are already done with, and sees them
vanish into nothing, like misty smoke; and like Enoch, “walking with
God,” and “translated” from human life and fashions, not “be found” amid
the vanities of this life. And that this actually happened corporeally
in the case of Enoch the book of Genesis thus tells us. “And Enoch
walked with God, and was not found, for God translated him.” And the
Apostle also says: “By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
death,” the death namely of which the Lord says in the gospel: “He that
liveth and believeth in me shall not die eternally.” <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219) Wherefore, if we are anxious to
attain true perfection, we ought to look to it that as we have outwardly
with the body made light of parents, home, the riches and pleasures of
the world, we may <span id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-Page_323"></span>also inwardly with the heart forsake
all these things and never be drawn back by any desires to those things
which we have forsaken, as those who were led up by Moses, though they
did not literally go back, are yet said to have returned in heart to
Egypt; viz., by forsaking God who had led them forth with such mighty
signs, and by worshipping the idols of Egypt of which they had thought
scorn, as Scripture says: “And in their hearts they turned back into
Egypt, saying to Aaron: Make us gods to go before us,” <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220) for we should fall into like
condemnation with those who, while dwelling in the wilderness, after
they had tasted manna from heaven, lusted after the filthy food of sins,
and of mean baseness, and should seem together with them to murmur in
the same way: “It was well with us in Egypt, when we sat over the flesh
pots and ate the onions, and garlic, and cucumbers, and melons:” <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221) A form of speech, which, although
it referred primarily to that people, we yet see fulfilled today in our
own case and mode of life: for everyone who after renouncing this world
turns back to his old desires, and reverts to his former likings asserts
in heart and act the very same thing that they did, and says “It was
well with me in Egypt,” and I am afraid that the number of these will be
as large as that of the multitudes of backsliders of whom we read under
Moses, for though they were reckoned as six hundred and three thousand
armed men who came out of Egypt, of this number not more than two
entered the land of promise. Wherefore we should be careful to take
examples of goodness from those who are few and far between, because
according to that figure of which we have spoken in the gospel “Many are
called but few” are said to be “chosen.” <span
id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222) A renunciation then in body alone,
and a mere change of place from Egypt will not do us any good, if we do
not succeed in achieving that renunciation in heart, which is far higher
and more valuable. For of that mere bodily renunciation of which we have
spoken the apostle declares as follows: “Though I bestow all my goods to
feed the poor, and give my body to be burned, but have not charity, it
profiteth me nothing.” <span id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223) And
the blessed Apostle would never have said this had it not been that he
foresaw by the spirit that some who had given all their goods to feed
the poor would not be able to attain to evangelical perfection and the
lofty heights of charity, because while pride or impatience ruled over
their hearts they were not careful to purify themselves from their
former sins, and unrestrained habits, and on that account could never
attain to that love of God which never faileth, and these, as they fall
short in this second stage of renunciation, can still less reach that
third stage which is most certainly far higher. But consider too in your
minds with great care the fact that he did not simply say “If I bestow
my goods.” For it might perhaps be thought that he spoke of one who had
not fulfilled the command of the gospel, but had kept back something for
himself, as some half-hearted persons do. But he says “Though I bestow
all my goods to feed the poor,” i.e., even if my renunciation of those
earthly riches be perfect. And to this renunciation he adds something
still greater: “And though I give my body to be burned, but have not
charity, I am nothing:” As if he had said in other words, though I
bestow all my goods to feed the poor in accordance with that command in
the gospel, where we are told “If thou wilt be perfect, go sell all that
thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
heaven,” <span id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224) renouncing them so
as to keep back nothing at all for myself, and though to this
distribution (of my goods) I should by the burning of my flesh add
martyrdom so as to give up my body for Christ, and yet be impatient, or
passionate or envious or proud, or excited by wrongs done by others, or
seek what is mine, or indulge in evil thoughts, or not be ready and
patient in bearing all that can be inflicted on me, this renunciation
and the burning of the outer man will profit me nothing, while the inner
man is still involved in the former sins, because, while in the fervour
of the early days of my conversion I made light of the mere worldly
substance, which is said to be not good or evil in itself but
indifferent, I took no care to cast out in like manner the injurious
powers of a bad heart, or to attain to that love of the Lord which is
patient, which is “kind, which envieth not, is not puffed up, is not
soon angry, dealeth not perversely, seeketh not her own, thinketh no
evil,” which “beareth all things, endureth all things,” <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225) and which lastly never suffers him
who follows after it to fall by the deceitfulness of sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[322:1212](2110625.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p3"></span> [Eph. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[322:1213](2110625.htm#fr_1212) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p4"></span> [Ezek. xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[322:1214](2110625.htm#fr_1213) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p5"></span> S. [John viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[322:1215](2110625.htm#fr_1214) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p6"></span> [2 Cor. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[322:1216](2110625.htm#fr_1215) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p7"></span> [Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[322:1217](2110625.htm#fr_1216) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p8"></span> [Ps.
119:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#019), [Ps.
39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[322:1218](2110625.htm#fr_1217) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p9"></span> S. [John xvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[322:1219](2110625.htm#fr_1218) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p10"></span> S. [John xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[322:1220](2110625.htm#fr_1219) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p11"></span> [Gen.
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024), [Heb.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#005), [John
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[323:1221](2110625.htm#fr_1220) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p12"></span> [Acts
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#040)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[323:1222](2110625.htm#fr_1221) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p13"></span> [Num.
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#018), [Exod.
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003), [Num.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[323:1223](2110625.htm#fr_1222) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p14"></span> S. [Matt. xxii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[323:1224](2110625.htm#fr_1223) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p15"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[323:1225](2110625.htm#fr_1224) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p16"></span> S. [Matt. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[323:1226](2110625.htm#fr_1225) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p17"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
4-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.vii-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of our very own possessions in which the beauty of
the soul is seen or its foulness.](2110626)
