[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110185)  [Next](2110187.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.lii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.lii-p0.1"></span>Chapter LII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.lii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.lii-p1.1"></span>The</span> government then passed to his
son Josia. He is related to have been very pious, and to have attended
to divine things with the utmost care, profiting largely by the aid of
the priest Helchia. Having read a book written with the words of God,
and which had been found in the temple by the priest, in which it was
stated that the Hebrew nation would be destroyed on account of their
frequent acts of impiety and sacrilege, by his pious supplications to
God, and constant tears, he averted the impending overthrow. When he
learned through Olda the prophetess that this favor was granted him, he
then with still greater care set himself to practice the worship of God,
inasmuch as he was now under obligation to the divine goodness.
Accordingly, he burned all the vessels which had by the superstitions of
former kings been consecrated to idols. For to such a height had profane
observances prevailed, that they used to pay divine honors to the sun
and moon, and even erected shrines made of metal to these fancied
deities. Josia reduced these to powder, and also slew the priests of the
profane temples. He did not even spare the tombs of the impious; and it
was observed that thus was fulfilled what had of old been predicted by
the prophet. In the eighteenth year of his reign, the Passover was
celebrated. And about three years afterwards, having gone forth to
battle against Nechao, king of Egypt, who was making war upon the
Assyrians, before the armies prop<span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span
id="ii.vi.i.lii-Page_96"></span>erly engaged, he was wounded by an
arrow. And being carried back to the city, he died of that wound, after
he had reigned twenty and one years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIII.](2110187.md)
