[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110192)  [Next](2110194) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.iv-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>But</span> in Judæa, over which, as we have
related above, Godolia was set after the destruction of Jerusalem, the
Jews taking it very ill that a ruler not of the royal race had been
assigned them by the mere will of the conqueror, with a certain Ismael
as their leader and instigator of the execrable conspiracy, cut off
Godolia by means of treachery while he was at a banquet. Those, however,
who had no part in the plot, wishing to take steps for avenging the
deed, hastily take up arms against Ismael. But when he learned that
destruction threatened him, leaving the army which he had collected, and
with not more than eight companions he fled to the Ammonites. Fear,
therefore, fell upon the whole people, lest the king of Babylon should
avenge the guilt of a few by the destruction of all; for, in addition to
Godolia, they had slain many of the Chaldæans along with him. They,
therefore, form a plan of fleeing into Egypt, but they first go in a
body to Jeremia, requesting of him divine counsel. He then exhorted them
all in the words of God to remain in their native country, telling them
that if they did so, they would be protected by the power of God, and
that no danger would accrue from the Babylonians, but that, if they went
into Egypt, they would all perish there by sword, and famine, and
different kinds of death. The rabble, however, with the usual evil
tendency they show, being unaccustomed to yield to useful advice and the
divine power, did go into Egypt. The sacred Scriptures are silent as to
their future fate; and I have not been able to discover anything
regarding it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.](2110194)
