[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110355)  [Next](2110357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii-p1"></span>Of the humility and obedience of
Abbot Patermucius, <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) which he did
not hesitate to make perfect by throwing his little boy into the river
at the command of his senior.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii-p3.1"></span>So</span> far let it suffice for me to
have told a few things out of many concerning Abbot John: now I will
relate a memorable deed of Abbot Patermucius. For he, when anxious to
renounce the world, remained lying before the doors of the monastery for
a long time until by his dogged persistence he induced them—contrary to
all the rules of the Cœnobia—to receive him together with his little boy
who was about eight years old. And when they were at last admitted they
were at once not <span id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii-Page_228"></span>only committed to the care of
different superiors, but also put to live in separate cells that the
father might not be reminded by the constant sight of the little one
that out of all his possessions and carnal treasures, which he had cast
off and renounced, at least his son remained to him; and that as he was
already taught that he was no longer a rich man, so he might also forget
the fact that he was a father. And that it might be more thoroughly
tested whether he would make affection and love <span
id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) for his own flesh and blood of more
account than obedience and Christian mortification (which all who
renounce the world ought out of love to Christ to prefer), the child was
on purpose neglected and dressed in rags instead of proper clothes; and
so covered and disfigured with dirt that he would rather disgust than
delight the eyes of his father whenever he saw him. And further, he was
exposed to blows and slaps from different people, which the father often
saw inflicted without the slightest reason on his innocent child under
his very eyes, so that he never saw his cheeks without their being
stained with the dirty marks of tears. And though the child was treated
thus day after day before his eyes, yet still out of love for Christ and
the virtue of obedience the father’s heart stood firm and unmoved. For
he no longer regarded him as his own son, as he had offered him equally
with himself to Christ; nor was he concerned about his present injuries,
but rather rejoiced because he saw that they were endured, not without
profit; thinking little of his son’s tears, but anxious about his own
humility and perfection. And when the Superior of the Cœnobium saw his
steadfastness of mind and immovable inflexibility, in order thoroughly
to prove the constancy of his purpose, one day when he had seen the
child crying, he pretended that he was annoyed with him and told the
father to throw him into the river. Then he, as if this had been
commanded him by the Lord, at once snatched up the child as quickly as
possible, and carried him in his arms to the river’s bank to throw him
in. And straightway in the fervour of his faith and obedience this would
have been carried out in act, had not some of the brethren been
purposely set to watch the banks of the river very carefully, and when
the child was thrown in, had somehow snatched him from the bed of the
stream, and prevented the command, which was really fulfilled by the
obedience and devotion of the father, from being consummated in act and
result.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_786"></span>[227:787](2110356.htm#fr_786) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii-p2"></span> *Patermucius* (Petschenig) or
*Mucius* (Gazæus); probably a different person from the man of this name
of whom we read in Rufinus, History of the Monks, c. ix., as there is no
allusion there to the narrative which Cassian gives here, nor any hint
that that Patermucius had a son.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[228:788](2110356.htm#fr_787) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxvii-p4"></span>
*Affectionem.…charitatem*.—Petschenig. The text of Gazæus reads the
ablative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII. How it was revealed to the Abbot concerning
Patermucius that he had done the deed of Abraham; and how when the same
Abbot died, Patermucius succeeded to the charge of the
monastery.](2110357)
