[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110050)  [Next](2110052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xiv-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xiv-p1.1"></span>We</span> found another equally remarkable
man living in a small hut, capable only of containing a single person.
Concerning him we were told that a she-wolf was accustomed to stand near
him at dinner; and that the beast could by no means be easily deceived
so as to fail to be with him at the regular hour when he took
refreshment. It was also said that the wolf waited at the door until he
offered her the bread which remained over his own humble dinner; that
she was accustomed to lick his hand, and then, her duty being, as it
were, fulfilled, and her respects paid to him, she took her departure.
But it so happened that that holy man, while he escorted a brother who
had paid him a visit, on his way home, was a pretty long time away, and
only returned under night. <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) In
the meanwhile, the beast made its appearance at the usual dinner time.
Having entered the vacant cell and perceived that its benefactor was
absent, it began to search round the hut with some curiosity to
discover, if possible, the inhabitant. Now it so happened that a basket
of palm-twigs was hanging close at hand with five loaves of bread in it.
Taking one of these, the beast devoured it, and then, having committed
this evil deed, went its way. The recluse on his return found the basket
in a state of disorder, and the number of loaves less than it should
have been. <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="ii.iv.i.xiv-Page_31"></span>He is aware of the loss of his household
goods, and observes near the threshold some fragments of the loaf which
had been stolen. Considering all this, he had little doubt as to the
author of the theft. Accordingly, when on the following days the beast
did not, in its usual way, make its appearance (undoubtedly hesitating
from a consciousness of its audacious deed to come to him on whom it had
inflicted injury), the recluse was deeply grieved at being deprived of
the happiness he had enjoyed in its society. At last, being brought back
through his prayers, it appeared to him as usual at dinner time, after
the lapse of seven days. But to make clear to every one the shame it
felt, through regret for what had been done, not daring to draw very
near, and with its eyes, from profound self-abasement, cast upon the
earth, it seemed, as was plain to the intelligence of every one, to beg
in a sort of way, for pardon. The recluse, pitying its confusion, bade
it come close to him, and then, with a kindly hand, stroked its head;
while, by giving it two loaves instead of the usual one, he restored the
guilty creature to its former position; and, laying aside its misery on
thus having obtained forgiveness, it betook itself anew to its former
habits. Behold, I beg of you, even in this case, the power of Christ, to
whom all is wise that is irrational, and to whom all is mild that is by
nature savage. A wolf discharges duty; a wolf acknowledges the crime of
theft; a wolf is confounded with a sense of shame: when called for, it
presents itself; it offers its head to be stroked; and it has a
perception of the pardon granted to it, just as if it had a feeling of
shame on account of its misconduct,—this is thy power, O Christ—these, O
Christ, are thy marvelous works. For in truth, whatever things thy
servants do in thy name are thy doings; and in this only we find cause
for deepest grief that, while wild beasts acknowledge thy majesty,
intelligent beings fail to do thee reverence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[30:102](2110051.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="ii.iv.i.xiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.xiv-p2"></span> “sub nocte”: this may be used for the
usual classical form “sub noctem,” *towards evening*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.](2110052.md)
