[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110007)  [Next](2110009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii.v"></span> <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="ii.ii.v-Page_6"></span>

#### <span id="ii.ii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p1"></span>Martin retires from Military Service.

<span id="ii.ii.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ii.v-p2.1"></span>In</span> the meantime, as the barbarians were
rushing within the two divisions of Gaul, Julian Cæsar, <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) bringing an army together at the
city <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) of the Vaugiones, began to
distribute a donative to the soldiers.  As was the custom in such a
case, they were called forward, one by one, until it came to the turn of
Martin. Then, indeed, judging it a suitable opportunity for seeking his
discharge—for he did not think it would be proper for him, if he were
not to continue in the service, to receive a donative—he said to Cæsar,
“Hitherto I have served *you* as a soldier: allow me now to become a
soldier to God: let the man who is to serve thee receive thy donative: I
am the soldier of Christ: it is not lawful for me to fight.” Then truly
the tyrant stormed on hearing such words, declaring that, from fear of
the battle, which was to take place on the morrow, and not from any
religious feeling, Martin withdrew from the service. But Martin, full of
courage, yea all the more resolute from the danger that had been set
before him, exclaims, “If this conduct of mine is ascribed to cowardice,
and not to faith, I will take my stand unarmed before the line of battle
tomorrow, and in the name of the Lord Jesus, protected by the sign of
the cross, and not by shield or helmet, I will safely penetrate the
ranks of the enemy.” He is ordered, therefore, to be thrust back into
prison, determined on proving his words true by exposing himself unarmed
to the barbarians. But, on the following day, the enemy sent ambassadors
to treat about peace and surrendered both themselves and all their
possessions. In these circumstances who can doubt that this victory was
due to the saintly man? It was granted him that he should not be sent
unarmed to the fight. And although the good Lord could have preserved
his own soldier, even amid the swords and darts of the enemy, yet that
his blessed eyes might not be pained by witnessing the death of others,
he removed all necessity for fighting. For Christ did not require to
secure any other victory in behalf of his own soldier, than that, the
enemy being subdued without bloodshed, no one should suffer death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[6:12](2110008.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="ii.ii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.v-p3"></span> Commonly known as Julian the Apostate.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[6:13](2110008.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="ii.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii.v-p4"></span> This city was called Borbetomagus, and is
represented by the modern *Worms*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Martin converts a Robber to the Faith.](2110009.md)
