[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110688)  [Next](2110690) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xxvi-p1"></span>How when we have got the better of
the passion of gluttony we must take pains to gain all the other
virtues.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xxvi-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> while we are practising
fasting and abstinence, we must be careful when we have got the better
of the passion of gluttony never to allow our mind to remain empty of
the virtues of which we stand in need; but <span id="page_351">p.
351</span> <span id="iv.iv.vi.xxvi-Page_351"></span>we should the more
earnestly fill the inmost recesses of our heart with them for fear lest
the spirit of concupiscence should return and find us empty and void of
them, and should not be content to secure an entrance there for himself
alone, but should bring in with him into our heart this sevenfold
incentive of sins and make our last state worse than the first. For the
soul which boasts that it has renounced this world with the eight faults
that hold sway over it, will afterwards be fouler and more unclean and
visited with severer punishments, than it was when formerly it was at
home in the world, when it had taken upon itself neither the rules nor
the name of monk. For these seven spirits are said to be worse than the
first which went forth, for this reason; because the love of good
things, i.e., gluttony would not be in itself harmful, were it not that
it opened the door to other passions; viz, to fornication, covetousness,
anger, dejection, and pride, which are clearly hurtful in themselves to
the soul, and domineering over it. And therefore a man will never be
able to gain perfect purity, if he hopes to secure it by means of
abstinence alone, i.e., bodily fasting, unless he knows that he ought to
practise it for this reason that when the flesh is brought low by means
of fasting, he may with greater ease enter the lists against other
faults, as the flesh has not been habituated to gluttony and surfeiting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII. That our battles are not fought with our faults in
the same order as that in which they stand in the list.](2110690)
