[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110352)  [Next](2110354) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iv.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxiv-p1"></span>Of the dry stick which, at the
bidding of his senior, Abbot John kept on watering as if it would grow.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxiv-p2.1"></span>And</span> so this blessed John from his
youth up even to a full and ripe age of manhood was subject to his
senior as long as he continued living in this world, and carried out his
commands with such humility that his senior himself was utterly
astounded at his obedience; and as he wanted to make sure whether this
virtue came from genuine faith and profound simplicity of heart, or
whether it was put on and as it were constrained and only shown in the
presence of the bidder, he often laid upon him many superfluous and
almost unnecessary or even impossible commands. From which I will select
three to show to those who wish to know how perfect was his disposition
and subjection. For the old man took from his woodstack a stick which
had previously been cut and got ready to make the fire with, and which,
as no opportunity for cooking had come, was lying not merely dry but
even mouldy from the lapse of time. And when he had stuck it into the
ground before his very eyes, he ordered him to fetch water and to <span
id="page_227">p. 227</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxiv-Page_227"></span>water it twice a day that by this
daily watering it might strike roots and be restored to life as a tree,
as it was before, and spread out its branches and afford a pleasant
sight to the eyes as well as a shade for those who sat under it in the
heat of summer. And this order the lad received with his customary
veneration, never considering its impossibility, and day by day carried
it out so that he constantly carried water for nearly two miles and
never ceased to water the stick; and for a whole year no bodily
infirmity, no festival services, no necessary business (which might
fairly have excused him from carrying out the command), and lastly no
severity of winter could interfere and hinder him from obeying this
order. And when the old man had watched this zeal of his on the sly
without saying anything for several days and had seen that he kept this
command of his with simple willingness of heart, as if it had come from
heaven, without any change of countenance or consideration of its
reasonableness—approving the unfeigned obedience of his humility and at
the same time commiserating his tedious labour which in the zeal of his
devotion he had continued for a whole year—he came to the dry stick, and
“John,” said he, “has this tree put forth roots or no?” And when the
other said that he did not know, then the old man as if seeking the
truth of the matter and trying whether it was yet depending on its
roots, pulled up the stick before him with a slight disturbance of the
earth, and throwing it away told him that for the future he might stop
watering it. <span id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_784"></span>[227:785](2110353.htm#fr_784) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xxiv-p3"></span> A somewhat similar story is told by
Sulpitius Severus (Dialogi I. c. xiii.) of an Egyptian monk, only in
that case the story terminates in a more satisfactory manner, as in the
third year the stick took root and sprouted!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. Of the unique vase of oil thrown away by Abbot John
at his senior's command.](2110354)
