[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110344)  [Next](2110346.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iv.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xvi-p1"></span>On the rules for various rebukes.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iv.xvi-p2.1"></span>If</span> then any one by accident breaks
an earthenware jar (which they call “baucalis”), he can only expiate his
carelessness by public penance; and when all the brethren are assembled
for service he must lie on the ground and ask for absolution until the
service of the prayers is finished; and will obtain it when by the
Abbot’s command he is bidden to rise from the ground. The same
satisfaction must be given by one who when summoned to some work or to
the usual service comes rather late, or who when singing a Psalm
hesitates ever so little. Similarly if he answers unnecessarily or
roughly or impertinently, if he is careless in carrying out the services
enjoined to him, if he makes a slight complaint, if preferring reading
to work or obedience he is slow in performing his appointed duties, if
when service is over he does not make haste to go back at once to his
cell, if he stops for ever so short a time with some one else, if he
goes anywhere else even for a moment, if he takes any one else by the
hand, if he ventures to discuss anything however small with one who is
not the joint-occupant of his cell, <span
id="fr_770"></span>[771](#fn_770.md) if he prays with one who is suspended
from prayer, if he sees any of his relations or friends in the world and
talks with them without his senior, if he tries to receive a letter from
any one or to write back without his Abbot’s leave. <span
id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771.md) To such an extent does spiritual
censure proceed and in such matters and faults like these. But as for
other things which when indiscriminately committed among us are treated
by us too as blameworthy, viz.: open wrangling, manifest contempt,
arrogant contradictions, going out from the monastery freely and without
check, familiarity with women, wrath, quarrelling, jealousies, disputes,
claiming something as <span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xvi-Page_224"></span>one’s own property, the infection of
covetousness, the desire and acquisition of unnecessary things which are
not possessed by the rest of the brethren, taking food between meals and
by stealth, and things like these—they are dealt with not by that
spiritual censure of which we spoke, but by stripes; or are atoned for
by expulsion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_770"></span>[223:771](2110345.htm#fr_770.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xvi-p3"></span> From this passage we gather that in
Egypt two monks were often the joint occupants of a single cell. Cf. II.
xii. and Conference XX. i., ii.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[223:772](2110345.htm#fr_771.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.xvi-p4"></span> Many of these faults are noticed in
the Rule of Pachomius as deserving censure, e.g., unpunctuality at or
carelessness in service (c. viii. ix.), breaking anything (c. cxxv.),
murmuring (lxxxvii.), taking the hand of another (xliv.). So also in the
Rule of S. Benedict (cc. xliii.–xlvi.) similar directions are given,
while in c. xliv. the nature of the penance is more fully described. He
who in punishment of a grievous fault has been excluded from the
Refectory and the Church, shall lie prostrate at the door of the latter
at the end of each office, and shall there remain in silence with his
forehead touching the ground, until the brethren retiring from church
have all walked over him. This penance he shall continue to perform till
it be announced to him that he has made due satisfaction. When commended
by the Abbot to appear before him, he shall go and cast himself at his
feet and then at the feet of all the brethren, begging of them to pray
for him. He shall then be admitted to the choir, if the Abbot so order,
and shall take there whatever place he may assign him: but let him not
presume to intone a Psalm, read a lesson or perform any similar duty,
without the special permission of the Abbot. He shall, moreover,
prostrate himself in his place in choir at the end of every office,
until the Abbot tells him to discontinue this penance. Those who for
light faults are excluded merely from the common table, shall make
satisfaction in the church according as the Abbot shall direct, and
shall continue to do so until he gives them his blessing and tells them
that they have made sufficient atonement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Of those who introduced the plan that the holy
Lessons should be read in the Cœnobia while the brethren are eating, and
of the strict silence which is kept among the Egyptians.](2110346.md)
