[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110477)  [Next](2110479) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ix.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.ix.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.iii.ix.vii-p1"></span>That we ought not to give up
intercourse with our brethren in order to seek after perfection, but
should rather constantly cultivate the virtue of patience.

<span id="iv.iii.ix.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.ix.vii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so God, the creator of all
things, having regard above everything to the amendment of His own work,
and because the roots and causes of our falls are found not in others,
but in ourselves, commands that we should not give up intercourse with
our brethren, nor avoid those who we think have been hurt by us, or by
whom we have been offended, but bids us pacify them, knowing that
perfection of heart is not secured by separating from men so much as by
the virtue of patience. Which when it is securely held, as it can keep
us at peace even with those who hate peace, so, if it has not been
acquired, it makes us perpetually differ from those who are perfect and
better than we are: for opportunities for disturbance, on account of
which we are eager to get away from those with whom we are connected,
will not be wanting so long as we are living among men; and therefore we
shall not escape altogether, but only change the causes of dejection on
account of which we separated from our former friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. That if we have improved our character it is
possible for us to get on with everybody.](2110479)
