[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110087)  [Next](2110089.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>But</span> to return to Avitianus: while
at every other place, and in all other cities, he displayed marks of
horrible cruelty, at Tours alone he did no harm. Yes, that beast, which
was nourished by human blood, and by the slaughter of unfortunate
creatures, showed himself meek and peaceable in the presence of the
blessed man. I remember that Martin one day came to him, and having
entered his private apartment, he saw a demon of marvelous size sitting
behind his back. Blowing upon him from a distance (if I may, as a matter
of necessity, make use of a word which is hardly Latin <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) , Avitianus thought that he was
blowing at *him*, and exclaimed, ‘Why, thou holy man, dost thou treat me
thus?’ But then Martin said, ‘It is not at you, but at him who, in all
his terribleness, leans over your neck.’ The devil gave way, and left
his familiar seat; and it is well known that, ever after that day,
Avitianus was milder, whether because he now understood that he had
always been doing the will of the devil sitting by him, or because the
unclean spirit, driven from his seat by Martin, was deprived of the
power of attacking him; while the servant was ashamed of his master, and
the master did not force on his servant.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p3"></span>“In a village of the Ambatienses,
that is in an old stronghold, which is now largely inhabited by
brethren, you know there is a great idol-temple built up with labor. The
building had been constructed of the most polished stones and furnished
with turrets; and, rising on high in the form of a cone, it preserved
the superstition of the place by the majesty of the work. The blessed
man had often enjoined its destruction on Marcellus, who was there
settled as presbyter. Returning after the lapse of some time, he
reproved the presbyter, because the edifice of the idol-temple was still
standing. He pleaded in excuse that such an immense structure could with
difficulty be thrown down by a band of soldiers, or by the strength of a
large body of the public, and far less should Martin think it easy for
that to be effected by means of weak clerics or helpless monks. Then
Martin, having recourse to his well-known auxiliaries, spent the whole
night in watching and prayer—with the result that, in the morning, a
storm arose, and cast down even to its foundations the idol-temple. Now
let this narrative rest on the testimony of Marcellus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[49:134](2110088.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p2"></span> “exsufflans.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.](2110089.md)
