[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110080)  [Next](2110082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>It</span> is daylight, our Gallic friend,
and you must get up. For, as you see, both Postumianus is urgent, and
this presbyter, who was yesterday admitted to hear what was going on,
expects that what you put off narrating with regard to our beloved
Martin till to-day, you should now, in fulfillment of your promise,
proceed to tell. He is not, indeed, ignorant of all the things which are
to be related, but knowledge is sweet and pleasant even to one who goes
over again things already known to him; since, indeed, it has been so
arranged by nature that one rejoices with a better conscience in his
knowledge of things which he is sure, through the testimony borne to
them by many, are not in any degree uncertain. For this man, too, having
been a follower of Martin from his early youth, has indeed been
acquainted with all his doings; but he gladly hears over again things
already known. And I will confess to thee, O Gaul, that the virtues of
Martin have often been heard of by me, since, in fact, I have committed
to writing many things regarding him; but through the admiration I feel
for his deeds, those things are always new to me which, although I have
already heard them, are, over and over again, repeated concerning him.
Wherefore, we congratulate you that Refrigerius has been added to us as
a hearer, all the <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) more earnestly
that Postumianus is manifesting such eagerness, because he hastens, as
it were, to convey a knowledge of these things to the East, and is now
to hear the truth from you confirmed, so to speak, by witnesses.”

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p3"></span>As I was saying these words, and as the
Gaul was now ready to resume his narrative, there rushes in upon us a
crowd of monks, Evagrius the presbyter, Aper, Sabbatius, Agricola; and,
a little after, there enters the presbyter Ætherius, with Calupio the
deacon, and Amator the subdeacon; lastly, Aurelius the presbyter, a very
dear friend of mine, who came from a longer distance, rushes up out of
breath.  “Why,” I enquire, “do you so suddenly and unexpectedly run
together to us from so many different quarters, and at so early an hour
in the morning?” “We,” they reply, “heard yesterday that your friend the
Gaul spent the whole day in narrating the virtues of Martin, and, as
night overtook him, put off the rest until to-day: wherefore, we have
made haste to furnish him with a crowded audience, as he speaks about
such interesting matters.” In the meantime, we are informed that a
multitude of lay people are standing at the door, not venturing to
enter, but begging, nevertheless, that they might be admitted. Then Aper
declares, “It is by no means proper that these people should be mixed up
with us, for they have come to hear, rather from curiosity than piety.”
I was grieved for the sake of those who ought not, as he thought, to be
admitted, but all that I could obtain, and with difficulty, was that
they should admit Eucherius from among the lieutenants, <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) and Celsus, a man of consular rank,
while the rest were kept back. We then place the Gaul in the middle
seat; and he, after long keeping silence, in harmony with his well-known
modesty, at length began as follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[46:127](2110081.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p2"></span> The original here is very obscure.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[46:128](2110081.htm#fr_127) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p4"></span> “ex vicariis.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](2110082)
