[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110563)  [Next](2110565.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.xii.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxxiii-p1"></span>Remedies against the evil of
pride.

<span id="iv.iii.xii.xxxiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.xii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>And</span> when men remain in this
condition, there is no doubt that this quiet and secure state of
humility will follow, so that considering ourselves inferior to every
one else we shall bear everything offered to us, even if it is hurtful,
and saddening, and damaging—with the utmost patience, as if it came from
those who are our superiors. And these things we shall not only bear
with the greatest ease, but we shall consider them trifling and mere
nothings, if we constantly bear in mind the passion of our Lord and of
all His Saints: considering that the injuries by which we are tried are
so much less than theirs, as we are so far behind their merits and their
lives: remembering also that we shall shortly depart out of this world,
and soon by a speedy end to our life here become sharers of their lot.
For considerations such as these are a sure end not only to pride but to
all kinds of sins. Then, next after this we must keep a firm grasp of
this same humility towards God: which we must so secure as not only to
acknowledge that we cannot possibly perform anything connected with the
attainment of perfect virtue without His assistance and grace, but also
truly to believe that this very fact that we can understand this, is His
own gift.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conferences of John Cassian. Part I. Containing Conferences
I-X.](2110565.md)
