[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110659)  [Next](2110661) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p1"></span>The answer concerning the threefold
condition of souls.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-p2.1"></span>Daniel</span>: There are, according to the
statements of Scripture, three kinds of souls; the first is the carnal,
the second the natural, and <span id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-Page_337"></span>the third the spiritual: which we find
are thus described by the Apostle. For of the carnal he says: “I gave
you milk to drink, not meat: for you were not able as yet. But neither
indeed are you now able; for you are yet carnal.” And again: “For
whereas there is among you envying and contention, are you not
carnal?” <span id="fr_1304"></span>[1305](#fn_1304) Concerning the
natural he also speaks as follows: “But the natural man perceiveth not
the things that are of the spirit of God; for it is foolishness to him.”
But concerning the spiritual: “But the spiritual man judgeth all things:
and he himself is judged by no man.” <span
id="fr_1305"></span>[1306](#fn_1305) And again “You who are spiritual
instruct such ones in the spirit of meekness.” <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[1307](#fn_1306) And so, though at our renunciation
we ceased to be carnal, i.e., we began to separate ourselves from
intercourse with those in the world, and to have nothing to do with open
pollution of the flesh, we must still be careful to strive with all our
might to attain forthwith a spiritual condition, lest haply we flatter
ourselves because we seem as far as the outer man is concerned to have
renounced this world and got rid of the defilement of carnal
fornication, as if by this we had reached the heights of perfection; and
thence become careless and indifferent about purifying ourselves from
other affections, and so being kept back between these two, become
unable to reach the stage of spiritual advancement; either because we
think that it is amply sufficient for our perfection if we seem to
separate ourselves, as regards the outward man, from intercourse with
this world and from its pleasure, or because we are free from corruption
and carnal intercourse, and thus we find ourselves in that lukewarm
condition which is considered the worst of all, and discover that we are
spued out of the mouth of the Lord, in accordance with these words of
His: “I would that thou wert hot or cold. But now thou art lukewarm and
I will begin to spue thee out of My mouth.” <span
id="fr_1307"></span>[1308](#fn_1307) And not without good reason does
the Lord declare that those whom he has previously received in the
bowels of His love, and who have become shamefully lukewarm, shall be
spued out and rejected from His bosom: in as much as, though they might
have yielded Him some health-giving subsistence, they preferred to be
torn away from His heart: thus becoming far worse than those who had
never found their way into the Lord’s mouth as food, just as we turn
away with loathing from that which nausea compels us to bring up. For
whatever is cold is warmed when received into the mouth and is received
with satisfaction and good results. But whatever has been once rejected
owing to its miserable luke-warmness, we cannot—I will not say touch
with the lips—but even look on from a distance without the greatest
disgust. Rightly then is he said to be worse, because the carnal man,
i.e., the worldly man and the heathen, is more readily brought to saving
conversion and to the heights of perfection than one who has been
professed as a monk, but has not, as his rule directs, laid hold on the
way of perfection, and so has once for all drawn back from that fire of
spiritual fervour. For the former is at last broken down by the sins of
the flesh, and acknowledges his uncleanness, and in his compunction
hastens from carnal pollution to the fountain of true cleansing, and the
heights of perfection, and in his horror at that cold state of
infidelity in which he finds himself, he is kindled with the fire of the
spirit and flies the more readily to perfection. For one who has, as we
said, once started with a lukewarm beginning, and has begun to abuse the
name of monk, and who has not laid hold on the way of this profession
with the humility and fervour that he ought, when once he is infected by
this miserable plague, and is as it were unstrung by it, can no longer
of himself discern what is perfect nor learn from the admonitions of
another. For he says in his heart that which the Lord tells us: “Because
I am rich and wealthy and want nothing;” and so this which follows is at
once applied to him: “But thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked:” <span id="fr_1308"></span>[1309](#fn_1308) and he
is so far in a worse condition than a worldly man, because he has no
idea that he is wretched or blind or naked or requires cleansing, or
needs to be directed and taught by any one; and on this account he
receives no sound advice as he does not realise that he is weighted with
the name of monk, and is lowered in the judgment of all, whereas, though
everybody believes him to be a saint and regards him as a servant of
God, he must hereafter be subjected to a stricter judgment and
punishment. Lastly, why should we any longer linger over those things
which we have sufficiently discovered and proved by experience? We have
often seen those who were cold and carnal, i.e., worldly men and
heathen, attain spiritual warmth: but lukewarm and “natural” men never.
And these too we read in the prophet are hated of the Lord, so that a
charge is given to spiritual and learned men to desist from warning and
teaching them, and not to sow the seed of the <span id="page_338">p.
338</span> <span id="iv.iv.v.xix-Page_338"></span>life-giving word in
ground that is barren and unfruitful and choked by noxious thorns; but
that they should scorn this, and rather cultivate fallow ground, i.e.,
that they should transfer all their care and teaching, and their zeal in
the life-giving word to pagans and worldly men: as we thus read: “Thus
saith the Lord to the men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: break
up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.” <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[1310](#fn_1309)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[337:1305](2110660.htm#fr_1304) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[337:1306](2110660.htm#fr_1305) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[337:1307](2110660.htm#fr_1306) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p5"></span> [Gal. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[337:1308](2110660.htm#fr_1307) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p6"></span> [Rev.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[337:1309](2110660.htm#fr_1308) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p7"></span> [Rev. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[338:1310](2110660.htm#fr_1309) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p8"></span> [Jerem. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.v.xix-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. Of those who renounce the world but ill.](2110661)
