[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110238)  [Next](2110240) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.l"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.l-p0.1"></span>Chapter L.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.l-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.l-p1.1"></span>Thus</span>, then, all whom the process
embraced were brought before the king. The bishops Ydacius and Ithacius
followed as accusers; and I would by no means blame their zeal in
overthrowing heretics, if they had not contended for victory with
greater keenness than was fitting. And my feeling indeed is, that the
accusers were as distasteful to me as the accused. I certainly hold that
Ithacius had no worth or holiness about him. For he was a bold,
loquacious, impudent, and extravagant man; excessively devoted to the
pleasures of sensuality. He proceeded even to such a pitch of folly as
to charge all those men, however holy, who either took delight in
reading, or made it their object to vie with each other in the practice
of fasting, with being friends or disciples of Priscillian. The
miserable wretch even ventured publicly to bring forward a disgraceful
charge of heresy against Martin, who was at that time a bishop, and a
man clearly worthy of being compared to the Apostles. For Martin, being
then settled at Treves, did not cease to importune Ithacius, that he
should give up his accusations, or to implore Maximus that he should not
shed the blood of the unhappy persons in question. He maintained that it
was quite sufficient punishment that, having been declared heretics by a
sentence of the bishops, they should have been expelled from the
churches; and that it was, besides, a foul and unheard-of indignity,
that a secular ruler should be judge in an ecclesiastical cause. And, in
fact, as long as Martin survived, the trial was put off; while, when he
was about to leave this world, he, by his remarkable influence, obtained
a promise from Maximus, that no cruel measure would be resolved on with
respect to the guilty persons. But subsequently, the emperor being led
astray by Magnus and Rufus, and turned from the milder course which
Martin had counseled, entrusted the case to the prefect Evodius, a man
of stern and severe character. He tried Priscillian in two assemblies,
and convicted him of evil conduct. In fact, Priscillian did not deny
that he had given himself up to lewd doctrines; had been accustomed to
hold, by night, gatherings of vile women, and to pray in a state of
nudity. Accordingly, Evodius pronounced him guilty, and sent him back to
prison, until he had time to consult the emperor. The matter, then, in
all its details, was reported to the palace, and the emperor decreed
that Priscillian and his friends should be put to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LI.](2110240)
