[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110078)  [Next](2110080.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>But</span> when we questioned him
concerning the end of the world, he said to us that Nero and Antichrist
have first to come; that Nero will rule in the Western portion of the
world, after having subdued ten kings; and that a persecution will be
carried on by him, with the view of compelling men to worship the idols
of the Gentiles. He also said that Antichrist, on the other hand, would
first seize upon the empire of the East, having his seat and the capital
of his kingdom at Jerusalem; while both the city and the temple would be
restored by him. He added that his persecution would have for its object
to compel men to deny Christ as God, while he maintained rather that he
himself was Christ, and ordered all men to be circumcised, according to
the law. He further said that Nero was to be destroyed by Antichrist,
and that the whole world, and all nations, were to be reduced under the
power of Antichrist, until that impious one should be overthrown by the
coming of Christ. He told us, too, that there was no doubt but that
Antichrist, having been conceived by an evil spirit, was already born,
and had, by this time, reached the years of boyhood, while he would
assume power as soon as he reached the proper age. Now, this is the
eighth year since we heard these words from his lips: you may
conjecture, then, how nearly about to happen are those things which are
feared in the future.”

<span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-p2"></span>As our friend the Gaul was
emphatically speaking thus, and had not yet finished what he intended to
relate, a boy of the family entered with the announcement that the
presbyter Refrigerius was standing at the door. We began to doubt
whether it would be better to hear the Gaul further, or to go and
welcome that man whom we so greatly loved, and who had come <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span id="ii.iv.ii.xiv-Page_46"></span>to pay
his respects to us, when our friend the Gaul remarked: “Even although
this most holy priest had not arrived, this talk of ours would have had
to be cut short, for the approach of night was itself urging us to
finish the discourse which has been so far continued. But inasmuch as
all things bearing upon the excellences of Martin have by no means yet
been mentioned, let what you have heard suffice for to-day: to-morrow we
shall proceed to what remains.” This promise of our Gallic friend being
equally acceptable to us all, we rose up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dialogue III. The Virtues of Martin Continued.](2110080.md)
