[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110592)  [Next](2110594.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p1"></span>What discretion alone can give a monk;
and a discourse of the blessed Antony on this subject.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so I remember that while I was
still a boy, in the region of Thebaid, where the blessed Antony
lived, <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161.md) the elders came to him
to inquire about perfection: and though the conference lasted from
evening till morning, the greatest part of the night was taken up with
this question. For it was discussed at great length what virtue or
observance could preserve a monk always unharmed by the snares and
deceits of the devil, and carry him forward on a sure and right path,
and with firm step to the heights of perfection. And when each one gave
his opinion according to the bent of his own mind, and some made it
consist in zeal in fasting and vigils, because a soul that has been
brought low by these, and so obtained purity of heart and body will be
the more easily united to God, others in despising all things, as, if
the mind were utterly deprived of them, it would come the more freely to
God, as if henceforth there were no snares to entangle it: others
thought that withdrawal from the world was the thing needful, i.e.,
solitude and the secrecy of the hermit’s life; living in which a man may
more readily commune with God, and cling more especially to Him; others
laid down that the duties of charity, i.e., of kindness should be
practised, because the Lord in the gospel promised more especially to
give the kingdom to these; when He said “Come ye blessed of My Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
For I was an hungred and ye gave Me to eat, I was thirsty and ye gave Me
to drink, etc.:” <span id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162.md) and when in
this fashion they declared that by means of different virtues a more
certain approach to God could be secured, and the greater part of the
night had been spent in this discussion, then at last the blessed Antony
spoke and said: All these things which you have mentioned are indeed
needful, and helpful to those who are thirsting for God, and desirous to
approach Him. But countless accidents and the experience of many people
will not allow us to make the most important of gifts consist in them.
For often when men are most strict in fasting or in vigils, and nobly
withdraw into solitude, and aim at depriving themselves of all their
goods so absolutely that they do not suffer even a day’s allowance of
food or a single penny to remain to them, and when they fulfil all the
duties of kindness with the utmost devotion, yet still we have seen them
suddenly deceived, so that they could not bring the work they had
entered upon to a suitable close, but brought their exalted fervour and
praiseworthy manner of life to a terrible end. Wherefore we shall be
able clearly to recognize what it is which mainly leads to God, if we
trace out with greater care the reason of their downfall and deception.
For when the works of the above mentioned virtues were abounding in
them, discretion alone was wanting, and allowed them not to continue
even to the end. Nor can any other reason for their falling off be
discovered except that <span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-Page_309"></span>as they were not sufficiently
instructed by their elders they could not obtain judgment and
discretion, which passing by excess on either side, teaches a monk
always to walk along the royal road, and does not suffer him to be
puffed up on the right hand of virtue, i.e., from excess of zeal to
transgress the bounds of due moderation in foolish presumption, nor
allows him to be enamoured of slackness and turn aside to the vices on
the left hand, i.e., under pretext of controlling the body, to grow
slack with the opposite spirit of luke-warmness. For this is discretion,
which is termed in the gospel the “eye,” “and light of the body,”
according to the Saviour’s saying: “The light of thy body is thine eye:
but if thine eye be single, thy whole body will be full of light, but if
thine eye be evil, thy whole body will be full of darkness:” <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163.md) because as it discerns all the
thoughts and actions of men, it sees and overlooks all things which
should be done. But if in any man this is “evil,” i.e., not fortified by
sound judgment and knowledge, or deceived by some error and presumption,
it will make our whole body “full of darkness,” i.e., it will darken all
our mental vision and our actions, as they will be involved in the
darkness of vices and the gloom of disturbances. For, says He, “if the
light which is in thee be darkness, how great will that darkness
be!” <span id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164.md) For no one can doubt
that when the judgment of our heart goes wrong, and is overwhelmed by
the night of ignorance, our thoughts and deeds, which are the result of
deliberation and discretion, must be involved in the darkness of still
greater sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[308:1162](2110593.htm#fr_1161.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p3"></span> Cf. the note on the Institutes, V.
iv.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[308:1163](2110593.htm#fr_1162.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p4"></span> S. [Matt.
25:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#036.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[309:1164](2110593.htm#fr_1163.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p5"></span> S. [Matt.
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[309:1165](2110593.htm#fr_1164.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p6"></span> S. [Matt.
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of the error of Saul and of Ahab, by which they were
deceived through lack of discretion.](2110594.md)
