[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110949)  [Next](2110951) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxx"></span>

#### <span id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXX.

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p1"></span>That no determination should be made
on those things which concern the needs of the common life.

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p2.1"></span>And</span> therefore a monk ought not
hastily to make any promise on those things which merely concern bodily
exercise, for fear lest he may stir up the enemy still more to attack
what he is keeping as it were under the observance of the law, and so he
may be more readily compelled to break it. Since every one who lives
under the grace of liberty, and sets himself a law, thereby binds
himself in a dangerous slavery, so that if by chance necessity
constrains him to do what he might have ventured on lawfully, and indeed
laudably and with thanksgiving, he is forced to act as a transgressor,
and to fall into sin: “for where there is no law there is no
transgression.” <span id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067)

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p4"></span>By this instruction and the teaching
of the blessed Joseph we were confirmed as by a Divine oracle and made
up our minds to stop in Egypt. But though henceforward we were but a
little anxious about our promise, yet when seven years were over we were
very glad to fulfil it. For we hastened to our monastery, at a time when
we were confident of obtaining permission to return to the desert, and
first paid our respects properly to our Elders; next we revived the
former love in their minds as out of the ardour of their love they had
not been at all softened by our very frequent letters to satisfy them,
and in the last place, we entirely removed the sting of our broken
promise and returned to the recesses of the desert of Scete, as they
themselves forwarded us with joy.

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p5"></span>This learning and doctrine of the
illustrious fathers, our ignorance, O holy brother, has to the best of
its ability made plain to you. And if perhaps our clumsy style has
confused it instead of setting it in order, I trust that the blame which
our clumsiness deserves will not interfere with the praise due to these
grand <span id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxx-Page_474"></span>men. Since it seemed to us a safer
course in the sight of our Judge to state even in unadorned style this
splendid doctrine rather than to hold our tongues about it, since if he
considers the grandeur of the thoughts, the fact that the awkwardness of
our style annoys him, need not be prejudicial to the profit of the
reader, and for our part we are more anxious about its usefulness than
its being praised. This at least I charge all those into whose hand this
little book may fall; viz., that they must know that whatever in it
pleases them belongs to the fathers, and whatever they dislike is all
our own. <span id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[473:2068](2110950.htm#fr_2067) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p3"></span> [Rom. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[474:2069](2110950.htm#fr_2068) <span
id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii.xxx-p6"></span> In this last chapter Cassian
certainly makes his own the sentiments of Abbot Joseph on the
permissibility of lying; and is therefore not unreasonably attacked for
the teaching of this Conference by Prosper. “Contra Collatorem,” c. ix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conferences of John Cassian. Part III. Containing Conferences
XVIII.-XXIV.](2110951)
