[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110644)  [Next](2110646) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.iv.v.iv-p1"></span>How there is a twofold reason for the
permission and allowance of God.

<span id="iv.iv.v.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.iv-p2.1"></span>But</span> for God’s permission and
allowance there is a twofold reason. First, that being for a short time
forsaken by the Lord, and observing with all humility the weakness of
our own heart, we may not be puffed up on account of the previous purity
of heart. granted to us by His visitation; and that by proving that when
we are forsaken by Him we cannot possibly recover our former state of
purity and delight by any groanings and efforts of our own, we may also
learn that our previous gladness of heart resulted not from our own
earnestness but from His gift, and that for the present time it must be
sought once more from His grace and enlightenment. But a second reason
for this allowance, is to prove our perseverance, and steadfastness of
mind, and real desires, and to show in us, with what purpose of heart,
or earnestness in prayer we seek for the return of the Holy Spirit, when
He leaves us, and also in order that when we discover with what efforts
we must seek for that spiritual gladness—when once it is lost—and the
joy of purity, we may learn to preserve it more carefully, when once it
is secured, and to hold it with firmer grasp. For men are generally more
careless about keeping whatever they think can be easily replaced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. How our efforts and exertions are of no use without
God's help.](2110646)
