[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110146)  [Next](2110148.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.i.xiii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.i.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="ii.vi.i.xiii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.i.xiii-p1.1"></span>It</span> is almost incredible to relate
how the Hebrews who had come down into Egypt so soon increased in
numbers, and filled Egypt with their numerous descendants. But on the
death of the king, who kindly cherished them on account of the services
of Joseph, they were kept down by the government of the succeeding
kings. For both the heavy labor of building cities was laid upon them,
and because their abounding numbers were now feared, lest some day they
should secure their independence by arms, they were compelled by a royal
edict to drown their newly-born male children. And no permission was
granted to evade this cruel order. Well, at that time, the daughter of
Pharaoh found an infant in the river, and caused it to be brought up as
her own son, giving the boy the name of Moses. This Moses, when he had
come to manhood, saw a Hebrew being assaulted by an Egyptian; and,
filled with sorrow at the sight, he delivered his brother from injury,
and killed the Egyptian with a stone. Soon after, fearing punishment on
account of what he had done, he fled into the land of Midian, and,
taking up his abode with Jothor the priest of that district, he received
his daughter Sepphora in marriage, who bore him two sons, Gersam and
Eliezer. At this epoch lived Job, who had acquired both the knowledge of
God and all righteousness simply from the law <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272.md) of nature. He was exceedingly rich,
and on that account all the more illustrious, because he was neither
corrupted by that wealth while it remained entire, nor perverted by it
when it was lost. For, when, through the agency of the devil, he was
stripped of his goods, deprived of his children, and finally covered in
his own person with terrible boils, he could not be broken down, so as,
from impatience of his sufferings, in any way, to commit sin. At length
he obtained the reward of the divine approval, and being restored to
health, he got back doubled all that he had lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_272"></span>[76:273](2110147.htm#fr_272.md) <span
id="ii.vi.i.xiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.i.xiii-p2"></span> This somewhat remarkable statement is
supported by the text of Halm, who reads, “lege naturæ.” But other
editions have “legem naturæ,” and the meaning will then be “who had
learned the law of nature, and the knowledge of God,” &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV.](2110148.md)
