[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110054)  [Next](2110056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="ii.iv.i.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.

<span id="ii.iv.i.xviii-p1"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i.xviii-p1.1"></span>I will</span> relate two wonderful
examples of almost incredible obedience, and two only, although many
present themselves to my recollection; but if, in any case, a few
instances do not suffice to rouse readers to an imitation of the like
virtues, many would be of no advantage. Well then, when a certain man
having laid aside <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="ii.iv.i.xviii-Page_33"></span>all worldly business, and having
entered a monastery of very <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104)
strict discipline, begged that he might be accepted as a member, the
Abbot began to place many considerations before him,—that the toils of
that order were severe; that his own requirements were heavy, and such
as no one’s endurance could easily comply with; that he should rather
enquire after another monastery where life was carried on under easier
conditions; and that he should not try to attempt that which he was
unable to accomplish. But he was in no degree moved by these terrors; on
the contrary, he all the more promised obedience, saying that if the
Abbot should order him to walk into the fire, he would not refuse to
enter it. The Master then, having accepted that profession of his, did
not delay putting it to the test. It so happened that an iron vessel was
close at hand, very hot, as it was being got ready by a powerful fire
for cooking some loaves of bread: the flames were bursting forth from
the oven broken open, and fire raged without restraint within the
hollows of that furnace. The Master, at this stage of affairs, ordered
the stranger to enter it, nor did he hesitate to obey the command.
Without a moment’s delay he entered into the midst of the flames, which,
conquered at once by so bold a display of faith, subsided at his
approach, as happened of old to the well-known Hebrew children. Nature
was overcome, and the fire gave way; so that he, of whom it was thought
that he would be burned to death, had reason to marvel at himself,
besprinkled, as it were, with a cooling dew. But what wonder is it, O
Christ, that that fire did not touch thy youthful soldier? The result
was that, neither did the Abbot regret having issued such harsh
commands, nor did the disciple repent having obeyed the orders received.
He, indeed, on the very day on which he came, being tried in his
weakness, was found perfect; deservedly happy, deservedly glorious,
having been tested in obedience, he was glorified through suffering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[33:105](2110055.htm#fr_104) <span
id="ii.iv.i.xviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i.xviii-p2"></span> “monasterium magnæ dispositionis.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX.](2110056)
