[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110651)  [Next](2110653.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p1"></span>What the Apostle means by flesh in this
passage, and what the lust of the flesh is.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> in this passage we ought to
take “flesh” as meaning not man, i.e., his ma<span id="page_334">p.
334</span> <span id="iv.iv.v.xi-Page_334"></span>terial substance, but
the carnal will and evil desires, just as “spirit” does not mean
anything material, but the good and spiritual desires of the soul: a
meaning which the blessed Apostle has clearly given just before, where
he begins: “But I say, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the
desires of the flesh; for the flesh lusteth against the spirit and the
spirit against the flesh: but these are contrary the one to the other,
that ye may not do what ye would.” And since these two; viz., the
desires of the flesh and of the spirit co-exist in one and the same man,
there arises an internal warfare daily carried on within us, while the
lust of the flesh which rushes blindly towards sin, revels in those
delights which are connected with present ease. And on the other hand
the desire of the spirit is opposed to these, and wishes to be entirely
absorbed in spiritual efforts, so that it actually wants to be rid of
even the necessary uses of the flesh, longing to be so constantly taken
up with these things as to desire to have no share of anxiety about the
weakness of the flesh. The flesh delights in wantonness and lust: the
spirit does not even tolerate natural desires. The one wants to have
plenty of sleep, and to be satiated with food: the other is nourished
with vigils and fasting, so as to be unwilling even to admit of sleep
and food for the needful purposes of life. The one longs to be enriched
with plenty of everything, the other is satisfied even without the
possession of a daily supply of scanty food. The one seeks to look sleek
by means of baths, and to be surrounded every day by crowds of
flatterers, the other delights in dirt and filth, and the solitude of
the inaccessible desert, and dreads the approach of all mortal men. The
one lives on the esteem and applause of men, the other glories in
injuries offered to it, and in persecutions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. What is our free will, which stands in between the
lust of the flesh and the spirit.](2110653.md)
