[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110227)  [Next](2110229) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p1.1"></span>From</span> this first proof that the
prince had been won over to their side, the Arians plucked up their
courage, knowing that they could make use of the power of the king, when
they could make little impression by their own authority. Accordingly,
when our friends did not accept of the judgment which they had
pronounced in regard to Athanasius, an edict was issued by the emperor
to the effect that those who did not subscribe to the condemnation of
Athanasius should be sent into banishment. But, at that time, councils
of bishops were held by our friends at Arles and Bitteræ, towns situated
in Gaul. They requested that before any were compelled to subscribe
against Athanasius, they should rather enter on a discussion as to the
true faith; and maintained that only then was a decision to be come to
respecting the point in question, when they had agreed as to the person
of the judges. <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) But Valens and
his confederates not venturing on a discussion respecting the faith,
first desired to secure by force the condemnation of Athanasius. Owing
to this conflict of parties, Paulinus was driven into banishment. In the
meantime, an assembly was held at Milan, where the emperor then was; but
the same controversy was there continued without any relaxation of its
bitterness. Then Eusebius, bishop of the Vercellenses, and Lucifer,
bishop of Caralis <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) in Sardinia,
were exiled. Dionysius, however, priest of Milan, subscribed to the
condemnation of Athanasius, on the condition that there should be an
investigation among the bishops as to the true faith. But Valens and
Ursatius, with the rest of that party, through fear of the people, who
maintained the Catholic faith with extraordinary enthusiasm, did not
venture to set forth in public their monstrous <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) doctrines, but assembled within the
palace. From that place, and under the name of the emperor, they issued
a letter full <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) of all sorts of
wickedness, with this purpose, no doubt, that, if the people gave it a
favorable hearing, they should then bring forward, under public
authority, the things which they desired; but if it should be received
otherwise, that all the ill feeling might be directed against the king,
while his mistake might be regarded as excusable, because being then
only a catechumen, he might readily be supposed to have erred concerning
the mysteries of the faith. Well, when the letter was read in the
church, the people expressed their aversion to it. And Dionysius,
because he did not concur with them, was banished from the city, while
Auxentius was immediately chosen as <span id="page_116">p. 116</span>
<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-Page_116"></span>bishop in his place. Liberius,
too, bishop of the city of Rome, and Hilarius, bishop of Poictiers, were
driven into exile. Rhodanius, also, bishop of Toulouse (who, being by
nature of a softer disposition, had resisted the Arians, not so much
from his own powers as from his fellowship with Hilarius) was involved
in the same punishment. All these persons, however, were prepared to
suspend Athanasius from communion, only in order that an inquiry might
be instituted among the bishops as to the true faith. But it seemed best
to the Arians to withdraw the most celebrated men from the controversy.
Accordingly, those whom we have mentioned above were driven into exile,
forty-five years ago, when Arbitio and Lollianus were consuls. Liberius,
however, was, a little afterwards, restored to the city, in consequence
of the disturbances at Rome. But it is well known that the persons
exiled were celebrated by the admiration of the whole world, and that
abundant supplies of money were collected to meet their wants, while
they were visited by deputies of the Catholic people from almost all the
provinces.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_371"></span>[115:372](2110228.htm#fr_371) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p2"></span> The text is here in utter confusion
and uncertainty. Some for “ac tum” read “nec tum,” and some, instead of
“judicum” read “judicium.” The meaning therefore can only be guessed at.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[115:373](2110228.htm#fr_372) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p3"></span> The modern *Cagliari*.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[115:374](2110228.htm#fr_373) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p4"></span> “Piacula profiteri.”

<span id="fn_374"></span>[115:375](2110228.htm#fr_374) <span
id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xxxix-p5"></span> Instead of “refertam,” some read
“infectam.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL.](2110229)
