[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110306)  [Next](2110308.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.ii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.x-p1"></span>Of the silence and conciseness with
which the Collects are offered up by the Egyptians.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.x-p2.1"></span>When</span>, then, they meet together to
celebrate the aforementioned rites, which they term *synaxes*, <span
id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696.md) they are all so perfectly silent that,
though so large a number of the brethren is assembled together, you
would not think a single person was present except the one who stands up
and chants the Psalm in the midst; and especially is this the case when
the prayer is offered up, <span id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697.md) for
then there is no spitting, no clearing of the throat, or noise of
coughing, no sleepy yawning with open mouths, and gaping, and no groans
or sighs are uttered, likely to distract those standing near. No voice
is heard save that of the priest concluding the prayer, except perhaps
one that escapes the lips through aberration of mind and unconsciously
takes the heart by surprise, inflamed as it is with an uncontrollable
and irrepressible fervour of spirit, while that which the glowing mind
is unable to keep to itself strives through a sort of unutterable
groaning to make its escape from the inmost chambers of the breast. But
if any one infected with coldness of mind prays out loud or emits any of
those sounds we have mentioned, or is overcome by a fit of yawning, they
declare that he is guilty of a double fault.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.x-p5"></span>He is blameworthy, first, as regards
his own prayer because he offers it to God in a careless way; and,
secondly, because by his unmannerly noise he disturbs the thoughts of
another who would otherwise perhaps have been able to pray with greater
attention. And so their rule is that the prayer ought to be brought to
an end with a speedy conclusion, lest while we are lingering over it
some superfluity of spittle or phlegm should interfere with the close of
our prayer. And, therefore, while it is still glowing the prayer is to
be snatched as speedily as possible out of the jaws of the enemy, who,
although he is indeed always hostile to us, is yet never more hostile
than when he sees that we are anxious to offer up prayers to God against
his attacks; and by exciting wandering thoughts and all sorts of rheums
he endeavours to distract our minds from attending to our prayers, and
by this means tries to make it grow cold, though begun with fervour.
Wherefore they think it best for the prayers to be short and offered up
very frequently: <span id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698.md) on the one hand
that by so often praying to the Lord we may be able to cleave to Him
continually; on the other, that when the devil is lying in wait for us,
we may by their terse brevity avoid the darts with which he endeavours
to wound us especially when we are saying our prayers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_696"></span>[209:697](2110307.htm#fr_696.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.x-p3"></span> *Synaxis* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.x-p3.1"></span>σύναξις</span>) a general name for the
course of the ecclesiastical offices.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[209:698](2110307.htm#fr_697.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.x-p4"></span> *Consummatur.*

<span id="fn_698"></span>[209:699](2110307.htm#fr_698.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii.x-p6"></span> Cf. Augustine, *Ep*. cxxx., § 20 (Vol.
II. 389): “Dicuntur fratres in Ægypto crebras quidem habere orationes,
sed eas tamen brevissimas, et raptim quodammodo jaculatas, ne illa
vigilantes erecta, quæ oranti plurimum necessaria est, per productiores
moras evanescat atque hebetetur intentio;” and Hooker, *Eccl. Polity*,
Book V. c. xxxiii.: “The brethren in Egypt (saith S. Augustine) are
reported to have many prayers, but every of them very short, as if they
were darts thrown out with a kind of sudden quickness, lest that
vigilant and erect attention of mind which in prayer is very necessary
should be wasted or dulled through continuance, if their prayers were
few and long.…Those prayers whereunto devout minds have added a piercing
kind of brevity, as well in that respect which we have already
mentioned, as also thereby the better to express that quick and speedy
expedition wherewith ardent affections, the very wings of prayer, are
delighted to present our suits in heaven, even sooner than our tongues
can devise to utter them,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Of the system according to which the Psalms are said
among the Egyptians.](2110308.md)
