[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110616)  [Next](2110618.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xxvi-p1"></span>The answer how we should not exceed
the proper measure of food.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>Moses</span>: Both duties must be
observed in the same way and with equal care: for we ought most
scrupulously to preserve the proper allowance of food for the sake of
our abstinence, and in like manner out of charity to show courtesy and
encouragement to any of the brethren who may arrive; because it is
absolutely ridiculous when you offer food to a brother, nay, to Christ
Himself, not to partake of it with him, but to make yourself a stranger
to his repast. And so we shall keep clear of guilt on either hand if we
observe this plan; viz., at the ninth hour to partake of one of the two
biscuits which form our proper canonical allowance, and to keep back the
other to the evening, in expectation of something like this, that if any
of the brethren comes to see us we may partake of it with him, and so
add nothing to our own customary allowance: and by this arrangement the
arrival of our brother which ought to be a pleasure to us will cause us
no inconvenience: since we shall show him the civilities which courtesy
requires in such a way as to relax nothing of the strictness of our
abstinence. But if no one should come, we may freely take this last
biscuit as belonging to us according to our canonical rule, and by this
frugality of ours as a single biscuit was taken at the ninth hour, our
stomach will not be overloaded at eventide, a thing which is often the
case with those who under the idea that they are observing a stricter
abstinence put off all their repast till evening; for the fact that we
have but recently taken food hinders our intellect from being bright and
keen both in our evening and in our nocturnal prayers, and so at the
ninth hour a convenient and suitable time has been allowed for food, in
which a monk can refresh himself and so find that he is not only fresh
and bright during his nocturnal vigils, but also perfectly ready for his
evening prayers, as his food is already digested.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xxvi-p3"></span>With such a banquet of two courses,
as it were, the holy Moses feasted us, showing us not only the grace and
power of discretion by his present learned speech, but also the method
of renunciation and the end and aim of the monastic life by the
discussion previously held; so as to make clearer than daylight what we
had hitherto pursued simply with fervour of spirit and zeal for God but
with closed eyes, and to make us feel how far we had up till then
wandered from purity of heart and the straight line of our course, since
the practice of all visible arts belonging to this life cannot possibly
stand without an understanding of their aim, nor can it be taken in hand
without a clear view of a definite end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference III. Conference of Abbot Paphnutius. On the Three
Sorts of Renunciations.](2110618.md)
