[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110305)  [Next](2110307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.ii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.ix-p1"></span>Of the characteristics of the prayer,
the fuller treatment of which is reserved for the Conferences of the
Elders.

<span id="iv.iii.ii.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>And</span> as the plan of these Institutes
leads us to the system of the canonical prayers, the fuller treatment of
which we will however reserve for the Conferences of the Elders (where
we shall speak of them at greater length when we have begun to tell in
their own words of the character of their prayers, and how continuous
they are), still I think it well, as far as the place and my narrative
permit, as the occasion offers itself, to glance briefly for the present
at a few points, so that by picturing in the meanwhile the movements of
the outer man, and by now laying the foundations, as it were, of the
prayer, we may afterwards, when we come to speak of the inner man, with
less labour build up the complete edifice of his prayers; providing,
above all, for this, that if the end of life should overtake us and cut
us off from finishing the narration which we are anxious (D.V.) fitly to
compose, we may at least leave in this work the *beginnings* of so
necessary a matter to you, to whom everything seems a delay, by reason
of the fervour of your desire: so that, if a few more years of life are
granted to us, we may at least mark out for you some outlines of their
prayers, that those above all who live in monasteries may have some
information about them; providing also, at the same time, that those who
perhaps may meet only with this book, and be unable to procure the
other, may find that they are supplied with some sort of information
about the nature of their prayers; and as they are instructed about the
dress and clothing of the outer man, so too they may not be ignorant
what his behaviour ought to be in offering spiritual sacrifices. <span
id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ii.ix-Page_209"></span>Since, though *these* books, which we
are now arranging with the Lord’s help to write, are mainly taken up
with what belongs to the outer man and the customs of the Cœnobia, yet
*those* will rather be concerned with the training of the inner man and
the perfection of the heart, and the life and doctrine of the
Anchorites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Of the silence and conciseness with which the Collects
are offered up by the Egyptians.](2110307)
