[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110775)  [Next](2110777.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.x.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.x.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.iv.x.vi-p1"></span>Of the vision which a certain Elder saw
concerning the restless work of a brother.

<span id="iv.iv.x.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.x.vi-p2.1"></span>And</span> that this is not done without the
prompting of devils we are taught by the surest proofs, for when one
very highly esteemed Elder was passing by the cell of a certain brother
who was suffering from this mental disease of which we have spoken, as
he was restlessly toiling in his daily occupations in building and
repairing what was unnecessary, he watched him from a distance breaking
a very hard stone with a heavy hammer, and saw a certain Ethiopian
standing over him and together with him striking the blows of the hammer
with joined and clasped hands, and urging him on with fiery incitements
to diligence in the work: and so he stood still for a long while in
astonishment at the force of the fierce demon and the deceitfulness of
such an illusion. For when the brother was worn out and tired and wanted
to rest and put an end to his toil, he was stimulated by the spirit’s
prompting and urged on to resume his hammer again and not to cease from
devoting himself to the work which he had begun, so that being
unweariedly supported by his incitements he did not feel the harm that
so great labour was doing him. At last then the old man, disgusted at
such a horrid mystification by a demon, turned aside to the brother’s
cell and saluted him, and asked “what work is it, brother, that you are
doing?” and he replied: “We are working at this awfully hard stone, and
we can hardly break it at all.” Whereupon the Elder replied: “You were
right in saying ‘*we* can,’ for you were not alone, when you were
striking it, but there was another with you whom you did not see, who
was standing over you not so much to help you as urge you on with all
his force.” And thus the fact that the disease of worldly vanity has not
got hold of our hearts, will be proved by no mere abstinence from those
affairs which even if we want to engage in, we cannot carry out, nor by
the despising of those matters which if we pursued them would make us
remarkable in the front rank among spiritual persons as well as among
worldly men, but only when we reject with inflexible firmness of mind
whatever ministers to our power and seems to be veiled in a show of
right. And in reality these things which seem trivial <span
id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span id="iv.iv.x.vi-Page_390"></span>and of
no consequence, and which we see to be permitted indifferently by those
who belong to our calling, none the less by their character affect the
soul than those more important things, which according to their
condition usually intoxicate the senses of worldly people and which do
not allow <span id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590.md) a monk to lay aside
earthly impurities and aspire to God, on whom his attention should ever
be fixed; for in his case even a slight separation from that highest
good must be regarded as present death and most dangerous destruction.
And when the soul has been established in such a peaceful condition, and
has been freed from the meshes of all carnal desires, and the purpose of
the heart has been steadily fixed on that which is the only highest
good, he will then fulfil this Apostolic precept: “Pray without
ceasing;” and: “in every place lifting up holy hands without wrath and
disputing:” <span id="fr_1591"></span>[1592](#fn_1591.md) for when by this
purity (if we can say so) the thoughts of the soul are engrossed, and
are re-fashioned out of their earthly condition to bear a spiritual and
angelic likeness, whatever it receives, whatever it takes in hand,
whatever it does, the prayer will be perfectly pure and sincere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[390:1591](2110776.htm#fr_1590.md) <span
id="iv.iv.x.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x.vi-p3"></span> *Sinentes*, though the reading of
almost all <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.x.vi-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> must be an error either of the
author or of a copyist for *sinentia*.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[390:1592](2110776.htm#fr_1591.md) <span
id="iv.iv.x.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x.vi-p4"></span> [1 Thess.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017.md), [1 Tim.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iv.x.vi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. A question how it is that it is harder work to
preserve than to originate good thoughts.](2110777.md)
