[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110204)  [Next](2110206) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.xvi-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>When</span> this became known to Judith (a
widow woman of great wealth, and remarkable for beauty, but still more
distinguished for her virtue than her beauty), who was then in the camp,
she thought that, in the distressed circumstances of her people, some
bold effort ought to be made by her, even though it should lead to her
own destruction. She therefore decks her head and beautifies her
countenance, and then, attended by a single maidservant, she enters the
camp of the enemy. She was immediately conducted to Holofernes, and
tells him that the affairs of her countrymen were desperate, so that she
had taken precautions for her life by flight. Then she begs of the
general the right of a free egress from the camp during night, for the
purpose of saying her prayers. That order was accordingly given to the
sentinels and keepers of the gates. But when by the practice of three
days she had established for herself the habit of going out and
returning, and had also in this way inspired belief in her into the
barbarians, the desire took possession of Holofernes of abusing the
person of his captive; for, being of surpassing beauty, she had easily
impressed the Persian. Accordingly, she was conducted to the tent of the
general by Baguas, the eunuch; and, commencing a banquet, the barbarian
stupefied himself with a great deal of wine. Then, when the servants
withdrew, before he offered violence to the woman, he fell asleep.
Judith, seizing the opportunity, cut off the head of the enemy and
carried it away with her. Being regarded as simply going out of the camp
according to her usual custom, she returned to her own people in safety.
On the following day the Hebrews held forth for show the head of
Holofernes from the heights; and, making a sally, marched upon the camp
of the enemy. And then the barbarians assemble in crowds at the tent of
their general, waiting for the signal of battle. When his mutilated body
was discovered, they turned to flight under the influence of a
disgraceful panic, and fled before the enemy. The Jews, for their part,
pursued the fugitives, and after slaying many thousands, took possession
of the camp and the booty within it. Judith was extolled with the
loftiest praises, and is said to have lived one hundred and five years.
If these things took place, as we believe, under king Ochus, in the
twelfth year of his reign, then from the date of the restoration of
Jerusalem up to that war there elapsed two and twenty years. Now Ochus
reigned in all twenty-three years. And he was beyond all others cruel,
and more than of a barbarous disposition. Baguas, the eunuch, took him
off by poison on an occasion of his suffering from illness. After him,
Arses his son held the government for three years, and Darius for four.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.](2110206)
