[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110776)  [Next](2110778.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.x.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.x.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.iv.x.vii-p1"></span>A question how it is that it is harder
work to preserve than to originate good thoughts.

<span id="iv.iv.x.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.x.vii-p2.1"></span>Germanus</span>: If only we could keep as a
lasting possession those spiritual thoughts in the same way and with the
same ease with which we generally conceive their germs! for when they
have been conceived in our hearts either through the recollection of the
Scriptures or by the memory of some spiritual actions, or by gazing upon
heavenly mysteries, they vanish all too soon and disappear by a sort of
unnoticed flight. And when our soul has discovered some other occasions
for spiritual emotions, different ones again crowd in upon us, and those
which we had grasped are scattered, and lightly fly away so that the
mind retaining no persistency, and keeping of its own power no firm hand
over holy thoughts, must be thought, even when it does seem to retain
them for a while, to have conceived them at random and not of set
purpose. For how can we think that their rise should be ascribed to our
own will, if they do not last and remain with us? But that we may not
owing to the consideration of this question wander any further from the
plan of the discourse we had commenced, or delay any longer the
explanation promised of the nature of prayer, we will keep this for its
own time, and ask to be informed at once of the character of prayer,
especially as the blessed Apostle exhorts us at no time to cease from
it, saying “Pray without ceasing.” And so we want to be taught first of
its character, i.e., how prayer ought *always* to be offered up, and
then how we can secure this, whatever it is, and practise it without
ceasing. For that it cannot be done by any light purpose of heart both
daily experience and the explanation of four holiness show us, as you
have laid it down that the aim of a monk, and the height of all
perfection consist in the consummation of prayer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of the different characters of prayer.](2110778.md)
