[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110506)  [Next](2110508) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.x.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.x.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.

<span id="iv.iii.x.xxii-p1"></span>How the brethren in Egypt work with
their hands, not only to supply their own needs, but also to minister to
those who are in prison.

<span id="iv.iii.x.xxii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.x.xxii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so taught by these examples
the Fathers in Egypt never allow monks, and especially the younger ones,
to be idle, <span id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998) estimating the
purpose of their hearts and their growth in patience and humility by
their diligence in work; and they not only do not allow them to receive
anything from another to supply their own wants, but further, they not
merely refresh pilgrims and brethren who come to visit them by means of
their labours, but actually collect an enormous store of provisions and
food, and distribute it in the parts of Libya which suffer from famine
and barrenness, and also in the cities, to those who are pining away in
the squalor of prison; as they believe that by such an offering of the
fruit of their hands they offer a reasonable and true sacrifice to the
Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_998"></span>[274:999](2110507.htm#fr_998) <span
id="iv.iii.x.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x.xxii-p3"></span> The monks of Egypt were famous for
their labours, and Cassian’s language might be illustrated from many
passages in the Fathers; e.g., Epiphanius, in his third book against
heresies, compares the monks, and especially those in Egypt, to bees,
because of their diligence. So S. Jerome, writing to Rusticus (Ep.
cxxv.<span id="iv.iii.x.xxii-p3.1"></span>), says that no one is
received in a monastery in Egypt unless he will work, and that this rule
is made for the good of the soul rather than for the sake of providing
food. Compare also Sozomen H. E. VI. xxviii., where it is said of
Serapion and his followers in the neighbourhood of Arsinöe that “they
lived on the produce of their labour and provided for the poor. During
harvest-time they busied themselves in reaping: they set aside
sufficient corn for their own use, and furnished grain gratuitously for
the other monks.” S. Basil also, in his Monastic Constitutions cc. iv.
and v., speaks strongly of the value of labour and the Rule of S.
Benedict (c. xlviii.) enjoins that “as idleness is the enemy of the
soul, the brethren are to be employed alternately in manual labour and
pious reading.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. That idleness is the reason why there are not
monasteries for monks in the West.](2110508)
