[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110189)  [Next](2110191) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ii.i"></span>

#### <span id="ii.vi.ii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="ii.vi.ii.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vi.ii.i-p1.1"></span>The</span> times of the captivity have been
rendered illustrious by the predictions and deeds of the prophets, and
especially by the remarkable persistency of Daniel in upholding the law,
and by the deliverance of Susanna through the divine wisdom, as well as
by the other things which it accomplished, and which we shall now relate
in their order, Daniel was made a prisoner under King Joachim, and was
brought to Babylon, while still a very little child. Afterwards, on
account of the beauty of his countenance, he had a place given him among
the king’s servants, and along with him, Annanias, Misael, and Azarias.
But, when the king had ordered them to be supplied with the finer kinds
of food, and had imposed it as a duty on Asphane the eunuch to attend to
that matter, Daniel, mindful of the traditions of his fathers which
forbade him to partake of food from the table of a king of the Gentiles,
begged of the eunuch to be allowed to use a diet of pulse only. Asphane
objected that the leanness which would follow might reveal the fact that
the king’s commandment had been disobeyed; but Daniel, putting his trust
in God, promised that he would have greater beauty of countenance from
living on pulse than from the use of the king’s dainties.  And his words
were made good, so that the faces of those who were cared for at the
public expense were regarded as by no means comparable to those of
Daniel and his friends. Accordingly, being promoted by the king to honor
and favor, they were, in a short time, by their prudence and wise
conduct, preferred to all those that stood nearest to the king. About
the same time, Susanna, the wife of a certain man called Joachis, a
woman of remarkable beauty, was desired by two elders, and, when she
would not listen to their unchaste proposals, was assailed by a false
accusation. These elders reported that a young man was found with her in
a retired place, but escaped their hands by his youthful nimbleness,
while they were enfeebled with age. Credit, accordingly, was given to
these elders, and Susanna was condemned by the sentence of the people.
And, as she was being led away to punishment according to the law,
Daniel, who was then twelve years old, after having rebuked the Jews for
delivering the innocent to death, demanded that she should be brought
back to trial, and that her cause should be heard afresh. For the
multitude of the Jews who were then present, thought that a boy of an
age so little commanding respect, had not ventured to take such a bold
step without a divine impulse, and, granting him the favor which was
asked, returned anew to council. The trial, then, is entered upon once
more; and Daniel was allowed to take his place among the elders. Upon
this, he orders the two accusers to be separated from each other, and
inquires of each of them in turn, under what kind of a tree he had
discovered the adulteress. From the difference of answers which they
gave, their falsehood was detected: Susanna was acquitted; and the
elders, who had brought the innocent into danger, were condemned to
death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](2110191)
