[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2110338)  [Next](2110340) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iv.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iii.iv.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.x-p1"></span>How thorough is the obedience of the
juniors even in those things which are matters of common necessity.

<span id="iv.iii.iv.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iv.x-p2.1"></span>Next</span>, the rule is kept with such
strict obedience that, without the knowledge and permission of their
superior, the juniors not only do not dare to leave their cell but on
their own authority do not venture to satisfy their common and natural
needs. And so they are quick to fulfil without any discussion all those
things that are ordered by him, as if they were commanded by God from
heaven; <span id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763) so that sometimes, when
impossibilities are commanded them, they undertake them with such faith
and devotion as to strive with all their powers and without the
slightest hesitation to fulfil them and carry them out; and out of
reverence for their senior they do not even consider whether a command
is an impossibility. <span id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764) But of
their obedience I omit at present to speak more particularly, for we
propose to speak of it in the proper place a little later on, with
instances of it, if through your prayers the Lord carry us safely
through. We now proceed to the other regulations, passing over all
account of those which cannot be imposed on <span id="page_222">p.
222</span> <span id="iv.iii.iv.x-Page_222"></span>or kept in the
monasteries in this country, as we promised to do in our Preface; for
instance, how they never use woollen garments, but only cotton, and
these not double, changes of which each superior gives out to the ten
monks under his care when he sees that those which they are wearing are
dirty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_763"></span>[221:764](2110339.htm#fr_763) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.x-p3"></span> Cf. the Rule of S. Benedict, c. v.,
where it is said that “the first degree of humility is ready obedience.
This is peculiar to those who…prefer nothing to Christ, and fulfil the
injunctions of their superiors as promptly as if God Himself had given
them the command,” etc.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[221:765](2110339.htm#fr_764) <span
id="iv.iii.iv.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv.x-p4"></span> The Rule of S. Benedict has a chapter
to explain what is to be done if a brother is commanded to perform
impossibilities (c. lxviii.). “If a brother is commanded to do anything
that is difficult, or even impossible, let him receive the command with
all meekness and obedience; meanwhile, should he see that he is utterly
unequal to the task laid upon him, let him represent the matter to his
superior calmly and respectfully, without pride, resistance, or
contradiction. If the superior, after hearing what he has to say, still
insists on the execution of the command, let the junior be persuaded
that it is for his spiritual good, and accordingly trusting in God’s
assistance, let him for His love undertake the work.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The kind of food which is considered the greater
delicacy by them.](2110340)
