[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111161)  [Next](2111163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xi-p1"></span>He removes the silent objection of
heretics who want to recant the profession of their faith made in
childhood.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.xi-p2.1"></span>But</span> perhaps you say that you were
a baby when you were regenerated, and so were not then able to think or
to contradict. It is true: that your infancy *did* prevent you from
contradicting, when if you had been a man you would have died for
contradicting. For what if when in that most faithful and devout Church
of Christ the priest delivered the Creed <span
id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559) to the Catechumen and the attesting
people, you had tried to hold your tongue at any point, or to
contradict? Perhaps you would have been heard, and not sent forth at
once like some new kind of monster or prodigy as a plague to be
expelled. Not because that most earnest and religious people of God has
any wish to be stained with the blood of even the worst of men: but
because especially in great cities the people inflamed with the love of
God cannot restrain the ardour of their faith when they see anyone rise
up against their God. But be it so. As a baby, if it be so, you could
not contradict and deny the Creed. Why did you hold your tongue when you
were older and stronger. At any rate you grew up, and became a man, and
were placed in the ministry of the Church. Through all these years,
through all the steps of office and dignity, did you never understand
the faith which you taught so long before? At any rate you knew that you
were His deacon and priest. If the rule of salvation was a difficulty to
you, why did you undertake the honour of that, of which you disliked the
faith? But indeed you were a far sighted and simply devout man, who
<span id="page_598">p. 598</span> <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xi-Page_598"></span>wished so to balance yourself between
the two, as to maintain both your wicked blasphemy, and the honour of
Catholicity!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[597:2560](2111162.htm#fr_2559) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xi-p3"></span> The reference is the ceremony known
as the *Traditio Symboli*, which is thus described by Professor Lumby:
“The practice of the early church in the admission of converts to
baptism seems to have been of this nature. For some period previous to
their baptism (the usual seasons for which were Easter and Pentecost)
the candidates for admission thereto were trained in the doctrines of
the faith by the presbyters. A few days before they were to be baptized
(the number of days varying at different periods) the Creed was
delivered to them accompanied with a sermon. The ceremony was known as
*Traditio Symboli*, the delivery of the Creed. At the time of Baptism
each candidate was interrogated upon the articles of the Creed which he
had received, and was to return an answer in the words which had been
given to him. This was known as *Redditio Symboli*, the repetition of
the Creed, and Baptism was the only occasion on which the Creed was
introduced into any public service of the Church.” History of the
Creeds, pp. 11, 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Christ crucified is an offence and foolishness to
those who declare that He was a mere man.](2111163)
