[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111013)  [Next](2111015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.v.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p1"></span>How fasting is not good in its own
nature.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p2.1"></span>And</span> so that it is a thing
indifferent is very clearly shown from this also; viz., because as it
brings justification when observed, so it does not bring condemnation
when it is broken in upon; unless perhaps the transgression of a command
rather than the partaking of food brings punishment. But in the case of
a thing that is good in its own nature, no time should be without it, in
such a way as that a man may do without it, for if it ceases, the man
who is careless about it is sure to fall into <span id="page_509">p.
509</span> <span id="iv.vi.v.xiv-Page_509"></span>mischief. Nor again is
any time given for what is bad in its own nature, because what is
hurtful cannot help hurting, if it is indulged in, nor can it ever be
made of a praiseworthy character. And further it is clear that these
things, for which we see conditions and times appointed, and which
sanctify, when observed without corrupting us when they are neglected,
are things indifferent, as, e.g., marriage, agriculture, riches,
retirement into the desert, vigils, reading and meditation on Holy
Scripture and fasting itself, from which our discussion took its rise.
All of which things the Divine precepts and the authority of Holy
Scripture decreed should not be so incessantly aimed at, or so
constantly observed, as for it to be wrong for them to be for a time
intermitted. For anything that is absolutely commanded brings death if
it be not fulfilled: but whatever things we are urged to rather than
commanded, when done are useful, when left undone bring no punishment.
And therefore in the case of all or some of these things our
predecessors commanded us either to do them with consideration, or to
observe them carefully with regard to the reason, place, manner, and
time, because if any of them are done suitably, it is fit and
convenient, but if incongruously, then it becomes foolish and hurtful.
And if at the coming of a brother in whose person he ought to refresh
Christ with courtesy and to embrace him with a most kindly welcome, a
man should choose to observe a strict fast, would he not rather be
guilty of incivility than gain the praise or reward of devoutness? or if
when the failure or weakness of the flesh requires the strength to be
restored by the partaking of food, a man will not consent to relax the
rigour of his abstinence, is he not to be regarded as a cruel murderer
of his own body rather than as one who is careful for his salvation? So
too when a festival season permits a suitable indulgence in food and a
necessarily liberal repast, if a man will resolutely cling to the strict
observance of a fast he must be considered as not religious so much as
boorish and unreasonable. But to those men also will these things be
found bad, who are on the lookout for the praises of men by their fasts,
and by a foolish show of paleness gain credit for sanctity, of whom the
word of the Gospel tells us that they have received their reward in this
life, and whose fast the Lord execrates by the prophet. In whose person
he first objected to himself and said: “Wherefore have we fasted and
Thou hast not regarded: wherefore have we humbled our souls, and Thou
hast not known it?” and then at once he answered and explained the
reasons why they did not deserve to be heard: “Behold,” he says, “in the
days of your fast your own will is found and you exact of all your
debtors. Behold you fast for debates and strife, and strike with the
fist wickedly. Do not fast as ye have done unto this day, to make your
cry to be heard on high. Is this such a fast as I have chosen, for a man
to afflict his soul for a day?  Is it this, to wind his head about like
a circle, and to spread sackcloth and ashes? Will ye call this a fast
and a day acceptable to the Lord?” Then he proceeds to teach how the
abstinence of one who fasts may become acceptable, and clearly lays down
that fasting cannot be good of itself alone, but only when it has the
following reasons which are added: “Is not this,” he says, “the fast
that I have chosen? Loose the bands of wickedness, undo the bundles that
oppress, let them that are broken go free, and break asunder every
burden. Deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the needy and the
harbourless into thine house: and when thou shalt see one naked cover
him, and despise not thine own flesh. Then shalt thy light break forth
as the morning and thy health shall speedily arise, and thy
righteousness shall go before thy face and the glory of the Lord shall
gather thee up. Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall hear: thou
shalt cry, and He shall say, Here am I.” <span
id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188) You see then that fasting is
certainly not considered by the Lord as a thing that is good in its own
nature, because it becomes good and well-pleasing to God not by itself
but by other works, and again from the surrounding circumstances it may
be regarded as not merely vain but actually hateful, as the Lord says:
“When they fast I will not hear their prayers.” <span
id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[509:2189](2111014.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p3"></span> [Isa. lviii.
3-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003)<span
id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[509:2190](2111014.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p4"></span> [Jer. xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#012)<span id="iv.vi.v.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. How a thing that is good in its own nature ought not
to be done for the sake of some lesser good.](2111015)
