[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111165)  [Next](2111167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xv-p1"></span>He shows that those who patronize
this false teaching acknowledge two Christs.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.xv-p2.1"></span>But</span> still, I had begun to say,
that as you certainly make out two Christs this very matter must be
illustrated and made clear. Tell me, I pray you, you who sever Christ
from the Son of God, how can you confess in the Creed that Christ was
begotten of God? For you say: “I believe in God the Father, and in Jesus
Christ His Son.” Here then you have Jesus Christ the Son of God: but you
say that it was not the same Son of God who was born of Mary. Therefore
there is one Christ of God, and another of Mary. In your view then there
are two Christs. For, though in the Creed you do not deny Christ, you
say that the Christ of Mary is another than the one whom you confess in
the Creed. But perhaps you say that Christ was not begotten of God: how
then do you say in the Creed: “I believe in Jesus Christ the Son of
God?” You must then either deny the Creed or confess that Christ is the
Son of God. But if you confess in the Creed that Christ is the Son of
God, you must also confess that the same Christ, the Son of God, is of
Mary. Or if you make out another Christ of Mary, you certainly make the
blasphemous assertion that there are two Christs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. He shows further that this teaching is destructive
of the confession of the Trinity.](2111167)
