[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111204)  [Next](2111206.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxx"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXX.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p1"></span>He adds also S. John Chrysostom.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p2.1"></span>As</span> for John the glory of the
Episcopate of Constantinople, whose holy life obtained <span
id="page_620">p. 620</span> <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-Page_620"></span>the reward of martyrdom without any
show of Gentile persecution, hear what he thought and taught on the
Incarnation of the Son of God: “And Him,” he says, “whom if He had come
in unveiled Deity neither the heaven nor the earth nor the sea nor any
other creature could have contained, the pure womb of a Virgin
bore.” <span id="fr_2679"></span>[2680](#fn_2679.md) This man’s faith and
doctrine then, even if you ignore that of others, you ought to follow
and hold, as out of love and affection for him the pious people chose
you as their Bishop. For when it took you for its priest from the Church
of Antioch, from which it had formerly chosen him, it believed that it
would receive in you all that it had lost in him. <span
id="fr_2680"></span>[2681](#fn_2680.md) Did not, I ask you, all these
almost with prophetic spirit say all these things in order to confound
your blasphemies. For you declare that our Lord and Saviour Christ is
not God: they declare that Christ the Lord is Very God. You
blasphemously assert that Mary is Christotocos not Theotocos: they do
not deny that she is Christotocos, while they acknowledge her as
Theotocos. Not merely the substance but the words also are opposed to
your blasphemies: that we may clearly see that an impregnable bulwark
was formerly prepared by God against your blasphemies, to break on the
wall of truth ready prepared, the force of the heretical attack which
was at some time or other to come. And you, O you most wicked and
shameless contaminator of an illustrious city, you disastrous and deadly
plague of a Catholic and holy people, do you dare to stand and teach in
the Church of God, and with your wild and blasphemous words slander the
priests of an ever unbroken faith and Catholic confession, and say that
the people of the city of Constantinople are in error through the fault
of their earlier teachers? Are you then the corrector of former Bishops,
the accuser of ancient priests, are you better than Gregory, more
approved than Nectarius, greater than John, <span
id="fr_2681"></span>[2682](#fn_2681.md) and all the other Bishops of
Eastern cities who, though not of the same renown as those whom I have
enumerated, were yet of the same faith? which, as far as the matter in
hand is concerned, is enough: for when it is a question of the faith,
all are as good as the best in so far as they agree with the best.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2679"></span>[620:2680](2111205.htm#fr_2679.md) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p3"></span> The passage has not been
identified with any now extant in the writings of S. Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_2680"></span>[620:2681](2111205.htm#fr_2680.md) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p4"></span> S. Chrysostom had been taken from
Antioch for the Bishopric of Constantinople: and after the death of
Sisinnius in 426, as there was so much rivalry and party spirit
displayed at Constantinople, the Emperor determined that none of that
Church should fill the vacant see, but sent for Nestorius from Antioch,
where he had already gained a great reputation for eloquence (cf.
Socrates H. E. VII. xxix.). It is to the fact that both S. Chrysostom
and Nestorius came from the same city that Cassian alludes in the text.

<span id="fn_2681"></span>[620:2682](2111205.htm#fr_2681.md) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxx-p5"></span> The reference is to Gregory
Nazianzen, Bishop of Constantinople from 379 to 381 when he retired in
the interests of peace; to Nectarius who was chosen to succeed him, and
occupied the post from 381 to 397; and to his successor, S. John
Chrysostom 397 to 404.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. He bemoans the unhappy lot of Constantinople, owing
to the misfortune which has overtaken it from that heretic; and at the
same time he urges the citizens to stand fast in the ancient Catholic
and ancestral faith.](2111206.md)
