[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111101)  [Next](2111103.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p1"></span>That the power of bestowing Divine
grace did not come to Christ in the course of time, but was innate in
Him from His very birth.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>But</span> perhaps you will say that this
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, of which the Apostle writes, was not
born with Him, but was afterwards infused into Him by the descent of
Divinity upon Him, since you say that the man Jesus Christ our Lord
(whom you call a mere man) was not born with God, but afterwards was
assumed by God: <span id="fr_2413"></span>[2414](#fn_2413.md) and that
through this grace was given to the man at the same time that Divinity
was given to Him. Nor do we say anything else than that Divine grace
descended with the Divinity, for the Divine grace of God is in a way a
bestowal of actual Divinity and a gift of a liberal supply of graces.
Perhaps then it may be thought that the difference between us is one of
time rather than of what is essential, since the Divinity which we say
was born with Jesus Christ you say was afterwards infused into Him. But
the fact is that if you deny that Divinity was born with the Lord you
cannot afterwards make a confession according to the faith; for it is an
impossibility for one and the same thing to be partly impious and also
to turn out partly pious, and for the same thing partly to belong to
faith and partly to misbelief. To begin with then I ask you this: Do you
say that our Lord Jesus Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary is only
the Son of man, or that He is the Son of God as well? For we, I mean all
who hold the Catholic faith, all of us, I say, believe and are sure and
know and confess that He is both, i.e., that He is Son of man because
born of a woman and Son of God because conceived of Divinity. Do you
then admit that He is both, i.e., Son of God and Son of man, or do you
say that He is Son of man only? If Son of man only then there cry out
against you apostles and prophets, aye and the Holy Ghost Himself, by
whom the conception was brought about. That most shameless mouth of
yours is stopped by all the witnesses of the Divine decrees: it is
stopped by sacred writings and holy witnesses: aye and it is stopped by
the very gospel of God as if by a Divine hand. And that mighty Gabriel
who in the case of Zacharias restrained the voice of unbelief by the
power of his word, much more strongly condemned in your case the voice
of <span id="page_562">p. 562</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.vi-Page_562"></span>blasphemy and sin, by his own lips,
saying to the Virgin Mary, the mother of God: “The Holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee:
therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son of God.” <span id="fr_2414"></span>[2415](#fn_2414.md) Do
you see how Jesus Christ is first proclaimed to be the Son of God that
according to the flesh He might become the Son of man? For when the
Virgin Mary was to bring forth the Lord she conceived owing to the
descent of the Holy Spirit upon her and the cooperation of the power of
the Most High. And from this you can see that the origin of our Lord and
Saviour must come from thence, whence His conception came; and since He
was born owing to the descent of the fulness of Divinity in Its
completeness upon the Virgin, He could not be the Son of man unless He
had first been the Son of God; and so the angel when sent to announce
His nativity and sacred birth, when he had already spoken of the mystery
of His conception added a word expressive of His birth, saying:
“Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be
called the Son of God” \[i.e., He shall be called the Son of Him from
whom He was begotten\]. <span id="fr_2415"></span>[2416](#fn_2415.md) Jesus
Christ is therefore the Son of God, because He was begotten of God and
conceived of God. But if He is the Son of God, then most certainly He is
God: but if He is God, then He is not lacking in the grace of God. Nor
indeed was He ever lacking in that of which He is Himself the maker. For
grace and truth were made by Jesus Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2413"></span>[561:2414](2111102.htm#fr_2413.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p3"></span> Nestorius maintained that “that
which was formed in the womb of Mary was not God Himself…but because God
dwells in him whom He has assumed, therefore also He who is assumed is
called God because of Him who assumes Him. And it is not God who has
suffered, but God was united with the crucified flesh.” (Fragm. in
Marius Mercator p. 789 *sq*. (ed. Migne).) Thus he made out that in
Christ were two Persons, one assuming and the other assumed.

<span id="fn_2414"></span>[562:2415](2111102.htm#fr_2414.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p4"></span> S. [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2415"></span>[562:2416](2111102.htm#fr_2415.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p5"></span> There is some doubt whether the
words enclosed in brackets form part of the genuine text. Petschenig
brackets them, as wanting in some <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>mss.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. How in Christ the Divinity, Majesty, Might and Power
have existed in perfection from eternity, and will continue.](2111103.md)
