[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111141)  [Next](2111143.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p1"></span>He shows again from the union in
Christ of two natures in one Person that what belongs to the Divine
nature may rightly be ascribed to man, and what belongs to the human
nature to God.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p2.1"></span>And</span> how was it the same Person
before the origin of the world, who was but recently born? Because it
was the same Person, who was recently born in human nature, who was God
before the rise of all things. And so the name of Christ includes
everything that the name of God does; for so close is the union between
Christ and God that no one, when he uses the name of Christ can help
speaking of God un<span id="page_585">p. 585</span> <span
id="iv.vii.vi.vii-Page_585"></span>der the name of Christ, nor, when he
speaks of God, can he help speaking of Christ under the name of God. And
as through the glory of His holy nativity the mystery of each substance
is joined together in Him, whatever was in existence—I mean both human
and Divine—all is regarded as God. And hence the Apostle Paul seeing
with unveiled eyes of faith the whole mystery of the ineffable glory in
Christ, spoke as follows, in inviting the peoples who were ignorant of
God’s goodness to give thanksgiving to God: “Giving thanks to the
Father, who hath made us worthy to be partakers of the lot of the saints
in light, who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath
translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His love, in whom we have
redemption through His blood, the remission of sins; who is the image of
the invisible God, the first-born of every creature: for in Him were all
things created in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether
thrones or dominations, or powers: all things were created by Him and in
Him. And He is before all, and by Him all things consist. And He is the
head of the body the Church, who is the beginning, the first-born from
the dead; that in all things He may hold the primacy. Because it pleased
the Father that in Him should all fulness dwell; and through Him to
reconcile all things unto Himself, making peace through the blood of His
cross, both as to the things on earth, and the things that are in
heaven.” <span id="fr_2514"></span>[2515](#fn_2514.md) Surely this does not
need the aid of any further explanation, as it is so fully and clearly
expressed that in itself it contains not merely the substance of the
faith, but a clear exposition of it. For he bids us give thanks to the
Father: and adds a weighty reason for thus giving thanks; viz., because
He hath made us worthy to be partakers with the saints, and hath
delivered us from the power of darkness, hath translated us unto the
kingdom of the Son of His love, in whom we have redemption and remission
of sins: who is the image of the invisible God, the first-born of every
creature; for in Him and through Him were all things created; of which
He is both the Creator and the ruler: and what follows after this? “He
is” he says, “the head of the body the Church: who is the beginning, the
first-born from the dead.” Scripture speaks of the resurrection as a
birth: because as birth is the beginning of life, so resurrection gives
birth unto life. Whence also the resurrection is actually spoken of as
regeneration, according to the words of the Lord: “Verily I say unto
you, that ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of
man shall sit on the throne of His glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” <span
id="fr_2515"></span>[2516](#fn_2515.md) Therefore he calls Him the
first-born from the dead, whom he had previously declared to be the
invisible Son and image of God. But who is the image of the invisible
God, except the only-begotten, the Word of God? And how can we say that
He rose from the dead, who is termed the image and word of the invisible
God? And what is it that follows afterwards? “That in all things He may
hold the primacy: for it pleased the Father that in Him should all
fulness dwell, and by Him to reconcile all things to Himself, making
peace through the blood of His cross, both as to things on earth and the
things that are in heaven.” Surely the Creator of all things has no need
of the primacy in all things? Nor He who made them, of the primacy of
those things which were made by Him? And how can we say of the Word,
that it pleased God that all fulness should dwell in Him who was the
first-born from the dead, when He was Himself the only-begotten Son of
God and the Word of God, before the origin of all things, and had within
Him the invisible Father, and so first had within Him all fulness, that
He might Himself be the fulness of all things? And what next? “Bringing
all things to peace through the blood of His cross, both things on
earth, and the things which are in heaven.” Certainly he has made it as
clear as possible of whom he was speaking, when he called Him the
first-born from the dead. For are all things reconciled and brought into
peace through the blood of the Word or Spirit? Most certainly not. For
no sort of passion can happen to nature that is impassible, nor can the
blood of any but a man be shed, nor any but a man die: and yet the same
Person who is spoken of in the following verses as dead, was above
called the image of the invisible God. How then can this be? Because the
apostles took every possible precaution that it might not be thought
that there was any division in Christ, or that the Son of God being
joined to a Son of man, might come by wild interpretations to be made
into two Persons, and thus He who is in Himself but one might by
wrongful and wicked notions of ours, be made into a double Person in one
nature. And so most excellently and admirably does the apostle’s
preaching pass from the only begotten Son of God to the Son of man
united to the Son of God, that the exposition of the doctrine might
follow the actual course of the things that happened. And so he
continues with an unbroken connexion, and <span id="page_586">p.
586</span> <span id="iv.vii.vi.vii-Page_586"></span>makes as it were a
sort of bridge, that without any gap or separation you might find at the
end of time Him whom we read of as in the beginning of the world; and
that you might not by admitting some division and erroneous separation
imagine that the Son of God was one person in the flesh and another in
the Spirit; when the teaching of the apostle had so linked together God
and man through the mystery of His birth in the body, so as to show that
it was the same Person reconciling to Himself all things on the Cross,
who had been proclaimed the image of the invisible God before the
foundation of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2514"></span>[585:2515](2111142.htm#fr_2514.md) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p3"></span> [Col. i.
12-20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2515"></span>[585:2516](2111142.htm#fr_2515.md) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p4"></span> S. [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.vii.vi.vii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. He confirms the judgment of the Apostle by the
authority of the Lord.](2111143.md)
