[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111058)  [Next](2111060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.vii.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xxi-p1"></span>That although we acknowledge that we
cannot be without sin, yet still we ought not to suspend ourselves from
the Lord’s Communion.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.vii.xxi-p2.1"></span>Yet</span> we ought not to suspend
ourselves from the Lord’s Communion because we confess ourselves
sinners, but should more and more eagerly hasten to it for the healing
of our soul, and purifying of our spirit, and seek the rather a remedy
for our wounds with humility of mind and faith, as considering ourselves
unworthy to receive so great grace. Otherwise we cannot worthily receive
the Communion even once a year, as some do, who live in monasteries and
so regard the dignity and holiness and value of the heavenly sacraments,
as to think that none but saints and spotless persons should venture to
receive them, and not rather that they would make us saints and pure by
taking them. And these thereby fall into greater presumption and
arrogance than what they seem to themselves to avoid, because at the
time when they do receive them, they consider that they are worthy to
receive them. But it is much better to receive them every Sunday for the
healing of our infirmities, with that humility of heart, whereby we
believe and confess that we can never touch those holy mysteries
worthily, than to be puffed up by a foolish persuasion of heart, and
believe that at the year’s end we are worthy to receive them. Wherefore
that we may be able to grasp this and hold it fruitfully, let us the
more earnestly implore the Lord’s mercy to help us to perform this,
which is learnt not like other human arts, by some previous verbal
explanation, but rather by experience and action leading the way; and
which also unless it is often considered and hammered out in the
Conferences of spiritual persons, and anxiously sifted by daily
experience and trial of it, will either become obsolete through
carelessness or perish by idle forgetfulness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference XXIV. Conference of Abbot Abraham. On
Mortification.](2111060)
