[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111070)  [Next](2111072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xi"></span> <span id="page_536">p. 536</span> <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xi-Page_536"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p1"></span>The answer stating what Saint Antony
laid down on this matter.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p2.1"></span>Abraham</span>: I will not give you my
own opinion against this, but that of the blessed Antony, whereby he
confounded the laziness of a certain brother (overcome by this
luke-warmness which you describe) in such a way as also to cut the knot
of your subject. For when one came as I said to the aforesaid old man,
and said that the Anchorite system was not at all to be admired,
declaring that it required greater virtue for a man to practise what
belongs to perfection living among men rather than in the desert, the
blessed Antony asked where he lived himself, and when he said that he
lived close to his relations, and boasted that by their provision he was
set free from all care and anxiety of daily work, and gave himself up
ceaselessly and solely to reading and prayer without any distraction of
spirit, once more the blessed Antony said: “Tell me, my good friend,
whether you grieve with their griefs and misfortunes, and in the same
way rejoice in their good fortune?” He confessed that he shared in them
both. To whom the old man: “You should know,” said he, “that in the
world to come also you will be judged in the lot of those with whom in
this life you have been affected by sharing in their gain or loss, or
joy or sorrow.” And not satisfied with this statement the blessed Antony
entered on a still wider field of discussion, saying: “This mode of life
and this most lukewarm condition not only strike you with that damage of
which I spoke (though you do not feel it now, when somehow you say in
accordance with that saying in Proverbs: ‘They strike me but I am not
grieved: and they mocked me but I knew it not;’ or this that is said in
the Prophet: ‘And strangers have devoured his strength, but he himself
knew it not’ <span id="fr_2308"></span>[2309](#fn_2308) ), because day
after day they ceaselessly drag down your mind to earthly things, and
change it in accordance with the variations of chance; but also because
they defraud you of the fruits of your hands and the due reward of your
own exertions, as they do not suffer you to be supported by what these
supply, or to procure your daily food for yourself with your own hands,
according to the rule of the blessed Apostle, as he when giving his last
charge to the heads of the Church of Ephesus, asserts that though he was
occupied with the sacred duties of preaching the gospel yet he provided
not only for himself, but also for those who were prevented by necessary
duties with regard to his ministry, saying: ‘Ye yourselves know that
these hands have ministered to my necessities and to the necessities of
those who were with me.’ But to show that he did this as a pattern to be
useful to us he says elsewhere: ‘We were not idle among you; neither did
we eat any man’s bread for nothing, but in labour and in toil we worked
night and day lest we should be chargeable to any of you. Not as if we
had not power; but that we might give ourselves a pattern unto you, to
imitate us.” <span id="fr_2309"></span>[2310](#fn_2309)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2308"></span>[536:2309](2111071.htm#fr_2308) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p3"></span> [Prov.
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#035), [Hos.
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#009)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2309"></span>[536:2310](2111071.htm#fr_2309) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p4"></span> [Acts
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034), [2 Thess.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Of the value of work and the harm of
idleness.](2111072)
