[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111168)  [Next](2111170.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xviii-p1"></span>He directs his discourse upon his
antagonist with whom he is disputing, and begs him to return to his
senses. The sacrament of reconciliation is necessary for the lapsed for
their salvation.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.xviii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so, you wretched, insane,
obstinate creature, you see that you have utterly upset the whole faith
of the Creed, and all that is valuable in our hope and the mysteries.
And yet you still dare to remain in the Church: and imagine that you are
a priest, though you have denied everything by which you came to be a
priest. Return then to the right way, and recover your former mind,
return to your senses if you ever had any. Come to your self, if there
ever was in you a self to which you can come back. Acknowledge the
sacraments of your salvation, by which you were initiated and
regenerated. They are of no less use to you now than they were then; for
they can now regenerate you by penance, as they then gave you birth
through the Font. Hold fast the full scheme of the Creed. Hold the
entire truth of the faith. Believe in God the Father: believe in God the
Son: in one who begat and one who was begotten, the Lord of all, Jesus
Christ; Being of one substance with the Father; Begotten in His
divinity; born in the flesh: of twofold birth, yet of but one glory; who
Himself creator of all things, was begotten of the Father, and was
afterwards born of the Virgin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. That the birth of Christ in time diminished nothing
of the glory and power of His Deity.](2111170.md)
