[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111014)  [Next](2111016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.v.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.v.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xv-p1"></span>How a thing that is good in its own
nature ought not to be done for the sake of some lesser good.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.v.xv-p2.1"></span>For</span> we ought not to practise pity,
patience and love, and the precepts of the virtues mentioned above,
wherein there is what is good in its own nature, for the sake of
fasting, but rather fasting for the sake of them. For our endeavour must
be that those virtues which are really good may be gained by fasting,
not that the practice of those virtues may lead to fasting as its end.
For this then the affliction of the flesh is useful, for this the remedy
of abstinence must be employed; viz., that by it we may succeed in
attaining to love, wherein there is what is good without change, <span
id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span id="iv.vi.v.xv-Page_510"></span>and
continually with no exception of time. For medicines, and the
goldsmith’s art, and the systems of other arts which there are in this
world are not employed for the sake of the instruments which belong to
the particular work; but rather the implements are prepared for the
practice of the art. And as they are useful for those who understand
them, so they are useless to those who are ignorant of the system of the
art in question; and as they are a great help to those who rely on their
aid for doing their work, so they cannot be of the smallest use to those
who do not know for what purpose they were made, and are contented
simply with the possession of them; because they make all their value
consist in the mere having of them, and not in the performance of work.
That then is in its own nature the best thing, for the sake of which
things indifferent are done, but the very chiefest good is done not for
the sake of anything else but because of its own intrinsic goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. How what is good in its own nature can be
distinguished from other things that are good.](2111016)
