[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111186)  [Next](2111188) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xii-p1"></span>He compares this notion and
reasonable suspicion of the devil with the obstinate and inflexible idea
of his opponents, and shows that this last is worse and more blasphemous
than the former.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xii-p2.1"></span>But</span> he certainly knew that the
Lord Jesus Christ was born of Mary: he knew that He was wrapped in
swaddling clothes and laid in a manger: that His childhood was that of a
poor person at the commencement of His human life; and His infancy
without the proper accessories of cradles: further he did not doubt that
He had true flesh, and was born a true man. And why did this seem to him
not enough for him to be secure in? Why did he believe that He could not
be God, whom he knew to be very man? Learn then, you wretched madman,
learn, you lunatic, you cruel sinner, learn, I pray, even from the
devil, to lessen your blasphemy. He said: “If Thou art the Son of God.”
You say: “Thou art not the Son of God.” You deny what he asked about. No
one was ever yet found but you, to outdo the devil in blasphemy. That
which he confessed to be possible in the case of the Lord, you do not
believe to have been possible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. How the devil always retained this notion of
Christ's Divinity (because of His secret working which he experienced)
even up to His Cross and Death.](2111188)
