[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111155)  [Next](2111157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.v-p1"></span>He proceeds against his opponent with
the choicest arguments, and shows that we ought to hold fast to the
religion which we have received from our fathers.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.v-p2.1"></span>If</span> you were an assertor of the
Arian or Sabellian heresy, and did not use your own creed, I would still
confute you by the authority of the holy Scriptures; I would confute you
by the words of the law itself; I would refute you by the truth of the
Creed which has been approved throughout the whole world. I would say
that, even if you were void of sense and understanding, yet still you
ought at least to follow universal consent: and not to make more of the
perverse view of a few wicked men than of the faith of all the Churches:
which as it was established by Christ, and handed down by the apostles
ought to be regarded as nothing but the voice of the authority of God,
which is certainly in possession of the voice and mind of God. And what
then if I were to deal with you in this way? What would you say? What
would you answer? Would it not, I adjure you, be this: viz., that you
had not been trained up and taught in this way: that something different
had been delivered to you by your parents, and masters, and teachers.
That you did not hear this in the meeting place of your father’s
teaching, nor in the Church of your Baptism: finally that the text and
words of the Creed delivered and taught to you contained something
different. That in it you were baptized and regenerated. You would say
that you would hold fast this which you had received, and that you would
live in that Creed in which you learnt that you were regenerated. When
you said this, would you not, I pray, fancy that you were using a very
strong shield even against the truth? And indeed it would be no
unreasonable defence, even in a bad business, and one which would give
no bad excuse for error, if it did not unite obstinacy with error. For
if you held this, which you had received from your childhood, we should
try to amend and correct your present error, rather than be severe in
punishing your past fault: Whereas now, as you were born in a Catholic
city, instructed in the Catholic faith, and regenerated with Catholic
Baptism, how can I deal with you as with an Arian or Sabellian? Would
that you were one!  I should grieve less had you been brought up in what
was wrong, instead of having fallen away from what was right: had you
never received the faith, instead of having lost it: had you been an old
heretic instead of a fresh apostate, for you would have brought less
scandal and harm on the whole Church; finally it would have been a less
bitter sorrow, and less injurious example had you been able to try the
Church as a layman rather than a priest. Therefore, as I said above, if
you had been a follower and assertor of Sabellianism or Arianism or any
heresy you please, you might shelter yourself under the example of your
parents, the teaching of your instructors, the company of those about
you, the faith of your creed. I ask, O you heretic, nothing unfair, and
nothing <span id="page_594">p. 594</span> <span
id="iv.vii.vii.v-Page_594"></span>hard. As you have been brought up in
the Catholic faith, do that which you would do for a wrong belief. Hold
fast to the teaching of your parents. Hold fast the faith of the Church:
hold fast the truth of the Creed: hold fast the salvation of baptism.
What sort of a wonder—what sort of a monster are you? You will not do
for yourself what others have done for their errors. But we have
launched out far enough: and out of love for a city that is connected
with us, <span id="fr_2551"></span>[2552](#fn_2551) have yielded to our
grief as to a strong wind, and while we were anxious to make way, have
overshot the mark of our proper course.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2551"></span>[594:2552](2111156.htm#fr_2551) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.v-p3"></span> Viz., Constantinople, where Nestorius
was Bishop and where Cassian himself had been ordained deacon by S.
Chrysostom, as he tells us below in Book VII. c. xxxi., where he returns
to the subject of his love for the city of his ordination, and interest
in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Once more he challenges him to the profession of the
Creed of Antioch.](2111157)
