[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111074)  [Next](2111076.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.viii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xv-p1"></span>The answer on the threefold movement
of the soul.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.viii.xv-p2.1"></span>Abraham</span>: Of all faults there is
one source and origin, but different names are assigned to the passions
and corruptions in accordance with the character of that part, or
member, if I may so call it, which has been injuriously affected in the
soul: As is sometimes also shown by the case of bodily diseases, in
which though the cause is one and the same, yet there is a division into
different kinds of maladies in accordance with the nature of the member
affected. For when the violence of a noxious moisture has seized on the
body’s citadel, i.e., the head, it brings about a feeling of headache,
but when it affects the ears or eyes, it passes into the malady of
earache or ophthalmia: when it spreads to the joints and the extremities
of the hands it is called the gout in the joints or hands; but when it
descends to the extremities of the feet, its name is changed and it is
termed podagra: and the noxious moisture which is originally one and the
same is described by as many names as there are separate members which
it affects. In the same way to pass from visible to invisible things, we
should hold that the tendency to each fault exists in the parts and, if
I may use the expression, members of our soul. And, as some very wise
men have laid down that its powers are threefold, either what is <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.viii.xv-p2.2"></span>λογικόν</span>, i.e.,
reasonable, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi.viii.xv-p2.3"></span>θυμικόν</span>, i.e., irascible, or <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.viii.xv-p2.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vi.viii.xv-p2.5"></span>πι θυμητικόν</span>,
i.e., subject to desire, is sure to be troubled by some assault. When
then the force of noxious passion takes possession of anyone by reason
of these feelings, the name of the fault is given to it in accordance
with the part affected. For if the plague of sin has infested its
rational parts, it will produce the sins of vainglory, conceit, envy,
pride, presumption, strife, heresy.  If it has wounded the irascible
feelings, it will give birth to rage, impatience, sulkiness, accidie,
pusillanimity and cruelty. If it has affected that part which is subject
to desire, it will be the parent of gluttony, fornication, covetousness,
avarice, and noxious and earthly desires.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. That the rational part of our soul is
corrupt.](2111076.md)
