[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111140)  [Next](2111142.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p1"></span>He illustrates the same doctrine by
passages from the New Testament.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p2"></span>“<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p2.1"></span>That</span>,” says the Apostle John,
“which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of
the word of the life: for the life was manifested: and we have seen, and
do bear witness, and declare unto you the life eternal which was with
the Father, and hath appeared unto us.” <span
id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512.md) You see how the old testimonies are
confirmed by fresh ones, and the support of the new preaching is given
to the ancient prophecy. Isaiah said: “Cease ye from the man whose
breath is in his nostrils for he is reputed high.” But John says: “That
which was from the beginning, which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled.” The former said that as
man He would be persecuted by the Jews: the latter declared that as man
He was handled by men’s hands. The one predicted that He whom he
announced as man, would be God Most High: the other asserts that He whom
he showed to have been handled by men, was ever God in the beginning. It
is then as clear as possible that they both showed the Lord Jesus Christ
to be both God and man; and that the same Person was afterwards man who
had always been God, and thus He was God and man, because God Himself
became man. That then, he says, “which was from the beginning, which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon,
and our hands have handled of the word of life; and the life was
manifested, and we have seen, and do bear witness, and declare unto you
the life eternal which was with the Father, and hath appeared unto us.”
You see the number of proofs and ways, very different and numerous, in
which that Apostle so well beloved and so devoted to God, indicates the
mystery of the Divine Incarnation. In the first instance he testifies
that He, who ever was in the beginning, was seen in the flesh. Lest in
case it might not seem sufficient for unbelievers that he had spoken of
Him as seen and heard, he supports it by saying that He was handled,
i.e., touched and felt by his own hands and by those of others.
Admirably indeed by showing how He took flesh, does he shut out the view
of the Marcionites and the error of the Manichees, so that no one may
think that a phantom appeared to men, since an apostle has declared that
a true body was handled by him. Then he adds “the word of life: and the
life was manifested;” and that he saw it, announced it, and proclaimed
it: thus at the same time carrying out the duties of the faith and
striking the unbelievers with terror, that while he declares that he
proclaims Him, he may bring home the danger in which he stands, to the
man who will not listen. “We declare to you,” he says, “the life eternal
which was with the Father, and hath appeared to us.” He teaches that
that which was ever with the Father appeared to men: and that which was
ever in the beginning, was seen of men: and that which was the Word of
life without beginning, was handled by men’s hands. You see the number
and variety, the particularity and the clearness of the ways in which he
unfolds the mystery of the flesh joined to God, in such a way that no
one could speak at all of either without acknowledging both. As the
Apostle himself clearly says elsewhere: “For Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.” <span
id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513.md) This is what he said in the passage
given above: “That which was from the beginning, our hands have
handled.” Not that a spirit can in its own nature be handled: but that
the Word made flesh was in a sense handled in the manhood with which it
was joined. And so Jesus is “the same yesterday and to-day”: i.e., the
same Person before the commencement of the world, as in the flesh; the
same in the past as in the present, the same also for ever, for He is
the same through all the ages, as before all the ages. And all this is
the Lord Jesus Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[584:2513](2111141.htm#fr_2512.md) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p3"></span> [1 John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[584:2514](2111141.htm#fr_2513.md) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p4"></span> [Heb. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.vii.vi.vi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. He shows again from the union in Christ of two
natures in one Person that what belongs to the Divine nature may rightly
be ascribed to man, and what belongs to the human nature to
God.](2111142.md)
