[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111136)  [Next](2111138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vi.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vi.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.ii-p1"></span>That the doctrine of Nestorius is
closely connected with the error of the Pelagians.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>You</span> say then that Christ was born a
mere man. But certainly this was asserted by that wicked heresy of
Pelagius, as we clearly showed in the first book; viz., that Christ was
born a mere man. You add besides, that Jesus Christ the Lord of all
should be termed a form that received God (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.vi.ii-p2.2"></span>Θεοδόχος)</span>, i.e., not God, but the
receiver of God, so that your view is that He is to be honoured not for
His own sake because He is God, but because He receives God into
Himself. But clearly this also was asserted by that heresy of which I
spoke before; viz., that Christ was not to be worshipped for His own
sake because He was God, but because owing to His good and pious actions
He won this; viz., to have God dwelling in Him. You see then that you
are belching out the poison of Pelagianism, and hissing with the very
spirit of Pelagianism. Whence it comes that you seem rather to have been
already judged, than to have now to undergo judgment, for since your
error is one and the same, you must be believed to fall under the same
condemnation: not to mention for the present that you compare the Lord
to a statue of the Emperor, and break out into such wicked and
blasphemous impieties that you seem in this madness of yours to surpass
even Pelagius himself, who surpassed almost every one else in impiety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. How this participation in Divinity which the
Pelagians and Nestorians attribute to Christ, is common to all holy
men.](2111138)
