[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111106)  [Next](2111108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p1"></span>He explains the apostle’s saying: “If
from henceforth we know no man according to the flesh,” etc.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so the same Apostle says:
“From henceforth we know no man according to the flesh, and if we have
known Christ according to the flesh, yet now we know Him so no
longer.” <span id="fr_2421"></span>[2422](#fn_2421.md) Admirably consistent
are all the writings of the sacred word with each other, and in every
portion of them: even where they do not correspond in the *form* of the
words, yet they agree in the drift and substance. As where he says: “And
if we have known Christ according to the flesh, yet now we know Him so
no longer.” For the witness of the passage before us confirms that
quoted above, in which he said: “Of whom is Christ according to the
flesh, who is over all, God blessed for ever.” For there he writes: “Of
whom is Christ according to the flesh;” and here: “if we have known
Christ according to the flesh.” There: “who is over all, God blessed for
ever;” and here: “yet now we no longer know Christ according to the
flesh.” The look of the words is different, but their force and drift is
the same. For it is the same Person whom he <span id="page_564">p.
564</span> <span id="iv.vii.iv.iii-Page_564"></span>there declares to be
God over all born according to the flesh, whom he here asserts that he
no longer knows according to the flesh. And plainly for this reason;
viz., because Him whom he had known as born in the flesh, he
acknowledges as God for ever; and therefore says that he knows him not
after the flesh, because He is over all, God blessed for ever; and the
phrase there: “who is over all God,” answers to this: “we no longer know
Christ according to the flesh;” and this phrase: “we no longer know
Christ according to the flesh” implies this: “who is God blessed for
ever.” <span id="fr_2422"></span>[2423](#fn_2422.md) The declaration of
Apostolic teaching then somehow rises, as it were to greater heights,
and though it is self-consistent throughout, yet it supports the mystery
of the perfect faith, with a still more express statement, and says:
“And though we have known Christ according to the flesh, yet now we know
Him so no longer,” i.e., as formerly we knew Him as man as well as God,
yet now only as God. For when the frailty of flesh comes to an end, we
no longer know anything in Him except the power of Divinity, for all
that is in Him is the power of Divine Majesty, where the weakness of
human infirmity has ceased to exist. In this passage then he has
thoroughly expounded the whole mystery of the Incarnation, and of His
perfect Divinity. For where he says: “And if we have known Christ
according to the flesh,” he speaks of the mystery of God born in flesh.
But by adding “yet now we know Him so no longer,” he manifests His power
when weakness is laid aside. And thus that knowledge of the flesh has to
do with His humanity, and that ignorance, with the glory of His
Divinity. For to say “we have known Christ according to the flesh:”
means “as long as that which was known, existed. Now we no longer know
it, after it has ceased to exist. For the nature of flesh has been
transformed into a spiritual substance: and that which formerly belonged
to the manhood, has all become God’s. And therefore we no longer know
Christ according to the flesh, because when bodily infirmity has been
absorbed by Divine Majesty, <span id="fr_2423"></span>[2424](#fn_2423.md)
nothing remains in that Sacred Body, from which weakness of the flesh
can be known in it. And thus whatever had formerly belonged to a twofold
substance, has become attached to a single Power. Since there is no sort
of doubt that Christ, who was crucified through human weakness lives
entirely through the glory of His Divinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2421"></span>[563:2422](2111107.htm#fr_2421.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p3"></span> [2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2422"></span>[564:2423](2111107.htm#fr_2422.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p4"></span> Petschenig’s text reads as follows:
*Ac per hoc et illud ibi; Qui est super omnia Deus, hoc dicit: non
novimus, jam Christum secundum carnem et hic: non novimus jam Christum
secundum carnem, hoc ait: Qui est Deus benedictus in sæcula*. That of
Gazæus has: *Ac per hoc et illud ibi qui est super omnia Deus: et hoc
dicit, non novimus jam Christum secundum carnem: Quia est Deus
benedictus in sæcula*.

<span id="fn_2423"></span>[564:2424](2111107.htm#fr_2423.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p5"></span> The language used in the text by
Cassian is scarcely defensible. The whole tenour of the treatise shows
clearly enough that his *meaning* is orthodox enough, and that he fully
recognizes that the Human nature of Christ is still existing (see
especially c. vi.): but the *language* used comes perilously near to
Eutychianism, and might be taken to imply that the human nature had been
absorbed in the Divine. Again in Book V. c. vii. he speaks of the Son of
man “united to the Son of God” (cf. also c. viii.), language which taken
by itself might seem to sanction Nestorianism, the very heresy against
which Cassian himself is writing. These instances of inaccurate
language, which a later writer would have carefully avoided, serve to
show one great service which heresies did to the Church in making
Churchmen write <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>λογικώτερον</span>. Cf. Dorner, Doctrine
of the Person of Christ, Vol. i. p. 458 (E. T.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. From the Epistle to the Galatians he brings forward a
passage to show that the weakness of the flesh in Christ was absorbed by
His Divinity.](2111108.md)
