[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111117)  [Next](2111119.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xiv-p1"></span>How the confession of the blessed
Peter is the faith of the whole Church.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>But</span> what are the other words which
follow that saying of the Lord’s, with which He commends Peter? “And I,”
said He, “say unto thee, that thou art Peter and upon this rock I will
build My Church.” Do you see how the saying of Peter is the faith of the
Church? He then must of course be outside the Church, who does not hold
the faith of the Church. “And to thee,” saith the Lord, “I will give the
keys of the kingdom of heaven.” This faith deserved heaven: this faith
received the keys of the heavenly kingdom. See what awaits you. You
cannot enter the gate to which this key belongs, if you have denied the
faith of this key. “And the gate,” He adds, “of hell shall not prevail
against thee.” The gates of hell are the belief or rather the misbelief
of heretics. For widely as hell is separated from heaven, <span
id="page_571">p. 571</span> <span id="iv.vii.iv.xiv-Page_571"></span>so
widely is he who denies from him who confessed that Christ is God.
“Whatsoever,” He proceeds, “thou shalt bind on earth, shalt be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shalt be loosed also
in heaven.” The perfect faith of the Apostle somehow is given the power
of Deity, that what it should bind or loose on earth, might be bound or
loosed in heaven. For you then, who come against the Apostle’s faith, as
you see that already you are bound on earth, it only remains that you
should know that you are bound also in heaven. But it would take too
long to go into details which are so numerous as to make a long and
wearisome story, even if they are related with brevity and conciseness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. St. Thomas also confessed the same faith as Peter
after the Lord's resurrection.](2111119.md)
