[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111145)  [Next](2111147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vi.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p1"></span>The mystery of the Lord’s Incarnation
clearly implies the Divinity of Christ.

<span id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>And</span> so to every man who breaks out
into this mad blasphemy, the Lord Jesus in the gospel Himself repeats
what He said to the Pharisees, and declares: “What God hath joined
together, let not man put asunder.” <span
id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528) For although where it was
originally spoken by God it seems to be in answer to another matter, yet
the deep wisdom of God which was speaking not more of carnal than of
spiritual things, would have this to be taken of that subject indeed,
but even more of this: for when the Jews of that day believed with you
that Jesus was only a man without Divinity, and the Lord was asked a
question about the union in marriage, in His teaching He not only
referred to it, but to this also: though consulted about matters of less
importance His answer applied to greater and deeper matters, when he
said, “What God hath joined together, let not man put asunder,” i.e., Do
not sever what God hath joined together in My Person. Let not human
wickedness sever that which the Divine Glory hath united in Me. But if
you want to be told more fully that this is so, hear the Apostle talking
about these very subjects of which the Saviour was then teaching, for
he, as a teacher sent from God that his weak-minded hearers might be
able to take in his teaching, expounded those very subjects which God
had proclaimed in a mystery. For when he was discussing the subject of
carnal union, on which the Saviour had been asked a question in the
gospel, he repeated those very passages from the old Law on which He had
dwelt, on purpose that they might see that as he was using the same
authorities he was expounding the same subject: besides which, that
nothing may seem to be wanting to his case, he adds the mention of
carnal union, and puts in the names of husband and wife whom he exhorts
to love one another: “Husbands, love your wives even as Christ also
loved the Church.” And again: “So also ought men to love their wives
even as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no
man ever hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, as
Christ also doth the Church, for we are members of His body.” <span
id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529) You see how by adding to the
mention of man and wife the mention of Christ and the Church, he leads
all from taking it carnally to understand it in a spiritual sense. For
when he had said all this, he added those passages which the Lord had
applied in the Gospel, saying: “For this cause shall a man leave his
father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they twain
shall be one flesh.” And after this with special emphasis he adds: “This
is a great mystery.” He certainly altogether cuts off and gets rid of
any carnal interpretation, by saying that it is a Divine mystery. And
what did he add after this? “But I am speaking of Christ and the
Church.” That is to say: “But that is a great mystery. But I am speaking
of Christ and the Church,” i.e., since perhaps at the present time all
cannot grasp that, they may at least grasp this, which is not at
variance with it, nor different from it, <span id="page_589">p.
589</span> <span id="iv.vii.vi.xi-Page_589"></span>because both refer to
Christ. But because they cannot grasp those more profound truths let
them at least take in these easier ones that by making a commencement by
grasping what lies on the surface, they may come to the deeper truths,
and that the acquisition of a somewhat simple matter may open the way in
time to what is more profound.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[588:2529](2111146.htm#fr_2528) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p3"></span> S. [Matt. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006)<span id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[588:2530](2111146.htm#fr_2529) <span
id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p4"></span> [Eph. v.
25-30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)<span
id="iv.vii.vi.xi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. He explains more fully what the mystery is which is
signified under the name of the man and wife.](2111147)
