[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111097)  [Next](2111099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p1"></span>Proof that the Virgin Mother of God
was not only Christotocos but also Theotocos, and that Christ is truly
God.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>And</span> so you say, O heretic, whoever
you may be, who deny that God was born of the Virgin, that Mary the
Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ ought not to be called Theotocos, i.e.,
Mother of God, but Christotocos, i.e., only the Mother of Christ, not of
God. <span id="fr_2388"></span>[2389](#fn_2388) For no one, you say,
brings forth what is anterior in time. And of this utterly foolish
argument whereby you think that the birth of God can be understood by
carnal minds, and fancy that the mystery of His Majesty can be accounted
for by human reasoning, we will, if God permits, say something later
on. <span id="fr_2389"></span>[2390](#fn_2389) In the meanwhile we will
now prove by Divine testimonies that Christ is God, and that Mary is the
Mother of God. Hear then how the angel of God speaks to the Shepherds of
the birth of God. “There is born,” he says, “to you this day in the city
of David a Saviour who is Christ the Lord.” <span
id="fr_2390"></span>[2391](#fn_2390) In order that you may not take
Christ for a mere man, he adds the name of Lord and Saviour, on purpose
that you may have no doubt that He whom you acknowledge as Saviour is
God, and that (as the office of saving belongs only to Divine power) you
may not question that He is of Divine power, in whom you have learnt
that the power to save resides. But perhaps this is not enough to
convince your unbelief, as the angel of the Lord termed Him Lord and
Saviour rather than God or the Son of God, as you certainly most
wickedly deny Him to be God, whom you acknowledge to be Saviour. Hear
then what the archangel Gabriel announces to the Virgin Mary. “The Holy
Ghost,” he says, “shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most High
shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be
born of thee shall be called the Son of God.” <span
id="fr_2391"></span>[2392](#fn_2391) Do you see how, when he is going to
point out the nativity of God, he first speaks of a work of Divinity.
For “the Holy Ghost,” he says, “shall come upon thee, and the power of
the Most High shall overshadow thee.” Admirably did the angel speak, and
explain the majesty of the Divine work by the Divine character of his
words. For the Holy Ghost sanctified the Virgin’s womb, and breathed
into it by the power of His Divinity, and thus imparted and communicated
Himself to human nature; and made His own what was before foreign to
Him, taking it to Himself by His own power and majesty. <span
id="fr_2392"></span>[2393](#fn_2392) And lest the weakness of human
nature should not be able to bear the entrance of Divinity the power of
the Most High strengthened the ever to be honoured Virgin, so that it
supported her bodily weakness by embracing it with overshadowing
protection, and human weakness was not insufficient for the consummation
of the ineffable mystery of the holy conception, since it was supported
by the Divine overshadowing. “Therefore,” he says, “the Holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee.”
If only a mere man was to be born of a pure virgin why should there be
such careful mention of the Divine Advent? Why such intervention of
Divinity itself? Certainly if only a man was to be born from man, and
flesh from flesh, a command alone might have done it, or the Divine
will. For if the will of God alone, and His command <span
id="page_557">p. 557</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-Page_557"></span>sufficed to fashion the heavens, form
the earth, create the sea, thrones, and seats, and angels, and
archangels, and principalities, and powers, and in a word to create all
the armies of heaven, and those countless thousands of thousands of the
Divine hosts (“For He spake and they were made, He commanded and they
were created” <span id="fr_2393"></span>[2394](#fn_2393) ), why was it
that that was insufficient for the creation of (according to you) a
single man, which was sufficient for the production of all things
divine, and that the power and majesty of God did not entrust that with
the birth of a single infant, which had availed to fashion all things
earthly and heavenly? But certainly the reason why all those works were
performed by the command of God, but the nativity was only accomplished
by His coming was because God could not be conceived by man unless He
allowed it, nor be born unless He Himself entered in; and therefore the
archangel pointed out that the sacred majesty would come upon the
Virgin, I mean that as so great an event could not be brought about by
human appointment, he announced that there would be present at the
conception the glory of Him who was to be born. <span
id="fr_2394"></span>[2395](#fn_2394) And so the Word, the Son,
descended: the majesty of the Holy Ghost was present: the power of the
Father was overshadowing; that in the mystery of the holy conception the
whole Trinity might cooperate. “Therefore,” he says, “also that holy
thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.”
Admirably does he add “Therefore,” in order to show that this would
*therefore* follow *because* that had gone before; and that *because*
God had come upon her at the conception *therefore* God would be present
at the birth. And when the maiden understood not, he gave a reason for
this great thing, saying: “Because the Holy Spirit shall come upon thee,
and because the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee, therefore
also that holy thing which shall be born shall be called the Son of
God;” that is to say: That thou mayest not be ignorant of the provision
for so great a work, and the mystery of this great secret, the majesty
of God shall therefore come upon thee completely; because the Son of God
shall be born of thee. What further doubt can there be about this? or
what is there further to be said? He said that God would come upon her;
that the Son of God would be born. Ask now, if you like, how the Son of
God can help being God, or how she who brought forth God can fail to be
Theotocos, i.e., the Mother of God? This alone ought to be enough for
you; aye this ought to be amply sufficient for you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2388"></span>[556:2389](2111098.htm#fr_2388) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p3"></span> The Nestorian controversy was
originated by a sermon of Anastasius, a follower of Theodore of
Mopsuestia, whom Nestorius brought with him to Constantinople as his
chaplain on his appointment as Archbishop, <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 428. This man, preaching in
the presence of the archbishop, said: “Let no one call Mary Theotocos;
for Mary was but a woman, and it is impossible that God should be born
of a woman.” In the controversy which was immediately excited by these
words Nestorius at once took the part of his chaplain and preached a
course of sermons in maintenance of his views; refusing to the Blessed
Virgin the title of Theotocos, while admitting that she might be termed
Christotocos. See Socrates H. E. Book VII.. c. xxxii., Evagrius H. E.
Book I. c. ii., and Vincentius Lirinensis Book I. c. xvii. The sermons
are still partially existing in the writings of Marius Mercator: and in
the second of them the title <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p3.2"></span>Χριστοτόκος</span> is admitted. Cf.
Hefele’s Councils Book IX. c. i. (Vol. iii. Eng. Transl. p. 12 sq.).

<span id="fn_2389"></span>[556:2390](2111098.htm#fr_2389) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p4"></span> The subject is dealt with in Book
IV. c. ii.; VII. c. ii. *sq*.

<span id="fn_2390"></span>[556:2391](2111098.htm#fr_2390) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p5"></span> S. [Luke ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2391"></span>[556:2392](2111098.htm#fr_2391) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p6"></span> S. [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2392"></span>[556:2393](2111098.htm#fr_2392) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p7"></span> On the conception by the Holy Ghost
compare Pearson on the Creed. Article III. c. ii.

<span id="fn_2393"></span>[557:2394](2111098.htm#fr_2393) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p8"></span> [Psa.
33.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2394"></span>[557:2395](2111098.htm#fr_2394) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p9"></span> Petschenig’s text is as follows:
*Videlicet ut, quia agi tanta res per humanum officium non valebat,
ipsius ad futuram diceret majestatem in conceptu, qui erat futurus in
partu*; while Gazæus reads *deceret* for *diceret*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Follows up the same argument with passages from the
Old Testament.](2111099)
