[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111090)  [Next](2111092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p1"></span>Description of the different heretical
monsters which spring from one another.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>For</span> these shoots of an unnatural
seed are no new thing in the churches. The harvest of the Lord’s field
has always had to put up with burrs and briars, and in it the shoots of
choking tares have constantly sprung up. For hence have arisen the
Ebionites, Sabellians, Arians, as well as Eunomians and Macedonians, and
Photinians and Apollinarians, and all the other tares of the churches,
and thistles which destroy the fruits of good faith. And of these the
earliest was Ebion, <span id="fr_2364"></span>[2365](#fn_2364) who while
over-anxious about asserting our Lord’s humanity <span
id="fr_2365"></span>[2366](#fn_2365) robbed it of its union with
Divinity. But after him the schism of Sabellius burst forth out of
reaction against the above mentioned heresy, and as he declared that
there was no distinction between the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, he
impiously confounded, as far as was possible, the Persons, and failed to
distinguish the holy and ineffable Trinity. Next after him whom we have
mentioned there followed the blasphemy of Arian perversity, which, in
order to avoid the appearance of confounding the Sacred Persons,
declared that there were different and <span id="page_552">p. 552</span>
<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-Page_552"></span>dissimilar substances in the
Trinity. But after him in time though like him in wickedness came
Eunomius, who, though allowing that the Persons of the Holy Trinity were
divine and like <span id="fr_2366"></span>[2367](#fn_2366) each other,
yet insisted that they were separate from each other; and so while
admitting their likeness denied their equality. Macedonius also
blaspheming against the Holy Ghost with unpardonable wickedness, while
allowing that the Father and the Son were of one substance, termed the
Holy Ghost a creature, and so sinned against the entire Divinity,
because no injury can be offered to anything in the Trinity without
affecting the entire Trinity. But Photinus, though allowing that Jesus
who was born of the Virgin was God, yet erred in his notion that His
Godhead began with the beginning of His manhood; <span
id="fr_2367"></span>[2368](#fn_2367) while Apollinaris through
inaccurately conceiving the union of God and man wrongly believed that
He was without a human soul. For it is as bad an error to add to our
Lord Jesus Christ what does not belong to Him as to rob Him of that
which is His. For where He is spoken of otherwise than as He is—even
though it seems to add to His glory—yet it is an offence. And so one
after another out of reaction against heresies they give rise to
heresies, and all teach things different from each other, but equally
opposed to the faith. And just lately also, i.e., in our own days, we
saw a most poisonous heresy spring up from the greatest city of the
Belgæ, <span id="fr_2368"></span>[2369](#fn_2368) and though there was
no doubt about its error, yet there was a doubt about its name, because
it arose with a fresh head from the old stock of the Ebionites, and so
it is still a question whether it ought to be called old or new. For it
was new as far as its upholders were concerned; but old in the character
of its errors. Indeed it blasphemously taught that our Lord Jesus Christ
was born as a mere man, and maintained that the fact that He afterwards
obtained the glory and power of the Godhead resulted from His human
worth and not from His Divine nature; and by this it taught that He had
not always His Divinity by the right of His very own Divine nature which
belonged to Him, but that He obtained it afterwards as a reward for His
labours and sufferings. Whereas then it blasphemously taught that our
Lord and Saviour was not God at His birth, but was subsequently taken
into the Godhead, it was indeed bordering on this heresy which has now
sprung up, and is as it were its first cousin and akin to it, and,
harmonizing both with Ebionism and these new ones, came in point of time
between them, and was linked with them both in point of wickedness. And
although there are some others like those which we have mentioned yet it
would take too long to describe them all. Nor have we now undertaken to
enumerate those that are dead and gone, but to refute those which are
novel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2364"></span>[551:2365](2111091.htm#fr_2364) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p3"></span> The earliest writer to allude to an
“Ebion” as the supposed founder of the Ebionites is Tertullian
(Præscriptio c. xxxiii.). He is followed in this by Epiphanius (I.
xxx.); Rufinus (In Symb. Apost. c. xxxix.), and others; but the
existence of such a person is more than doubtful, and the name is now
generally believed to have been derived from the Hebrew “Ebhion”=poor.

<span id="fn_2365"></span>[551:2366](2111091.htm#fr_2365) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p4"></span> Incarnatio.

<span id="fn_2366"></span>[552:2367](2111091.htm#fr_2366) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p5"></span> Cassian’s statement here is scarcely
accurate, as Eunomius is best known from his bold assertion that the Son
was *unlike* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>νόμοιον</span>) to the Father.

<span id="fn_2367"></span>[552:2368](2111091.htm#fr_2367) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p6"></span> Photinus, the pupil of Marcellus of
Ancyra, appears to have taught a form of Sabellianism, teaching that
Christ Himself, the Son of God, had not existed from all eternity but
only from the time when He became the Son of God and Christ; viz., at
the Incarnation.

<span id="fn_2368"></span>[552:2369](2111091.htm#fr_2368) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p7"></span> *Et maxima Belgarum urbe*
(Petschenig). Gazæus edits: *Et maxime Beligarum urbe*. The city must be
<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>Trêves and the allusion is to the
heresy of Leporius, which was an outcome of Pelagianism. Leporius was
apparently a native of <span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p7.2"></span>Trêves who
propagated Pelagian views in Gaul, ascribing his virtues to his own free
will and his own strength; and going to far greater lengths than his
master in that he connected this doctrine of human sufficiency with
heretical views on the Incarnation; thus combining Pelagianism with what
was practically Nestorianism, teaching that Jesus was a mere man who had
used His free will so well as to have lived without sin, and had only
been made Christ in virtue of His Baptism, whereby the Divine and Human
were associated so as virtually to make two Christs. He taught further
that the only object of His coming into the world was to exhibit to
mankind an example of virtue; and that if they chose to profit by it
they also might be without sin. For these errors he was rebuked by
Cassian and others in Gaul and on his refusal to abandon them was
formally censured by Proculus Bishop of Marseilles and Cylinnius (Bishop
of <span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p7.3"></span>Fréjus?). He then left Gaul and
came to Africa, where he was convinced by Augustine of the erroneous
character of his teaching, and under his influence signed a recantation,
which was perhaps drawn up by Augustine himself, and from which Cassian
quotes below (c. v.). This recantation was read in the Church of
Carthage, and subscribed by four bishops as witnesses (including
Augustine). It was then sent to the Gallican Bishops accompanied by a
letter from the four attesting bishops (Epp. August. no. ccxxix.)
commending the treatment which Leporius had previously received, but
recommending him once more to their favour as having retracted his
errors. See further Fleury H. E. Book XXIV. c. xlix. and Dictionary of
Christian Biography, Art. Leporius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. He describes the pestilent error of the
Pelagian.](2111092)
