[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111089)  [Next](2111091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ii.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.ii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.i-p1"></span>The heresy compared to the hydra of the
poets. <span id="fr_2363"></span>[2364](#fn_2363)

<span id="iv.vii.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>The</span> tales of poets tell us that of
old the hydra when its heads were cut off gained by its injuries, and
sprang up more abundantly: so that owing to a miracle of a strange and
unheard-of kind, its loss proved a kind of gain to the monster which was
thus increased by death, while that extraordinary fecundity doubled
everything which the knife of the executioner cut off, until the man who
was eagerly seeking its destruction, toiling and sweating, and finding
his efforts so often baffled by useless labours, added to the courage of
battle the arts of craft, and by the application of fire, as they tell
us, cut off with a fiery sword the manifold offspring of that monstrous
body; and so when the inward parts were thus burnt, by cauterizing the
rebellious throbbings of that ghastly fecundity, at length those
prodigious births were brought to an end. Thus also heresies in the
churches bear some likeness to that hydra which the poets’ imagination
invented; for *they* too hiss against us with deadly tongues; and *they*
too cast forth their deadly poison, and spring up again when their heads
are cut off. But because the medicine should not be wanting when the
disease revives, and because the remedy should be the more speedy as the
sickness is the more dangerous, our Lord God is able to bring to pass
that that may be a truth in the church’s warfare, which Gentile fictions
imagined of the death of the hydra, and that the fiery sword of the Holy
Spirit may cauterize the inward parts of that most dangerous birth, in
the new heresy to be put down, so that at last its monstrous fecundity
may cease to answer to its dying throbs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2363"></span>[551:2364](2111090.htm#fr_2363) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.i-p2"></span> Petschenig’s text gives no titles to
the chapters in this work. They are added here from the text of Gazæus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Description of the different heretical monsters which
spring from one another.](2111091)
