[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111164)  [Next](2111166) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xiv-p1"></span>He compares this erroneous view with
the teaching of the Pelagians.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.xiv-p2.1"></span>Otherwise</span> if Christ who was born
of Mary is not the same Person as He who is of God, you certainly make
two Christs; after the manner of that abominable error of Pelagius,
which in asserting that a mere man was born of the Virgin, said that He
was the teacher rather than the redeemer of mankind; for He did not
bring to men redemption of life but only an example of how to live,
i.e., that by following Him men should do the same sort of things and so
come to a similar state. Your blasphemy then has but one source, and the
root of the errors is one and the same. They maintain that a mere man
was born of Mary: you maintain the same. They sever the Son of man from
the Son of God: you do the same. They say that the Saviour was made the
Christ by His baptism: you say that in baptism He became the Temple of
God. <span id="page_599">p. 599</span> <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xiv-Page_599"></span>They do not deny that He became God
after His Passion: you deny Him even after His ascension. In one point
only therefore your perverseness goes beyond theirs, for they seem to
blaspheme the Lord on earth, and you even in heaven. We do not deny that
you have beaten and outstripped those whom you are copying. They at last
cease to deny God; you never do. Although theirs must not altogether be
deemed a true confession, as they only allow the glory of Divinity to
the Saviour after His Passion, and while they deny that He was God
before this, only confess it afterwards: for, as it seems to me, one who
denies some part in regard to God, denies Him altogether: and one who
does not confess that He ever existed, denies Him forever. Just as you
also, even if you were to admit that now in the heavens the Lord Jesus
Christ, who was born of the Virgin Mary, is God, would not truly confess
Him unless you admitted that He was always God. But indeed you do not
want in any point to change or vary your opinion. For you assert that He
whom you speak of as born a mere man, is still at the present time not
God. O novel and marvellous blasphemy, though with the heretics you
assert Him to be man, you do not with the heretics confess Him to be
God!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. He shows that those who patronize this false teaching
acknowledge two Christs.](2111166)
