[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111154)  [Next](2111156.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iv-p1"></span>How the Creed has authority Divine as
well as human.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.iv-p2.1"></span>You</span> see then that the Creed has
the authority of God: for “a short word will the Lord make upon the
earth.” But perhaps you want the authority of men: nor is that wanting,
for God made it by means of men. For as He fashioned the whole body of
the sacred Scriptures by means of the patriarchs and more particularly
his own prophets, so He formed the Creed by means of His apostles and
priests. And whatever He enlarged on in these (in Scripture) with
copious and abundant material, He here embraced in a most complete and
compendious form by means of His own servants. There is nothing wanting
then in the Creed; because as it was formed from the Scriptures of God
by the apostles of God, it has in it all the authority it can possibly
have, whether of men or of God: Although too that which was made by men,
must be accounted God’s work, for we should not look on it so much as
their work, by whose instrumentality it was made, but rather as His, who
was the actual maker. “I believe,” then, says the Creed, “in one true
and only God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things visible and
invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, His only begotten Son and the
first-born of every creature; Begotten of Him before all worlds, and not
made; Very God of Very God, being of one substance with the Father; by
whom both the worlds were framed and all things were made; who for us
came, and was born of the Virgin Mary; and was crucified under Pontius
Pilate, and was buried. And the third day He rose again according to the
Scriptures; and ascended into heaven: and shall come again to judge the
quick and the dead,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. He proceeds against his opponent with the choicest
arguments, and shows that we ought to hold fast to the religion which we
have received from our fathers.](2111156.md)
