[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111160)  [Next](2111162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.x-p1"></span>He inveighs against him because though
he has forsaken the Catholic religion, he nevertheless presumes to teach
in the Church, to sacrifice, and to give decisions.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.x-p2"></span>I <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.x-p2.1"></span>appeal</span> then to you, to you
yourself, I say. Tell me, I pray, if any Jew or pagan denied the Creed
of the Catholic faith, should you think that we ought to listen to him?
Most certainly not. What if a heretic or an apostate does the same?
Still less should we listen to him, for it is worse for a man to forsake
the truth which he has known, than to deny it without ever having known
it. We see then two men in you: a Catholic and an apostate: first a
Catholic, afterwards an apostate. Determine for yourself which you think
we ought to follow: for you cannot press the claims of the one in
yourself without condemning the other. Do you say then that it is your
former self which is to be condemned: and that you condemn the Catholic
Creed, and the confession and faith of all men? And what then? O
shameful deed! O wretched grief! What are you doing in the Catholic
Church, you preventer of Catholics? Why is it that you, who have denied
the faith of the people, are still polluting the meetings of the people:
And above all venture to stand at the altar, to mount the pulpit, and
show your impudent and treacherous face to God’s people—to occupy the
Bishop’s throne, to exercise the priesthood, to set yourself up as a
teacher? To teach the Christians what? Not to believe in Christ: to deny
that He in whose Divine temple they are, is God. <span
id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556) And after all this, O folly! O
<span id="page_597">p. 597</span> <span
id="iv.vii.vii.x-Page_597"></span>madness! you fancy that you are a
teacher and a Bishop, while (O wretched blindness) you are denying His
Divinity, His Divinity (I repeat it) whose priest you claim to be. But
we are carried away by our grief. What then says the Creed? or what did
you yourself say in the Creed? Surely “the Lord Jesus Christ, Very God
of Very God; Being of one substance with the Father; By whom the worlds
were created and all things made:” and that this same Person “for us
came and was born of the Virgin Mary.” Since then you said that God was
born of Mary, how can you deny that Mary was the mother of God? Since
you said that God came, how can you deny that He is God who has come?
You said in the Creed: “I believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God: I
believe in Very God of Very God, of one substance with the Father: who
for us came and was born of the Virgin Mary; and was crucified under
Pontius Pilate; and was buried.” But now you say: “If we should say, I
believe in God the Word, the only Son of God, Begotten of the Father, of
one substance with the Father; who came and was buried, would not our
ears be shocked at the sound?” Do you see then how you are utterly
destroying and stamping out the whole faith of the Catholic Creed and
the Catholic mystery? “O Sin, O monstrosity, to be driven away,” as one
says, <span id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557) “to the utmost parts of
the earth:” for this is more truly said of you, that you may forsooth go
into that solitude where you will not be able to find anyone to ruin.
You think then that the faith of our salvation, and the mystery of the
Church’s hope is a shock to your ears and hearing. And how was it that
formerly when you were hastening to be baptized, you heard these
mysteries with unharmed ears? How was it that when the teachers of the
church were instructing you your ears were not damaged? You certainly at
that time did your duty without any double shock to your mouth and ears;
when you repeated what you heard from others, and as the speaker
yourself heard yourself speaking. Where then were these injuries to your
ears? Where these shocks to your hearing? Why did you not contradict and
cry out against it? But indeed you are at your will and fancy, when you
please, a disciple; and when you please, the Church’s enemy: when you
please a Catholic, and when you please an apostate. A worthy leader
indeed, to draw Churches after you, to whatever side you attach
yourself; to make your will the law of our life, and to change mankind
as you yourself change, that, as you will not be what all others are,
they may be what you want! <span id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558) A
splendid authority indeed, that because you are not now what you used to
be, the world must cease to be what it formerly was!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[596:2557](2111161.htm#fr_2556) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.x-p3"></span> Petschenig’s text is as follows: *Ut
quid doceas Christianos? Christum non credere, cum ipsum in cujus Dei
templo sint Deum negare*. Gazæus edits: *Ut quid doces Christianos,
Christum non credens? Cum ipsum, in cujus Dei templo sunt, Deum neges*.

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[597:2558](2111161.htm#fr_2557) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.x-p4"></span> Cicero in Verr. Act. II. Book l. xv.
40.

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[597:2559](2111161.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.x-p5"></span> *Ut, quia tu esse nolis quod omnes
sint, omnes sint, quod tu velis* (Petschenig). Gazæus has: *Et quia tu
esse nolis quod omnes sunt, quod tu velis*: a text which he confesses
must be corrupt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. He removes the silent objection of heretics who want
to recant the profession of their faith made in childhood.](2111162)
