[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111102)  [Next](2111104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vii-p1"></span>How in Christ the Divinity, Majesty,
Might and Power have existed in perfection from eternity, and will
continue.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>Therefore</span> all grace, power,
might, Divinity, aye, and the fulness of actual Divinity and glory have
ever existed together with Him and in Him, whether in heaven or in earth
or in the womb or at His birth. Nothing that is proper to God was ever
wanting to God. For the Godhead was ever present with God, no where and
at no time severed from Him. For everywhere God is present in His
completeness and in His perfection. He suffers no division or change or
diminution; for nothing can be either added to God or taken away from
Him, for He is subject to no diminution of Divinity, as to no increase
of It. He was the same Person then on earth who was also in heaven: the
same Person in His low estate who was also in the highest: the same
Person in the littleness of manhood as in the glory of the Godhead. And
so the Apostle was right in speaking of the grace of Christ when He
meant the grace of God. For Christ was everything that God is. At the
very time of His conception as man there came all the power of God, all
the fulness of the Godhead; for thence came all the perfection of the
Godhead, whence was His origin. Nor was that Human nature of His <span
id="fr_2416"></span>[2417](#fn_2416) ever without the Deity as it
received from Deity the very fact of its existence. And so, to begin
with, whether you like it or no, you cannot deny this; viz., that the
Lord Jesus Christ is the Son of God, especially as the archangel
declares in the gospels: “That holy thing which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God.” But when this is established then
remember that whatever you read of Christ you read of the Son of God:
whatever you read of the Lord or Jesus belongs to the Son of God. And so
when you recognize a title of Divinity in all these terms which you hear
uttered, as you see that in each case you ought to understand that the
Son of God is meant, prove to me, if you like, how you can separate the
Godhead from the Son of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2416"></span>[562:2417](2111103.htm#fr_2416) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.vii-p3"></span> *Homo ille*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III.](2111104)
