[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111151)  [Next](2111153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.i-p1"></span>From the miracle of the feeding of the
multitude from five barley loaves and two fishes he shows the majesty of
Divine Power.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.i-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.i-p2.1"></span>We</span> read in the gospel that when
five loaves were at the Lord’s bidding brought to Him an immense number
of God’s people were fed with them. But *how* this was done it is
impossible to explain, or to understand or to imagine. So great and so
incomprehensible is the might of Divine Power, that though we are
perfectly assured of the *fact*, yet we are unable to understand the
*manner* of the fact. For first one would have to comprehend how so
small a number of loaves could be sufficient, I will not say for them to
eat and be filled, but even to be divided and set before them, when
there were many more thousands of men than there were loaves; and almost
more companies than there could be fragments of the whole number of
loaves. The plentiful supply then was the creation of the word of the
Lord. The work grew in the doing of it. And though what was visible was
but little; yet what was given to them became more than could be
reckoned. There is then no room for conjecture, for human speculation,
or imagination. The only thing in such a case is that like faithful and
wise men we should acknowledge that, however great and incomprehensible
are the things which are done by God, even if they are altogether beyond
our comprehension, we must recognize that nothing is impossible with
God. But of these unspeakable acts of Divine Power, we will, as the
subject demands it, speaks more fully later on, because it exactly
corresponds to the ineffable miracles of His Holy Nativity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The author adapts the mystery of the number seven
(made up of the five loaves and two fishes) to his own work.](2111153)
