[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111092)  [Next](2111094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.ii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.iv-p1"></span>Leporius together with some others
recants his Pelagianism.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>But</span> still as those who were the
outcome of this stock of pestilent thorns have already by the Divine
help and goodness been healed, we should also now pray to our Lord God
that as in some points that older heresy and this new one are akin to
each other, He would grant a like happy ending to those which had a like
bad beginning. For Leporius, then a monk, now a presbyter, who followed
the teaching or rather the evil deeds of Pelagius, as we said above, and
was among the earliest and greatest champions of the aforesaid heresy in
Gaul, was admonished by us and corrected by God, and so nobly condemned
his former erroneous persuasion that his amendment was almost as much a
matter for congratulation as is the unimpaired faith of many. For it is
the best thing never to fall into error: the second best thing to make a
good repudiation of it. He then coming to himself confessed his mistake
with grief but without shame not only in Africa, where he was then and
is now, <span id="fr_2370"></span>[2371](#fn_2370.md) but also gave to all
the cities of Gaul penitent letters containing his confession and grief;
in order that his return to the faith might be made known where his
deviation from it had been first published, and that those who had
formerly been witnesses of his error might also afterwards be witnesses
of his amendment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2370"></span>[553:2371](2111093.htm#fr_2370.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.iv-p3"></span> The after history of Leporius appears
to have been this. Having come under Augustine’s influence, he was
persuaded by him to give up all his property, and renounce the temporal
care of a monastery which he had previously founded in a garden at
Hippo; where also he had begun to build a *xenodochium* or house of
refuge for strangers, partly at his own expense, and partly out of the
alms of the faithful. He also at Augustine’s suggestion, built a church
in memory of the “eight martyrs” (see Aug. Serm. 356). This complete
renunciation of the world must have taken place about 425; and in the
following year we find that he was present at the election of Eraclius
to succeed Augustine (Aug. Ep. 213<span id="iv.vii.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>);
but subsequent to this nothing is known of his history except that he
was still living when Cassian wrote.  It is right to mention that doubts
have been raised by Tillemont whether the presbyter of Hippo is
identical with the quondam heretic, but on scarcely sufficient grounds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. By the case of Leporius he establishes the fact that
an open sin ought to be expiated by an open confession; and also teaches
from his words what is the right view to be held on the
Incarnation.](2111094.md)
