[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111022)  [Next](2111024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p1"></span>Of the time and measure of
refreshment.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p2.1"></span>So</span> then we should keep the
observance of the days mentioned in such a way that the relaxation
allowed may be useful rather than harmful to the good of body and soul,
because the joy of any festival cannot blunt the pricks of the flesh,
nor can that fierce enemy of ours be pacified by regard for days. In
order then that the observance of the customs appointed for festival
seasons may be kept and that the most salutary rule of abstinence be not
at all exceeded it is enough for us to allow the permitted relaxation to
go so far, as for us out of regard for the festival season to take the
food, which ought to be taken at the ninth hour, a little earlier; viz.,
at the sixth hour, <span id="page_513">p. 513</span> <span
id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-Page_513"></span>but with this condition, that the
regular allowance and character of the food be not altered, for fear
lest the purity of body and uprightness of soul which has been gained by
the abstinence of Lent be lost by the relaxation of Eastertide, and it
profit us nothing to have acquired by our fast what a careless satiety
causes us presently to lose, especially as the well-known cunning of our
enemy assaults the stronghold of our purity then chiefly when he sees
that our guard over it is somewhat relaxed at the celebration of some
festival. Wherefore we must most vigilantly look out that the vigour of
our soul be never enervated by seductive flatteries, and we lose not the
purity of our chastity, gained, as was said, by the continuous efforts
of Lent, by the repose and carelessness of Eastertide. And therefore no
addition at all should be made to the quality or the quantity of the
food, but even on the highest festivals we should similarly abstain from
those foods, by abstinence from which we preserve our uprightness on
common days, that the joy of the festival may not excite in us a most
deadly conflict of carnal desires, and so be turned to grief, and put an
end to that most excellent festival of the heart, which exults in the
joy of purity; and after a brief show of carnal joy we begin to mourn
our lost purity of heart with a lasting sorrow of repentance. Moreover
we should strive that this warning of the prophetic exhortation may not
be uttered against us to no purpose: “Celebrate, O Judah, thy festivals,
and pay thy vows.” <span id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203) For if the
occurrence of festival days does not interfere with the continuity of
our abstinence, we shall continually enjoy spiritual festivals and so,
when we cease from servile work, “there shall be month after month and
Sabbath after Sabbath.” <span id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[513:2204](2111023.htm#fr_2203) <span
id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p3"></span> [Nah. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015)<span
id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[513:2205](2111023.htm#fr_2204) <span
id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p4"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023)<span
id="iv.vi.v.xxiii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV. A question on the different ways of keeping
Lent.](2111024)
