[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111126)  [Next](2111128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p1"></span>That there is in Christ but one
Hypostasis (i.e., Personal self).

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.v.vi-p2.1"></span>But</span> perhaps you think it a trifle to
make this clear: not because it fails in clearness, but because the
obscurity of unbelief always causes obscurity even in what is clear.
Hear then how the Apostle sums up in a few words this whole mystery of
the Lord’s unity \[of Person\]. “Our one Lord Jesus Christ,” he says,
“by whom are all things.” <span id="fr_2459"></span>[2460](#fn_2459) O
good Jesus, what weight there is in Thy words! For Thine they are, when
spoken of Thee by Thine own. See how much is embraced in the few words
of this saying of the Apostle’s. “One Lord,” says he, “Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things.” Did he make use of any circumlocution in order to
proclaim the truth of this great mystery? <span
id="fr_2460"></span>[2461](#fn_2460) or did he make a long story of that
which he wanted us to grasp? “Our one Lord,” he says, “Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things.” In a plain and short phrase he taught the secret
of this great mystery, through this confidence by which he realized that
in what refers to God his statements had no need of lengthened
arguments, and that the Divinity added faith to his utterances. For the
demonstration of facts is enough to confirm what is said, whenever the
proof rests on the authority of the speaker. There is then, he says,
“one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things.” Notice how you read the
same thing of the Word of the Father, which you read of Christ. For the
gospel tells us that “All things were made by Him, and without Him was
not anything made.” <span id="fr_2461"></span>[2462](#fn_2461) The
Apostle says, “By Christ are all things:” the gospel says, “By the Word
are all things.” Do these sacred utterances contradict each other? Most
certainly not. But by Christ, by whom the Apostle said that all things
were created, and by the Word, by whom the Evangelist relates that all
things were made, we are meant to understand one and the same Person.
Hear, I tell you, what the Word of God, Himself God, has said of
Himself. “No man,” he saith, “hath ascended into heaven, save He who
came down from heaven, even the Son of man, who is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2462"></span>[2463](#fn_2462) And again He says: “If ye shall see
the Son of man ascending where He was before.” <span
id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463) He said that the Son of man was in
heaven: He asserted that the Son of man had come down from heaven. What
does it mean? Why are you muttering? Deny it, if you can. But do you ask
the reason of what is said? However I do not give it you. God has said
this. God has spoken this to me: His Word is the best reason. I get rid
of arguments and discussions. The Person of the Speaker alone is enough
to make me believe. I may not debate about the trustworthiness of what
is said, nor discuss it. Why should I question whether what God has said
is true, since I ought not to doubt that what God says is true. “No
man,” He says, “hath ascended into heaven, save He who came down from
heaven, even the Son of man, who is in heaven.” Certainly the Word of
the Father was ever in heaven: and how did He assert that the Son of man
was ever in heaven? You are then to understand that He showed that He
who was ever the Son of God was also the Son of man: when He asserted
that He, who had but recently appeared as the Son of man, was ever in
heaven. To this points still more that other passage in which He
testifies that the same Son of man; viz., the Word of God who, as He
said, came down from heaven, even at the time when He was speaking on
earth, was in heaven. For “no man,” He said, “hath ascended into heaven,
save He who came down from heaven, even the Son of man who is in
heaven.” Who, I pray you, is this who is speaking? Assuredly it is
Christ. But where was He at the moment when He spoke? Assuredly on
earth. And how can He assert that He came down from heaven when He was
born, and that He was in heaven when He was speaking, or say that He is
the same Son of man, when certainly no one but God can come down from
heaven, and when He speaks on earth, and certainly cannot be in heaven
except through the Infinite nature of God? Consider then this at last,
and note that the Son of man is the same Person as the Word of God: for
He is the Son of man since He is truly born of man, and the Word of God,
since He who speaks on earth abideth <span id="page_577">p. 577</span>
<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-Page_577"></span>ever in heaven. And so when He
truly terms Himself the Son of man, it refers to His human birth, while
the fact that He never departs from heaven, refers to the Infinite
character of His Divine nature. And so the Apostle’s teaching is
admirably in accordance with those sacred words: (“for He that
descended,” says He, “is the same that ascended also above all heavens,
that He might fill all things,” <span
id="fr_2464"></span>[2465](#fn_2464) ) when He says that He that
descended is the same that ascended. But none can descend from heaven
except the Word of God: who certainly “being in the form of God, emptied
Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of
men, and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.” <span
id="fr_2465"></span>[2466](#fn_2465) Thus the Word of God descended from
heaven: but the Son of man ascended. But He says that the same Person
ascended and descended. Thus you see that the Son of man is the same
Person as the Word of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2459"></span>[576:2460](2111127.htm#fr_2459) <span
id="iv.vii.v.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p3"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2460"></span>[576:2461](2111127.htm#fr_2460) <span
id="iv.vii.v.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p4"></span> *Tanti mysterii sacramentum*.

<span id="fn_2461"></span>[576:2462](2111127.htm#fr_2461) <span
id="iv.vii.v.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p5"></span> S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2462"></span>[576:2463](2111127.htm#fr_2462) <span
id="iv.vii.v.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p6"></span> S. [John iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[576:2464](2111127.htm#fr_2463) <span
id="iv.vii.v.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p7"></span> S. [John vi.
63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063)<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2464"></span>[577:2465](2111127.htm#fr_2464) <span
id="iv.vii.v.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p8"></span> [Eph. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2465"></span>[577:2466](2111127.htm#fr_2465) <span
id="iv.vii.v.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.vi-p9"></span> [Phil. ii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.vii.v.vi-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. He returns to the former subject, in order to show
against the Nestorians that those things are said of the man, which
belong to the Divine nature as it were of a Person of Divine nature, and
conversely that those things are said of God, which belong to the human
nature as it were of a Person of human nature, because there is in
Christ but one and a single Personal self.](2111128)
