[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111032)  [Next](2111034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p1"></span>Of the fact that the precepts of the
gospel are milder than those of the law.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>Whoever</span> therefore climbs this
height of evangelical perfection, is at once raised by the merits of
such virtue above every law, and disregarding as trivial all that is
commanded by Moses, recognizes that he is only subject to the grace of
the Saviour, by whose aid he knows that he attained to that most exalted
condition. Therefore sin has no dominion over him, “because the love of
God, which is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given
to us,” <span id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221.md) shuts out all <span
id="page_517">p. 517</span> <span
id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-Page_517"></span>care for everything else, and can
neither desire what is forbidden, or disregard what is commanded, as its
whole aim and all its desire is ever fixed on divine love, and to such
an extent is it not caught by the delights of worthless things, that it
actually does not take advantage of those things which are permitted.
But under the law, where lawful marriages are observed, although the
rovings of wantonness are restrained, and bound down to one woman alone,
yet the pricks of carnal lust cannot help being vigorous; and it is hard
for the fire, for which fuel is expressly supplied, to be thus shut in
within prearranged limits, so as not to spread further and burn up
anything it touches. As even if this objection occurs to it that it is
not allowed to be kindled beyond these limits, yet even while it is kept
in check, it is on fire because the will itself is in fault, and its
habit of carnal intercourse hurries it into too speedy excesses of
adultery. But those whom the grace of the Saviour has fired with the
holy love of chastity, so consume all the thorns of carnal desires in
the fire of the Lord’s love, that no dying embers of sin interfere with
the coldness of their purity. The servants of the law then from the use
of lawful things fall away to unlawful; the partakers of grace while
they disregard lawful things know nothing of unlawful ones. But as sin
is alive in one who loves marriage, so is it also in one who is
satisfied with merely paying his tithes and firstfruits. For, while he
is dawdling or careless, he is sure to sin in regard to either their
quality or quantity, or the daily distribution of them. For as he is
commanded unweariedly to minister to those in want of what is his,
although he may dispense it with the fullest faith and devotion, yet it
is hard for him not to fall often into the snares of sin. But over those
who have not set at naught the counsel of the Lord, but who, disposing
of all their property to the poor, take up their cross and follow the
bestower of grace, sin can have no dominion. For no faithless anxiety
for getting food will annoy him who piously distributes and disperses
his wealth already consecrated to Christ and no longer regarded as his
own; nor will any grudging hesitation take away from the cheerfulness of
his almsgiving, because without any thought of his own needs or fear of
his own food running short he is distributing what has once for all been
completely offered to God, and is no longer regarded as his own, as he
is sure that when he has succeeded in stripping himself as he desires,
he will be fed by God much more than the birds of the air. On the other
hand he who retains his goods of this world, or, bound by the rules of
the old law, distributes the tithe of his produce, and his firstfruits,
or a portion of his income, although he may to a considerable degree
quench the fire of his sins by this dew of almsgiving, yet, however
generously he gives away his wealth, it is impossible for him altogether
to rid himself of the dominion of sin, unless perhaps by the grace of
the Saviour, together with his substance he gets rid of all love of
possessing. In the same way he cannot fail to be subject to the bloody
sway of sin, whoever chooses to pull out, as the law commands, an eye
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, or to hate his enemy, for while he
desires by retaliation in exchange to avenge an injury done to himself,
and while he cherishes bitter hatred against an enemy, he is sure always
to be inflamed with the passion of anger and rage. But whoever lives
under the light of the grace of the gospel, and overcomes evil by not
resisting it, but by bearing it, and does not hesitate of his own free
will to give to one who smites his right cheek, the other also, and to
one who wants to raise a lawsuit against him for his coat, gives his
cloak also, and who loves his enemies, and prays for those who slander
him, this man has broken the yoke of sin and burst its chains. For he is
not living under the law, which does not destroy the seeds of sin
(whence not without reason the Apostle says of it: “There is a setting
aside of the former commandment because of the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof: for the law brought nothing to perfection;”
and the Lord says by the prophet: “And I gave them commands that were
not good, and ordinances, whereby they could not live” <span
id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222.md) , but under grace which does not
merely lop off the boughs of wickedness, but actually tears up the very
roots of an evil will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[516:2222](2111033.htm#fr_2221.md) <span
id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p3"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[517:2223](2111033.htm#fr_2222.md) <span
id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p4"></span> [Heb.
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#019.md), [Ezek.
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.vi.v.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV. How a man can be shown to be under
grace.](2111034.md)
