[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111195)  [Next](2111197.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p1"></span>That it must be ascribed equally to
Christ and the Holy Ghost that His flesh and Humanity became the temple
of God.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p2.1"></span>But</span> there follows in your
blasphemy that His flesh was made a temple of the Holy Ghost, for this
reason, that John has said: “For I saw the Spirit descending from heaven
and abiding upon Him.” <span id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650.md) For
you try to support even this wild statement of yours by Scriptural
authority: wherefore let us see whether this sacred authority has said
that which you say. “For I saw,” it says, “the Spirit descending like a
dove, and abiding upon Him.” Discern here, if you can, which is the more
powerful, which greater, which more to be honoured? He who descended, or
He to whom the descent was made? He who brought down the honour, or He
to whom the honour was brought? Where do you find in this passage that
the Spirit made His flesh a temple? or wherein does it lessen the honour
of God, if God Himself descended to show God to mankind? For certainly
we ought not to think that He is less whose high estate was pointed out,
than He who pointed out His high estate. But away with the thought of
believing or making any separation in the Godhead: for one and the same
Godhead <span id="page_616">p. 616</span> <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-Page_616"></span>and equal power shut out altogether
the wicked notion of inequality. And so in this matter, where there is
the Person of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and where
it is the Son of God to whom the descent is made, the Spirit who
descends, the Father who gives His witness, no one had more honour, and
no one received any slight, but it all redounds equally to the fulness
of the Godhead, for each Person of the Trinity contains within Himself
the glory of the whole Trinity. And so nothing further needs to be said,
except only to show the rise and origin of your blasphemy. For thorns
and thistles springing up from the roots produce shoots of their own
nature, and from their character show their origin. So then you also, a
thorny offshoot of the Pelagian heresy, show in germ just the same that
your father is said to have had in the root. For he <span
id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651) (as Leporius his follower said.md)
declared that our Lord was made the Christ by His baptism: you say that
at His baptism He was made the temple of God by the Spirit. The words
are not altogether identical: but the wrong-headedness is altogether the
same.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[615:2651](2111196.htm#fr_2650.md) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p3"></span> S. [John i.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[616:2652](2111196.htm#fr_2651.md) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p4"></span> *Ille enim*; viz., Pelagius. This
appears to be the true reading, though one <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxi-p4.1"></span>ms</span>. followed by Gazæus has
*Leporius ille enim*; a reading which would involve the supposition that
there were two persons of the name of Leporius, master and scholar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. That the raising up of Christ into heaven is not to
be ascribed to the Spirit alone.](2111197.md)
