[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111094)  [Next](2111096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.vi-p1"></span>The united doctrine of the Catholics
is to be received as the orthodox faith.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>This</span> confession of his therefore,
which was the faith of all Catholics was approved of by all the Bishops
of Africa, <span id="fr_2383"></span>[2384](#fn_2383.md) whence he wrote,
and by all those of Gaul, to whom he wrote. Nor has there ever been
anyone who quarrelled with this faith, without being guilty of unbelief:
for to deny what is right and proved is to confess what is wrong. The
agreement of all ought then to be in itself already sufficient to
confute heresy: for the authority of all shows undoubted truth, and a
perfect reason results where no one disputes it: so that if a man
endeavours to hold opinions contrary to these, we should in the first
instance rather condemn his perverseness than listen to his assertions,
for one who impugns the judgment of all announces beforehand his own
condemnation, and a man who disturbs what has been determined by all, is
not even given a hearing. For when the truth has once for all been
established by all men, whatever arises contrary to it is by this very
fact to be recognized at once as falsehood, because it differs from the
truth. And thus it is agreed that this alone is sufficient to condemn a
man; viz., that he differs from the judgment of truth. But still as an
explanation of a system does no harm to the system, and truth always
shines brighter when thoroughly ventilated, and as it is better that
those who are wrong should be set right by discussion rather than
condemned by severe censures, we should cure, as far as we can with the
Divine assistance, this old heresy appearing in the persons of new
heretics, that when through God’s mercy they have recovered their
health, their cure may bear testimony to our holy faith instead of their
condemnation proving an instance of just severity. Only may the Truth
indeed be present at our discussion and discourse concerning it, and
assist our human weakness with that goodness with which God vouchsafed
to come to men, as for this purpose above all He willed to be born on
earth and among men; viz., that there might be no more room for
falsehood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2383"></span>[555:2384](2111095.htm#fr_2383.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.vi-p3"></span> The attesting Bishops who subscribed
his recantation as witnesses were Aurelius of Carthage; Augustine of
Hippo Regius; Florentius of the other Hippo; and Secundinus of
Megarmita.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II.](2111096.md)
