[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111098)  [Next](2111100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p1"></span>Follows up the same argument with
passages from the Old Testament.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>But</span> as there is an abundant
supply of witnesses to the holy nativity; viz., all that has been on
this account written, to hear witness to it, let us examine in some
slight degree an announcement about God even in the Old Testament, that
you may know that the fact that the birth of God was to be from a virgin
was not only then announced when it actually came to pass, but had been
foretold from the very beginning of the world, that, as the event to be
brought about was ineffable, incredulity of the fact when actually
present might be removed by its having been previously announced while
still future. And so the prophet Isaiah says: “Behold a virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which is
interpreted God with us.” <span id="fr_2395"></span>[2396](#fn_2395.md)
What room is there here for doubt, you incredulous person? <span
id="fr_2396"></span>[2397](#fn_2396.md) The prophet said that a virgin
should conceive: a virgin *has* conceived: that a Son should be born: a
Son *has* been born: that He should be called God: He is called God. For
He is called by that name as being of that nature. Therefore when the
Spirit of God said that He should be called God, He proved that He is
without the Spirit of God who makes himself a stranger to all fellowship
with the Divine title. “Behold then,” he says, “a virgin shall conceive
and bear a Son, and they shall call His name Emmanuel, which is
interpreted God with us.” But here is a point on which it is possible
that your shuffling incredulity may fasten; viz., by saying that this
which the prophet declared He should be called referred not to the glory
of His Divinity, but to the name by which He should be addressed. But
what are we to do because Christ is never spoken of by this name in the
gospels, though the Spirit of God cannot be said to have spoken falsely
through the prophet? How is it then? Surely that we should understand
that that prophecy then foretold the name of His Divine nature and not
of His humanity. For since in His manhood united to the Godhead <span
id="fr_2397"></span>[2398](#fn_2397.md) He received another name <span
id="page_558">p. 558</span> <span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-Page_558"></span>in
the gospel, it is certainly clear that *this* name belonged to His
humanity, *that* to His Divinity. But let us proceed further and summon
other true witnesses to establish the truth: For where we are speaking
about the Godhead, the Divinity cannot be better established than by His
own witnesses. So then the same prophet says elsewhere: “For unto us a
Son is born: unto us a child is given; and the government shall be upon
His shoulder; and His name shall be called the angel of great counsel,
God the mighty, the Father of the world to come, the Prince of
peace.” <span id="fr_2398"></span>[2399](#fn_2398.md) Just as above the
prophet had expressly said that He should be called Emmanuel, so here he
says that He should be called “the angel of great counsel, and God the
mighty, and the Father of the world to come and the prince of peace”
(although we certainly never read that He was called by these names in
the gospel): of course that we may understand that these are not terms
belonging to His human, but to His Divine nature; and that the name used
in the gospel belonged to the manhood which He took upon Him, <span
id="fr_2399"></span>[2400](#fn_2399.md) and this one to His innate power.
And because God was to be born in human form, these names were so
distributed in the sacred economy, that to the manhood a human name was
given and to the Divinity a Divine one. Therefore he says: “He shall be
called the angel of great counsel, God the mighty, the Father of the
world to come, the prince of peace.” Not, O heretic, whoever you may be,
not that here the prophet, full as he was of the Holy Spirit, followed
your example and compared Him who was born to a molten image and a
figure fashioned without sense. <span
id="fr_2400"></span>[2401](#fn_2400.md) For “a Son,” he says, “is born to
us, a Child is given to us; and the government shall be upon his
shoulder; and His name shall be called the angel of great counsel, God
the mighty.” And that you may not imagine Him whom He announced as
God <span id="fr_2401"></span>[2402](#fn_2401.md) to be other than Him who
was born in the flesh, he adds a term referring to His birth, saying: “A
child is born to us: a son is given to us.” Do you see how many titles
the prophet used to make clear the reality of His birth in the body? for
he called Him both Son and child on purpose that the manner of the child
which was born might be more clearly shown by a name referring to His
infancy; and the Holy Spirit foreseeing without doubt this perversity of
blasphemous heretics, showed to the whole world that it was God who was
born, by the very terms and words used; that even if a heretic was
determined to utter blasphemy, he might not find any loophole for his
blasphemy. Therefore he says: “A Son is born to us; a child is given to
us; and the government shall be upon His shoulder; and His name shall be
called the angel of great counsel, God the mighty, the Father of the
world to come, the prince of peace.” He teaches that this child which
was born is both prince of peace and Father of the world to come and God
the mighty. What room is there then for shuffling? This child which is
born cannot be severed from God who is born in Him, for he called Him,
whom he spoke of as born, Father of the world to come; Him whom he
called a child, he foretold as God the mighty. What is it, O heretic?
Whither will you betake yourself? Every place is hedged and shut in:
there is no possibility of getting out of it. There is nothing for it
but that you should at length be obliged to confess the mistake which
you *would* not understand. But not content with these passages which
are indeed enough let us inquire what the Holy Ghost said through
another prophet. “Shall a man,” says he, “pierce his God, for you are
piercing me?” <span id="fr_2402"></span>[2403](#fn_2402.md) In order that
the subject of the prophecy might be still clearer the prophet foretells
what he proclaimed of the Lord’s passion as if from the mouth of Him of
whom he was speaking. “Shall a man pierce his God, for you are piercing
me?” Does not our Lord God, I ask, seem to have said this when He was
led to the Cross? Why indeed do you not acknowledge Me as your Redeemer?
Why are ye ignorant of God clothed in flesh for you? Are you <span
id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-Page_559"></span>preparing death for your Saviour?
Are yon leading forth to death the Author of life? I am your God whom ye
are lifting up: your God whom ye are crucifying. What mistake, I ask, is
here or what madness is it? “Shall a man pierce his God, for you are
piercing me?” Do you see how exactly the words describe what was
actually done? Could you ask for anything more express or clearer? Do
you see how sacred testimonies follow our Incarnate Lord Jesus Christ
from the very cradle to the Cross which He bore, as here you can see
that He whom elsewhere you read of as God when born in the flesh was God
when pierced on the cross? And so there, where His birth was treated of,
He is spoken of by the prophet as God: and here where His crucifixion is
concerned, He is most clearly named God; that the taking upon Him of
manhood might not in any point prejudice dignity of His Divinity, nor
the humiliation of His body and the shame of the passion affect the
glory of His majesty; for His condescension to so lowly a birth and His
generous goodness in enduring his passion ought to increase our love and
devotion to Him; since it is certainly a great and monstrous sin if, the
more He lavishes love upon us, the less He is honoured by us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2395"></span>[557:2396](2111099.htm#fr_2395.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p3"></span> [Isa. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2396"></span>[557:2397](2111099.htm#fr_2396.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p4"></span> *Incredule* (Petschenig).
*Incredulæ* (Gazæus).

<span id="fn_2397"></span>[557:2398](2111099.htm#fr_2397.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p5"></span> Here is an instance of language
which the mature judgment of the Church has rejected, as experience
showed how it was capable of being pressed into the service of heresy.
*Homo unitus Deo*, in Cassian’s mouth evidently means the *manhood
joined to the Godhead*, but the words might easily be taken as implying
that *a man* was united to God, i.e., that there were in the Incarnation
two persons, one assuming and the other assumed, which was the essence
of Nestorianism. Compare above, the note on *Homo* to Book I. c. v.

<span id="fn_2398"></span>[558:2399](2111099.htm#fr_2398.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6"></span> [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.1"></span> where in the LXX. B reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.2"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.3"></span>τι παιδίον ἑγεννήθη
ἡμῖν, ὑιὸς καὶ ἐδόθη ἡμῖν, οὗ ἡ ἀρχὴ ἐγενήθη ἐπὶ τοὺ ὤμου αὐτοῦ, καὶ
καλεῖται τὸ ὄνομα αῦτοῦ Μεγάλης Βουλῆς ἄγγελος ἄζω γὰρ κ.τ.λ</span>. To
this, however, <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.4"></span>א</span> and A add after <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.5"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.6"></span>γγελος, θαυμαστὸς
σύμβουλος· Θεὸς</span> (our <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.7"></span>Θεὸς</span> A) <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.8"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.9"></span>σχυρὸς ἐξουσιαστὴς ἄρχων εἰρήνης πατὴρ
τοῦ μέλλοντος αἱῶνος</span> and hence in the main comes the old Latin
version, which Cassian here follows. Jerome’s version has Parvulus enim
natus est nobis et filius datus est nobis; et factus est principatus
super humerum ejus: et vocabitur nomen ejus admirabilis consiliarius
Deus fortis pater futuri sæculi princeps pacis. The Hebrew has nothing
directly corresponding to the “angel of great counsel,” which seems to
be intended as a paraphrase of “Wonderful Counsellor” (cf. [Judg. xiii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.10"></span>), while “Father of the world to come”
is an interpretation of the Hebrew “Father of eternity.”

<span id="fn_2399"></span>[558:2400](2111099.htm#fr_2399.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p6.11"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p7"></span> *Suscepti hominis*. Cf. the line in
the Te Deum, which originally ran “Tu ad liberandum mundum suscepisti
hominem: non horruisti virginis uterum.”

<span id="fn_2400"></span>[558:2401](2111099.htm#fr_2400.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p8"></span> See the language of Nestorius
himself quoted below in Book VII. c. vi. and cf. V. iii.

<span id="fn_2401"></span>[558:2402](2111099.htm#fr_2401.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p9"></span> The text of Gazæus omits *Deus*.

<span id="fn_2402"></span>[558:2403](2111099.htm#fr_2402.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p10"></span> [Malachi iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>. Jerome’s rendering is almost
identical “Si affiget homo Deum, quia vos configitis me,” where the
Douay version strangely departs from the literal sense of the word and
renders vaguely “afflict.” It is clear however that it was intended to
be understood literally, as it is here taken by Cassian as a direct
prophecy of the Crucifixion. The LXX. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>πτερνιεῖ</span>. The Hebrew word, which
is only found again in [Prov. xxii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p10.3"></span>, appears to mean “defraud.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. He produces testimonies to the same doctrine from the
Apostle Paul.](2111100.md)
