[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111008)  [Next](2111010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.v.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p1"></span>How he fled to a monastery when his wife
would not consent.

<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.v.ix-p2.1"></span>And</span> when his wife was hard and would
not consent to him as he constantly persisted with entreaties of this
kind, but said that as she was in the flower of her age she could not
altogether do without the solace of her husband, and further that
supposing she was deserted by him and fell into sin, the guilt would
rather be his who had broken the bonds of wedlock: to this he, when he
had for a long while urged the condition of human nature (which being so
weak and uncertain, it would be dangerous for it to be any longer mixed
up with carnal desires and works), added the assertion that it was not
right for anyone to cut himself off from that virtue to which he had
learnt that he ought by all means to cleave, and that it was more
dangerous to disregard goodness when discovered, than to fail to love it
before it was discovered; further that he was already involved in the
guilt of a fall if when he had discovered such grand and heavenly
blessings he had preferred earthly and mean ones. Further that the
grandeur of perfection was open to every age and either sex, and that
all the members of the Church were urged to scale the heights of
heavenly goodness when the Apostle said: “So run that ye may
obtain;” <span id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178) nor should those who
were ready and eager for it hang back because of the delays of the slow
and dawdlers, as it is better for the sluggards to be urged on by those
running before than for those who are doing their best to be hampered by
the slothful. Further that he had determined and made up his mind to
renounce the world and to die to the world that he might live to God,
and that if he could not attain this happiness; viz., to pass with his
wife into union with Christ, he would rather be saved even with the loss
of one member, and enter into the kingdom of heaven as one maimed rather
than be condemned with his body whole. But he also added and spoke as
follows: If Moses suffered wives to be divorced for the hardness of
their hearts, why should not Christ allow this for the desire of
chastity, especially when the same Lord among those other affections;
viz., for fathers and mothers and children (all due regard to which not
only the law but He Himself also charged to be shown, yet for His name’s
sake and for the desire of perfection He decreed that they should not
simply be disregarded but actually hated)—to these, I say, He joined
also the mention of wives, saying: “And everyone that hath left house,
or brethren or sisters or father or mother or wife or children for My
name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold and shall inherit eternal
life.” <span id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179) So far then is He from
allowing anything to be set against that perfection which He is
proclaiming, that He actually enjoins that the ties to father and mother
should be broken and disregarded out of love for Him, though according
to the Apostle it is the first commandment with promise; viz., “Honour
thy father and thy mother, which is the first commandment with promise,
that it may be well with thee and that thy days may be long upon
earth.” <span id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180) And as the word of
the gospel condemns those who break the chains of matrimony where there
has been no sin of adultery, so it clearly promises a reward of an
hundredfold to those who have cast off a carnal yoke out of love for
Christ and the desire for chastity. Wherefore if it can be brought about
that you may listen to reason and be turned together with me to this
most desirable choice; viz., that we should together serve the Lord and
escape the pains of hell, I will not refuse the affection of marriage,
<span id="page_507">p. 507</span> <span
id="iv.vi.v.ix-Page_507"></span>nay I will embrace it with a still
greater love. For I acknowledge and honour my helpmeet assigned to me by
the word of the Lord, and I do not refuse to be joined to her in an
unbroken tie of love in Christ, nor do I separate from me what the Lord
joined to me by the law of the original condition, <span
id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181) if only you yourself will be what
your Maker meant you to be. But if you will not be a helpmeet, but
prefer to make yourself a deceiver and an assistance not to me but to
the adversary, and fancy that the sacrament of matrimony was granted to
you for this reason that you may deprive yourself of this salvation
which is offered to you, and also hold me back from following the
Saviour as a disciple, then I will resolutely lay hold on the words
which were uttered by the lips of Abbot John, or rather of Christ
Himself, so that no carnal affection may be able to tear me away from
spiritual blessings, for He says: “He that hateth not father and mother
and children and brothers and sisters and wife and lands, yea and his
own soul also, cannot be My disciple.” <span
id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182) When then by these and such like
words the woman’s purpose was not moved and she persisted in the same
obstinate hardness, If, said the blessed Theonas, I cannot drag you away
from death, neither shall you separate me from Christ: but it is safer
for me to be divorced from a human person than from God. And so by the
aid of God’s grace he at once set about the execution of his purpose and
suffered not the ardour of his desire to grow cool through any delay.
For at once he stripped himself of all his worldly goods, and fled to a
monastery, where in a very short time he was so famous for the splendour
of his sanctity and humility that when John of blessed memory departed
this life to the Lord, and the holy Elias, a man who was no less great
than his predecessor, had likewise died, Theonas was chosen by the
judgment of all as the third to succeed them in the administration of
the almsgiving.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[506:2179](2111009.htm#fr_2178) <span
id="iv.vi.v.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p3"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[506:2180](2111009.htm#fr_2179) <span
id="iv.vi.v.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p4"></span> S. [Matt. xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029)<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[506:2181](2111009.htm#fr_2180) <span
id="iv.vi.v.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p5"></span> [Eph.
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#003)<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[507:2182](2111009.htm#fr_2181) <span
id="iv.vi.v.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p6"></span> Cf. [Gen. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018)<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[507:2183](2111009.htm#fr_2182) <span
id="iv.vi.v.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p7"></span> S. [Luke xiv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026)<span id="iv.vi.v.ix-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. An explanation that we may not appear to recommend
separation from wives.](2111010)
