[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111043)  [Next](2111045.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.vii.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.vii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.vi-p1"></span>How those who think that they are
without sin are like purblind people.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>As</span> if we were to suppose that two
men, one of whom was clear sighted with perfect vision, and the other,
one whose eyesight was obscured by dimness of vision, had together
entered some great house that was filled with a quantity of bundles,
instruments, and vessels, would not he, whose dullness of vision
prevented his seeing everything, assert that there was nothing there but
chests, beds, benches, tables, and whatever met the fingers of one who
felt them rather than the eyes of one who saw them, while on the other
hand would not the other, who searched out what was hidden with clear
and bright eyes, declare that there were there many most minute
articles, and what could scarcely be counted; which if they were ever
gathered up into a single pile, would by their number equal or perhaps
exceed the size of those few things which the other had felt. So then
even saints, and, if we may so say, men who *see*, whose aim is the
utmost perfection, cleverly detect in themselves even those things which
the gaze of our mind being as it were darkened cannot see, and condemn
them very severely, to such an extent that those who have not, as it
seems to our carelessness, dimmed the whiteness of their body, which is
as it were like snow, with even the slightest spot of sin, seem to
themselves to be covered with many stains, if, I will not say any evil
or vain thoughts creep into the doors of their mind, but even the
recollection of a Psalm which has to be said takes off the attention of
the kneeler at the time for prayer. For if, say they, when we ask some
great man, I will not say for our life and salvation, but for some
advantage and profit, we fasten all our attention of mind and body upon
him, and hang with trembling expectation on his nod, with no slight
dread lest haply some foolish or unsuitable word may turn aside the pity
of our hearer, and then too, when we are standing in the forum or in the
courts of earthly judges, with our opponent standing over against us, if
in the midst of the prosecution and trial any coughing, or spitting, or
laughing, or yawning, or sleep overtakes us, with what malice will our
ever watchful opponent stir up the severity of the judge to our damage:
how much more, when we entreat Him who knows all secrets, should we, by
reason of our imminent danger of everlasting death, plead with earnest
and anxious prayer for the kindness of the judge, especially as on the
other side there stands one who is both our crafty seducer and our
accuser! And not without reason will he be bound by no light sin, but by
a grievous fault of wickedness, who, when he pours forth his prayer to
God, departs at once from His sight as if from the eyes of one who
neither sees nor hears, and follows the vanity of wicked thoughts. But
they who cover the eyes of their heart with a thick veil of their sins,
and as the Saviour says, “Seeing see not and hearing hear not nor
understand,” <span id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255.md) hardly regard in
the inmost recesses of their breast even those faults which are great
and deadly, and cannot with clear eyes look at any deceitful thoughts,
nor even those vague and secret desires which strike the mind with
slight and subtle suggestions, nor the captivities of their soul, but
always wandering among impure thoughts they know not how to be sorry
when they are distracted from that meditation which is so special, nor
can they grieve that they have lost anything as while they lay open
their mind to the entrance of any thought as they please, they have
nothing set before them to hold to as the main thing or to desire in
every way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[523:2256](2111044.htm#fr_2255.md) <span
id="iv.vi.vii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii.vi-p3"></span> S. [Matt. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.vi.vii.vi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. How those who maintain that a man can be without sin
are charged with a twofold error.](2111045.md)
