[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111177)  [Next](2111179) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iii-p1"></span>He replies to the cavil that the
one who is born must be of one substance with the one who bears.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.iii-p2.1"></span>The</span> second blasphemous slander
or slanderous blasphemy of your heresy is when you say that the one who
is born must be of one substance with the one who bears. It is not very
different from the previous one, for it differs from it in terms rather
than in fact and reality. For when we are treating of the birth of God,
you maintain that one of greater power could not be born of Mary just as
above you maintain than one older could not be begotten. And so you may
take it that the same answer may be given to this as to what you said
before: or you may conceive that the answer given to this assertion,
which you are now making, applies to that also. You say then that the
one who is born must be of one substance with the one who bears. If this
refers to earthly creatures, it is most certainly the case. But if it
refers to the birth of God, why in the case of His birth do you regard
precedents from nature? for appointments are subject to Him who
appointed them, and not the appointer to His appointments. But would you
like to know more fully how these slanders of yours are not only wicked
but foolish, and the idle talk of one who does not in the least see the
omnipotence of God? Tell me, I pray, you who think that like things can
only be produced from like things, whence was the origin of that
unaccountable host of quails in the wilderness of old time to feed the
children of Israel, for nowhere do we read that they had been previously
born of mother birds, but that they were brought up and came suddenly.
Again whence came that heavenly food which for forty years fell on the
camp of the Hebrews? Did manna produce manna? But these refer to ancient
miracles. And what of more recent ones? With a few loaves and small
fishes the Lord Jesus Christ fed countless hosts of the people that
followed Him, and not once only. The reason that they were satisfied lay
not in the food: for a secret and unseen cause satisfied the hungry
folk, especially as there was much more left when they were filled than
there had been set before them when they were hungry. And how was all
this brought about that when those who ate were satisfied, the food
itself was multiplied by an extraordinary increase? We read that in
Galilee wine was produced from water. Tell me how what was of one nature
produced something of an altogether different substance from its own
quality? Especially when (which exactly applies to the birth of the
Lord) it was the production of a nobler substance from what was inferior
to it? Tell me then how from mere water there could be produced rich and
splendid wine? How was it that one thing was drawn out, another poured
in? Was the cistern a well of such a nature as to change the water drawn
from it into the best wine? Or did the character of the vessels or the
diligence of the servants effect this? Most certainly neither of these.
And how is it that the *manner* of the fact is not understood by the
thoughts of the heart, though the *truth* of the fact is firmly held by
the conscience? In the gospel clay was placed on the eyes of a blind man
and when it was washed off <span id="fr_2601"></span>[2602](#fn_2601)
eyes <span id="page_606">p. 606</span> <span
id="iv.vii.viii.iii-Page_606"></span>were produced. Had water the power
of giving birth to eyes, or clay of creating light? Certainly not,
especially as water could be of no use to a blind man, and clay would
actually hinder the sight of those who could see. And how was it that a
thing that itself in its own nature was injurious, became the means of
restoring health; and that what was ordinarily hurtful to sound people,
was then made the instrument of healing? You say that the power of God
brought it about, and the remedy of God caused it, and that all these
things of which we have been speaking were simply brought about by
Divine Omnipotence; which is able to fashion new things from unwonted
material, and to make serviceable things out of their opposites, and to
change what belongs to the realm of things impossible and impracticable
into possibilities and actual performances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2601"></span>[605:2602](2111178.htm#fr_2601) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iii-p3"></span> *Abluto eo* (Petschenig): *Ab luto
eo* (Gazæus).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. How God has shown His Omnipotence in His birth in
time as well as in everything else.](2111179)
