[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111205)  [Next](2111207.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p1"></span>He bemoans the unhappy lot of
Constantinople, owing to the misfortune which has overtaken it from that
heretic; and at the same time he urges the citizens to stand fast in the
ancient Catholic and ancestral faith.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> I also, humble and
insignificant as I am in name as in desert, and although I cannot claim
a place as Teacher among those illustrious Bishops of Constantinople,
yet venture to claim the zeal and enthusiasm of a disciple. For I was
admitted into the sacred ministry by the Bishop John, of blessed memory,
and offered to God, and even though I am absent in body yet I am still
there in heart: and though by actual presence I no longer mix with that
most dear and honourable people of God, yet I am still joined to them in
spirit. And hence it comes that condoling and sympathizing with them, I
broke out just now into the utterance of our common grief and sorrow,
and in my weakness cried out (which was all that I could do) by means of
the dolorous lamentation of my works, as if for my own limbs and
members: for if as the Apostle says, when the smaller part of the body
is grieved, the greater part grieves and sympathizes with it, <span
id="fr_2682"></span>[2683](#fn_2682.md) how much more should the smaller
part sympathize when the greater part is grieved? It is indeed utterly
inhuman for the smaller parts not to feel the sufferings of the greater
in one and the same body, if the greater feel those of the smaller.
Wherefore I pray and beseech you, you who live within the circuit of
Constantinople, and who are my fellow-citizens through the love of my
country, and my brothers through the unity of the faith; separate
yourselves from that ravening wolf who (as it is written) devours the
people of God, as if they were bread. <span
id="fr_2683"></span>[2684](#fn_2683.md) Touch not, taste not anything of
his, for all those things lead to death. Come out from the midst of him
and be ye separate and touch not the unclean thing. Remember your
ancient teachers, and your priests; Gregory whose fame was spread
through the world, Nectarius renowned for holiness, John a marvel of
faith and purity. John, I say; that John who like John the Evangelist
was indeed a disciple of Jesus and an Apostle; and so to speak ever
reclined on the breast and heart of the Lord. Remember him, I say.
Follow him. Think of his purity, his faith, his doctrine, and holiness.
Remember <span id="page_621">p. 621</span> <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-Page_621"></span> him ever as your teacher and
nurse, in whose bosom and embraces you as it were grew up. Who was the
teacher in common both of you and of me: whose disciples and pupils we
are. Read his writings. Hold fast his instruction. Embrace his faith and
merits. For though to attain this is a hard and magnificent thing: yet
even to follow is beautiful and sublime. For in the highest matters, not
merely the attainment, but even the attempt to copy is worthy of praise.
For scarcely anyone entirely misses all parts in that to which he is
trying to climb and reach. He then should ever be in your minds and
almost in your sight: he should live in your hearts and in your
thoughts. He would himself commend to you this that I have written, for
it was he who taught me what I have written: and so do not think of this
as mine, so much as his: for the stream comes from the spring, and
whatever you think belongs to the disciple, ought all to be referred to
the honour of the master. But, beyond and above all I pray with all my
heart and voice, to Thee, O God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that Thou wouldest fill with the gift of Thy love whatever we have
written by Thy bounteous grace. And because, as the Lord our God Thine
Only Begotten Son Himself taught us, Thou hast so loved this world as to
send Thine Only Begotten Son to save the world, grant to Thy people whom
Thou hast redeemed that in the Incarnation of Thine Only Begotten Son
they may perceive both Thy gift and His love: and that all may
understand the truth that for us Thine Only Begotten, our Lord God, was
born and suffered and rose again, and may so love it that the
condescension of His glory may increase our love: and let not His
Humility lead to a diminution of His honour in the hearts of all men,
but let it ever produce an increase of love: and may we all rightly and
wisely comprehend the blessings of His Sacred Compassion, so as to see
that we owe the more to God, in proportion as for our sakes God humbled
Himself yet lower.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2682"></span>[620:2683](2111206.htm#fr_2682.md) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p3"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. xii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2683"></span>[620:2684](2111206.htm#fr_2683.md) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p4"></span> [Ps.
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004.md), [Col.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023.md), [2 Cor.
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](2111207.md)
