[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111035)  [Next](2111037.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.v.xxxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxxvi-p1"></span>The answer, telling that this
question should be reserved for a future Conference.

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxxvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.v.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>Theonas</span>: Your zeal indeed, whereby
you desire to reach the way of perfection, not for a moment only but
fully and perfectly, urges us to continue this discussion unweariedly.
For you are anxiously inquiring not about external chastity or outward
circumcision, but about that which is secret, as you know that complete
perfection does not consist in this visible continence of the flesh
which can be attained either by constraint, or by hypocrisy even by
unbelievers, but in that voluntary and invisible purity of heart, which
the blessed Apostle describes as follows: “For he is not a Jew which is
so outwardly, nor is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh,
but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and the circumcision is that of
the heart, in the spirit not in the letter, whose praise is not of men
but of God,” <span id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227.md) who alone
searches the secrets of the heart. But because it is not possible for
your wish to be fully satisfied (as the short space of the night that is
left is not enough for the investigation of this most difficult
question,) I think it well to postpone it for a while. For these
matters, as they should be propounded by us quietly and with an heart
entirely free from all bustling thoughts, so should they be received
into your minds; for just as the inquiry ought to be undertaken for the
sake of our common purity, so they cannot be learnt or acquired by one
who is without the gift of uprightness. For we do not ask what arguments
of empty words, but what the inward faith of the conscience and the
greater force of truth can persuade. And therefore with regard to the
knowledge and teaching of this purification nothing can be brought
forward except by one who has had experience of it, nor can anything be
committed except to one who is a most eager and very earnest lover of
the truth itself, who does not hope to attain it by asking questions
with mere vain words, but by striving with all his might and main, with
no wish for useless chattering but with the desire to purify himself
internally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[518:2228](2111036.htm#fr_2227.md) <span
id="iv.vi.v.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.v.xxxvi-p3"></span> [Rom.
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.vi.v.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conference XXII. The Second Conference of Abbot Theonas. On
Nocturnal Illusions.](2111037.md)
