[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111173)  [Next](2111175) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p1"></span>That the figure Synecdoche, in
which the part stands for the whole, is very familiar to the Holy
Scripture.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>Whatever</span> then you say of the
Lord Jesus Christ, you say of the whole person, and in mentioning the
Son of God you mention the Son of man, and in mentioning the Son of man
you mention the Son of God: by the grammatical trope synecdoche in which
you understand the whole from the parts, and a part is put for the
whole: and the holy Scriptures certainly show this, as in them the Lord
often uses this trope, and teaches in this way about others and would
have us understand about Himself in the same way. For sometimes days,
and things, and men, and times are de<span id="page_603">p. 603</span>
<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-Page_603"></span>noted in holy Scripture in
no other fashion. As in this case where God declares that Israel shall
serve the Egyptians for four hundred years, and says to Abraham: “Know
thou that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land not theirs, and they
shall bring them under bondage and afflict them four hundred
years.” <span id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587) Whereas if you take
into account the whole time after that God spoke, they are more than
four hundred: but if you only reckon the time in which they were in
slavery, they are less. And in giving this period indeed, unless you
understand it in this way, we must think that the Word of God lied (and
away with such a thought from Christian minds!). But since from the time
of the Divine utterance, the whole period of their lives amounted to
more than four hundred years, and their bondage endured for not nearly
four hundred, you must understand that the part is to be taken for the
whole, or the whole for the part. There is also a similar way of
representing days and nights, where, when in the case of either division
of time one day is meant, either period is shown by a portion of a
single period. And indeed in this way the difficulty about the time of
our Lord’s Passion is cleared up: for whereas the Lord prophesied that
after the model of the prophet Jonah, the Son of man would be three days
and three nights in the heart of the earth, <span
id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588) and whereas after the sixth day of
the week on which He was crucified, He was only in hell <span
id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589) for one day and two nights, how can
we show the truth of the Divine words? Surely by the trope of
Synecdoche, i.e., because to the day on which He was crucified the
previous night belongs, and to the night on which He rose again, the
coming day; and so when there is added the night which preceded the day
belonging to it, and the day which followed the night belonging to it,
we see that there is nothing lacking to the whole period of time, which
is made up of its portions. The holy Scriptures abound in such instances
of ways of speaking: but it would take too long to relate them all. For
so when the Psalm says, “What is a man that Thou art mindful of
Him,” <span id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590) from the part we
understand the whole, as while only one man is mentioned the whole human
race is meant. So also where Ahab sinned we are told that the people
sinned. Where—though all are mentioned, a part is to be understood from
the whole. John also the Lord’s forerunner says: “After me cometh a man
who is preferred before me for He was before me.” <span
id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591) How then does He mean that He would
come after Him, whom He shows to be before Him? For if this is
understood of a man who was afterwards born, how was he before him? But
if it is taken of the Word how is it, “a *man* cometh after me?” Except
that in the one Lord Jesus Christ is shown both the posteriority of the
manhood and the precedence of the Godhead. And so the result is that one
and the same Lord was before him and came after him: for according to
the flesh He was posterior in time to John; and according to His Deity
was before all men. And so he, when he named that man, denoted both the
manhood and the Word, for as the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God was
complete in both manhood and Divinity <span
id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592) in mentioning one of these natures
in Him he denoted the whole person. And what need is there of anything
further? I think that the day would fail me if I were to try to collect
or to tell everything that could be said on this subject. And what we
have already said is enough, at any rate on this part of the subject,
both for the exposition of the Creed, and for the requirements of our
case, and for the limits of our book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[603:2588](2111174.htm#fr_2587) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p3"></span> [Gen. xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013)<span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[603:2589](2111174.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p4"></span> S. [Matt. xii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)<span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[603:2590](2111174.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p5"></span> *Apud inferos*.

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[603:2591](2111174.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p6"></span> [Ps. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[603:2592](2111174.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p7"></span> S. [John i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015)<span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[603:2593](2111174.htm#fr_2592) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.xxiii-p8"></span> Verbi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII.](2111175)
