[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111099)  [Next](2111101.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p1"></span>He produces testimonies to the same
doctrine from the Apostle Paul.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>But</span> passing over these things
which cannot possibly be unfolded because there would be no limit to the
telling of them, as the blessings which he gives are without stint, it
is time for us to consult the Apostle Paul, the stoutest and clearest
witness to Him, for he can tell us everything about God in the most
trustworthy way because God always spoke from his breast. He then, the
chosen teacher of the nations, who was sent to destroy the errors of
Gentile superstition, bears his witness in the following way to the
grace and coming of our Lord God: “The grace,” he says, “of God and our
Saviour appeared unto all men, instructing us that denying ungodliness
and worldly desires we should live soberly and justly and godly in this
world, looking for the blessed hope and coming of the glory of the great
God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2403"></span>[2404](#fn_2403.md) He says that “there appeared the
grace of God our Saviour.” Admirably does he use a word suited to show
the arrival of a new grace and birth; for by saying “there *appeared*,”
he indicated the approach of a new grace and birth, for thenceforward
the gift of a new grace began to appear, from the moment when God
appeared as born in the world. Thus by using the right word, and one
exactly suitable, he shows the light of this new grace almost as if he
pointed to it with his finger. For that is most properly said to
*appear*, which is shown by sudden light manifesting it. Just as we read
in the gospel that the star *appeared* to the wise men in the
East: <span id="fr_2404"></span>[2405](#fn_2404.md) and in Exodus: “There
*appeared*,” he says, “to Moses an angel in a flame of fire in the
bush:” <span id="fr_2405"></span>[2406](#fn_2405.md) for in all these and
in the case of other visions in the Holy Scripture, Scripture determined
that this word in particular should be used, that it might speak of that
as “appearing,” which shone forth with unwonted light. So then the
Apostle also, well knowing the coming of the heavenly grace, which
appeared at the approach of the holy nativity, indicated it by using a
term applied to a bright appearance; expressly in order to say that it
*appeared*, as it shone with the splendour of a new light. “There
appeared” then “the grace of God our Saviour.” Surely you cannot raise
any quibble about the ambiguity of the names in this place, so as to say
that “Christ” is one and “God” another, or to divide “the Saviour” from
the glory of His name, and separate “the Lord” from the Divinity? Lo,
here the vessel <span id="fr_2406"></span>[2407](#fn_2406.md) of God speaks
from God, and testifies by the clearest statement that the grace of God
appeared from Mary. And in order that you may not deny that God appeared
from Mary, he at once adds the name of Saviour, on purpose that you may
believe that He who is born of Mary is God, whom you cannot deny to have
been born a Saviour, in accordance with this passage: “For to you is
born to-day a Saviour.” <span id="fr_2407"></span>[2408](#fn_2407.md) O
excellent teacher of the Gentiles truly given by God to them, for he
knew that this wild heretical folly would arise, which would turn to
controversial uses the names of God, and would not hesitate to slander
God from His own titles; and so just in order that the heretic might not
separate the title of Saviour from the Divinity he put first the name of
God, that the name of God standing first might claim as His all the
names which followed, and that no one might imagine that in what
followed Christ was spoken of as a mere man, as by the very first word
used he had <span id="page_560">p. 560</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-Page_560"></span>taught that He was God. “Looking,”
says the same Apostle, “for the blessed hope and coming of the glory of
the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.” Certainly that teacher of
divine wisdom saw that plain and simple teaching would not in itself be
sufficient to meet the crafty wiles of the devil’s cunning, unless he
fortified the holy preaching of the faith with a protection of extreme
care. And so although he had used the name of God the Saviour up above,
he here adds “Jesus Christ,” in case you might think that the mere name
of Saviour was not enough to indicate to you our Lord Jesus Christ, and
might fail to understand that the God, whom you acknowledge as God the
Saviour, is the same Jesus Christ. What then does he say? He says:
“Looking for the blessed hope and coming of the glory of the great God
and our Saviour Jesus Christ.” Nothing is here wanting as regards the
titles of our Lord and you see here God, and the Saviour, and Jesus, and
Christ. But when you see all these, you see that they all belong to God.
For you have heard of Him as God, but as Saviour as well. You have heard
of Him as God, but as Jesus as well. You have heard of Him as God, but
as Christ as well. That which the Divinity has joined and united
together cannot be separated by this diversity of titles; for whichever
you may seek for of them, all, you will find it there. The Saviour is
God, Jesus is God, Christ is God. In all of this which you hear, though
the titles used are many, yet they belong to one Person in power. For
whereas the Saviour is God, and Jesus is God, and Christ is God, it is
easy to see that all these, though different appellations, are united as
regards the Majesty. And when you hear quite plainly that one and the
same Person is called God in each case, you can surely clearly see that
in all these cases there is but one God spoken of. And so you cannot any
longer seek to make out a distinction of power from the different names
given to the Lord, or to make a difference of Person owing to variety of
titles. You cannot say: Christ was born of Mary, but God was not; for an
Apostle declares that God was. You cannot say that Jesus was born of
Mary, but God was not; for an Apostle testifies that God was. You cannot
say: the Saviour was born, but God was not; for an Apostle supports the
fact that God was. There is no way of escape for you. Whichever of the
titles of the Lord you may take, He is God, of whom you speak. You have
nothing to say: nothing to assert: nothing to invent in your wicked
falsehood. You can in impious unbelief refuse to believe: you have
nothing to deny in the matter of your blasphemy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2403"></span>[559:2404](2111100.htm#fr_2403.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p3"></span> [Titus ii.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2404"></span>[559:2405](2111100.htm#fr_2404.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p4"></span> S. [Matt.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2405"></span>[559:2406](2111100.htm#fr_2405.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p5"></span> [Exod. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2406"></span>[559:2407](2111100.htm#fr_2406.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p6"></span> *Vas Dei* (Petschenig): Gazæus has
*Vis Dei*.

<span id="fn_2407"></span>[559:2408](2111100.htm#fr_2407.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p7"></span> S. [Luke ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.iv-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. From the gifts of Divine grace which we receive
through Christ he infers that He is truly God.](2111101.md)
