[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111188)  [Next](2111190.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xiv-p1"></span>He shows how heretics pervert holy
Scripture, by replying to the argument drawn from the Apostle’s words,
“Without father, without mother,” etc.: [Heb.
vii.](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.xiv-p2.1"></span>You</span> then make use of the holy
Scriptures against God, and try to bring His own witnesses against Him.
But how? Truly so as to become a false accuser not only of God, but of
the evidences themselves. Nor indeed is it wonderful that, as you cannot
do what you want, you only do what you can: as you cannot turn the
sacred witnesses against God, you do what you can, and pervert them. For
you say: Then Paul tells a lie, when he says of Christ: “Without mother,
without genealogy.” <span id="fr_2624"></span>[2625](#fn_2624.md) I ask
you, of whom do you think that Paul said this? Of the Son and Word of
God, or of the Christ, whom you separate from the Son of God, and
blasphemously assert to be a mere man? If of the Christ, whom you
maintain to be a mere man, how could a man be born without a mother and
without a genealogy on the mother’s side? But if of the Word of God and
Son of God—what can we make of it, when the same Apostle, your own
witness, as you impiously imagine, testifies in the same place and by
the same witness, that He whom you assert to be without mother, was also
without father; saying, “Without father, without mother, without
genealogy”? It follows then that if you use the Apostle’s witness, since
you assert that the Son of God was “without mother,” you must also be
guilty of the blasphemy that He was “without father.” You see then in
what a downfall of impiety you have landed yourself, in your eagerness
for your perversity and wickedness, so that, while you say that the Son
of God had not a mother, you must also deny Him a Father—a thing which
no one yet since the world began, except perhaps a madman, ever did. And
this, whether with greater wickedness or folly, I hardly know; for what
is more foolish and silly than to give the name of Son and to try to
keep back the name of Father? But you say I don’t keep it back, I don’t
deny it. And what madness then drove you to quote that passage, where,
while you say that He had no mother, you must seem also to deny to Him a
Father? For as in the same passage He is said to be without mother and
also without father, it follows that if it can be understood that there
He is without mother, in the same way in which we understand that He is
without mother, we must also believe that He is without father. But that
hasty craze for denying <span id="page_612">p. 612</span> <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xiv-Page_612"></span>God did not see this; and when it
quoted mutilated, what was written entire, it failed to see that the
shameless and palpable lie could be refuted by laying open the contents
of the sacred volume. O foolish blasphemy, and madness! which, while it
failed to see what it ought to follow, had not the wit to see even what
could be read: as if, because it could get rid of its own intelligence,
it could get rid of the power of reading from everybody else, or as if
everybody would lose their eyes in their heads for reading, because it
had lost the eyes of the mind. Hear then, you heretic, the passage you
have garbled: hear in full and completely, what you quoted mutilated and
hacked about. The Apostle wants to make clear to every one the twofold
birth of God—and in order to show how the Lord was born in the Godhead
and in flesh, he says, “Without father, without mother:” for the one
belongs to the birth of Divinity, the other to that of the flesh. For as
He was begotten in His Divine nature “without mother,” so He is in the
body “without father:” and so though He is neither without father nor
without mother, we must believe in Him “without father and without
mother.” For if you regard Him as He is begotten of the Father, He is
without mother: if, as born of His mother, He is without father. And so
in each of these births He has one: in both together He is without each:
for the birth of Divinity had no need of mother, and for the birth of
His body, He was Himself sufficient, without a father. Therefore says
the Apostle “Without mother, without genealogy.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2624"></span>[611:2625](2111189.htm#fr_2624.md) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.xiv-p3"></span> [Heb. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. How Christ could be said by the Apostle to be without
genealogy.](2111190.md)
