[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111159)  [Next](2111161.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.vii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.vii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.ix-p1"></span>Again he convicts his opponent of
deadly heresy by his own confession.

<span id="iv.vii.vii.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.vii.ix-p2.1"></span>But</span> why are we arguing about
words, when the facts are clear enough? and seeking for a determination
of the matter from the terms of the Creed, when the Creed itself deals
with the question. Let us repeat the confession of the Creed, and of you
yourself (for yours it is as well as the Creed’s, for you made it yours
by confessing it), that you may see that you have departed not only from
the Creed but from yourself. “I believe” then, says the Creed, “In one
only true God, the Father Almighty, Maker of all things visible and
invisible: And in the Lord Jesus Christ, His only begotten Son, and the
first-born of every creature: Begotten of Him before all worlds and not
made; Very God of Very God; Being of one substance with the Father; By
whom both the worlds were framed, and all things were made. Who for us
came, and was born of the Virgin Mary.” “For us” then the Creed says,
our Lord Jesus Christ “came and was born of the Virgin Mary, and was
crucified under Pontius Pilate; and was buried, and rose again according
to the Scriptures.” The Churches are not ashamed to confess this: the
Apostles were not ashamed to preach it. You yourself, you, I say, whose
every utterance is now blasphemy, you who now deny everything, you did
not deny all these truths: that God was born; that God suffered, that
God rose again. And what next? Whither have you fallen? What have you
become? To what are you reduced? What do you say? What are you vomiting
forth? What, as one says, even mad Orestes himself would swear to be the
words of a madman. <span id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555.md) For what
is it that you say? “Who then is the Son of God who was born of the
Christotocos? As for instance if we were to say I believe in God the
Word, the only Son of God, begotten of His Father, Being of one
substance with the Father, who came down and was buried, would not our
ears be shocked at the sound? God dead?” And again: “Can it possibly be,
you say, that He who was begotten before all worlds, should be born a
second time, and be God?” If all these things cannot possibly be, how is
it that the Creed of the Churches says that they did happen? How is it
that you yourself said that they did? For let us compare what you now
say with what you formerly said. Once you said: “I believe in God the
Father Almighty; and in Jesus Christ His Son, Very God of Very God;
Being of one substance with the Father; who for us came and was born of
the Virgin Mary; and was crucified under Pontius Pilate; and was
buried.” But now what is it that you say? “If we should say: I believe
in God the Word, the only Son of God, Begotten of His Father; Being of
one substance with the Father, who came down and was buried, would not
our ears be shocked at the sound?” The bitterness indeed and blasphemy
of your words might drive us to a furious and ferocious attack in
answer; but we must somewhat curb the reins of our pious sorrow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[596:2556](2111160.htm#fr_2555.md) <span
id="iv.vii.vii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.vii.ix-p3"></span> Persius Sat. iii. l. 116…“quod ipse
non sani esse hominis non sanus juret Orestes.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. He inveighs against him because though he has forsaken
the Catholic religion, he nevertheless presumes to teach in the Church,
to sacrifice, and to give decisions.](2111161.md)
