[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111039)  [Next](2111041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.vii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.vii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.ii-p1"></span>How the Apostle completed many good
actions.

<span id="iv.vi.vii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.vii.ii-p2.1"></span>It</span> remains therefore for us to
measure its meaning and drift from the inmost feelings of the speaker,
and to discuss what the blessed Apostle called good, and what he
pronounced by comparison evil, not by the bare meaning of the words, but
with the same insight which he showed, and to investigate his meaning
with due regard to the worth and goodness of the speaker. For then we
shall be able to understand the words, which were uttered by God’s
inspiration, in accordance with his purpose and wish, when we weigh the
position and character of those by whom they were spoken, and are
ourselves clothed with the same feelings (not in words but by
experience), in accordance with the character of which most certainly
all the thoughts are conceived and opinions uttered. Wherefore let us
carefully consider what was in the main that good which the Apostle
could not do when he would. For we know that there are many good things
which we cannot deny that the blessed Apostle and all men as good as he
either have by nature, or acquire by grace. For chastity is good,
continence is praiseworthy, prudence is to be admired, kindness is
liberal, sobriety is careful, temperance is modest, pity is kind,
justice is holy: all of which we cannot doubt existed fully and in
perfection in the Apostle Paul and his companions, so that they taught
religion by the lesson of their virtues rather than their words. What if
they were always consumed with the constant care of all the churches and
watchful anxiety? How great a good is this pity, what perfection it is
to burn for them that are offended, to be weak with the weak! <span
id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233) If then the Apostle abounded with
such good things, we cannot recognize what that good was, in the
perfection of which the Apostle was lacking, unless we have advanced to
that state of mind in which he was speaking. And so all those virtues
which we say that he possessed, though they are like most splendid and
precious gems, yet when they are compared with that most beautiful and
unique pearl which the merchant in the gospel sought and wanted to
acquire by selling all that he possessed, so does their value seem poor
and trifling, so that if they are without hesitation got rid of, the
possession of one good thing alone will enrich the man who sells
countless good things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[520:2234](2111040.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="iv.vi.vii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii.ii-p3"></span> Cf. [2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span
id="iv.vi.vii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. What is really the good which the Apostle testifies
that he could not perform.](2111041)
