[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111121)  [Next](2111123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.v.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.v.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.vii.v.i-p1"></span>That Christ was before the Incarnation
God from everlasting.

<span id="iv.vii.v.i-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.v.i-p2.1"></span>As</span> we have finished three books with
the most certain and the most valuable witnesses, whose truth is
substantiated not only by human but also by Divine evidences, they would
abundantly suffice to prove our case by Divine authority, especially as
the Divine authority of the case itself would be enough for this. But
still as the whole mass of the sacred Scriptures is full of these
evidences, and where there are so many witnesses, there are so many
opinions to be urged—nay where Holy Scripture itself gives its witness
so to speak with one Divine mouth—we have thought it well to add some
others still, not from any need of confirmation, but because of the
supply of material at our disposal; so that anything which might be
unnecessary for purposes of defence, might be useful by way of
ornamentation. Therefore since in the earlier books we proved the
Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ while He was in the flesh by the
evidence not only of prophets and apostles, but of evangelists and
angels as well, let us now show that He who was born in the flesh was
God even before His Incarnation; that you may understand by the harmony
and concord of the evidences from the sacred Scriptures, that you ought
to believe that at His birth in the body He was both God and man, who
before His birth was only God, and that He who after He had been brought
forth by the Virgin in the body was God, was before His birth from the
Virgin, God the Word. Learn then first of all from the Apostle the
teacher of the whole world, that He who is without beginning, God, the
Son of God, became the Son of man at the end of the world, i.e., in the
fulness of the times. For he says: “But when the fulness of the times
was come, God sent His Son, made of a woman, made <span id="page_574">p.
574</span> <span id="iv.vii.v.i-Page_574"></span>under the law.” <span
id="fr_2447"></span>[2448](#fn_2447) Tell me then, before the Lord Jesus
Christ was born of His mother Mary, had God a Son or had He not? You
cannot deny that He had, for never yet was there either a son without a
father, or a father without a son: because as a son is so called with
reference to a father, so is a father so named with reference to a son.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2447"></span>[574:2448](2111122.htm#fr_2447) <span
id="iv.vii.v.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.i-p3"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="iv.vii.v.i-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. He infers from what he has said that the Virgin Mary
gave birth to a Son who had pre-existed and was greater than she herself
was.](2111123)
