[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111183)  [Next](2111185) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p1"></span>How those are wrong who say that the
birth of Christ was a secret, since it was clearly shown even to the
patriarch Jacob.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p2.1"></span>But</span> I suppose you excuse the
degradation offered to the Lord by means of a subordinate honour, by the
words “as the image of the secret God.” By the fact that you term Him an
image you compare Him to man’s estate. In speaking of Him as the image
of the secret God, you detract from the honour plainly due to Him. For
“God,” says David, “shall plainly come; our God, and shall not keep
silence.” <span id="fr_2614"></span>[2615](#fn_2614) And He surely came
and did not keep silence, who before that He in His own person uttered
anything after His birth, made known His advent by both earthly and
heavenly witnesses alike, while the star points Him out, the magi adore
Him, and angels declare Him. What more do you want? His voice was yet
silent on earth, and His glory was already crying aloud in heaven. Do
you say then that God was and is secret in Him? But this was not the
announcement of the Prophets, of the Patriarchs, aye and of the whole
Law. For they did not say that He would be secret, whose coming they all
foretold. You err in your wretched blindness, seeking grounds for
blasphemy and not finding them. You say that He was secret even after
His advent. I maintain that He was not secret even before His advent.
For did the mystery of God to be born of a Virgin escape the knowledge
of that celebrated Patriarch on whom the vision of God present with him
conferred a title, whereby from the name of Supplanter he rose to the
name of Israel? Who, when from the struggle with the man who wrestled
with him he understood the mystery of the Incarnation yet to come, said,
“I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.” <span
id="fr_2615"></span>[2616](#fn_2615) What, I pray you, had he seen, for
him to believe that he had seen God? Did God manifest Himself to him in
the midst of thunder and lightning? or when the heavens were opened, did
the dazzling face of the Deity show itself to him? Most certainly not:
but rather on the contrary he saw a man and acknowledged a God. O truly
worthy of the name he received, as with the eyes of the soul rather than
of the body he earned the honour of a title given by God! He saw a human
form wrestling with him, and declared that he saw God. He certainly knew
that human form was indeed God: for in that form in which God then
appeared, in the selfsame form He was in very truth afterwards to come.
Although why should we be surprised that so great a patriarch
unhesitatingly believed what God Himself so plainly showed in His own
Person to him, when he said, “I have seen God face to face and my life
is preserved.” How did God show to him so much of the presence of Deity,
that he could say that the face of God was shown to him? For it seems
that only a man had appeared to him, whom he had actually beaten in the
struggle. But God was certainly bringing this about by precursory signs,
that there might not be any one to disbelieve <span id="page_610">p.
610</span> <span id="iv.vii.viii.ix-Page_610"></span>that God was born
of man, when already long before the Patriarch had seen God in human
form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2614"></span>[609:2615](2111184.htm#fr_2614) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p3"></span> [Psa.
50.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2615"></span>[609:2616](2111184.htm#fr_2615) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p4"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p4.1"></span>. The name Israel was in the 4th and 5th
centuries commonly explained to mean the “man seeing God” as if it came
from <span class="Hebrew"><span id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p4.2"></span>שּׁיא,
האָרָ</span>, and <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.ix-p4.3"></span>לא”·</span> S. Jerome (Quæst. in Genesim
c. xxxii. ver. 27, 28) rejects this interpretation as forced and prefers
“a Prince with God.” Hence the rendering in the A.V. “For as a prince
hast thou power with God and with men and hast prevailed.” This however
is now generally rejected, and the right interpretation of the name
appears to be “He who striveth with God.” Cf. R.V. “For thou hast
striven with God and men, and hast prevailed.” Cf. the Conferences,
Pref. and V. xxiii. XII. xi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. He collects more witnesses of the same fact.](2111185)
