[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111129)  [Next](2111131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.v.ix"></span> <span id="page_578">p. 578</span> <span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-Page_578"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p1"></span>He corroborates this statement by the
authority of the old prophets.

<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>But</span> since up to this point we have
made use more particularly of the witness, comparatively new, of
evangelists and apostles, now let us bring forward the testimony of the
old prophets, intermingling at times new things with old, that everybody
may see that the holy Scriptures proclaim as it were with one mouth that
Christ was to come in the flesh, with a body of His own complete. And so
that far-famed and renowned prophet as richly endowed with God’s gifts
as with his testimony, to whom alone it was given to be sanctified
before His birth, <span id="fr_2471"></span>[2472](#fn_2471) Jeremiah,
says, “This is our Lord, and there shall no other be accounted of in
comparison with Him. He found out all the way of knowledge and gave it
to Jacob His servant and Israel His beloved. Afterwards He was seen upon
earth and conversed with men.” <span
id="fr_2472"></span>[2473](#fn_2472) “This is,” then, he says, “our
God.” You see how the prophet points to God as it were with his hand,
and indicates Him as it were with his finger. “This is,” he says, “our
God.” Tell me then, who was it that the prophet showed by these signs
and tokens to be God? Surely it was not the Father? For what need was
there that He should be pointed out, whom all believed that they knew?
For even then the Jews were not ignorant of God, for they were living
under God’s law. But he was clearly aiming at this, that they might come
to know the Son of God as God. And so excellently did the Prophet say
that He who had found out all knowledge, i.e., had given the law, was to
be seen upon earth, i.e., was to come in the flesh, in order that, as
the Jews did not doubt that He who had given the law was God, they might
recognize that He who was to come in the flesh was God, especially since
they heard that He, in whom they believed as God the giver of the law,
was to be seen among men by taking upon Him manhood, as He Himself
promises His own advent by the prophet: “For I myself that spoke, behold
I am here.” <span id="fr_2473"></span>[2474](#fn_2473) “There shall
then,” says the Scriptures, “be no other accounted of in comparison of
Him.” Beautifully does the prophet here foresee false teaching, and so
exclude the interpretations of heretical perverseness. “There shall no
other be accounted of in comparison of Him.” For He is alone begotten to
be God of God: at whose bidding the completion of the universe followed:
whose will is the beginning of things: whose empire is the fabric of the
world: who spake all things, and they came to pass: commanded all
things, and they were created. He then alone it is who spake to the
patriarchs, dwelt in the prophets, was conceived by the Spirit, born of
the Virgin Mary, appeared in the world, lived among men, fastened to the
wood of the cross the handwriting of our offences, triumphed in
Himself, <span id="fr_2474"></span>[2475](#fn_2474) slew by His death
the powers that were at enmity and hostile to us; and gave to all men
belief in the resurrection, and by the glory of His body put an end to
the corruption of man’s flesh. You see then that all these belong to the
Lord Jesus Christ alone: and therefore no other shall be accounted of in
comparison with Him, for He alone is God begotten of God in this glory
and unique blessedness. This then is what the prophet’s teaching was
aiming at; viz., that He might be known by all men to be the only
begotten Son of God the Father, and that when they heard that no other
was accounted of as God in comparison with the Son, they might confess
that there was but one God in the Persons of the Father and the Son.
“After this,” he said, “He was seen upon earth and conversed with men.”
You see how plainly this points to the advent and nativity of the Lord.
For surely the Father—of whom we read that He can only be seen in the
Son—was not seen upon earth, nor born in the flesh, nor conversed with
men? Most certainly not. You see then that all this is spoken of the Son
of God. For since the prophet said that God should be seen upon earth,
and no other but the Son was seen upon earth, it is clear that the
prophet said this only of Him, of whom facts afterwards proved that it
was spoken. For when He said that God should be seen, He could not say
this truly, except of Him who was indeed afterwards seen. But enough of
this. Now let us turn to another point. “The labour of Egypt,” says the
prophet Isaiah, “and the merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabæans, men
of stature, shall come over to thee and shall be thy servants. They
shall walk after thee, bound with manacles, and they shall worship thee,
and they shall make supplication to thee: for in thee is God, and there
is no God beside thee. For thou <span id="page_579">p. 579</span> <span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-Page_579"></span>art our God and we knew thee not, O God
of Israel the Saviour.” <span id="fr_2475"></span>[2476](#fn_2475) How
wonderfully consistent the Holy Scriptures always are! For the first
mentioned prophet said, “This is our God,” and this one says, “Thou art
our God.” In the one there is the teaching of Divinity, in the other the
confession of men. The one exhibits the character of the Master
teaching, the other that of the people confessing. For consider now the
prophet Jeremiah daily teaching, as he does, in the church, and saying
of the Lord Jesus Christ, “This is our God,” what else could the whole
Church reply, as it does, than what the other prophet said to the Lord
Jesus, “Thou art our God.” So that full well could the mention of their
past ignorance be joined to their present acknowledgment, in the words
of the people: “Thou art our God, and we knew thee not.” For well can
these who, in times past being taken up with the superstitions of devils
did not know God, yet when now converted to the faith say, “Thou art our
God, and we knew thee not.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2471"></span>[578:2472](2111130.htm#fr_2471) <span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p3"></span> Cf. [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2472"></span>[578:2473](2111130.htm#fr_2472) <span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p4"></span> The passage comes not from Jeremiah,
but from [Baruch 3.36-38](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#036)<span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p4.1"></span>. It is also quoted as from Jeremiah by
Augustine (c. Faustin. xii. c. 43): and in the LXX. version the book of
Baruch is placed among the works of Jeremiah, e.g., In both the Vatican
and Alexandrine <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p4.2"></span>mss.</span> they stand in the following
order: (1) Jeremiah, (2) Baruch, (3) Lamentations, (4) the Epistle of
Jeremy (<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p4.3"></span>Baruch c. vi. in A.V.). The
passage which Cassian here quotes is constantly appealed to by both
Greek and Latin Fathers, as a prophecy of the Incarnation. See e.g. S.
Augustine (l.c.) S. Chrysost. “Ecloga” Hom. xxxiv. Rufinus in. Symb. §
5.

<span id="fn_2473"></span>[578:2474](2111130.htm#fr_2473) <span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p5"></span> [Isa. lii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#006)<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2474"></span>[578:2475](2111130.htm#fr_2474) <span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p6"></span> Cf. [Col.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2475"></span>[579:2476](2111130.htm#fr_2475) <span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.v.ix-p7"></span> [Isa.
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#015)<span
id="iv.vii.v.ix-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. He proves Christ's Divinity from the blasphemy of
Judaizing Jews as well as from the confession of converts to the faith
of Christ.](2111131)
