[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111113)  [Next](2111115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.x-p1"></span>How the apostle maintains that Christ
is the power of God and the wisdom of God.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.x-p2.1"></span>But</span> let us see something more on the
subject. Christ then, according to the Apostle, is the power of God and
the wisdom of God. What have you to say to this? How can you get out of
it? There is no place for you to escape and fly to. Christ is the wisdom
of God and the power of God. He, I say, whom the Jews attacked, the
Gentiles mocked, whom you yourself together with them are
persecuting,—He, I say, who is foolishness to the heathen, and a
stumbling-block to the Jews, and both to you, He, I say, is the power of
God and the wisdom of God. What is there that you can do? Shut your
ears, forsooth, so as not to hear? This the Jews did also when the
Apostle was preaching. Do what you will, Christ is in heaven, and in
God, and with Him, and in Him in the heavens above in whom also He was
here below: you can no longer persecute Him with the Jews. But you do
the one thing that you can. You persecute Him in the faith, you
persecute Him in the church, you persecute Him with the arms of a wicked
belief, you persecute Him with the sword of false doctrine. Perhaps you
do rather more than the Jews of old did. You now persecute Christ, after
ever those who did persecute Him, have believed. But perhaps you think
that the sin is less because you can no longer lay hands on Him. No less
grievous, I tell you, no less grievous to Him is that persecution, in
which sinful men persecute Him in the persons of His followers. But the
mention of the Lord’s cross offends you. It always offended the Jews as
well. You shudder at hearing that God suffered: the Gentiles in their
error mocked at this also. I ask you then, in what point do you differ
from them, since you both agree in this frowardness? But for my part I
not only do not water down this preaching of the holy cross, this
preaching of the Lord’s passion, but as far as my wishes and powers go I
emphasise it. For I will declare that He who was crucified is not only
the power and wisdom of God, than which there is nothing greater, but
actually Lord of absolute Divinity and glory. And this the rather,
because this assertion of mine is the doctrine of God, as the Apostle
says: “We speak wisdom among them that are perfect: but the wisdom not
of this world, nor of the rulers of this world who are brought to
nought: but we speak the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery, which God
ordained before the world, unto our glory: which none of the princes of
this world knew: for if they had known it, they would never have
crucified the Lord of glory. But as it is written: that eye hath not
seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man, what
God hath prepared for them that love Him.” <span
id="fr_2438"></span>[2439](#fn_2438.md) You see what great matters the
Apostle’s discourse comprises in how small a compass. He says that he
speaks wisdom, but a wisdom which only those that are perfect can know,
and which the prudent of this world cannot know. For he says that this
is the wisdom of God, which is hidden in a Divine mystery, and
predestined before all worlds for the glory of the saints: and that
therefore it is only known to those who savour of God; while the princes
of this world are utterly ignorant of it. But he adds the reason, to
establish both points that he had mentioned, saying: “For if they had
known it, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory. But it is
written, that eye hath not seen, nor ear hath heard, neither hath it
entered into the heart of man, what God hath prepared for them that love
Him.” You see then how the wisdom of God, hidden in a mystery, and
predestined before all worlds, was unknown to those who crucified the
Lord of glory, and known by those who received it. And well does he say
that the wisdom of God was hidden in a mystery, for never yet could the
eye of any man see, or the ear hear, or the heart imagine this; viz.,
that the Lord of glory should be born of a virgin and come in the flesh,
and suffer all kinds of punishment, and shameful passion. But with
regard to these gifts of God, as there is no one who—since <span
id="page_569">p. 569</span> <span id="iv.vii.iv.x-Page_569"></span>they
were hidden in a mystery—could ever of himself understand them, so
blessed is he who has grasped them when they are revealed. Thus all who
have failed to grasp them must be reckoned among the princes of this
world, and those who have grasped them among God’s wise ones. He then
does not grasp it who denies God born in the flesh; therefore you also
do not grasp it, as you deny this. But do what you will, deny as
impiously as you like, we the rather believe the Apostle. But why should
I say the Apostle? the rather do we believe God. For through the Apostle
we believe Him, whom we know to have spoken by the Apostle. The Divine
word says that the Lord of glory was crucified by the princes of the
world. You deny it. They also who crucified Him denied that it was God
whom they were crucifying. They then who confess Him have their portion
with the Apostle who confessed Him. You are sure to have your lot with
His persecutors. What is there then that can be replied to this? The
Apostle says that the Lord of glory was crucified. Alter this if you
can. Separate now, if you please, Jesus from God. At least you cannot
deny that Christ was crucified by the Jews. But it was the Lord of glory
who was crucified. Therefore you must either deny that Christ was nailed
to the cross, or you must admit that God was nailed to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2438"></span>[568:2439](2111114.htm#fr_2438.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.x-p3"></span> [1 Cor. i.
6-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.x-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. He supports the same doctrine by proofs from the
gospel.](2111115.md)
