[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111176)  [Next](2111178.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.ii-p1"></span>He meets the objection taken from
these words: No one gave birth to one who had existed before her.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.ii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.ii-p2.1"></span>And</span> before I begin to speak of
those things of which I have given no foretaste in the earlier books, I
think it right to try to carry out what I have already promised, that
when I have thoroughly redeemed my pledge, I may begin to speak more
freely of what has not been touched upon, after having satisfied my
promise. So then that new serpent, in order to destroy the faith of the
holy nativity, hisses out against the Church of God and says: “No one
ever gives birth to one older than herself.” To begin with then I think
that you know neither what you say nor where you get it from. For if you
knew or understood where you got it from, you would never regard the
nativity of the only begotten of God in the light of human fancies, nor
would you try to settle by merely human propositions, about Him who was
born without His conception originating from man: nor would you bring
human impossibilities as objections against Divine Omnipotence if you
knew that with God nothing was impossible. No one then, you say, gives
birth to one older than herself. Tell me then, I pray, of what cases are
you speaking, for the nature of what creatures do you think that you can
lay down rules? Do you suppose that you can fix laws for men or beasts
or birds or cattle? Those (and others of the same kind) are the things
of which such assertions can be made. For none of them is able to
produce one older than itself; for what has already been produced cannot
return to it again so as to be born again by a new creation. And so no
one can bear one older than herself, as no one can beget one older than
himself: for the opportunity of bearing only results where there is the
possibility of begetting. Do you then imagine that in reference to the
nativity of Almighty God regard must be had to the same considerations
as in the birth of earthly creatures? And do you bring the nature of
man’s conditions as a difficulty in the case of Him who is Himself the
<span id="page_605">p. 605</span> <span
id="iv.vii.viii.ii-Page_605"></span>author of nature? You see then that,
as I said above, you know not whence or of whom you are talking, as you
are comparing creatures to the Creator; and in order to calculate the
power of God are drawing an instance from those things which would never
have existed at all, but that the very fact of their existence comes
from God. God then came as He would, when He would, and of her whom He
would. Neither time nor person, nor the manner of men, nor the custom of
creatures was any difficulty with Him; for the law of the creatures
could not stand in the way of Him who is Himself the Creator of them
all. And whatever He would have possible was ready to His hand, for the
power of willing it was His. Do you want to know how far the omnipotence
of God extends, and how great it is? I believe that the Lord could do
that even in the case of His creatures which you do not believe that He
could do in His own case. For all living creatures which now bear things
younger than themselves could, if only God gave the word, bear things
much older than themselves. For even food and drink, if it were God’s
will, could be turned into the fœtus and offspring: and even water,
which has been flowing from the beginning of things, and which all
living creatures use, could, if God gave the word, be made a body in the
womb, and have birth given to it. For who can set a limit to divine
works, or circumscribe Divine Providence? or who (to use the words of
Scripture) can say to Him “What doest thou?” <span
id="fr_2600"></span>[2601](#fn_2600.md) If you deny that God can do all
things, then deny, that, when God was born, one older than Mary could be
born of her. But if there is nothing impossible with God, why do you
bring as an objection against His coming an impossibility, when you know
that for Him nothing is impossible in anything?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2600"></span>[605:2601](2111177.htm#fr_2600.md) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.ii-p3"></span> [Isa.
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009.md), [Rom.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. He replies to the cavil that the one who is born
must be of one substance with the one who bears.](2111178.md)
