[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111100)  [Next](2111102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p1"></span>From the gifts of Divine grace which
we receive through Christ he infers that He is truly God.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p2.1"></span>Although</span> we began to speak some
time back on this Divine grace of our Lord and Saviour, I want to say
somewhat more on the same subject from the Holy Scriptures. We read in
the Acts of the Apostles that the Apostle James <span
id="fr_2408"></span>[2409](#fn_2408.md) thus refuted those who thought that
when they received the gospel they ought still to bear the yoke of the
old Law: “Why,” said he, “do ye tempt God, to put a yoke upon the necks
of the disciples which neither our fathers nor we have been able to
bear. But by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we believe to be saved
in like manner as they also.” <span id="fr_2409"></span>[2410](#fn_2409.md)
The Apostle certainly speaks of the gift of this grace as given by Jesus
Christ. Answer me now, if you please: do you think that this grace which
is given for the salvation of all men, is given by man or by God? If you
say, By man, Paul, God’s own vessel, will cry out against you, saying:
“There appeared the grace of God our Saviour.” <span
id="fr_2410"></span>[2411](#fn_2410.md) He teaches that this grace is the
result of a Divine gift, and not of human weakness. And even if the
sacred testimony was not sufficient, the truth of the matter itself
would bear its witness, because fragile earthly things cannot possibly
furnish a thing of lasting and immortal value; nor can anyone give to
another that in which he himself is lacking, nor supply a sufficiency of
that, from the want of which he admits that he himself is suffering. You
cannot then help admitting that the grace comes from God. It is God then
who has given it. But it has been given by our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ is God. But if He be, as He certainly
is, God: then she who bore God is Theotocos, i.e., the mother of God.
Unless perhaps you want to take refuge in so utterly absurd and
blasphemous a contradiction as to deny that she from whom God was born
is the mother of God, while you cannot deny that He who was born is God.
But, however, let us see what the gospel of God thinks about this same
grace of our Lord: “Grace and truth,” it says, “came by Jesus
Christ.” <span id="fr_2411"></span>[2412](#fn_2411.md) If <span
id="page_561">p. 561</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-Page_561"></span>Christ is a mere man, how did these
come by Christ? Whence was there in Him Divine power if, as you say,
there was in Him only the nature of man? Whence comes heavenly largesse,
if His is earthly poverty? For no one can give what he has not already.
As then Christ gave Divine grace, He already had that which He gave. Nor
can anyone endure a diversity of things that are so utterly different
from each other, as at one and the same time to suffer the wants of a
poor man, and also to show the munificence of a bounteous one. And so
the Apostle Paul, knowing that all the treasures of heavenly riches are
found in Christ, rightly writes to the Churches: “The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you.” <span id="fr_2412"></span>[2413](#fn_2412.md)
For though he had already often enough taught that God is the same as
Christ, and that all the glory of Deity resides in Him, and that all the
fulness of the Godhead dwelleth in Him bodily, yet here he is certainly
right in praying for the grace of Christ alone, without adding the word
God: for while he had often taught that the grace of God is the same as
the grace of Christ, he now most perfectly prays only for the grace of
Christ, for he knows that in the grace of Christ is contained the whole
grace of God. Therefore he says: “The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you.” If Jesus Christ was a mere man, then in his wish that the
grace of Christ might be given to the Churches he was wishing that the
grace of a man might be given; and by saying: “The grace of Christ be
with you” he meant: the grace of a man be with you, the grace of flesh
be with you, the grace of bodily weakness, the grace of human frailty!
Or why did he ever even mention the word grace, if his wish was for the
grace of a man? For there was no reason for wishing, if that was not in
existence which was wished for; nor ought he to have prayed that there
might be bestowed on them the grace of one who, according to you, did
not possess the reality of that grace for which he was wishing. And so
you see that it is utterly absurd and ridiculous—or rather not a thing
to laugh at but to cry over, for what is a matter for laughter to some
frivolous persons becomes a matter for crying to pious and faithful
souls, for they shed tears of charity for the folly of your unbelief,
and weep pious tears at the folly of another’s impiety. Let us then
recover ourselves for a while and take our breath, for this idea is not
only without wisdom but also without the Spirit, as it is certainly
wanting in spiritual wisdom and has nothing to do with the Spirit of
salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2408"></span>[560:2409](2111101.htm#fr_2408.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p3"></span> *Jacobum*. So Petschenig, after his
authority. It is however an error on Cassian’s part, as the words quoted
were spoken not by S. James but by S. Peter. (The text of Gazæus reads
apparently with no authority *Petrum*.)

<span id="fn_2409"></span>[560:2410](2111101.htm#fr_2409.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p4"></span> [Acts
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2410"></span>[560:2411](2111101.htm#fr_2410.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p5"></span> [Titus ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2411"></span>[560:2412](2111101.htm#fr_2411.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p6"></span> S. [John i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2412"></span>[561:2413](2111101.htm#fr_2412.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p7"></span> [1 Cor. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. That the power of bestowing Divine grace did not come
to Christ in the course of time, but was innate in Him from His very
birth.](2111102.md)
