[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111085)  [Next](2111087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p1"></span>How the promise of an hundredfold
in this life is made to those whose renunciation is perfect.

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>Further</span> also that recompense of
reward, wherein the Lord promises an hundredfold in this life to those
whose renunciation is perfect, and says: “And everyone that hath left
house or brethren or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or
lands for My name’s sake, shall receive an hundredfold in the present
time and shall inherit eternal life,” <span
id="fr_2348"></span>[2349](#fn_2348) is rightly and truly taken in the
same sense without any disturbance of faith. For many taking occasion by
this saying, insist with crass intelligence that these things will be
given carnally in the millennium, though they must certainly admit that
age, which they say will be after the resurrection cannot possibly be
understood as present. It is then more credible and much clearer that
one, who at the persuasion of Christ has made light of any worldly
affections or goods, receives from the brethren and partners of his
life, who are joined to him by a spiritual tie, even in this life a love
which is an hundred times better: since it is certain that among parents
and children and brothers, wives and relations, where either the tie is
merely formed by intercourse, or the bond of union by the claims of
relationship, the love is tolerably short lived and easily broken.
Finally even good and duteous children when they have grown up, are
sometimes shut out by their parents from their homes and property, and
sometimes for a really good reason the tie of matrimony is severed, and
a quarrelsome division destroys the property of brothers. Monks alone
maintain a lasting union in intimacy, and possess all things in common,
as they hold that everything that belongs to their brethren is their
own, and that everything which is their own is their brethren’s. If then
the grace of our love is compared to those affections where the bond of
union is a carnal love, certainly it is an hundred times sweeter and
finer. There will indeed also be gained from conjugal continence a
pleasure that is an hundred times greater than that which arises from
the union of the sexes. And instead of that joy, which a man experiences
from the possession of a single field of house, he will enjoy a delight
in riches a hundred times greater, if he passes over to the adoption of
sons of God, and possesses as his own all things which belong to the
eternal Father, and asserts in heart and soul after the fashion <span
id="page_544">p. 544</span> <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-Page_544"></span>of that true Son: “All things that
the Father hath are mine;” <span id="fr_2349"></span>[2350](#fn_2349)
and if no longer tried by that criminal anxiety in distractions and
cares, but free from care and glad at heart he succeeds everywhere to
his own, hearing daily the announcement made to him by the Apostle: “For
all things are yours, whether the world, or things present, or things to
come;” and by Solomon: “The faithful man has a whole world of
riches.” <span id="fr_2350"></span>[2351](#fn_2350) You have then that
recompense of an hundredfold brought out by the greatness of the value,
and the difference of the character that cannot be estimated. For if for
a fixed weight of brass or iron or some still commoner metal, one had
given in exchange the same weight only in gold, he would appear to have
given much more than an hundredfold. And so when for the scorn of
delights and earthly affections there is made a recompense of spiritual
joy and the gladness of a most precious love, even if the actual amount
be the same, yet it is an hundred times better and grander. And to make
this plainer by frequent repetition: I used formerly to have a wife in
the lustful passion of desire: I now have one in honourable
sanctification and the true love of Christ. The woman is but one, but
the value of the love has increased an hundredfold. But if instead of
distrusting anger and wrath you have regard to constant gentleness and
patience, instead of the stress of anxiety and trouble, peace and
freedom from care, instead of the fruitless and criminal vexation of
this world the salutary fruits of sorrow, instead of the vanity of
temporal joy the richness of spiritual delights, you will see in the
change of these feelings a recompense of an hundredfold. And if we
compare with the short-lived and fleeting pleasure of each sin the
benefits of the opposite virtues the increased delights will prove that
these are an hundred times better. For in counting on your fingers you
transfer the number of an hundred from the left hand to the right and
though you seem to keep the same arrangement of the fingers yet there is
a great increase in the amount of the quantity. <span
id="fr_2351"></span>[2352](#fn_2351) For the result will be that we who
seemed to bear the form of the goats on the left hand, will be removed
and gain the reward of the sheep on the right hand. Now let us pass on
to consider the nature of those things which Christ gives back to us in
this world for our scorn of worldly advantages, more particularly
according to the Gospel of Mark who says: “There is no man who hath left
house or brethren or sisters or mother or children or lands for My sake
and the gospel’s sake, who shall not receive an hundred times as much
now in this time: houses and brethren and sisters and mothers and
children and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come life
eternal.” <span id="fr_2352"></span>[2353](#fn_2352) For he who for the
sake of Christ’s name disregards the love of a single father or mother
or child, and gives himself over to the purest love of all who serve
Christ, will receive an hundred times the amount of brethren and
kinsfolk; since instead of but one he will begin to have so many fathers
and brethren bound to him by a still more fervent and admirable
affection. He also will be enriched with an increased possession of
lands, who has given up a single house for the love of Christ, and
possesses countless homes in monasteries as his own, to whatever part of
the world he may retire, as to his own house. For how can he fail to
receive an hundredfold, and, if it is not wrong to add somewhat to our
Lord’s words, more than an hundredfold, who gives up the faithless and
compulsory service of ten or twenty slaves and relies on the spontaneous
attendance of so many noble and free born men? And that this is so you
could prove by your own experience, as since you have each left but one
father and mother and home, you have gained without any effort or care,
in any part of the world to which you have come, countless fathers and
mothers and brethren, as well as houses and lands and most faithful
servants, who receive you as their masters, and welcome, and respect,
and take care of you with the utmost attention. But, I say that
deservedly and confidently will the saints enjoy this service, if they
have first submitted themselves and everything they have by a voluntary
offering for the service of the brethren. For, as the Lord says, they
will freely receive back that which they themselves have bestowed on
others. But if a man has not first offered this with true humility to
his companions, how can he calmly endure to have it offered to him by
others, when he knows that he is burdened rather than helped by their
services, because he prefers to receive attention from the brethren
rather than to give it to them?

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p8"></span>But all these things he will
receive not with careless slackness and a lazy delight, but, in
accordance with the Lord’s word, “with persecutions,” i.e., with the
pressure of this world, and terrible distress from his passions,
because, as the wise man testifies: “He who is easy going and without
trouble shall come <span id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-Page_545"></span>to want.” <span
id="fr_2353"></span>[2354](#fn_2353) For not the slothful, or the
careless, or the delicate, or the tender take the kingdom of heaven by
force, but the violent. Who then are the violent? Surely they are those
who show a splendid violence not to others, but to their own soul, who
by a laudable force deprive it of all delights in things present, and
are declared by the Lord’s mouth to be splendid plunderers, and by
rapine of this kind, violently seize upon the kingdom of heaven. For, as
the Lord says, “The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence and the violent
take it by force.” <span id="fr_2354"></span>[2355](#fn_2354) Those are
certainly worthy of praise as violent, who do violence to their own
destruction, for, “A man,” as it is written, “that is in sorrow
laboureth for himself and does violence to his own destruction.” <span
id="fr_2355"></span>[2356](#fn_2355) For our destruction is delight in
this present life, and to speak more definitely, the performance of our
own likes and desires, as, if a man withdraws these from his soul and
mortifies them, he straightway does glorious and valuable violence to
his own destruction, provided that he refuses to it the pleasantest of
its wishes which the Divine word often rebukes by the prophet, saying:
“For in the days of your fast your own will is found;” and again: “If
thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, to do thy will on My holy day,
and glorify him, while thou dost not thy own ways, and thy own will is
not found, to speak a word.” And the great blessedness that is promised
to him is at once added by the prophet. “Then,” he says, “shalt thou be
delighted in the Lord, and I will lift thee up above the high places of
the earth, and will feed thee with the inheritance of Jacob thy father.
For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.” <span
id="fr_2356"></span>[2357](#fn_2356) And therefore our Lord and Saviour,
to give us an example of giving up our own wills, says: “I came not to
do My own will, but the will of Him that sent Me;” and again: “Not as I
will, but as Thou wilt.” <span id="fr_2357"></span>[2358](#fn_2357) And
this good quality those men in particular show who live in the Cœnobia
and are governed by the rule of the Elders, who do nothing of their own
choice, but their will depends upon the will of the Abbot. Finally to
bring this discussion to a close, I ask you, do not those who faithfully
serve Christ, most clearly receive grace an hundredfold in this, while
for His name’s sake they are honoured by the greatest princes, and
though they do not look for the praise of men, yet become venerated in
the trials of persecution whose humble condition would perhaps have been
looked down upon even by common folk, either because of their obscure
birth, or because of their condition as slaves, if they had continued in
their life in the world? But because of the service of Christ no one
will venture to raise a calumny against their state of nobility, or to
fling in their teeth the obscurity of their origin. Nay rather, through
the very opprobrium of a humble condition by which others are shamed and
confounded, the servants of Christ are more splendidly ennobled, as we
can clearly show by the case of Abbot John who lives in the desert which
borders on the town of Lycus. For he sprang from obscure parents, but
owing to the name of Christ has become so well known to almost all
mankind that the very lords of creation, who hold the reins of this
world and of empire, and are a terror to all powers and kings, venerate
him as their lord, and from distant countries seek his advice, and
entrust to his prayers and merits the crown of their empire, and the
state of safety, and the fortunes of war. <span
id="fr_2358"></span>[2359](#fn_2358)

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p15"></span>In such terms the blessed Abraham
discoursed on the origin of and remedy for our illusion, and exposed to
our eyes the crafty thoughts which the devil had originated and
suggested, and kindled in us the desire of true mortification, wherewith
we hope that many also may be inflamed, even though all these things
have been written in a somewhat simple style. For though the dying
embers of our words cover up the glowing thoughts of the greatest
fathers, yet we hope that in the case of very many who try to remove the
embers of our words and to fan into a flame the hidden thoughts, their
coldness will be turned into heat. But, O holy brethren, I have not
indeed been so puffed up by the spirit of presumption as to give forth
to you this fire (which the Lord came to send upon the earth, and which
He eagerly longs to kindle <span id="fr_2359"></span>[2360](#fn_2359) )
in order that by the application of this warmth I might set on fire your
purpose which is already at a white heat, but in order that your
authority with your children might be greater, if in addition the
precepts of the greatest and most ancient fathers support what you are
teaching not by the dead sound of words but by your living example. It
only remains that I who have been till now tossed about by a most
dangerous tempest, should be wafted to the safe harbour of silence by
the spiritual gales of your prayers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2348"></span>[543:2349](2111086.htm#fr_2348) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p3"></span> S. [Matt. xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2349"></span>[544:2350](2111086.htm#fr_2349) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p4"></span> S. [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2350"></span>[544:2351](2111086.htm#fr_2350) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022), [Prov.
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p5.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_2351"></span>[544:2352](2111086.htm#fr_2351) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p6"></span> The practice alludes to the
counting on the fingers, in which all the tens up to ninety were
reckoned on the fingers of the *left* hand, but with the number of a
hundred the reckoning began with the same arrangement of the fingers on
the *right* hand. S. Jerome had a similar allusion to the practice in
his work against Jovian I. i. and compare also Juvenal Satire. X. l.
247, 248.

<span id="fn_2352"></span>[544:2353](2111086.htm#fr_2352) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p7"></span> S. [Mark
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2353"></span>[545:2354](2111086.htm#fr_2353) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p9"></span> [Prov. xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p9.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_2354"></span>[545:2355](2111086.htm#fr_2354) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p10"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2355"></span>[545:2356](2111086.htm#fr_2355) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p11"></span> [Prov. xiv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#026)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p11.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_2356"></span>[545:2357](2111086.htm#fr_2356) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p12"></span> [Isa.
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2357"></span>[545:2358](2111086.htm#fr_2357) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p13"></span> [John
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038), [Matt.
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2358"></span>[545:2359](2111086.htm#fr_2358) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p14"></span> Cf. the note on the Institutes
IV. xxiii.

<span id="fn_2359"></span>[545:2360](2111086.htm#fr_2359) <span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p16"></span> Cf. S. [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span
id="iv.vi.viii.xxvi-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seven Books of John Cassian on the Incarnation of the Lord,
Against Nestorius.](2111087)
