[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2111178)  [Next](2111180) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p1"></span>How God has shown His Omnipotence in
His birth in time as well as in everything else.

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p2.1"></span>Confess</span> then the same truth in
respect of the actual nativity of the Lord, as in respect of everything
else. Believe that God was born when He would, for you do not deny that
He could do what He would; unless possibly you think that that power
which belonged to Him for all other things was deficient as regards
Himself, and that His Omnipotence though proceeding from Him and
penetrating all things, was insufficient to bring about His own
nativity. In the case of the Lord’s nativity you bring this as an
objection against me: No one gives birth to one who is anterior in time:
and in regard of the birth which Almighty God underwent you say that the
one who is born ought to be of one substance with the one who <span
id="page_607">p. 607</span> <span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-Page_607"></span>bears; as if you had to do with
human laws as in the case of any ordinary man, to whom you might bring
the impossibility as an objection, as you include him in the weakness of
earthly things. You say that for all men there are common conditions of
birth, and but one law of generation; and that a thing could not
possibly happen to one man only out of the whole of humanity, which God
has forbidden to happen to all. You do not understand of whom you are
speaking; nor do you see of whom you are talking; for He is the Author
of all conditions, and the very Law of all natures, through whom exists
whatever man can do, and whatever man cannot do: for He certainly has
laid down the limits of both; viz., how far his powers should extend,
and the bounds beyond which his weakness should not advance. How wildly
then do you bring human impossibilities as an objection in the case of
Him, who possesses all powers and possibilities. If you estimate the
Person of the Lord by earthly weaknesses, and measure God’s Omnipotence
by human rules, you will most certainly fail to find anything which
seems appropriate to God as concerns the sufferings of His Body. For if
it can seem to you unreasonable that Mary could give birth to God who
was anterior to her, how will it seem reasonable that God was crucified
by men? And yet the same God who was crucified Himself predicted: “Shall
a man afflict God, for you afflict Me?” <span
id="fr_2602"></span>[2603](#fn_2602) If then we cannot think that the
Lord was born of a Virgin because He who was born was anterior to her
who bore Him, how can we believe that God had blood? And yet it was said
to the Ephesian elders: “Feed the Church of God which He has purchased
with His own Blood.” <span id="fr_2603"></span>[2604](#fn_2603) Finally
how can we think that the Author of life was Himself deprived of life:
And yet Peter says: “Ye have killed the Author of life.” <span
id="fr_2604"></span>[2605](#fn_2604) No one who is set on earth can be
in heaven: and how does the Lord Himself say: “The Son of man who is in
heaven”? <span id="fr_2605"></span>[2606](#fn_2605) If then you think
that God was not born of a Virgin because the one who is born must be of
one substance with the one who bears, how will you believe that
different things can be produced from different natures? Thus according
to you the wind did not suddenly bring the quails, nor did the manna
fall, nor was water turned into wine nor were many thousands of men fed
with a few loaves, nor did the blind man receive his sight after the
clay had been put on him. But if all these things seem incredible and
contrary to nature, unless we believe that they were wrought by God, why
should you deny in the matter of His nativity, what you admit in the
matter of His works? Or was He unable to contribute to His own nativity
and advent what He did not refuse for the succour and profit of men?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2602"></span>[607:2603](2111179.htm#fr_2602) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p3"></span> [Mal. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2603"></span>[607:2604](2111179.htm#fr_2603) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p4"></span> [Acts xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2604"></span>[607:2605](2111179.htm#fr_2604) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p5"></span> [Acts iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2605"></span>[607:2606](2111179.htm#fr_2605) <span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p6"></span> S. [John iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.vii.viii.iv-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. He shows by proofs drawn from nature itself, that the
law which his opponents lay down; viz., that the one born ought to be of
one substance with the one who bears, fails to hold good in many
cases.](2111180)
