[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sma09)  [Next](sma11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKTI/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Secret Societies of the Middle Ages*, by Thomas Keightley, \[1837\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

<span class="small">Mohammed II.--Anecdote of the Imam
Fakhr-ed-deen--Noor-ed-deen--Conquest of Egypt--Attempt on the Life of
Saladin.</span>

THE death of Hassan was amply avenged by his son and successor, Mohammed
II. Not only was the murderer himself put to death; vengeance, in its
oriental form, extended itself to all his kindred of both sexes, and
men, women, and children bled beneath the sword of the executioner.
Mohammed, who had been carefully trained up in the study of philosophy
and literature, was, like his father, puffed up with vanity and
ambition, and, far from receding from any of his predecessor's
pretensions to the imamat, he carried them to even a still greater
length than he had done. At the same time he maintained a high character
for knowledge and talent among his literary contemporaries, who were
numerous, for his reign extended through a period of forty-six years,
and the modern Persian literature was now fast approaching its climax.
Not to mention other names, less familiar to our readers, we shall
remark, as a proof of what we have said, that this was the period in
which Nizamee of Ghenj sang in harmonious numbers the loves of Khosroo
and Shireen, and of Mujnoon and Leila (these last the Romeo and Juliet
of the east), the crown and flower of the romantic poetry of Persia.
Then too flourished the great panegyrist Enveree, and a crowd of
historians, jurists, and divines.

One of the most celebrated men of this time was

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

the imam Fakhr-ed-deen (*Glory of Religion*) Rasi, who gave public
lectures on the law in his native city of Rei. It being slanderously
reported that he was devoted in secret to the opinions of the
Ismaïlites, and was even one of their missionaries, he adopted the
ordinary expedient of abusing and reviling that sect, and each time he
ascended the pulpit to preach he reprobated and cursed the *Impious* in
no measured terms. Intelligence of what he was about was not long in
reaching the eyrie of the Sheikh-al-Jebal, and a Fedavee received his
instructions, and forthwith set out for Rei. He here entered himself as
a student of the law, and sedulously attended the lectures of the
learned imam. During seven months he watched in vain for an opportunity
of executing his commission. At length he discovered one day that the
attendants of the imam had left him to go to fetch him some food, and
that he was alone in his study. The Fedavee entered, fastened the doors,
seized the imam, cast him on the ground, and directed his dagger at his
bosom. "What is thy design?" said the astonished imam. "To rip up thy
belly and breast." "And wherefore?" "Wherefore? Because thou hast spoken
evil of the Ismaïlites in the pulpit." The imam implored and entreated,
vowing that, if his life was spared, he would never more say aught to
offend the sect of Ismaïl. "I cannot trust thee," cried the Assassin;
for when I am gone thou wilt return to thy old courses, and, by some
ingenious shift or other, contrive to free thyself from the obligation
of thy oath." The imam then, with a most solemn oath, abjured the idea
of explaining away his words, or seeking absolution for perjury. The
Assassin got up from over him, saying, "I had no order to slay thee, or
I should have put thee to death without fail. Mohammed, the son of
Hassan, greets thee, and invites thee to honour

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

him by a visit at his castle. Thou shalt there have unlimited power, and
we will all obey thee like trusty servants. We despise, so saith the
sheikh, the discourses of the rabble, which rebound from our ears like
nuts from a ball; but *you* should not revile us, since your words
impress themselves like the strokes of the graver in the stone." The
imam replied that it was totally out of his power to go to Alamoot, but
that in future he should be most careful never to suffer a word to pass
his lips to the discredit of the mountain prince. Hereupon the Fedavee
drew 300 pieces of gold from his girdle, and, laying them down, said,
"See! here is thy annual pension; and, by a decree of the divan, thou
shalt every year receive an equal sum through the reis Mozaffer. I also
leave thee, for thy attendants, two garments from Yemen, which the
Sheikh-al-Jebal has sent thee." So saying, the Fedavee disappeared. The
imam took the money and the clothes, and for some years his pension was
Maid regularly. A change in his language now became perceptible, for,
whereas he was used before, when, on treating of any controverted point,
he had occasion to mention the Ismaïlites, to express himself thus,
"Whatever the Ismaïlites, whom God curse and destroy! may say,"--now
that he was pensioned he contented himself with merely saying,
"Notwithstanding what the Ismaïlites may say." When one of his scholars
asked him the cause of this change he made answer, "We cannot curse the
Ismaïlites, they employ such sharp and convincing arguments." This
anecdote is related by several of the Persian historians, and it serves
to prove, like the case of sultan Sanjar, related above, that the
Ismaïlites were not so thoroughly ruthless and bloodthirsty as not to
prefer rendering an enemy innocuous by gentle means to depriving him of
life.

Historians record no other event connected with

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

the eastern establishment of the Ismaïlite society during the long reign
of Mohammed II. We shall now, therefore, turn our view to the Syrian
branch, which attracts attention by the illustrious names which appear
in oriental history at that time, and with which the ruler of Massyat
came into hostile or friendly relations. The names of Noor-ed-deen
(*Light of Religion*), Salah-ed-deen (*Integrity of Religion*), the
Noradin and Saladin of western writers, and the Lion-hearted king of
England, will at once awake the attention of the reader.

The celebrated Emod-ed-deen (*Pillar of Religion*) Zengi, who gave the
Christian power in the east its first shock by the conquest of Edessa,
perished by the hand of a slave shortly after that achievement. His
power and the title Atabeg fell to his son Noor-ed-deen, who carried on
the war against the Christians with all the activity of his father, and
with more of the gentleness and courtesies which shed a lustre on zeal
and valour. Noor-ed-deen was one of the most accomplished characters
which the East has exhibited. He was generous and just, and strict in
the observance of all the duties of Islam. No pomp or magnificence
surrounded him. He wore neither silk nor gold. With the fifth part of
the booty, which was his share as prince, he provided for all his
expenses. A zealous Moslem, he was evermore engaged in the combats of
the Holy War,--either the *greater*, which was held to be fought against
the world and its temptations by fasting and prayer, by study, and the
daily practice of the virtues required of him who is placed in
authority,--or the *lesser*, which was fought with natural weapon's
against the foes of Islam. From this union of piety and valour he
acquired the titles of Gasi (*Victor*) and Sheheed (*Martyr*); for,
though he did not fall in the defence of the faith, he was regarded as
being entitled to all the future rewards attendant

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

on actual martyrdom. Notwithstanding his being one of the most deadly
foes that the Christians ever encountered, their historians did justice
to the illustrious Noor-ed-deen, and the learned William, Archbishop of
Tyre, says of him, "He was a prudent, moderate man, who feared God
according to the faith of his people, fortunate, and an augmenter of his
paternal inheritance."

The possession of Mossul and Aleppo made Noor-ed-deen master of northern
Syria; the southern part of that country was under the Prince of
Damascus. Twice did the atabeg lay siege, without effect, to that city;
at length the inhabitants, fearing the Crusaders, invited him to take
possession of it, and the feeble prince was obliged to retire, accepting
Emessa in exchange for the "Queen of Syria." The power of Noor-ed-deen
now extended from the Euphrates to the Holy Land, and his thoughts were
directed towards his grand object of expelling the Franks from the East,
when an opportunity presented itself of bringing Egypt once more under
the spiritual dominion of the house of Abbas.

Degeneracy is the inevitable lot of unlimited power. The Fatimite
Commanders of the Faithful were now become mere puppets in the hands of
their ministers, and the post of vizir was now, as was so often the case
with the throne, contended for with arms. A civil war was at this time
raging in Egypt between Shaver and Dhargam, rival candidates for the
viziriate. The former came in person to Damascus, and offered the atabeg
Noor-ed-deen a third of the revenues of Egypt if he would aid him to
overcome his rival. Without hesitation Noor-ed-deen ordered Asad-ed-deen
(*Lion of Religion*) Sheerkoh (*Mountain Lion*) <span
id="fr_46"></span>[\*](#fn_46) a Koordish chief who commanded for him at
Emessa, to assemble an army and march for

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egypt. Sheerkoh
obeyed, and sorely against his will, and only at the urgent command of
Noor-ed-deen, did his nephew, the then little known, afterwards so
justly famous, Saladin, quit the banquets and enjoyments of Damascus,
and the other towns of Syria, to accompany his uncle to the toils and
the perils of war. Dhargam was victorious in the first action, but he
being murdered shortly afterwards by one of his slaves, Shaver obtained
possession of the dignity which he sought. 'The new vizir then tried. to
get rid of his allies, but such was not the intention of Noor-ed-deen,
and Sheerkoh took his post with his troops in the north-eastern part of
the kingdom, where he occupied the frontier town of Belbeïs, on the most
eastern branch of the Nile, under pretext of receiving the third part of
the revenue which had been promised to Noor-ed-deen. Shaver, anxious to
get rid of such dangerous guests, formed a secret league with Amalric,
King of Jerusalem, and engaged to give him 60,000 ducats for his aid
against them. Sheerkoh, who had been reinforced, advanced into Upper
Egypt, and Saladin took the command of Alexandria, which he gallantly
defended for three months against the combined forces of the Christians
and Egyptians, and, after some fighting, peace was made on condition of
Noor-ed-deen receiving 50,000 ducats, and double that sum being paid
annually to the King of Jerusalem.

Shortly afterwards an unprincipled attempt was made on Egypt by Amalric,
at the suggestion of the Master of the Hospitallers, and Shaver, in his
distress, had once more recourse to Noor-ed-deen. The phantom-khalif
joined in the supplication, and sent what is the greatest mark of need
in the east--locks of the hair of his women, which is as much as to say,
"Aid! aid! the foe is dragging the women forth by the hair." Belbeïs had
now been conquered, and

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cairo was besieged
by the Christians. Shaver had burnt the old town, and defended himself
and the khalif in the new town, the proper Cairo. Sheerkoh appeared once
more in Egypt with a larger army [than](errata.htm#7) before <span
id="fr_47"></span>[\*](#fn_47), but, ere he reached the beleaguered
town, Shaver and Amalric had entered into a composition, and the former
had withdrawn on receiving a sum of 50,000 ducats. Sheerkoh however
advanced, and pitched his tents before the walls of Cairo. The khalif
Adhad and his principal nobles came forth to receive him, and that
unhappy prince made his complaints of the tyranny and selfishness of
Shaver, who had brought so much misery on him and his kingdom. He
concluded by requesting the head of his vizir at the hand of the general
of Noor-ed-deen. Shaver, aware of the danger which menaced him, invited
Sheerkoh, his nephew, and the other chiefs of the army, to a banquet,
with the intention of destroying them, but his plot was discovered, and
his head cast at the feet of the khalif. Sheerkoh was forthwith
appointed to the vacant dignity, with the honourable title of
Melik-el-Mansoor (Victorious King), but he enjoyed it only for a short
time, having been carried off by death in little more than two months
after his elevation. He was succeeded in his rank, and in the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

command of the army, by his nephew Saladin, u ho now became in effect
master of Egypt. Noor-ed-deen, thinking the time was come for
establishing the spiritual sway of the house of Abbas, sent directions
to Saladin to fill all the offices which had been occupied by the Sheähs
with the orthodox, and hear prayer celebrated in the name of the Khalif
of Bagdad; but this prudent chief, who knew that the great majority of
the people of Egypt were firmly attached to the belief of the Fatimites
being the rightful successors of the Prophet, hesitated to comply. At
length the death of the Fatimite khalif occurred most opportunely to
free him from embarrassment. Adhad-ladin-Allah, the last of the
descendants of Moez-ladin-Allah, the founder of the dynasty, died
suddenly--of disease, according to the oriental historians,--by the hand
of Saladin, according to the rumour which went among the
Christians <span id="fr_48"></span>[\*](#fn_48). All obstacles being now
removed, public prayer was celebrated in the mosks of Egypt in the name
of the Abbasside khalif, and the power of the western Ismaïlites, after
a continuance of 200 years, brought completely to an end.

Noor-ed-deen, who saw that the power of his lieutenant was now too great
to be controlled, adopted the prudent plan of soothing him by titles and
marks of confidence. The khalif of Bagdad sent him a dress of honour and
a letter of thanks for having reduced under his spiritual dominion a
province which had been so long rebellious against his house. But the
most important consequence of the timely death of the khalif to Saladin
was the acquisition of the accumulated treasures of the Fatimites, which
fell into his hands, and which he employed as the means of securing the
fidelity of his officers and soldiers. As a specimen of oriental
exaggeration, we shall give the list of these treasures- as they are
enumerated by

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

eastern writers. There were, we are assured, no less than 700 pearls,
each of which was of a size that rendered it inestimable, an emerald a
span long, and as thick as the finger, a library consisting of 2,600,000
books, and gold, both coined and in the in ass; aloes, amber, and
military arms and weapons past computation. A large portion of this
enormous treasure was distributed by Saladin among his soldiers; the
remainder was applied, during ten successive years, to defray the
expenses of his wars and buildings. As Saladin's name was Yoossuf
(*Joseph*), the same with that of the son of Jacob, the minister of king
Pharaoh, it is not an improbable supposition that, in Egyptian
tradition, the two Josephs have been confounded, and the works of the
latter been ascribed to the former; for it is the character of popular
tradition to leap over centuries, and even thousands of years, and to
form out of several heroes one who is made to perform the actions of
them all.

As long as Noor-ed-deen lived, Saladin continued to acknowledge his
superiority; and when, on his death, he left his dominions to his son
Malek-es-Saleh, the coins of Egypt bore the name of the young prince. As
Malek-es-Saleh was a minor, and entirely under the guidance of the
eunuch Kameshtegin, great discontent prevailed among the emirs; and
Seif-ed-deen (*Sword of Religion*), the cousin of the young prince, who
was at the head of an army in Mesopotamia, prepared to wrest the
dominion from the young Malek-es-Saleh. All eyes were turned to Saladin,
as the only person capable of preserving the country. He left Egypt with
only 700 horsemen. The governor and people of Damascus cheerfully opened
the gates to him. Hems and Hama followed the example of Damascus.
Saladin took the government under the modest title of

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

lieutenant of the young atabeg, whose rights he declared himself ready
to maintain on all occasions. He advanced to Aleppo, where
Malek-es-Saleh was residing; but the militia of that town, moved by the
tears of the young prince, who was probably influenced by the eunuch
Kameshtegin, who feared to lose his power, marched out and put to flight
the small force with which Saladin had approached the town. Having
collected a larger army, Saladin laid siege regularly to Aleppo, and
Kameshtegin, despairing of force, resolved to have recourse to
treachery. He sent accordingly to Sinan, the Sheikh of the Assassins,
who resided at Massyat, representing to him how dangerous a foe to the
Ismaïlites was the valiant Koord, who was so ardent in his zeal for the
house of Abbas, and had put an end to the dynasty of the Fatimites, who
had so long given lustre to the maintainers of the rights of Ismaïl by
the possession of extensive temporal power and dignity. He reminded him
that, if Saladin succeeded in his ambitious projects in Syria, he would,
in all probability, turn his might against the Assassins, and destroy
their power in that country. These arguments were enforced by gold, and
the sheikh, readily yielding to them, despatched without delay three
Fedavees, who fell on Saladin in the camp before Aleppo. The attempt,
however, miscarried, and the murderers were seized and put to death.
Saladin, incensed at this attempt on his life, and guessing well the
quarter whence it came, now pressed on the siege with greater vigour.

Finding the benefit which might be derived from the daggers of the
Fedavee, Kameshtegin resolved to employ them against his personal
enemies. The vizir of the young prince, and two of the principal emirs,
had laid a plot for his destruction. Coming to the knowledge of it, he
determined to be beforehand with

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

them, and, watching the moment when Malek-es-Saleh was about to mount
his horse to go to the chase, he approached him, requesting his
signature to a blank paper, under pretence of its being necessary for
some affair of urgent importance. The young prince signed his name
without suspicion, and Kameshtegin instantly wrote on the paper a letter
to the Sheikh of the Assassins, in which Malek-es-Saleh was made to
request him to send men to put those three emirs out of the way. The
Ismaïlite chief readily complied with the request, as he supposed it to
be, of his young friend and neighbour, and several Fedavees were
despatched to execute his wishes. Two of these fell on the vizir as he
was going out of the eastern gate of a mosk near his own house. They
were cut to pieces on the spot. Soon after three fell on the emir
Mujaheed as he was on horseback. One of them caught hold of the end of
his cloak, in order to make more sure of him, but the emir gave his
horse the spurs, and broke away, leaving his cloak behind. The people
seized the Assassins, two of whom were recognized as being acquaintances
of the emir's head groom. One of them was crucified, and along with him
the groom as an accomplice: on the breast of the latter was placed this
inscription, "This is the reward of the concealer of the Impious." The
others were dragged to the castle, and beaten on the soles of their feet
to make them confess what had induced them to attempt the commission of
such a crime. In the midst of his tortures one of them cried out, "Thou
didst desire of our lord Sinan the murder of thy slaves, and now thou
dost punish us for performing thy wishes." Full of wrath Malek-es-Saleh
wrote a letter to the sheikh Sinan filled with the bitterest reproaches.
The sheikh made no other reply than that of sending him back the letter
bearing his own subscription. Historians do not tell us what

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the final result was; and it is also in a great measure uncertain at
what time this event occurred.

The Assassins did not give over their attempts upon Saladin, whose power
became more formidable to them after he had deprived the family of
Noor-ed-deen of their honours and dominions; and he was again attacked
by them in his camp before the fortress of Ezag. One of them assailed
him and wounded him in the head, but the sultan (he had now assumed that
title) caught him by the arm and struck him down. A second rushed on--he
was cut down by the guards; a third, a fourth, shared the same fate.
Terrified at their obstinate perseverance, the sultan shut himself up in
his tent during several days, and ordered all strangers and suspicious
persons to quit the camp.

Next year (1176) the sultan, being at peace with his other enemies,
resolved to take exemplary vengeance on those who had so unprovokedly
attempted his life. Assembling an army, he entered the mountains, wasted
with fire and sword the territory of the Ismaïlites, and came and laid
siege to Massyat. The power of the Syrian Ismaïlites would have been now
extinguished but for the intercession of the Prince of Hama, the
sultan's uncle, who, at the entreaty of Sinan, prevailed on his nephew
to grant a peace on condition of no attempt being made at any future
time on his life. Sinan gladly assented to these terms, and he
honourably kept his engagement, for the great Saladin reigned fifteen
years after this time, carried on continual wars, conquered Jerusalem
and the Holy Land, exposed himself to danger in the field and in the
camp, but no Assassin was ever again known to approach him with hostile
intentions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[106:\*](sma10.htm#fr_46) The former of these
names is Arabic, the latter Persian.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[108:\*](sma10.htm#fr_47) He was accompanied by
Saladin, who gives the following account of his own repugnance to the
expedition:--"When Noor-ed-deen ordered me to go to Egypt with my uncle,
after Sheerkoh had said to me in his presence, 'Come Yoossuf, make ready
for the journey!' I replied, 'By God, if thou wert to give me the
kingdom of Egypt I would not go, for I have endured in Alexandria what I
shall not forget while I live.' But Sheerkoh said to Noor-ed-deen, 'It
cannot be but that he should accompany me.' Whereupon Noor-ed-deen
repeated his command, but I persisted in my refusal. As Noor-ed-deen
also adhered to his determination, I excused myself by pleading the
narrowness of my circumstances. Noor-ed-deen then gave me all that was
requisite for my outfit, but I felt as if I was going to
death."--*Abulfeda*.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[109:\*](sma10.htm#fr_48) William of Tyre xx.
12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](sma11)
