[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37028)  [Next](sbe37030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVI.

*Ganabâ-sar-ni*g*a*d *Nask.*

1\. The third section is the Aratê*s*târistân ('*warrior code*'),
particulars about the worthiness of destroying a wolf; *and*, among
wolves, the greater need of destroying (zani*s*ntarîh) those with two
legs than those with four legs.

2\. About selecting the daily *supplies* of warriors, the beasts *of
burden*, clothing, and equipment of warriors, and other appurtenances
(*av*â*rî*gânakîh) which are to be given to them; *also* selecting a
horse *and* accoutrements (zênŏ-*a*fzâr) *for* each one.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 3. About having a
man's horse trained before *one* sends *him* to smite enemies. 4. About
the efficacy of the resources *and* care of a warrior in the destruction
which enemies occasion; *also* the army and the slaughter of war. 5.
About the sin of the village and abode of the warriors on the occurrence
of a battle, and what is the retribution for wounds and damage; what is
that which is disfiguring (*a*pîrâyak) therein, and what is that which
is worthy of death therein.

6\. About the characteristics of the wearing of armour (zênâvandîh) and
not wearing of armour *by* warriors. 7. About the rank of the general
(sipâhpa*d*ŏ), *and* other officers (pa*d*ân) over the troops, as to
daily *supplies*, pay, and dignity; also their subordinates (a*z*îrag),
and the number of troopers (gû*r*d) *to* each one of the officers. 8.
About the anxieties of a trooper for the protection of person and
family. 9. About the number of troopers when the king of kings goes to
battle. 10. About the proportion of daily provision for two warriors,
the meat and milk and bread thereof, which are for the sake of providing
guidance *and* causing contests of the warriors in that good eating;
also the reason *of* certifying (gôvâîk) its distribution and weighing,
the beast *of burden* of the original village (bûn kôkîh) <span
id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_236.md), and *its* means of *being* sent unto
the troops. 11. About cutting the herbs for the veterinary surgeon (stôr
be*z*ashkŏ), the store of accoutrements, *and* other things which are
necessary with an army. 12. About the feeding of warriors *on* the day
of battle, the meat and whatsoever are their eatables; even so the food
of the horses.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

13\. About the wealth which foreigners bring away, and this which is
declared thereof, that is, 'I, too, *am* assisting even the wolf.' 14.
About the display of esteem by warriors together, the union of
friendship one with the other, obedient unto their commander of the
troops, and mindfully resigning *them*selves to death, *there* being
seen a spiritual reward, without doubt, in the future existence.

15\. About the choice of a commander over the troops; also as to *his*
coming *and* understanding the habits of his troops, each separately,
through the capability of skill which is theirs. 16. About estimating
the strength *and* resources of the troops, with those of *their*
enemies; that is, how the battle is to be engaged in, *or* how the
*case* is when it is to be avoided. 17. About the provision of anything
requisite <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_237.md) which warriors shall
leave for safety when *there is* danger in the neighbourhood from a
distant stronghold, or danger to a neighbouring stronghold from afar.
18. About *the case* where, when it is necessary to engage in battle,
the horse of a warrior has not arrived, *and it* is allowable to seize
upon several horses from a herd of horses. 19. About the watchful
sentinel (nigâhakŏ pâspânŏ), *and* of what kind is the information from
which this is manifest, to the army and commander of the troops, that
the enemy is well dead, or fled.

20\. About a demonstration whereby they produce terror *and*
apprehension in the enemy. 21. About an altercation of the commander of
the troops with foreigners before a battle; altercation also through an
envoy, and calling them into subjection to the

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

king of kings and the religion of the sacred beings. 22. About
admonition to the troops, and declaring the share and arrangement of
special duty of each one in the fight; announcing to the troops the
recompense of the active, telling *and* informing the troops *of* the
reason of being worthy of death, *of* the worthiness of destroying
foreigners, *of* the command of the sacred beings as to their
destruction when they shall not accept the Irânian nationality (Airîh),
and the equally great reward *and* recompense for their destruction
announced by revelation, the legal code (dâ*d*istânîkîh) of Irân.

23\. About not uttering words of irritation on the day of battle, *and*
not mentioning, among the troops, any intelligence which gives the
troops apprehension, but *only* that which is agreeable and pleasing,
through giving heartiness and increasing the strength. 24. About the
*sacred* ceremonial on the day of battle *and* evil deeds of war;—a twig
of the sacred twigs of that ceremonial, and the Avesta as regards
fighting, *being* the first arrow well delivered into the mark shot
*at*;—the consecration of the water which is nearest to the place of
battle, even by bringing holy-water; and the sequence of the fight, that
is, with which arms *and* appliances *it* is first to be fought, *and*
successively unto those which *are* the last.

25\. About the proportion of those who keep the arms (zâ*ê*) for the
combatants, and, after a victory over foreigners, are taking away the
hostages and captives, out of the foreigners, from the combatants; *also
their* return from them. 26. At what degree of distance from them *they
have* to carry the arms *and* appliances and the restoratives for the
unfatigued

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

and the fatigued; and, the accoutrements *being* deposited, a warm bath
prepared, and relaxation of the body effected, the reward of merit is
given. 27. *One has* to search offenders, to bring restoratives for the
unfatigued and the fatigued, to deliver the accoutrements back to the
arsenal (gan*g*ŏ), to allot the share of the hostage brought back to his
own *people*, and also much else on the same subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_236"></span>[87:1](sbe37029.htm#fr_237.md) Whence the supplies
come.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[88:1](sbe37029.htm#fr_238.md) Or 'of value;'
khvâstakŏ having both meanings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](sbe37030.md)
