[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37117)  [Next](sbe37119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXIX.

1\. About a selection from the whole Ya*s*t <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[3](#fn_1483) referring to the developer
(vakhshînî*d*âr-hômônd).

2\. Those are beneficial who increase for the developer, that is, they
shall occasion benefit (nêvakîh) for him who would occasion that benefit
which is for others <span id="fr_1524"></span>[4](#fn_1484). 3. Thus the
righteous *man* who produces perfect thought is *he* who comes upon it
through Vohûman <span id="fr_1525"></span>[5](#fn_1485), *and* the
benefit of him who is an open annoyer <span
id="fr_1526"></span>[6](#fn_1486)—the righteous man who is a smiter *of*
the wicked, *and* who developes as to what is Aûha*r*ma*zd*'s and as to
what is Zaratû*s*t's—is that he slays in moderation.

4\. Regarding him who is an oppressive man who is righteous, the reply
spoken is *thus:* 'The reward of the smiter and developer—that man of
whom *one*

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

knows the smiting and developing—is the very evil reward *of* him who is
wicked; just as his smiting, as an evil reward for him from those two
spirits, is that very evil practice loved by him who is wicked; even for
this reason every righteous individual is Gâthic <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[1](#fn_1487), because, when privileged
(pa*d*ôkhshâî), he who is wicked is thus he *who* is righteous, *and*
also he who is privileged is unprivileged <span
id="fr_1528"></span>[2](#fn_1488).'

5\. Zaratû*s*t proceeded with the smiting at the wicked, *and* as to
that proceeding Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'Thou shouldst thus proceed
with smiting at the wicked by ordinance (dâ*d*istân), because thus they
have thee and the righteous of every kind as ruler. 6. Also through my
decree (pavan-i*k* man vi*g*îr) *one* produces the ritual of ordeal,
which realizes that which is real, so that *one* may make that which is
dark fully light. 7. Thine, too, is so much the sovereignty of
Aûha*r*ma*zd*, thus through worship, that its requisite (khvâstakŏ)
privilege is thus maintained through virtue, because thou, who *art*
thus, *art* more unconfined (anâkô*s*î*d*ar) to the world through the
furtherance *and* development of righteousness; great, indeed, is he who
trusts the righteous *man* for righteousness, and great is he who
*trusts* the wicked *man* for wickedness.'

8\. As to that utterance (farmâyi*s*nŏ) Zaratû*s*t spoke thus: 'An open
annoyer is the righteous man—the benefiter disclosed *by*
Aûha*r*ma*zd*—that loves the embodied world of righteousness, and
demands its reverence (tarsakâyîh) for the proportion of righteousness
therein, that is, he knows the proportion of duty and good works.' 9.
Regarding

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

the worldly *existence*, the reply spoken is thus: 'That which is again
contaminated (gûmîkhtê*d*) *by* the demons becomes abundant so long as
that which is proper is again contaminated with the demons; *and*, so
long as *there is* a developer, they subsist for their own substances,
so that *it* is possible for them to seek benefit for their own, *and*
they are smiters of the righteous.'

10\. Regarding him who is a wise smiter, Sôshâns <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1](#fn_1489) spoke *in* reply thus: 'It arises
through his way when it is again contaminated.'

11\. As to that mischief (drû*g*i*s*nŏ) Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'Happy
is he from whom there is no mischief.' 12. Regarding <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[2](#fn_1490) him who has come, the Yim of
splendour <span id="fr_1531"></span>[3](#fn_1491), he spoke thus: 'He
attains his reward who is no smiter and no developer, not privileged and
not unprivileged.'

13\. As to that disclosure (h*âk*i*s*nŏ) Vohûman <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[4](#fn_1492) spoke thus: 'I aggrandize that
spiritual lord and that priestly master who is my righteousness in
person.'

14\. As to that utterance Spenda*r*ma*d* <span
id="fr_1533"></span>[4](#fn_1492) spoke thus: 'So do thou perfect
(ba*r*â vadîdûn) him whose information subsists—a man that becomes
wise—who is as an emblem of my religion; because he *has* worshipped
that which is ours, so that he has retained property in our possession,
through whose words *there* is a furtherance of the world of
righteousness. 15. That is my arrangement, and that my wish—that is,
what is necessary for me—and I

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

love that which thou fully understandest, that is, that arrangement
which is righteousness; also whatever discourse and perfect performance,
thou askest of us, *O* Zaratû*s*t! in complete mindfulness, I now
practise by the work of each hand; observe thoroughly that which I *am*
performing, *and* thou, too, *art* accomplishing. 16. In worship thou,
*O* Zaratû*s*t! art liberal, who art liberal in ceremonial; *for* thee,
whose body believes, controversy is not lavish (râ*d*) for the sake of
the wealth bestowed; the reward of Zaratû*s*t the developer is for
developing, the reward of Zaratû*s*t the smiter is for smiting, *and*
the reward of Zaratû*s*t the smiter and developer is for smiting and
developing. 17. At the bridge *judgment* of him whose name the fire
calls for participation, as when they repeatedly pour the melted ore
upon him in the throat, thou shouldst pray near him alive—him whose love
is for virtue—so that he may perform duty and good works with
fearlessness; with his desire, too, it is expedient to know that *it is*
done by him on account of necessity.'

18\. As to that utterance Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'Such is the upward
attraction (lâlâ-han*g*i*s*nîh) of Shatraver <span
id="fr_1534"></span>[1](#fn_1493) for him who is ours.' 19. As to that
question (frashnŏ) Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: Such has happened to him
who is ours through Vohûman; he ought to come to our religion through
virtue. 20. Truly he, *O* Zaratû*s*t! is privileged for the sovereignty,
who confines *his* ears *to* this religion, that he may make *it* fully
progressive; who is given immortality through this, and kind regard
*for* the will *of* him *who* is the best of that religion of mine,

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *O* Zaratû*s*t!
*and* who assists the furtherance of this world of mine in
righteousness.'

21\. As to those of that *other one* <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1](#fn_1494) Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'As regards
that which is great evidence, when wicked they consider *it* as
unattested for him who is wicked himself; *and* the thoughts <span
id="fr_1536"></span>[2](#fn_1495) of him, whose deeds are those of that
*other one*, are due to Akômanô <span id="fr_1537"></span>[3](#fn_1496).
22. Owing also to this, when both Khû*r*da*d* and Amû*r*da*d* <span
id="fr_1538"></span>[4](#fn_1497) are given to thee, *it is* in that
way—when thou art of the propitious spirit and the best thought—that
what thou understandest thou shouldst be accomplishing, and what thou
dost not understand thou askest again.'

23\. Of him whose wisdom exists (aîtŏ)—of Aûha*r*ma*zd*—he whose wisdom
arises (yehevûnê*d*)—Zaratû*s*t—enquired concerning him who is unreal
(an-aîtŏ) *and* who does not subsist (yehevûnê*d*) *here*after, who
*has* thus never become a material *existence* for those *on* the side
of virtue, and does not subsist for them henceforth.

24\. As to that reverse description (pa*d*îrakŏ-nisâni*s*nîh)
Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'Among men of every kind say unto the
righteous who are smiting the wicked, *that* we improve the measure of
any milk they propitiate, even by the holy-water which is the sustenance
(bari*s*nŏ) of milk, *in order* to cause much happiness of life.'

25\. As to that utterance Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'Happy is he from
whom there is no complaint, and a life which is like this the text
Gerezôi . . .

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

âkhsô . . . <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1](#fn_1498) implores. 26. To
thee, *O* Zaratû*s*t! my protection is given *in* the reply of the
K*e*m-nâ <span id="fr_1540"></span>[2](#fn_1499) which, before the
companionship of Kaî-Vi*s*tâsp <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[3](#fn_1500)—that righteous friend of mine <span
id="fr_1542"></span>[4](#fn_1501)—*was* a published thing of those which
are used, *and* of those such as it is requisite to use. 27. The talk of
a man which is immoderate is false, everything immoderate is *so* for
this reason, everything is not that which the good man possesses,
because, when privileged, the wicked *one* is he who is righteous, and
he who is privileged becomes unprivileged; he who is righteous is thus
he who is wicked, and becomes him who is privileged and unprivileged, so
that he is fully incriminated, and they shall carry off his
possessions.'

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

28\. Regarding the benefiters the reply spoken is *thus:* 'They are
owing to the reward of the smiter and developer; those are beneficial
whose smiting and developing are those of the developer Aûha*r*ma*zd*,
who understands smiting and development.'

29\. When through smiting by Aûha*r*ma*zd*, on account of the wicked, a
question (frashnŏ) about *it* arose, the reply spoken, as to the smiting
of the present *world* by means of him who is ruler, *was:* 'The reward
which the judgment that is perfect teaches is thus, that he who is the
smiter and developer, Sôshâns <span id="fr_1543"></span>[1](#fn_1502),
shall make the decision.' 30. Zaratû*s*t spoke *in* reply thus: 'He
gives a reward.' 31. And that wise smiter, Sôshâns, spoke *in* reply
thus: 'He shall inflict punishment.'

32\. Even he who is an ox of many cattle has openly *and* publicly
wailed this complaint <span id="fr_1544"></span>[2](#fn_1503) on account
of the righteous *one:* 'How long *is it* till *the time* when a
developer arises, even he who is an irresolute ruler (akâmakŏ khû*d*âî)?
How long is the time till he arises, until the wicked *one* who is a
smiter *and* privileged corrupter is he *who is* unprivileged?' 33.
Because, for the sake of producing resolution (kâmak-dahîh), he
complains that, until the developer shall arise, even he who is
irresolute is ruler, that is, until he who is the developer shall become
privileged.

34\. As to that complaint of his Aûha*r*ma*zd* spoke thus: 'Not so as by
this complaint is the obtainment of spiritual lordship (ahûîkih), for
this reason, when they do not consider the ruler as a ruler, and *there
is* no giving of priestly authority (ra*d*ŏîh) by any

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

righteousness whatever <span id="fr_1545"></span>[1](#fn_1504), it is
requisite, on account of the many righteous, to speak henceforth, until
*the time* when the developer arises, even *of* him who is an irresolute
ruler.'

35\. On account of the many statements of the spirits, even as to
thought, word, *and* deed, it is requisite to say that they shall always
render an account until even some obtainment *of* a smiter and
developer, privileged *or* unprivileged. 36. Some arise *of* whom it is
requisite to ask this question (frashnŏ) <span
id="fr_1546"></span>[2](#fn_1505) while he who is righteous *and* he who
is wicked are two witnesses, *and* they make the righteous *one*
manifest by his evidence, *or* they molest him who is righteous by
smiting. 37. Some arise when it is requisite to speak this reply <span
id="fr_1547"></span>[3](#fn_1506) during the smiting *of* the maintainer
of strife and *of* the kinsman. 38. *And* some arise while that
individual <span id="fr_1548"></span>[4](#fn_1507) is loved, though a
righteous *one and* a developer arise, and it is requisite to produce a
provider of benefit on account of the many, both wicked and righteous,
so long as a wicked *one* of the smiting which is maintaining strife is
privileged.

39\. Because, regarding the production of resolution, *it* is proclaimed
that *it is* so that they shall fully understand that Aûha*r*ma*zd*
discriminates truly, *and* Aharman does not discriminate truly. 40. And
that *it is* so that they shall fully understand that the punishment of
the wicked is for teaching *them* that they *will* attain to the
existence of darkness, that even *to* him who belongs to the
ever-stationary they *may* give his reward, that they are for smiting
the wicked *one*, that they are very powerful to give, that

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

they *should* kill the apostate, that *one has to be* converted from
vileness to goodness, that he who would be wicked is made to believe by
the tongue, that for the sake of proper nurture of the creatures
next-of-kin marriage is provided, that the demons are despised, that
thus he who is evil-ruling is wicked, and that they are approaching *the
place* where Aûha*r*ma*zd* shall provide for the account of sin and good
works.

41\. They shall become more diligent in the performance of duty and good
works, and abstain more from sin, always until *one* attains even to
some acquirement *for* those in life and those in a lifeless state <span
id="fr_1549"></span>[1](#fn_1508). 42. And they shall not inflict their
punishment completely in the embodied state, and the fiend does not pity
the worldly *existence*; every individual is counted up, and every one
is fully completed for the affairs of Aûha*r*ma*zd*, *but* the fiend is
not smitten, and they shall not fully inflict the punishment.

43\. No one thinks thou shouldst remain for the propitious
Aûha*r*ma*zd*, and no one completely presents *him*self; they attack
through the fiend, and arise for the foolish *one*. 44. No one arises
for the goodness of him who is good, *but* for the vileness *of* the
fiend they destroy *what is* good, and do not understand evil *and*
good; they recite the revelation for a wicked *one*, they do not bestow
friendship for labour, *but* are for the evil-doer.

45\. And the righteous *one*, who is the best of spiritual *and* worldly
*existences*, becomes a privileged

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

developer, even he who is an irresolute ruler <span
id="fr_1550"></span>[1](#fn_1509); and so he who is wicked, even he who
is privileged, becomes unprivileged, at that time when *one* gives the
soul of every one unto the supreme heaven <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[2](#fn_1510), and when thou shouldst, every one,
know that the affliction of the annoyers arises <span
id="fr_1552"></span>[3](#fn_1511), so that when, owing thereto, they
beseech the sacred beings, *it is* only hell that they supply.

46\. When every one shall provide the ceremonial of the archangels
unworriedly, and when every one knows that Gô*s*-aûrvan complained <span
id="fr_1553"></span>[4](#fn_1512)—so that he who is the fashioner of
cattle enquired thus: 'Whose is the guardianship of cattle <span
id="fr_1554"></span>[5](#fn_1513)?' *and* 'Not without annoyance' *was*
the reply of Ashavahi*s*t, 'that is, they shall inflict his
punishment <span id="fr_1555"></span>[6](#fn_1514)'—every one *also*
knows that in their light is joyfulness for the sight <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[7](#fn_1515).

47\. When every individual (ko*l*â aî*s*-1) becomes aware *of* the
priestly authority of Aûha*r*ma*zd*; and when every individual knows
that his remedy *for* the devastation owing to the evil spirit is
comprehensibly stated <span id="fr_1557"></span>[8](#fn_1516); when
every individual knows that Aûha*r*ma*zd* fashioned the propitiousness
in the liturgy <span id="fr_1558"></span>[9](#fn_1517); and when every
one knows that the priest is perfect, that Aûha*r*ma*zd* enhances both
of them in spirituality <span id="fr_1559"></span>[10](#fn_1518), that
Vohûman is the offspring of Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span
id="fr_1560"></span>[11](#fn_1519), that Spenda*r*ma*d* is
Aûha*r*ma*zd*'s own <span id="fr_1561"></span>[12](#fn_1520), that all
three of them are the life *of* him who

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

*has* wandered forth <span id="fr_1562"></span>[1](#fn_1521)—that is,
life is given by the thought and wisdom <span
id="fr_1563"></span>[2](#fn_1522) which are his own—and that the sacred
beings are they who are supporting *it*.

48\. When every one of this existence must act for the sake of that
*other* existence, *and* knows *how* to act; when every one is a friend,
through deeds, of the spirit which is his own <span
id="fr_1564"></span>[3](#fn_1523); and when every one becomes a person
supporting Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span id="fr_1565"></span>[4](#fn_1524). 49.
When every individual knows that they give no reward to him in whose
body a demon is lodging who is not listening <span
id="fr_1566"></span>[5](#fn_1525); when every one shall make his own
soul immortal <span id="fr_1567"></span>[6](#fn_1526); and when every
one has advantage through possession of Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span
id="fr_1568"></span>[7](#fn_1527).

50\. When every one becomes a Zôti unsullied in righteousness <span
id="fr_1569"></span>[8](#fn_1528); when every one gives a sacred cake to
the archangels <span id="fr_1570"></span>[9](#fn_1529); when every one
knows that co-operation is due to him who is their servant; and when
they are together *in* soul <span id="fr_1571"></span>[10](#fn_1530).
51. When every individual gives *his* body <span
id="fr_1572"></span>[11](#fn_1531); when every one proceeds to their
ceremonial and glorification <span id="fr_1573"></span>[12](#fn_1532);
when every individual knows that 'other than they' is *meant by*
naê*k*îm t*e*m any*e*m <span id="fr_1574"></span>[13](#fn_1533); and
when every one knows

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

that, through that sovereignty of his, the renovation *of the universe*
is produced by *his* will among the existences <span
id="fr_1575"></span>[1](#fn_1534).

52\. When every one knows the elucidation (rôshanŏ) of the religion;
when every one considers the religion as governor and serf <span
id="fr_1576"></span>[2](#fn_1535); when every one knows that the
manifestation of this ought to arise in him; when every one thinks
Aûha*r*ma*zd* auspicious <span id="fr_1577"></span>[3](#fn_1536); and
when every one knows that, when it occurs, benefit is produced, through
resolute sovereignty <span id="fr_1578"></span>[4](#fn_1537), where and
when it gives him a reward for the performance of the duty and good
works they should call for. 53. When every one gives <span
id="fr_1579"></span>[5](#fn_1538) the sacred beings *and* the good a
sheep; when every one knows that, for him whose righteousness is in
action, immense *and* complete mindfulness arises <span
id="fr_1580"></span>[6](#fn_1539); when every one thinks of much
assistance from Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span id="fr_1581"></span>[7](#fn_1540);
when every one speaks to restore *his* temper <span
id="fr_1582"></span>[8](#fn_1541); when every one speaks to provide the
ceremonial <span id="fr_1583"></span>[9](#fn_1542); and when every one
produces that advantage by liberal giving <span
id="fr_1584"></span>[10](#fn_1543). 54. When every one knows that *one*
grants him the obeisance which is *due to* him when in a condition for
the supreme heaven (amat dên garô*d*mânîkîh) <span
id="fr_1585"></span>[11](#fn_1544); when every one knows that *it* is
done by those in the realm of Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[12](#fn_1545); and when every individual knows

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

that, so long as the religion of the first creation <span
id="fr_1587"></span>[1](#fn_1546) shall exist (ae), this characteristic
is to be considered thus: Hvô zî dregv*a*u, &c. <span
id="fr_1588"></span>[2](#fn_1547)

55\. When every individual keeps no wealth for a high-priest of the
apostates <span id="fr_1589"></span>[3](#fn_1548); when every one knows
that, when above, *there* is righteousness <span
id="fr_1590"></span>[4](#fn_1549); when they shall make
intercession <span id="fr_1591"></span>[5](#fn_1550) *for* every
individual, and when every individual becomes aware <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[6](#fn_1551) *of it;* when every individual sees
that he is a father of righteousness <span
id="fr_1593"></span>[7](#fn_1552); and when every individual knows that
the propitious spirit is in him <span id="fr_1594"></span>[8](#fn_1553).
56. When every one knows that, when a supplicant, he is more a smiter of
the wicked <span id="fr_1595"></span>[9](#fn_1554); when every
individual utters the salutation (nîyâyi*s*nŏ) of Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span
id="fr_1596"></span>[10](#fn_1555); when every individual knows that
that is our comfort <span id="fr_1597"></span>[11](#fn_1556), *and* that
it is Aûha*r*ma*zd*'s own creature <span
id="fr_1598"></span>[12](#fn_1557); and when every individual is
taught <span id="fr_1599"></span>[13](#fn_1558), *and* every individual
joins in the perfect religion <span id="fr_1600"></span>[14](#fn_1559).

57\. When every individual knows that Vohûman

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

guards the creatures <span id="fr_1601"></span>[1](#fn_1560); when every
individual becomes privileged by will <span
id="fr_1602"></span>[2](#fn_1561) for the reward; when every individual
knows that gain is through giving away <span
id="fr_1603"></span>[3](#fn_1562); when every individual transacts, *or*
shall transact, the affairs of the archangels <span
id="fr_1604"></span>[4](#fn_1563); and when every individual knows that
when he who is intelligent speaks to him <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[5](#fn_1564), it becomes a possession for the
benefit of righteousness <span id="fr_1606"></span>[6](#fn_1565).

58\. When, for equal meritoriousness, it is necessary to give sooner to
Magian men <span id="fr_1607"></span>[7](#fn_1566)—so that on account
even of the Magianship of Kaî-Vi*s*tâsp *he was* suitable for the
sovereignty <span id="fr_1608"></span>[8](#fn_1567), that Zaratû*s*t was
given a wife by Frashô*s*tar <span id="fr_1609"></span>[9](#fn_1568),
that *it was* the learned *G*âmâsp <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[10](#fn_1569) that Aûha*r*ma*zd* gave—and that
every individual shall provide the ceremonial of Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[11](#fn_1570). 59. And when every individual knows
that *they are* the best prayers which are the words of Zaratû*s*t <span
id="fr_1612"></span>[12](#fn_1571), and, even so, his is a wise reward
for those which are yours <span id="fr_1613"></span>[13](#fn_1572).

60\. It is perfect *is* the excellence of righteousness; it is perfect
excellence *that is* righteousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[384:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1523) The twenty-first
Nask, or original Yasna (see Bk. VIII, Chap. XLVI, 1). It is not very
clear, from this chapter and from what is stated about it in Chap. I, 2,
whether this selection was compiled by the author of the Dinka*rd*, or
by some earlier writer. So far as its statements have yet been traced,
nearly all of them originate in the Gâthas, or in the Yasna
Haptanghâiti; but § 45 quotes a passage from the Bakŏ Nask (Yas. XIX).

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[384:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1524) Compare Pahl.
Yas. XLII, 1 a.

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[384:5](sbe37118.htm#fr_1525) Compare Pahl.
Yas. XXVIII, 2 a, where J2, Pt4, Mf4 have ba*r*â yehamtûnânê pavan
Vohûman.

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[384:6](sbe37118.htm#fr_1526) Compare Pahl.
Yas. XLII, 8 b.

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[385:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1527) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. I, 5 n.

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[385:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1528) See Chap. LXI,
11.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[386:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1529) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. XIV, 14.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[386:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1530) Assuming that
lâ, 'not,' stands for râî.

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[386:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1531) Av. Yimô
khshaêtô (see Bk. VIII, Chap. XIII, 6, 7).

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[386:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1533) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. IX, 3.

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[387:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1534) See Chap. XLIII,
1. It is here written Shatrôver.

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[388:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1535) The followers of
Aharman.

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[388:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1536) Assuming that
mâni*s*nŏ, 'dwelling,' stands for mîni*s*nŏ.

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[388:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1537) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. IX, 3 n.

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[388:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1538) See Chap. XIX,
1.

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[389:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1539) Yas. XLVI, 2
c-e; its Pahlavi version (Pahl. Yas. XLV, 2 c-e) may be translated as
follows:—'I complain to thee, behold it and this *one, O* Aûha*r*ma*zd*!
(that is, seek a remedy for me); *that* pleasure is my desire, which a
friend gives to his friend; through the instruction of Vohûman (when I
am instructed in virtue) is the coveted *thing* of righteousness (thou
shouldst give me).' The words in parentheses have no equivalents in the
Avesta text.

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[389:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1540) Yas. XLVI, 7;
its Pahlavi version (Pahl. Yas. XLV, 7 a-e) may be translated as
follows:—'Who is given to me (and mine, my disciples) *as* protector by
thee, *O* Aûha*r*ma*zd*! when that wicked (Aharman) retains malice *for*
me in possession (that is, maintains malice with me? Who shall provide
me protection), other than thy fire and Vohûman? (Because I know that
they would provide me protection for your sake) when I nourish
righteousness through deeds *for* them, O Aûha*r*ma*zd*! (that is,
should I perform duty and good works, who shall provide me protection?)
Thou shouldst proclaim to me that high-priest of the religion; (this
thou shouldst state thus: "Maintain the religion as high-priest").'

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[389:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1541) See Pahl. Yas.
XLV, 13 e, and Bk. VIII, Chaps. XI, 1 , XIII, 15.

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[389:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1542) Compare Ibid. 14
a which is given in Pt4, Mf4, as follows:—Zaratû*s*tŏ mûn lak aharûbŏ
dôstŏ.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[390:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1543) See § 10.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[390:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1544) Compare Pahl.
Yas. XXIX, 1, 9.

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[391:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1545) See Pahl. Yas.
XXIX, 6 b.

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[391:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1546) That in § 32.

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[391:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1547) That in § 34.

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[391:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1548) The irresolute
ruler.

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[392:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1549) By accumulating
more good works than are necessary to balance one's own sins.

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[393:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1550) See Pahl. Yas.
XIX, 58, XX, 10.

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[393:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1551) See Pahl. Yas.
XXVIII, 4 a.

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[393:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1552) Ibid. 6 c.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[393:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1553) See Pahl. Yas.
XXIX, 1 a, and Chap. XV, 3.

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[393:5](sbe37118.htm#fr_1554) Ibid. 2 a.

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[393:6](sbe37118.htm#fr_1555) Ibid. 3 a, and
Bk. VIII, Chap. XXXVII, 14.

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[393:7](sbe37118.htm#fr_1556) See Pahl. Yas.
XXX, 1 c.

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[393:8](sbe37118.htm#fr_1557) See Pahl. Yas.
XXIX, 6 a.

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[393:9](sbe37118.htm#fr_1558) Ibid. 7 a.

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[393:10](sbe37118.htm#fr_1559) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXI, 7 c.

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[393:11](sbe37118.htm#fr_1560) Ibid. 8 a.

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[393:12](sbe37118.htm#fr_1561) Ibid. 9 a.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[394:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1562) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXI, 10 a.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[394:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1563) Ibid. 11 b, c.

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[394:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1564) Ibid. 21 c.

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[394:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1565) Ibid. 22 c.

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[394:5](sbe37118.htm#fr_1566) Compare Pahl.
Yas. XXXIII, 4 a, XLIII, 13 c.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[394:6](sbe37118.htm#fr_1567) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXIV, 1 a.

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[394:7](sbe37118.htm#fr_1568) Ibid. 3 a.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[394:8](sbe37118.htm#fr_1569) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXIII, 6 a, and Bk. VIII, Chap. VII, 5.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[394:9](sbe37118.htm#fr_1570) Ibid. 8 c.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[394:10](sbe37118.htm#fr_1571) Ibid. 9 c.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[394:11](sbe37118.htm#fr_1572) Ibid. 10 c.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[394:12](sbe37118.htm#fr_1573) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXIV, 6 c.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[394:13](sbe37118.htm#fr_1574) Yas. XXXIV, 7
c, the Pahlavi version of which may be translated as follows:—'I am
aware of no one (above), other than you (that is, I know no one from
whom my benefit is such as from you, and when they shall cause)
righteousness (that is, they shall perform duty and good works, it) thus
produces shelter for us.' The MS. has naê*k*î*d*.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[395:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1575) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXIV, 15 c.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[395:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1576) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXV, 22.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[395:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1577) See Pahl. Yas.
XLII, 7 a.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[395:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1578) Ibid. 8 d.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[395:5](sbe37118.htm#fr_1579) Assuming that
yehevûnê*d*, 'becomes,' stands for yehabûnê*d*.

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[395:6](sbe37118.htm#fr_1580) See Pahl. Yas.
XLIII, 6 c.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[395:7](sbe37118.htm#fr_1581) Ibid. 7 d.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[395:8](sbe37118.htm#fr_1582) See Pahl. Yas.
XLIV, 3 a.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[395:9](sbe37118.htm#fr_1583) Ibid. 6 a.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[395:10](sbe37118.htm#fr_1584) Ibid. 7 a.

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[395:11](sbe37118.htm#fr_1585) Ibid. 8 e.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[395:12](sbe37118.htm#fr_1586) Ibid. 9 c.

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[396:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1587) See Pahl. Yas.
XLV, 6 e.

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[396:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1588) Yas. XLVI, 6
c-e; its Pahlavi version (Pahl. Yas. XLV, 6 c-e) may be translated as
follows:—'For he is wicked whose best nature is for the wicked, and he
is righteous whose homage (franâmi*s*nŏ in Pt4, Mf4) is for the
righteous (in any doubtfulness, whoever gives anything to the wicked is
to be considered as wicked, and whoever gives to the righteous is to be
considered as righteous) so long as the religion of the first creation,
*O* Aûha*r*ma*zd*! (until the *time* when Sôshâns arrives *one* is ever
to be considered in this *way*).'

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[396:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1589) See Pahl. Yas.
XLV, 8 a. The MS. has 'the righteous' by mistake.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[396:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1590) Ibid. 12 a.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[396:5](sbe37118.htm#fr_1591) Compare Pahl.
Yas. XLVIII, 6 a.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[396:6](sbe37118.htm#fr_1592) Compare Pahl.
Yas. XLV, 17 e.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[396:7](sbe37118.htm#fr_1593) See Pahl. Yas.
XLVI, 2 d.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[396:8](sbe37118.htm#fr_1594) Ibid. 3 a.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[396:9](sbe37118.htm#fr_1595) Ibid. 4 d.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[396:10](sbe37118.htm#fr_1596) See Pahl. Yas.
XLVII, 1 d.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[396:11](sbe37118.htm#fr_1597) Ibid. 6 a.

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[396:12](sbe37118.htm#fr_1598) Ibid. 7 d.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[396:13](sbe37118.htm#fr_1599) Ibid. 12 c.

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[396:14](sbe37118.htm#fr_1600) See Pahl. Yas.
XLVIII, 9 c.

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[397:1](sbe37118.htm#fr_1601) See Pahl. Yas.
XLVIII, 10 a, b.

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[397:2](sbe37118.htm#fr_1602) See Pahl. Yas.
XLIX, 9 c.

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[397:3](sbe37118.htm#fr_1603) See Pahl. Yas.
L, 1 b. The MS. has bûn, instead of ba*r*â, by mistake.

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[397:4](sbe37118.htm#fr_1604) Ibid. 3 c.

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[397:5](sbe37118.htm#fr_1605) Ibid. 8 a.

<span id="fn_1565"></span>[397:6](sbe37118.htm#fr_1606) Ibid. 8 b.

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[397:7](sbe37118.htm#fr_1607) Ibid. 15 a.

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[397:8](sbe37118.htm#fr_1608) Ibid. 16 a, and
Bk. VIII, Chap. XI, 1.

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[397:9](sbe37118.htm#fr_1609) Ibid. 17 a, and
Bk. VIII, Chap. XXXVIII, 68.

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[397:10](sbe37118.htm#fr_1610) Ibid. 18 a.

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[397:11](sbe37118.htm#fr_1611) Ibid. 20 c.

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[397:12](sbe37118.htm#fr_1612) See Pahl. Yas.
LII, 1 a.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[397:13](sbe37118.htm#fr_1613) Ibid. 7 a.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Observations](sbe37119)
