[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37080)  [Next](sbe37082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

### CHAPTER XXXII.

*Var*s*tmânsar Nask*.

1\. The ninth fargar*d*, *Hv*aêtumaiti <span
id="fr_886"></span>[1](#fn_880), is about the coming of three deceitful
demons, and *their* making supplication (lâ*g*ak-karîh) *to*
Aûha*r*ma*zd* <span id="fr_887"></span>[2](#fn_881), so that he should
consider and reward those aggrieved by him, and it would amount to
strength for them in destroying the creatures. 2. The disgorging
(akhvâr*d*anŏ) of supplication *by* those demons clamorously upwards
from an abyss, *and* the statement of one that *he is* <span
id="fr_888"></span>[3](#fn_882) the kindred that is undeceitful, of
*another* one that *he is* the serfdom that is undeceitful, *and* of
*the third* one that he is the confederacy that is undeceitful, *was* in
these *words*, namely: 'We are those spirits when the kinsman,
confederate, and serf <span id="fr_889"></span>[2](#fn_881) do not break
promises, one with the other; we are not really these that are no
implements of thine, *but* our religion *and* law are thine, and we do
thy will; we become assistants of *him* who is thy friend, and injurers
of *him* who is thy enemy <span id="fr_890"></span>[4](#fn_883); *and*
from thee we beg a position in the existence that is best, the reward
that is a reward *of* the worthy.'

3\. The reply of Aûha*r*ma*zd* to them *was* thus: 'You rush out, astute
in evil, to the extremity (bûn) of that horrible gloom <span
id="fr_891"></span>[5](#fn_884); so you are all from the demon, your
race is really from Evil Thought, that

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

is, your race is from there where Evil Thought <span
id="fr_892"></span>[1](#fn_885), as well as Lust the destroyer and also
Greed the well-accumulating, *resides*, and *where*, moreover, Îndar the
fighter is the spirit of the religion of apostasy and further deceives
the worldly *existence* of mankind, as to proper living and immortal
progress <span id="fr_893"></span>[2](#fn_886), and first confines their
thoughts. 4. He shall first do this, so that he *may* restrain the
thoughts of men from virtuous things <span
id="fr_894"></span>[3](#fn_887), and their further words and perverted
further deeds from the ceremonial of us who are archangels; they further
lose *their* wisdom <span id="fr_895"></span>[4](#fn_888), and further
consider even as perfect righteousness that which is loved *by* the
demons; they utter the false words and consecrate with the worse deeds
of mankind; *and* with the holy-water which *one* consecrates most *to*
you, more falsely *and* more arrogantly <span
id="fr_896"></span>[5](#fn_889) than that falsity and arrogance, do they
enhance the greatest ceremonial, so that they shall make more of the
most. 5. Owing to discord, through that love of you who are demons, they
smite with destruction *him* who shall not be a satisfaction to you in
the presidency; *and* the leader they take (girênd) becomes a destroyer,
so in the sequel, too, there is *some one* that smites *him*; even
though they

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

consider *him* as your follower, they shall occasion *his* destruction.
6. You are evil demons for a congregation when they speak of avoiding
you, and worse for the ceremonial, *or* obeisance, when it occurs; that
which becomes all clearness *to* the utterer of righteousness, in *this*
existence, you utterly destroy; *and* the lodgment of complete
mindfulness in the body is for admonition to human beings about
abstaining from the demons.'

7\. This, too, *is stated*, namely: 'Evil *are* you *who* are wicked
*and* worship the demons with good holy-water *and* with words; through
them the holy-water obtains evil recompense, even the hell that is
horrible.' 8. This, too, *he spoke*, namely: 'Concerning those malicious
demons <span id="fr_897"></span>[1](#fn_890) I *will* first mention
intelligibly to thee when they have come to the world, that is, first
when they have rushed in, how their jurisdiction arose. 9. *For* thirty
centuries <span id="fr_898"></span>[2](#fn_891) those of my world were
immortal *and* undecaying, *O* Zaratû*s*t! *but* when the thirtieth
century was accomplished <span id="fr_899"></span>[3](#fn_892), *O*
Spîtâmân! the sweat (khvâe) produced by the demons then came on to my
Gâyômar*d* <span id="fr_900"></span>[4](#fn_893), for his affliction, so
long a time as a man speaks forth these words *of* the
Yathâ-ahû-vairyô <span id="fr_901"></span>[5](#fn_894), relating to the
spiritual lord and priestly master. 10. And when he issued from that
sweat he was shadowless, that is, darkness had entered <span
id="fr_902"></span>[6](#fn_895); and the words of the formula (âyîn)
relating to the spiritual lord and priestly master *were* spoken forth
by me, and when

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

vâstârem <span id="fr_903"></span>[1](#fn_896) was uttered by me the
demons then fell <span id="fr_904"></span>[2](#fn_897) into the gloom.'

11\. About the harm owing to the demons this, too, *he spoke*, namely:
'The destructiveness *of* the evil spirit is *his* evil teaching *by*
statements <span id="fr_905"></span>[3](#fn_898) *to* my creatures; and
my riches (î*s*tŏ) plundered by him are the proportion of the production
*and* possession of wealth *for* which a desire exists through Good
Thought; that is, when they possess *it* with propriety *it is*
desirable <span id="fr_906"></span>[4](#fn_899). 12. And mankind *were*
gratified by that son of Vîvangh*a*u who was Yim <span
id="fr_907"></span>[5](#fn_900), and cattle *were* gratified by him,
producing thus *the phrase* "you are mankind" in words, *O* Zaratû*s*t!
when he spoke to mankind thus: "You are the mankind for cattle, that is,
you *who* are mankind eat meat of your own subdivision, and through
subdivision by you there is a superabundant occurrence of meat <span
id="fr_908"></span>[6](#fn_901); you are mankind, neither for Greed
(*âz*ŏ), nor for Envy (arêshkŏ) <span id="fr_909"></span>[7](#fn_902),
do thou throw away the warm entrails (taftôg rû*d*îk), nor do thou throw
*them* away warm on account of custom (pî*s*akŏ), now you slay for
slaughtering, so that thus *it may be* beneficial for you and your
servant."'

13\. This, too, *is stated*, namely: 'Even that man

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

is produced for the destruction of mine <span
id="fr_910"></span>[1](#fn_903), who is possessed *by* the wicked evil
spirit; the want of discernment of that man is a tedious life, in which
the utterance of the praise of righteousness is the want of ceremonial
of which a righteous man spoke *thus:* "At *the place* where their
pasture is you are the mankind, the all-producer that fully developes
*them, and* the all-collector that would thoroughly set *them* moving;
in their pasture you are the mankind, *and* they all remain <span
id="fr_911"></span>[2](#fn_904); with hospitality *for* the body they
remain on account of their pasture, *and* in fighting they strike
*their* heads together; you are the mankind of their pasture, it is
expedient and you deprive *it* of moisture <span
id="fr_912"></span>[3](#fn_905) through fire; as to other things, it was
also you that made one altogether believe that untrue statement which is
a lie—the possession of material *existence by* life—owing to external
seduction by the fiend who has come chiefly to you."'

14\. About the harm owing to the demons this, too, *is stated*, namely:
'Their accomplishment of arrogance over these creatures of mine, *and*
also the unfitness for heaven (avahi*s*tîh-i*k*) of a righteous man,
*and* that, too, of a valiant *one*, are *due to* the burial of a
corpse.' 15. This, too, namely: 'They who drag away a corpse <span
id="fr_913"></span>[4](#fn_906) are most hurtful for men, as regards the
wealth of the religion in this world, *and* as regards sheep and beasts
*of burden*.' 16. This, too, namely: '*As to* the people, assisted *by*

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

*one* living *in* terrible difficulty, who deliver the corpse of a dead
*person*, on a sheep *or* beast *of burden*, at a village where they
shall convey *it*, they distress the fire and also the water flowing
*from* the hills <span id="fr_914"></span>[1](#fn_907), likewise those
liquids of the body which are ten <span id="fr_915"></span>[2](#fn_908),
and those saps (aêvanŏ) *of plants* which are fourfold in thousands,
that is, they come out a thousand at one time.'

17\. 'They are giving more assistance when <span
id="fr_916"></span>[3](#fn_909) *it is* the corpse *of* a wicked
*person;* concerning them, too, I tell thee, *O* Zaratû*s*t the
Spîtâmân! that they *shall* arrive in the ninth and tenth
centuries <span id="fr_917"></span>[4](#fn_910) who are the spawn of the
fiend (drû*g*ô hûnôyâkŏ) and the cesspool (rîkhdâr) of the evil spirit;
even one of them is more to be destroyed than ten idolators (dêvîyastô)
*by* him they shall make pure, that is, *the people* shall make him
quite void of wealth who is a priest without recitation *and*
commendation. 18. And they, who *will be* full

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

many in the future, shall bring prostration upon him who is an innocent
person, the husbandman who watches the frog of the ditch (zak-î gîlûgŏ
vazagh) so that he may keep it away from mankind; and they execute
ill-contrived commands. 19. They also produce destruction for these of
mine, and speak of the living state, to these of my religion, thus:
"When living is an expediency it is in our way;" they are wicked, they
dwindle through greatness and even terror, that is, they shall commit
sin through leadership and vassalage <span
id="fr_918"></span>[1](#fn_911) who are smiting thee, and they speak
folly who are smiting this pure religion of thine, O Spîtâmân!'

20\. 'They, too, who recite this thy revelation of the
Ma*zd*a-worshippers, say that the distinction (nî*s*ôn) of those others
from those who are thine, even those whom they hurt, is this, that they
plunder, they also think scornfully of this thy ceremonial, and think
scornfully of the obeisances (nîyâyisnŏ) and of both those blessings
from me, the Avesta and Zand which I, who am the most propitious of
spirits, spoke forth to thee. 21. They also injure the ceremonial of him
who is perfectly righteous <span id="fr_919"></span>[2](#fn_912), even
the obeisance arisen from a disciple of Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân; and
they chant that which is a settled effusion (ba*r*â-hankhetûntô rêgîh)
that is very evil, as a perfect deed for mankind <span
id="fr_920"></span>[3](#fn_913), which those of very evil deeds call
joy <span id="fr_921"></span>[4](#fn_914).'

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

22\. 'They seek sovereignty as a devouring (grehmakŏ), that is, they
seek privilege for a bribe, and in their abode is he who is very evil in
thought, that is, they seek with this design, that, *for* the hundred
which another gives up, they *may* take two hundred away *from* the
other <span id="fr_922"></span>[1](#fn_915); they destroy the best
existence <span id="fr_923"></span>[2](#fn_916), they destroy their own
souls, *and* they destroy the world of material beings. 23. Then they
who are privileged shall convey that sovereignty *of* the Kîk and
Karap <span id="fr_924"></span>[3](#fn_917), even those that are the
worst-ruling who are in the country, unto him who is best-ruling in
house, village, community, *and* province; *and* then both shall keep up
an uproar, he who is well-ruling and also he who is ill-ruling, and he
who is ill-ruling is beaten, and he is delivered up to the best-ruling
ruler. 24. *And* then, among them, *he* who seeks for a devouring
(grehmakŏ) of all that which is animate, as well as that which is
inanimate, is *he* who is desirous of assault and complaint; *and he*
who fears him who is a righteous man of mine allots *him* comfort, and
is *he* who watches those who are an exposition of righteousness <span
id="fr_925"></span>[4](#fn_918), and who would be wizards *or* witches,
so that *the authorities* shall inflict punishment *upon* them.'

25\. And this, too, *is stated*, namely: 'The malice of many malicious
*ones* demands that they shall inflict punishment *on* sinners <span
id="fr_926"></span>[5](#fn_919) when they put (pa*d*-mû*g*ênd) life into
the body, that is, they give life

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

back to the body; but *for* that purpose the metal, melted forth, arises
full upon the earth, which does not wreak vengeance *on* him who is
righteous, and does wreak vengeance *on* him who is wicked, *when* I,
who am Aûha*r*ma*zd*, produce the renovation among the existences <span
id="fr_927"></span>[1](#fn_920). 26. Thus, too, that *which* becomes a
healthful world—a healthful one that is thus mine—never first becomes
that further sick *one* which, apart from me, is even now the immortal
*and* manifest place *where* vengeance exists <span
id="fr_928"></span>[2](#fn_921); and they become also aware, through
that sovereignty of mine, that, apart from me, even now immortal is the
material world of righteousness.'

27\. Excellence *that is* perfect is righteousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_880"></span>[252:1](sbe37081.htm#fr_886) See Chap. IX, 1 n.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[252:2](sbe37081.htm#fr_889) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 1 a.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[252:3](sbe37081.htm#fr_888) Literally 'I am.'

<span id="fn_883"></span>[252:4](sbe37081.htm#fr_890) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 1 c.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[252:5](sbe37081.htm#fr_891) Compare Pahl.
Vend. XIX, 147.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[253:1](sbe37081.htm#fr_892) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 3 a. For the demons here mentioned, Akômanô, Varenô, and *Âz*ŏ,
see Bk. VIII, Chaps. IX, 3, XXXI, 44; Îndar is the same as Andar (in
Chap. IX, 1), the arch-demon who perverts from virtue and despises the
sacred shirt and girdle (Bd. I, 27, XXVIII, 8). With reference to the
good old schism-hypothesis, that identified the Av. daêva I*n*dra, or
Andra, with the Sans. deva Indra, it is worthy of note that he is here
represented as the pervading spirit of an apostate religion, and is
termed the kûshî*d*âr, 'fighter, slayer.'

<span id="fn_886"></span>[253:2](sbe37081.htm#fr_893) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 5 a.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[253:3](sbe37081.htm#fr_894) See Bd. XXVIII, 8.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[253:4](sbe37081.htm#fr_895) See Pahl. Yas.
XXX, 4 c.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[253:5](sbe37081.htm#fr_896) Ibid. 3 b.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[254:1](sbe37081.htm#fr_897) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 7 a, 8 a.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[254:2](sbe37081.htm#fr_898) See Bd. I, 20, 21.
But from § 10 it appears more probable that these are the three
millenniums mentioned in Bd. I, 8.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[254:3](sbe37081.htm#fr_899) Bd. III, 3.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[254:4](sbe37081.htm#fr_900) Ibid. 19.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[254:5](sbe37081.htm#fr_901) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. I, 7 n.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[254:6](sbe37081.htm#fr_902) Bd. III, 20.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[255:1](sbe37081.htm#fr_903) The last word of
the formula. In Bd. I, 21, 22 this utterance seems to be placed before
the attack upon Gâyômar*d*, but until the complete text of the Irânian
Bundahi*s* has been examined, some doubt as to the exact sequence of its
statements may be entertained.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[255:2](sbe37081.htm#fr_904) Pahl. zîflûnî*d*,
for yîflûnî*d*, formed from the aorist of Ch. ‏נְפַל‎; instead of the
usual neflûnast, formed from the preterit.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[255:3](sbe37081.htm#fr_905) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 9 a.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[255:4](sbe37081.htm#fr_906) Ibid. 9b. Instead
of *av*ôrdŏ, 'plundered,' B has the miswriting s*p*ôrdŏ, 'consigned.'

<span id="fn_900"></span>[255:5](sbe37081.htm#fr_907) Ibid. 8 a and Bk.
VIII, Chap. XIII, 6.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[255:6](sbe37081.htm#fr_908) Ibid. 8 b.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[255:7](sbe37081.htm#fr_909) Alluding, perhaps,
to the legend detailed in Bd. XV, 18, 19.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[256:1](sbe37081.htm#fr_910) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 10 a.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[256:2](sbe37081.htm#fr_911) Or, perhaps, 'and
they remain astonished,' (va-s*î*pŏ mânênd).

<span id="fn_905"></span>[256:3](sbe37081.htm#fr_912) Pahl.
vîy*âv*ânînê*d* which, with vâstar, 'pasture,' occurs in Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 10 c.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[256:4](sbe37081.htm#fr_913) They who carry a
corpse alone, like the iristô-kasha of Vend. III, 15.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[257:1](sbe37081.htm#fr_914) Pahl.
gêrân-ta*g*i*s*nŏ = Av. h*e*bvai*n*ti in Yas. XXXVIII, 3 and Av.
thraotô-stâ*d* in Yas. LXVIII, 6, &c. It is the second species of liquid
in Bd. XXI, 1.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[257:2](sbe37081.htm#fr_915) Only nine are
mentioned in Bd. XXI, 1, namely: semen, urine, sweat, skin-fluid, tears,
blood, oil, saliva, and milk.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[257:3](sbe37081.htm#fr_916) Assuming that mûn
stands for amat as in Bk. VIII, Chap. XXI, 10.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[257:4](sbe37081.htm#fr_917) If these centuries
are dated from 'the coming of the religion,' according to the incorrect
Arabian chronology of the Bundahi*s*, they extended from A.D. 393 or 435
to 593 or 635 (see Byt. III, 11 n). In the ninth century lived king
Ya*zd*aka*rd* (A.D. 399-420), surnamed 'the sinner' by the priesthood
because he tolerated other religions, and the heretic Mazdak who was put
to death in A.D. 528. In the tenth century the Muhammadan religion
arose, and the Sasanian dynasty tottered to its fall. If it were not for
the manifest errors in the Bundahi*s* chronology, this passage in our
text might be important for fixing the age of the Pahlavi version of
this Nask.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[258:1](sbe37081.htm#fr_918) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 11 a.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[258:2](sbe37081.htm#fr_919) Ibid. 11 c.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[258:3](sbe37081.htm#fr_920) Ibid. 12 a, which
has corrupted rêgîh into rêsh; the former, corresponding better with the
original Av. r*a*unghayen, can be compared with Pers. rîhîdan, rêzîdan;
or it might mean 'imposture,' compare Pers. rîgan.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[258:4](sbe37081.htm#fr_921) Ibid. 12 b.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[259:1](sbe37081.htm#fr_922) See Pahl. Yas.
XXXII, 13 a; the exact meaning of grehmakŏ (Av. ger*e*hma) is uncertain,
and the last verb is literally 'I *may* take.'

<span id="fn_916"></span>[259:2](sbe37081.htm#fr_923) Ibid. 13 b.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[259:3](sbe37081.htm#fr_924) Ibid. 14 a, 15 a,
and Bk. VIII, Chap. XXXV, 13 n.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[259:4](sbe37081.htm#fr_925) Ibid. 13 c.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[259:5](sbe37081.htm#fr_926) Ibid. 16 c.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[260:1](sbe37081.htm#fr_927) At the
resurrection all men are said to be purified in melted metal which hurts
only those who have been wicked (see Bd. XXX, 19, 20).

<span id="fn_921"></span>[260:2](sbe37081.htm#fr_928) That is, the earth
never becomes hell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII](sbe37082)
