[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37127)  [Next](sbe37129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

### IV. FROM THE RIVÂYAT OF DASTÛR BARZÛ QIYÂMU-D-DÎN <span id="fr_1724"></span>[1](#fn_1683).

1\. The reply about the Nasks of the Avesta. The Yathâ-ahû-vairyô is
*of* twenty-one words, and the Avesta is similarly *of* twenty-one
Nasks.

2\. The name of the first Nask is Stô*d*-ya*s*t, and that book is of
thirty-three compilations, that is, it is of thirty-three subdivisions,
and the description of the Lord and the angels is in it.

3\. The name of the second Nask is Stûdgar, and that is of twenty-two
subdivisions; its description is about prayer, virtuous authority, and
intercession.

4, The third Nask is the Vahi*s*t-mânthrah, and that is of twenty-two
subdivisions about faith and heedfulness; and *one* is reminded \[*&c.,
very nearly the same as in II*, 3\],

5\. The fourth Nask is the Bagh, and that is of twenty-one subdivisions;
its explanation is about the religion and *its* intention, and whatever
the Lord *has* made incumbent on mankind as to devotion and heedfulness;
also about closing the path of Satan to oneself, and approaching the
last abode.

6\. The name of the fifth book is Dvâzdah-hâmâst, and that is of
thirty-two subdivisions in remembrance of the beginning \[*&c., very
nearly the same as in II*, 5\].

7\. The name of the sixth Nask is Nâdar, *and* that is of thirty-five
compilations about the stars

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

and the disposition and life of the sky. \[*&c., very nearly the same as
in II*, 6 *to*\] Bavaf*t*âl, and in Persian the name of that book is
Favâmsa'hân, that is, instruction arises therefrom for the moderns.

8\. The name of the seventh Nask is Pâ*g*am, *and* that is of twenty-two
subdivisions; its description is about quadrupeds *and* how *they are*
made lawful, which is lawful \[*&c., as in II*, 7, *to*\] for the sake
of a season-festival, and how it is necessary to perform whatever is in
a season-festival; the expense of a season-festival \[*&c., as in II*,
7, *to*\] high-priests, and a description of the clothing *for* a
righteous gift, so that they *may* obtain recompense in the end from
heaven.

9\. The eighth Nask is the Ratu*s*tâyî, *and* that is of fifty
subdivisions; its purport is about the affairs of the king and
obedience, cities constructed and made magnificent, birds, animals, and
fish, and whatever is Ormazd's, besides the creatures of Aharman;
\[*&c., as in II*, 8\].

10\. The name of the ninth book is Bari*s*, *and* that is of sixty
subdivisions, and about descriptions of kings and judges, and an
investigation of their authority; also the relations of a peasant
\[*&c., as in II*, 9, *to*\] deceit, and telling lies.

11\. The name of the tenth book is Ka*s*kanîz, *and* that is of sixty
subdivisions, about the advantage (faʓl) of natural wisdom and knowledge
*as distinguished* from acquired knowledge, that is, the knowledge born
from the mother, and the knowledge which they learn *by* instruction;
doctrine about purity and truth, and anything \[*&c., as in II*, 10,
*to*\] how it occurs.

12\. The name of the eleventh Nask is Vi*s*tâsp,

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

and that is of sixty compilations, *but* after the calamity of
Alexander, when they sought *them* again, they found no more *than*
eight subdivisions, and those are about Gu*s*tâsp's acceptance \[*&c.,
as in II*, 11\].

13\. The name of the twelfth book is ‘*H*as t, *and* that is of
twenty-two fargar*d*s in six portions. The first portion is about
knowing the Lord, may he be honoured and glorified! and faith in the
mission of Zaratu*s*t and any duties which are ordered in a book of the
religion. The second portion is about the obedience of kings, the truth
of the religion, and complying *with* commands. The third portion is
about the promise *to* benefactors and their recompense, the punishment
of evildoers, and escaping from hell. The fourth portion is about the
mansions of the world, agriculture and trimming trees, the power of
mankind and quadrupeds arisen therefrom, the obedience they exercise,
and whatever duty they perform for the high-priests of the religion. The
fifth portion \[*&c., as in II*, 12, *to*\] the obeisances, so that they
obtain great rewards in the end.

14\. The name of the thirteenth book is Sfend, *and* that is of sixty
subdivisions, for the information of people who are in want of it, and
for their knowledge; also for any persons who become covetous as to
virtuous actions, *and* proceed after the footsteps of the learned and
people of religion, and receive advantage therefrom; and as reminders of
the celestial sphere that there is advantage from the daily practice of
them. Also about the accounts of the evil of mankind, by the apostle
Zaratu*s*t, about the false speaking \[*&c., as in II*, 13\].

15\. The fourteenth Nask is the *G*ira*s*t, *and* that

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

is of twenty-two subdivisions, for the understanding of the causes of
mankind \[*&c., as in II*, 14.\].

16\. The name of the fifteenth book is Baghân-ya*s*t, and that is of
seventeen subdivisions, in praise of the Lord, the praiseworthy *and*
exalted, and the admitted angels; also thanksgiving *for* the favours
due to that which he makes expedient in the religion, and the
thanksgiving *for* his favour *lasts* until *one* obtains *it* back in
the end; likewise the appearance of the angels, and these are nobles for
the praise of the sacred being.

17\. The name of the sixteenth book is Niyâram, and that is of
fifty-four subdivisions, about decrees *as to* riches, bringing abroad,
and whatever is made lawful; obtaining deliverance from hell, performing
service, slavery, and the nature of wayfarers; whatever is in the
thoughts of mankind, and whatever is in the bodies of mankind.

18\. The name of the seventeenth book is Aspâram, and that is of sixty
subdivisions about rituals \[*&c., very nearly the same as in II*, 17\].

19\. The name of the eighteenth Nask is Duvâsrôb, and that is of
sixty-five subdivisions, about robbers (duvâyân?) of human beings
\[*&c., very nearly the same as in II*, 18\].

20\. The name of the nineteenth Nask is Askâram, and that is of
fifty-two fargar*d*s \[*&c., very nearly the same as in II*, 19\].

21\. The name of the twentieth Nask is Vîndâd, *and* that is of
twenty-two subdivisions \[*&c., very nearly the same as in II*, 20\].
And *as to* this book Vîndâd, which is the twentieth book of the Nasks,
out of the twenty-one Nasks of the Avesta, we and you are now using *it*
in the ceremonial, and when,

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

after the calamity of Alexander, they sought for the books again, they
found a portion of each Nask, *but* did not find any Nask in
completeness except the Vîndâd which they found complete.

22\. The name of the twenty-first Nask is Hâdokht, *and* that is of
thirty subdivisions, about the manner of bringing together and the many
miracles, and *their* excellences *and* connections; and in this book
the accursed devil becomes cursed and becomes annihilated.

23\. At present, since the Nasks *have* not remained perfect in the
midst *of us*, it is not possible to solemnize *them*, because Alexander
the Rûman <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1](#fn_1684) carried off a rough
draft, in Rûman characters, of those of the twenty-one Nasks of the
Avesta which were *about* the stars and medicine, and repeatedly burnt
the books of the Avesta, so that the soul of Alexander burns in hell;
and after his calamity, every one of the high-priests, in council
together, preserved something of the Avesta in *his* mind, *and* the
aggregate *has* disclosed the books of the Yasna (ya*s*t), Vîsperad,
Vendîdâd, Fravash, Khûrdah Avesta, Darûn, Âfrîngân, *K*îdah
Va*g*arkardan, and Bundahi*s*, *which* they wrote correctly; *as to* the
remainder (tatammah) which they did not write, it was on this account,
that they did not preserve *it* correctly in *their* minds. And the
expectation, descended from the midst *of them* in the court of Ormazd
and the archangels, is thus, that Var*g*âvand, Peshôtan, and
Hushêdar <span id="fr_1726"></span>[2](#fn_1685) *will* arrive in haste
*for* the manifestation of the religion, and the goodness

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

of the religion again assumes splendour from a new head; the good and
those of the good religion become cheerful and happy, and the bad and
wicked become extinct and disappearing. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[433:1](sbe37128.htm#fr_1724) This Dastûr
appears to have been one of several residing at Nausârî A.D. 1614-1646;
his father's name is more usually written Qavâmu-d-dîn, and his account
of the Nasks closely resembles that of Kâmah Bahrah.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[437:1](sbe37128.htm#fr_1725) See Dk. Bk. IV,
24 n.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[437:2](sbe37128.htm#fr_1726) The three chief
producers of the future and final triumph of the religion (see Byt. III,
13-52).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From The Dîn-Vi*g*irgard](sbe37129)
