[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc30022)  [Next](cc30024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span>Chapter 4

<span id="iv.v.i"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p2"></span>**1.** For, behold, the day cometh, that
shall burn as an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly,
shall be stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the
LORD of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

<span id="iv.v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quia ecce dies venit ardens tanquam
clibanus; et erunt omnes superbi et omnes facientes iniquitatem stipula;
et inflammabit eos dies qui venturus est, dicit Iehova exercituum, qui
non relinquet illis radicem et ramum.

<span id="iv.v.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.i-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p6"></span>He confirms the previous verse, for he
denounces ruin on all the reprobate and the despisers of God; and he
also confirms what I have mentioned, — that he sets this threatening in
opposition to the slanders which they commonly uttered against God, as
though he had ceased to discharge his office as a Judge. Though indeed
he speaks in the third person, yet he is not deficient in force when he
says,

<span id="iv.v.i-p7"></span>*Behold, come shall the day, which shed
consume all the ungodly, as a hernia oven the stubble*. The comparison
is very common which the Prophet uses, when he says, that the ungodly
shall be like stubble: I trill not therefore quote passages which must
be well known, and they are so many that there is no need to adduce here
either two or three of them. The vengeance of God is also often compared
to fire and to a flame; and we know how fierce and how dreadful an
element is fire, when it lays hold on wood or some other dry material.
Hence according to the common usage of Scripture, the Prophet says, that
the day of the Lord would be like an oven, and that the ungodly would be
like stubble. The demonstrative particle, *Behold*, shows certainty,
*Behold, I come*. The present time is put here for the future, a common
thing in Hebrew. But the Prophet called the attention of the Jews as it
were to what was present, that his prophecy might not appear doubtful,
and that they might understand that God’s vengeance was not far distant,
but already suspended over their heads.

<span id="iv.v.i-p8"></span>There is however a question as to the day
which he points out. The greater part think that the Prophet speaks of
the last coming of Christ, which seems not to me probably. It is indeed
true that these and similar expressions, which everywhere occur in
Scripture, have not their full accomplishment in this world; but God so
suspends his judgements, as yet never to withhold from giving evidences
of them that the godly may have some props to their faith: for if God
gave no specimen or proof of his providence, it would immediately occur
to our minds, that there is to be no judgement; but he sets before us
some examples, that we may learn that he will some time be the judge of
the world. It seems then to me more probable, that the Prophet speaks
here of the renovation of the Church: for the wrath of God was then at
length more kindled against the Jews, when they had alienated themselves
from Christ; for their last hope and their last remedy in their evils
was the aid of the Redeemer, and it was for the rejection of his favor
that the Jews had to feel the dreadful punishment of their ingratitude.
No sin could have been more atrocious than to have rejected the offered
favor, in which their happiness and that of the whole world consisted.
When the Prophet then says, that the *day would come*, be refers I think
to the first coming of Christ; for the Jews made a confident boast of
the coming of a Redeemer, and he gives them this answer — that the day
of the Lord would come, such as they did not imagine, but a day which
would wholly consume them, according to a quotation we have made from
another Prophet,

<span id="iv.v.i-p9"></span>“What will be the day of the Lord to you?
that day will not be light, but darkness, a thick darkness and not
brightness.” (<span id="iv.v.i-p9.1"></span>[Am
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018)<span id="iv.v.i-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.i-p10"></span>The day of the Lord will be an unhappy
event to you, as though one escaped from the jaws of a lion, and fell at
home on a serpent. So in this place he says that the day would come,
which would consume them like an oven.

<span id="iv.v.i-p11"></span>He says that *all the proud and the workers
of iniquity* would be like *stubble*. He repeats their words, but
somewhat ironically; for when they had said before that the proud were
happy, they regarded themselves as being far from being such characters.
Isaiah also in like manner condemned hypocrites, because they exposed to
contempt their own brethren; for the worshippers of God were at that
time in great reproach among the Jews; yea, hypocrites disdainfully
treated the godly and the upright, as though they were the dregs and
filth of the people. So also they said, “Behold, we are constrained, not
without great sorrow, to look on the happiness of the ungodly; for the
proud and the despisers of God enjoy prosperity, they live in
pleasures.” The Prophet now answers them ironically and says, “Ye shall
see the difference which ye so much wish; for God will consume the proud
and the ungodly.” He says this of them; but it is, as I have stated, as
though he had said, “When your mask is taken away, Ye shall see where
impiety is, that it is even in you; and therefore ye shall suffer the
punishment which you have deserved.” This is the return which he had
before mentioned: for though the ungodly do not seriously and sincerely
return to God, yet they are forced, willing or unwilling, to acknowledge
their impiety when God constrains them. Hence after they had been
constrained to examine their own life, God visited them with the
punishment they most justly deserved, though judgement had been invoked
by themselves.

<span id="iv.v.i-p12"></span>He now adds, *And it will leave neither
root nor branch*. He means here that their ruin would be complete, as
though he had said, that no residue of them would be found. As he had
made them like stubble, so he mentions root and stalk; for branch is
improper here, as he speaks of stubble, and branches belong to trees.
The meaning, however, is not obscure, which is — that such would be the
consumption that nothing would remain. This, indeed, properly belongs to
the last judgement; but, as I have said, this is no reason why God
should not set before our eyes some evidences of that vengeance which
awaits the ungodly, by which our faith may be more and more confirmed
daily.  <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270)

<span id="iv.v.i-p16"></span>With regard to God’s name, which is
mentioned twice, he reminds us that God does not execute his judgements
in an even or a continued course, but that he has a fixed time, now for
forbearance, then for vengeance, as it seems good to him. Whenever then
the day of the Lord is mentioned in Scripture, let us know that God is
bound by no laws, that he should hasten his work according to our hasty
wishes; but the specific time is in his own power, and at his own will.
On this subject I lightly touch only, because I have explained it more
fully elsewhere. It follows —

<span id="iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p2"></span>**2.** But unto you that fear my name shall
the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall
go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Et orietur vobis timentibus nomen
meum Sol justitiae, et sanitas in alis ejus; et exibitis et salietis
quasi vituli saginae (vel, vituli pinguefacti.)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p6"></span>The Prophet now turns his discourse to the
godly; and hence it appears more clearly that he has been hitherto
threatening those gross hypocrites who arrogated sanctity to themselves
alone, while yet they were continuing to provoke God’s wrath; for he
evidently addresses some different from those previously spoken of, when
he says, Arise to you, etc.; he separates those who feared God, or the
true servants of God, from that multitude with whom he has been hitherto
contending. *Arise*, then, *to you who fear my name*, *etc*

<span id="iv.v.ii-p7"></span>There is to be noticed here a contrast; for
the body of the people were infected as it were with a general
contagion, but God had preserved a few uncontaminated. As then he had
been hitherto contending with the greatest part of the people, so he now
gathers as it were apart the chosen few, and promises to them Christ as
the author of salvation. For the godly, we know, trembled at
threatenings, and would have almost fainted, had not God mitigated them.
Whenever he denounced vengeance on sinners, the greater part either
mocked, or became angry, at least were not duly impressed. Thus it
happens that while God is thundering, the ungodly go on securely in
their sinful courses; but the godly tremble at a word, and would be
altogether cast down, were not God to apply a remedy.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p8"></span>Hence our Prophet softens the severity of
the threatening which we have observed; as though he had said, that he
had not announced the coming of Christ as terrible for the purpose of
filling pious souls with fear, (for it was not spoken to them,) but only
of terrifying the ungodly. The sum of the whole is briefly this —
“Hearken ye,” he says, “who fear God; for I have a different word for
you, and that is, that the Sun of righteousness shall arise, which will
bring healing in its wings. Let those despisers of God then perish, who,
though they carry on war with him, yet seek to have him as it were bound
to them; but raise ye up your heads, and patiently look for that day,
and with the hope of it calmly bear your troubles.” We now understand
the import of this verse.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p9"></span>There is indeed no doubt but that Malachi
calls Christ the Sun of righteousness; and a most suitable term it is,
when we consider how the condition of the fathers differed from ours.
God has always given light to his Church, but Christ brought the full
light, according to what Isaiah teaches us,

<span id="iv.v.ii-p10"></span>“On thee shall Jehovah arise,  
and the glory of God shall be seen in thee.” (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p10.2"></span>[Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.ii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p11"></span>This can be applied to none but to Christ.
Again he says, “Behold darkness shall cover the earth,” etc.; “shine on
thee shall Jehovah;” and farther,

<span id="iv.v.ii-p12"></span>“There shall be now no sun by day nor moon
by night; but God alone shall give thee light.” (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p12.1"></span>[Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019)<span
id="iv.v.ii-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p13"></span>All these words show that Sun is a name
appropriate to Christ; for God the Father has given a much clearer light
in the person of Christ than formerly by the law, and by all the
appendages of the law. And for this reason also is Christ called the
light of the world; not that the fathers wandered as the blind in
darkness, but that they were content with the dawn only, or with the
moon and stars. We indeed know how obscure was the doctrine of the law,
so that it may truly be said to be shadowy. When therefore the heavens
became at length opened and clear by means of the gospel, it was through
the rising of the Sun, which brought the full day; and hence it is the
peculiar office of Christ to illuminate. And on this account it is said
in the first chapter of John, that he was from the beginning the true
light, which illuminates every man that cometh into the world, and yet
that it was a light shining in darkness; for some sparks of reason
continue in men, however blinded they are become through the fall of
Adam and the corruption of nature. But Christ is peculiarly called light
with regard to the faithful, whom he delivers from the blindness in
which all are involved by nature, and whom he undertakes to guide by his
Spirit.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p14"></span>The meaning then of the word sun, when
metaphorically applied to Christ, is this, — that he is called a sun,
because without him we cannot but wander and go astray, but that by his
guidance we shall keep in the right way; and hence he says,

<span id="iv.v.ii-p15"></span>“He who follows me walks not in darkness.”
(<span id="iv.v.ii-p15.1"></span>[Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span id="iv.v.ii-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p16"></span>But we must observe that this is not to be
confined to the person of Christ, but extended to the gospel. Hence Paul
says,

<span id="iv.v.ii-p17"></span>“Awake thou who sleepest, and rise from
darkness,  
and Christ shall illuminate thee.” (<span id="iv.v.ii-p17.2"></span>[Eph
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014)<span id="iv.v.ii-p17.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p18"></span>Christ then daily illuminates us by his
doctrine and his Spirit; and though we see him not with our eyes, yet we
find by experience that he is a sun.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p19"></span>He is called the sun of *righteousness*,
either because of his perfect rectitude, in whom there is nothing
defective, or because the righteousness of God is conspicuous in him:
and yet, that we may know the light, derived from him, which proceeds
from him to us and irradiates us, we are not to regard the transient
concerns of this life, but what belongs to the spiritual life. The first
thing is, that Christ performs towards us the office of a sun, not to
guide our feet and hands as to what is earthly, but that he brings light
to us, to show the way to heaven, and that by its means we may come to
the enjoyment of a blessed and eternal life. We must secondly observe,
that this spiritual light cannot be separated from righteousness; for
how does Christ become our sun? It is by regenerating us by his Spirit
into righteousness, by delivering us from the pollutions of the world,
by renewing us after the image of God. We now then see the import of the
word righteousness.  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p25"></span>He adds, *And healing in its wings*. He
gives the name of wings to the rays of the sun; and this comparison has
much beauty, for it is taken from nature, and most fitly applied to
Christ. There is nothing, we know, more cheering and healing than the
rays of the sun; for ill-savor would soon overwhelm us, even within a
day, were not the sun to purge the earth from its dregs; and without the
sun there would be no respiration. We also feel a sort of relief at the
rising of the sun; for the night is a kind of burden. When the sun sets,
we feel as it were a heaviness in all our members; and the sick are
exhilarated in the morning and experience a change from the influence of
the sun; for it brings to us healing in its wing. But the Prophet has
expressed what is still more, — that a clear sun in a serene sky brings
healing; for there is an implied opposition between a cloudy or stormy
time and a clear and bright season. During time of serenity we are far
more cheerful, whether we be in health or in sickness; and there is no
one who does not derive some cheerfulness from the serenity of the
heavens: but when it is cloudy, even the most healthy feels some
inconvenience.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p26"></span>According to this view Malachi now says,
that there would be *healing in the wings* of Christ, inasmuch as many
evils were to be borne by the true servants of God; for if we consider
the history of those times, it will appear that the condition of that
people was most grievous. He now promises a change to them; for the
restoration of the Church would bring them joy. See then in what way he
meant there would be healing in the wings of Christ; for the darkness
would be dissipated, and the heavens would be free from clouds, so as to
exhilarate the minds of the godly.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p27"></span>By calling the godly those who *fear God*,
he adopts the common language of Scripture; for we have said that the
chief part of righteousness and holiness consists in the true worship of
God: but something new is here expressed; for this fear is what
peculiarly belongs to true religion, so that men submit to God, though
he is invisible, though he does not address them face to face, though he
does not openly show his hand armed with scourges. When therefore men of
their own accord reverence the glory of God, and acknowledge that the
world is governed by him, and that they are under his authority, this is
a real evidence of true religion: and this is what the Prophet means by
*name*. Hence they who fear the name of God, desire not to draw him down
from heaven, nor seek manifest signs of his presence, but suffer their
faith to be thus tried, so that they adore and worship God, though they
see him not face to face, but only through a mirror and that darkly, and
also through the displays of his power, justice, and other attributes,
which are evident before our eyes.

<span id="iv.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.v.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
appointed thine only-begotten Son to be like a sun to us, we may not be
blind, so as not to see his brightness; and that since he is pleased to
guide us daily into the way of salvation, may we follow him and never be
detained by any of the impediments of this world, so as not to pursue
after that celestial life to which thou invitest us; and that as thou
hast promised that he is to come and gather us into the eternal
inheritance, may we not in the meantime grow wanton, but on the contrary
watch with diligence and be ever attentively looking for him; and my we
not reject the favor which thou hast been pleased to offer us in him,
and thus grow torpid in our dregs, but on the contrary be stimulated to
fear thy none and truly to worship thee, until we shall at length obtain
the fruit of our faith and piety, when he shall appear again for our
final redemption, even that sun which has already appeared to us, in
order that we might not remain involved in darkness, but hold on our way
in the midst of darkness, even the way which leads us to heaven. — Amen.

<span id="iv.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Eighty-second

<span id="iv.v.iv-p2"></span>Malachi, after having said that the Sun of
righteousness would arise on the Jews, now adds that it would be for
their joy, for as sorrow lays hold on the faithful when they are without
Christ, or when they think him far removed from them, so his favor is
their chief happiness and real joy. Hence the angel when he made known
to the shepherds that Christ was born, thus introduces his message,

<span id="iv.v.iv-p3"></span>“Behold, I declare to you great joy.”
(<span id="iv.v.iv-p3.1"></span>[Lu
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#010)<span id="iv.v.iv-p3.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.iv-p4"></span>Now though the comparison might seem rather
unnatural, yet it was not without reason that the Prophet said that the
Jews would be like *fattened calves*, for the change of which he speaks
was incredible; hence it was necessary that the subject should be stated
in a very homely manner, that they might entertain hope.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p5"></span>There is in the words *going forth*, an
implied contrast, for anxiety had long held them as it were captives,
but now they were to go forth and be at liberty, according to what takes
place when things change for the better; we then openly declare our joy
to one another, and we seek as it were a wide place for giving vent to
our feelings. We now see why the Prophet says that the Jews would *go
forth*: they had been before confined as it were within narrow limits,
but God would now give them occasion for rejoicing, according to what
Paul says,

<span id="iv.v.iv-p6"></span>“Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty.”  
(<span id="iv.v.iv-p6.2"></span>[2Co
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span id="iv.v.iv-p6.2"></span>).
 <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272)

<span id="iv.v.iv-p13"></span>It follows —

<span id="iv.v.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.v-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#003)<span id="iv.v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p2"></span>**3.** And ye shall tread down the wicked;
for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I
shall do *this*, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="iv.v.v-p3"></span>**3.** Et pessundabitis impios, quia erunt
pulvis sub plantis pedum vestrorum, in die qua ego facio, (alii vertunt,
quam ego facio,) dicit Iehova exercituum.

<span id="iv.v.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p6"></span>When God promises redemption to his Church,
he usually mentions what is of an opposite character, even the
destruction and ruin of his enemies, and he does this on purpose lest
envy should annoy or harass the faithful, while seeing the ungodly
prosperous and happy. So also in this place Malachi says, that the
*ungodly would be trodden under foot by the faithful like the dust*; and
he says this lest the elect, while lying prostrate under the feet of
their enemies and proudly trampled upon by them, should succumb under
their troubles; but they were to look for what the Prophet declares
here, for they were not only to be raised up by the hand of God, but
were also to be superior to their enemies, and be enabled in their turn
to suppress their pride: in short, he means that they were to be raised
above all the height of the world.

<span id="iv.v.v-p7"></span>At the same time, God does not allow his
children cruelly to seek vengeance, for he would have them to be endued
with meekness, so as not to cease to do good to the wicked and to pray
for them, though they may have been unjustly treated by them. But, as I
have already said, he meant here to obviate an evil which is natural to
us all, for we are apt to despond when our enemies exult over us, and
rage against us. Lest then their temporary success and prosperity should
deject our minds, God brings a remedy, and strengthens our patience by
this consideration, — that the state of things will shortly be changed,
so that we shall triumph over the ungodly, who thought us to have been
undone a hundred times; God will indeed visit them with extreme shame,
because they not only fatuitously boast of their unjust deeds, but also
raise up their horns against him.

<span id="iv.v.v-p8"></span>Let us proceed; he says, *In the day in
which I make*  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) He again
restrains their desires, that they might not with too much haste look
forward, but wait for the day prefixed by the Lord. We indeed know how
great is the importunity of men as to their wishes, and how ardently
they seek their accomplishment unless God checks them. Whenever then we
speak of the destruction of our enemies, let us remember that we ought
to regard the day of the Lord, in which he purposes to execute his
judgement. Some, as I have said, give a different version, but the one I
have given is the most probable, and is also more generally approved. It
now follows —

<span id="iv.v.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004)<span id="iv.v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p2"></span>**4.** Remember ye the law of Moses my
servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, *with* the
statutes and judgments.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Memores estote legis Mosis servi
mei, quam mandavi ei in Horeb ad totum Israelem, (nempe,) statuta et
judicia, (vel, statutorum et judiciorum.)

<span id="iv.v.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.vi-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p6"></span>This passage has not been clearly and fully
explained, because interpreters did not understand the design of Malachi
nor consider the time. We know that before the coming of Christ there
was a kind of silence on the part of God, for by not sending Prophets
for a time, he designed to stimulate as it were the Jews, so that they
might with greater ardor seek Christ. Our Prophet was amongst the very
last. As then the Jews were without Prophets, they ought more diligently
to have attended to the law, and to have taken a more careful heed to
the doctrine of religion contained in it. This is the reason why he now
bids them to remember the law of Moses; as though he had said,
“Hereafter shall come the time when ye shall be without Prophets, but
your remedy shall be the law; attend then carefully to it, and beware
lest you should forget it.” For men, as soon as God ceases to speak to
them even for the shortest time, are carried away after their own
inventions, and are ever inclined to vanity, as we abundantly find by
experience. Hence Malachi, in order to keep the Jews from wandering, and
from thus departing from the pure doctrine of the law, reminds them that
they were faithfully and constantly to remember it until the Redeemer
came.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p7"></span>If it be asked why he mentions the law
only, the answer is obvious, because that saying of Christ is true, that
the law and the Prophets were until John. (<span
id="iv.v.vi-p7.1"></span>[Mt 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.v.vi-p7.1"></span>.) It must yet be observed, that the prophetic
office was not separated from the law, for all the prophecies which
followed the law were as it were its appendages; so that they included
nothing new, but were given that the people might be more fully retained
in their obedience to the law. Hence as the Prophets were the
interpreters of Moses, it is no wonder that their doctrine was
subjected, or as they commonly say, subordinated to the law. The object
of the Prophet was to make the Jews attentive to that doctrine which had
been delivered to them from above by Moses and the Prophets, so as not
to depart from it even in the least degree; as though he had said, “God
will not now send to you different teachers in succession; there is
enough for your instruction in the law: there is no reason on this
account that you should change anything in the discipline of the Church.
Though God by ceasing to speak to you, may seem to let loose the reins,
so as to allow every one to stray and wander in uncertainty after his
own imaginations, it is yet not so; for the law is sufficient to guide
us, provided we shake not off its yoke, nor through our ingratitude bury
the light by which it directs us.”

<span id="iv.v.vi-p8"></span>He calls it the *law of Moses*, not because
he was its author, but its minister, as also Paul calls the gospel “my
gospel,” because he was its minister and preacher. At the same time God
claims to himself the whole authority, by adding that Moses was his
*savant*: we hence conclude that he brought nothing of himself; for the
word servant is not to be confined to his vocation only, but also to his
fidelity in executing his office. God then honored Moses with this
title, not so much for his own sake, as in order to give sanction to his
law, that no one might think that it was a doctrine invented by man.
 <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) He expresses the same thing
still more clearly by saying, that he had committed the law to him on
*Horeb*; for this clause clearly asserts that Moses had faithfully
discharged his office of a servant; for he brought nothing but what had
been committed to him from above, and he delivered it, as they say, from
hand to hand. Many give this version, “To whom I committed, in the
valley of Horeb, statutes and judgements;” but I approve of the other
rendering — that God makes himself here the author of the law, that all
the godly might reverently receive it as coming from him. Horeb is
Sinai; but they who describe these places say, that a part of the
mountain towards the east is called Horeb, and that the other towards
the west is called Sinai; but it is still the same mountain.

<span id="iv.v.vi-p10"></span>By saying *To all Israel*, or to the whole
of Israel, he confirms what I have already said — that he had committed
to them the law: that the Jews might be the more touched, he expressly
says, that the law was given to them, and that this was a singular
privilege with which God had favored them, according to what is said in
<span id="iv.v.vi-p10.1"></span>[Ps
147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)<span
id="iv.v.vi-p10.1"></span>,

<span id="iv.v.vi-p11"></span>“He has not done so to other nations, nor
has he manifested to them his judgements.”

<span id="iv.v.vi-p12"></span>For the nations had not been laid under
such obligations as the Jews, to whom God had given his law as a
peculiar treasure to his own children. And that no one might claim an
exemption, he says, *to the whole of Israel*; as though he had said,
“Neither the learned nor the unlearned, neither the rulers nor the
common people, can have any excuse, except they all with the greatest
care attend to the law, yea, all from the least to the greatest.”

<span id="iv.v.vi-p13"></span>What follows may admit of two
explanations: for <span id="iv.v.vi-p13.1"></span>חוקים, *chukim*, and
<span id="iv.v.vi-p13.2"></span>משפטים, *meshephethim*, may be referred
to the verb <span id="iv.v.vi-p13.3"></span>זכרו, *zacaru*, remember;
but as he says Which I have committed, we may take statutes and
judgements as explanatory. As to the subject itself, it signifies but
little which view we may adopt. There is no doubt but that God by these
terms commends his law for its benefits; as though he had said, “The law
includes what the Jews ought rightly to observe, even statutes and
judgements.” We know that other terms are used in Scripture, such as
<span id="iv.v.vi-p13.4"></span>פקודים, *pekudim*, precepts; <span
id="iv.v.vi-p13.5"></span>מצותים, *metsutim*, commandments; and <span
id="iv.v.vi-p13.6"></span>עדותים, *odutim*, testimonies; but here the
Prophet is content brief to remind the Jews that their ingratitude would
be less excusable if they departed from the law of God, for this would
be openly to reject statutes and judgements; and this is what I have
stated, that they were here taught by the Prophet that the doctrine of
the law is profitable, in order that they might attend to it more
willingly.  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) It follows —

<span id="iv.v.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.vii-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005)<span id="iv.v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p2"></span>**5.** Behold, I will send you Elijah the
prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the LORD:

<span id="iv.v.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Ecce ego mitto vobis Eliam
prophetam antequam veniat dies Iehovae magnus et terribilis.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet continues the same subject;
for having testified to the Jews, that though God would for a time
suspend the course of prophetic teaching, they yet had in the law what
was sufficient for salvation, he now promises the renovation of the
Church; as though he had said, “The Lord will again unexpectedly utter
his voice after a long silence.” Isaiah speaks on the same subject,
prophesying of the return of the people, when he says,

<span id="iv.v.vii-p7"></span>“Comfort ye, comfort my people, will our
God say.” (<span id="iv.v.vii-p7.1"></span>[Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011)<span id="iv.v.vii-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.v.vii-p8"></span>There is an emphatic import in the use of
the future tense. So also in this passage, the Prophet declares that
prophetic teaching would be again renewed, that when God showed mercy to
his people, he would open his mouth, and show that he had been silent,
not because he intended to forsake his people, but as we have said, for
another end. At the same time he shows that the time would come, when
his purpose was to confirm and seal all the prophecies by his
only-begotten Son.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p9"></span>This passage has fascinated the Jews so as
to think that men rise again; and their resurrection is, — that the
souls of men pass into various bodies three or four times. There is
indeed such a delirious notion as this held by that nation! We hence see
how great is the sottishness of men, when they become alienated from
Christ, who is the light of the world and the Sun of Righteousness, as
we have lately seen. There is no need to disprove an error so palpable.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p10"></span>But Christ himself took away all doubt on
this point, when he said, that John the Baptist was the Elijah, who had
been promised; (<span id="iv.v.vii-p10.1"></span>[Mt
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#010)<span
id="iv.v.vii-p10.1"></span>:) and the thing itself proves this, had not
Christ spoken on the subject. And why John the Baptist is called Elijah,
I shall explain in a few words. What some say of zeal, I shall say
nothing of; and many have sought other likenesses, whom I shall neither
follow nor blame. But this likeness seems to me the most suitable of
all, — that God intended to raise up John the Baptist for the purpose of
restoring his worship, as formerly he had raised up Elijah: for at the
time of Elijah, we know, that not only the truth was corrupted and the
worship of God vitiated, but that also all religion was almost extinct,
so that nothing pure and sound remained. At the coming of Christ, though
the Jews did not worship idols, but retained some outward form of
religion, yet the whole of their religion was spurious, so that that
time may truly be compared, on account of its multiplied pollutions, to
the age of Elijah. John then was a true successor of Elijah, nor were
any of the Prophets so much like John as Elijah: hence justly might his
name be transferred to him.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p11"></span>But someone may object and say, that he
is here called a prophet, while he yet denied that he was a prophet: to
this the answer is obvious, — that John renounced the title of a
prophet, that he might not hinder the progress of Christ’s teaching:
hence he means not in those words that he ran presumptuously without a
call, but that he was content to be counted the herald of Christ, so
that his teaching might not prevent Christ from being heard alone. Yet
Christ declares that he was a prophet, and more than a prophet, and that
because his ministry was more excellent than that of a prophet.

<span id="iv.v.vii-p12"></span>He says, *Before shall come the day,
great and terrible*. The Prophet seems not here to speak very suitably
of Christ’s coming; but he now addresses the whole people; and as there
were many slothful and tardy, who even despised the favor of God, and
others insolent and profane, he speaks not so kindly, but mixes these
threatenings. We hence perceive why the Prophet describes the coming of
Christ as terrible; he does this, not because Christ was to come to
terrify men, but on the contrary, according to what Isaiah says,

<span id="iv.v.vii-p13"></span>“The smoking flax he will not extinguish,
the shaken reed he will not break; not heard will his voice be in the
streets, nor will he raise a clamor.” (<span
id="iv.v.vii-p13.1"></span>[Isa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003)<span
id="iv.v.vii-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.vii-p14"></span>Though then Christ calmly presents
himself, as we have before observed, and as soon as he appears to us, he
brings an abundant reason for joy; yet the perverseness of that people
was such as to constrain the Prophet to use a severe language, according
to the manner in which God deals daily with us; when he sees that we
have a tasteless palate, he gives us some bitter medicine, so that we
may have some relish for his favor. Whenever then we meet with any thing
in Scripture tending to fill us with terror, let us remember that such
thing is announced, because we are either deaf or slothful, or even
rebellious, when God kindly invites us to himself. It follows —

<span id="iv.v.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)<span id="iv.v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p2"></span>**6.** And he shall turn the heart of the
fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers,
lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Et convertet cor patrum ad filios,
et cor filiorum ad patres; ne forte veniam et percutiam terram
anathemate.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.viii-p5"></span><span id="iv.v.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p6"></span>This verse may be viewed as containing a
simple promise; but I prefer to regard it as including what is between
an exhortation and a promise. The first thing is, that God reminds the
Jews for what purpose he would send John, even to turn the hearts of men
and to restore them to a holy unity of faith. It must therefore be
noticed, that not only the Redeemer would come, but that after some
intermission, as it has been said, had taken place, the doctrine of
salvation would again have its own course, and would be commenced by
John.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p7"></span>Yet the Prophet seems here to concede to
men more than what is right, for the turning of the heart is God’s
peculiar work, and still more, it is more peculiarly his than his other
works; and if no one can change a hair on the head of his brother, how
can he renew his heart, so as to make him a new man? It is at the same
time of more consequence to be regenerated than to be created and to be
made only the inhabitants of this world. John then seems to be here too
highly extolled, when the turning of the heart is ascribed to him. The
solution of this difficulty may be easily given: when God thus speaks
highly of his ministers, the power of his Spirit is not excluded; and he
shows how great is the power of truth when he works through it by the
secret influence of his Spirit. God sometimes connects himself with his
servants, and sometimes separates himself from them: when he connects
himself with them, he transfers to them what never ceases to dwell in
him; for he never resigns to them his own office, but makes them
partakers of it only. And this is the import of such expressions as
these,

<span id="iv.v.viii-p8"></span>“Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted:
whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven,” (<span
id="iv.v.viii-p8.1"></span>[Joh
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p8.1"></span>;)

<span id="iv.v.viii-p9"></span>or when Paul says, that he had begotten
the Corinthians, (<span id="iv.v.viii-p9.1"></span>[1Co
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p9.1"></span>,) he did not claim for himself what he knew
only belonged to God, but rather extolled the favor of God as manifested
in his ministry, according to what he declares in another place,

<span id="iv.v.viii-p10"></span>“Not I, but the grace of God which was
with me.”  
(<span id="iv.v.viii-p10.2"></span>[1Co
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.viii-p11"></span>But when God separates himself from his
ministers, nothing remains in them: “He who plants is nothing,” says
Paul in another place,

<span id="iv.v.viii-p12"></span>“And he who waters is nothing, but God
who gives the increase.” (<span id="iv.v.viii-p12.1"></span>[1Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.viii-p13"></span>When then is it that teachers are
co-workers with God? Even when God, ruling them by his Spirit, at the
same time blesses their labor, so that it brings forth its fruit.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p14"></span>We now then see that this mode of
speaking derogates nothing from God, that is, when the minister is said
to turn the hearts of men; for as he implants nothing by his own
influence, so God supplies what is necessary that he may fulfill his
office.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p15"></span>By saying that he would turn the *hearts
of fathers to sons and of sons to fathers*,  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) he points out not a simple union or
consent, for men often unite together, and yet God reprobates and hates
their union; but the Prophet here has in view the origin of the people,
even Abraham and other holy patriarchs. Had he spoken of the Egyptians
or the Assyrians, or some other nations, this turning would not have
been so wonderful; but when he speaks of the holy and chosen race, it is
no wonder that he mentions it as an instance of the ineffable kindness
of God, that they were all to be gathered and restored from discord to
unity, so as to become united in one faith.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p22"></span>Since their mutual consent is the
subject, we must come to the fountain; for Malachi takes it for granted,
that there was formerly true religion in that people, that the true
worship of God prevailed among them, and that they were bound together
by a sacred bond; but since in course of time various notions rose among
them, yea, monstrous dotages, since sincerity had become wholly
corrupted, he now recalls them to their first condition, so that sons
might unite in sentiment with their fathers, and fathers also with their
sons, and become one in that faith which had been delivered in the law.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p23"></span>Were any to object and say, that it was
not reasonable that fathers should join themselves to their apostate
sons, for this would be to approve of their defection, I answer, that
there have been some converted young men who have shown the right way to
their fathers, and have carried light before them. We indeed know that
old men, as their are morose, not only reject what they hear from the
young, but are rendered more obstinate, because they are ashamed to
learn. Such a dispute the Prophet bids to be dismissed, so that all
might in their heart think only the same thing in the Lord.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p24"></span>*Lest I come and smite the land with a
curse*. Here again the Prophet threatens the Jews, and indeed
vehemently. He was constrained, as we have said, by necessity, for the
torpor of that people was very great, and many of them were hardened in
their perverseness. This is the reason why God now declares, that the
Jews would not escape unpunished for despising the coming of Christ. And
we are at the same time reminded how abominable in the sight of God is
the ingratitude of not receiving his Son whom he sends to us. If we wish
to derive benefit from what the Prophet teaches us, we ought especially
to welcome Christ, while he so kindly calls us, yea, allures us to
himself. But if the sloth of our flesh keeps us back, let even this
threatening stimulate us; and as we learn that the sin of not embracing
Christ when he offers himself to us, shall not go unpunished, let us
struggle against our tardiness. At all events, let us take heed to kiss
the Son, as in <span id="iv.v.viii-p24.1"></span>[Ps
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p24.1"></span>, we are exhorted to do.

<span id="iv.v.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.v.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as nothing is
omitted by thee to help us onward in the course of our faith, and as our
sloth is such that we hardly advance one step though stimulated by thee,
— O grant, that we may strive to profit more by the various helps which
thou hast provided for us, so that the Law, the Prophets, the voice of
John the Baptist, and especially the doctrine of thine only-begotten
Son, may more fully awaken us, that we may not only hasten to him, but
also proceed constantly in our course, and persevere in it until we
shall at length obtain the victory and the crown of our calling, as thou
hast promised an eternal inherence in heaven to all who faint not but
wait for the coming of the great Redeemer. — Amen.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p3"></span>The End of all the Lectures of John Calvin
on the Minor Prophets

<span id="iv.v.ix-p4"></span>Τῳ Θεῳ δοξα.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p5"></span>To God the Glory

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc30023.htm#fr_270) <span
id="iv.v.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p13"></span> Exceedingly forcible are the words of this
verse —

<span id="iv.v.i-p14"></span>For behold the day! It comes burning like a
furnace; And all the proud, and every worker of iniquity, shall be
stubble; And burn them up shall the day that is coming, Saith Jehovah of
hosts, So that not left to them shall be a root or a branch.

<span id="iv.v.i-p15"></span>Very many MS., have “workers” instead of
“worker;” but it is of no consequence, as the singular is often used
poetically for the plural. “Root” and “branch” is no doubt a proverbial
phrase, including every thing. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc30023.htm#fr_271) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p20"></span> There is something incongruous in the
expression, “the Sun of righteousness.” Hence some have considered that
<span id="iv.v.ii-p20.1"></span>צדקה means here benignity or
beneficence. “Righteousness,” says *Leigh*, “in a special sense, in the
Hebrew and the Oriental tongues, signifieth <span
id="iv.v.ii-p20.2"></span>*beneficence* or *bounty*;” and he refers to
*Mede* on <span id="iv.v.ii-p20.3"></span>[Ps
112:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#006)<span id="iv.v.ii-p20.3"></span>.
It is evidently added as descriptive of what the sun is, and used as the
case often is in Hebrew, instead of an adjective. Now a righteous sun
would not be proper, but a benignant or a beneficient sun would convey a
suitable idea. The real meaning would then be conveyed by such a vision
as the following, —

<span id="iv.v.ii-p21"></span>But arise for you, who fear my name, Shall
a beneficient sun, With healing in its beams, And ye shall go forth and
leap Like calves freed from the stall.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p22"></span>“Understand,” says *Marckius*, “by
righteousness either benignity and beneficence, or truth, or complete
constancy, or the manifold righteousness of God, which shone in him, or
incontaminated uprightness and rectitude which appeared in him both as
God and man, or as Mediator, which so shines, that he diffuses it to all
the faithful in the gifts of justification and sanctification.”

<span id="iv.v.ii-p23"></span>*Jerome*’s exposition is, that Christ is
called the Sun of righteousness, because he determines all things
justly, and reveals, discovers what is good and what is evil, what is
virtuous and what is vicious.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p24"></span>The pronoun affixed to “wings,” or beams,
or rays, is feminine, which shows the gender of “sun,” <span
id="iv.v.ii-p24.1"></span>שמש; but “its” is the most appropriate
rendering. He or she is everything in Hebrew, and it is in so Welsh. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc30023.htm#fr_272) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p7"></span> *Newcome*’s version of the last line is as
follows —

<span id="iv.v.iv-p8"></span>And ye shall go forth and thrive as
bullocks of the stall.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p9"></span>*Henderson*’s is —

<span id="iv.v.iv-p10"></span>And ye shall go forth and leap as calves
of the stall.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p11"></span>The latter part is rendered by the
*Septuagint* “Ye shall leap (or frisk — <span
id="iv.v.iv-p11.1"></span>σκιρτήσετε) like calves let loose from bonds.”
This conveys the idea, for <span id="iv.v.iv-p11.2"></span>פשה, means
first to spread, to be diffused, and then to range at large, to leap, to
frisk. The context favors this view: they would go forth, that is, from
confinement to the fields, and leap like calves of the stall, or from
the stall, which are tied up during the night but are let loose when the
sun arises, and allowed to range at large in the field.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p12"></span>To apply this as a prophecy to the escape
of the Christians from Jerusalem when destroyed by the Romans, has
nothing in the context to justify it, but everything to the contrary.
The effect here produced is ascribed to the influence of the Sun of
righteousness, and it is exhilarating and joyful, and followed, as it
appears from the next verse, by the subjugation of the wicked.
*Calvin*’s view is consistent with the whole tenor of the passage. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc30023.htm#fr_273) <span
id="iv.v.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.v-p9"></span> See note on <span
id="iv.v.v-p9.2"></span>[Malachi
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#017)<span id="iv.v.v-p9.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc30023.htm#fr_274) <span
id="iv.v.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p9"></span> “Observe here,” says *Henry*, “the
honorable mention that is made of Moses, the first writer in the Old
Testament, by Malachi the last writer.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc30023.htm#fr_275) <span
id="iv.v.vi-p13.7"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vi-p14"></span> The first word, “statutes,” <span
id="iv.v.vi-p14.1"></span>חקים, means, according to *Marckius*, the
moral and the ceremonial laws; and the second, “judgments,” <span
id="iv.v.vi-p14.2"></span>משפטים, the civil or judicial laws. We may
consider “law” at the beginning of the verse as a general term,
comprehending the whole of what was delivered to Moses; and “statutes”
and “judgments” as explanatory of what it was. The *Septuagint* render
the first “precepts — <span id="iv.v.vi-p14.3"></span>προσταγματα.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc30023.htm#fr_276) <span
id="iv.v.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.viii-p16"></span> *Newcome*’s version is different,

<span id="iv.v.viii-p17"></span>That he may convert the heart of the
fathers together with the children, And the heart of the children
together with their fathers.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p18"></span>This is inconsistent with the passage
partially quoted in <span id="iv.v.viii-p18.1"></span>[Lu
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.v.viii-p18.1"></span>, and also with the *Septuagint* version,
which is as follows —

<span id="iv.v.viii-p19"></span>Who shall restore the heart of the
father to the son, And the heart of a man to his neighbor.

<span id="iv.v.viii-p20"></span>Internal discord was a prevailing evil
among the Jews. What is here promised is union and concord as the effect
of the ministry of the second Elijah; but it is announced in terms
suitable to a single family. — *Ed.*

<span id="iv.v.viii-p21"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Scripture Translations](cc30024)
