[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc30021)  [Next](cc30023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Behold, I will send my messenger,
and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek,
shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant,
who ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Ecce ego mitto Angelum meum, et
purgabit viam coram facie mea; et mox veniet ad templum suum Dominus,
quem vos quaeritis, et Angelo foederis quem vos expetitis; ecce venit,
dicit Iehova exercituum.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.i-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p6"></span>Here the Prophet does not bring comfort to
the wicked slanderers previously mentioned, but asserts the constancy of
his faith in opposition to their blasphemous words; as though he had
said, “Though they impiously declare that they have been either deceived
or forsaken by the God in whom they had hoped, yet his covenant shall
not be in vain.” The design of what is announced is like that of the
declaration made elsewhere,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p7"></span>“Though men are perfidious and false, yet
God remains true, and cannot depart from his own nature.” (<span
id="iv.iv.i-p7.1"></span>[Nu
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.i-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p8"></span>God then does here gloriously triumph over
the Jews, and alleges his own covenant in opposition to their
disgraceful slanders, because their wicked murmurings could not hinder
him to accomplish his promises and to perform in due time what they
thought would never be done; and he adopts a demonstrative adverb in
order to show the certainty of what is said.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p9"></span>*Behold*, he says, *I send my messenger,
who will clear the way before my face*  <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) This passage ought doubtless to be
understood of John the Baptist, for Christ himself so explains it, than
whom no better interpreter can be found; and since John the Baptist was
the messenger of Christ, the beginning of the verse can be applied to no
other person. Afterwards the Father himself speaks as we shall see: but
as he who appeared in the flesh is the same God with the Father, it is
no wonder that he speaks, and then that the words which follow are
spoken in the person of the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p11"></span>There is here a striking allusion to
Moses, whose office it was to intercede, that God might not in his just
wrath destroy the whole people; for as then the majesty of God was more
than could be borne without an intercessor, so that the people through
fear cried out “Speak thou to us lest we die,” (<span
id="iv.iv.i-p11.1"></span>[Ex
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.i-p11.1"></span>,) so also now does Malachi teach us, that
there is need of an intercessor, by whom God’s wrath might be mitigated,
which the Jews had extremely provoked. This office John the Baptist
undertook, who prepared the Jews to hear the voice of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p12"></span>By saying that he would *send a messenger
to clear his way*, he indirectly reproved the Jews, by whom many
hindrances were thrown as it were in the way; as though he had said,
“They prevent by the obstacles they raise up the redemption and the
promised salvation to be revealed: there will therefore be the need of a
*messenger to clear the way*.” For the Jews had introduced impediments,
as though they designedly wished to resist the favor which had been
prepared and promised to them. But how the Baptist performed his work by
clearing the way, is evident from the fortieth chapter of Isaiah, as
well as from the Gospels; and hence may be gathered what I have already
said — that God by his fidelity and mercy struggled with those obstacles
which the Jews had raised up to prevent the coming of Christ.  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, *And presently shall*
 <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) *come to his temple the Lord,
whom ye seek*. After having said that he would open a way for his favor,
he now adds, *come shall the Lord*. He introduces here, not Jehovah, but
the Lord, <span id="iv.iv.i-p18.2"></span>אדון, *Adun*; and hence he
speaks distinctly of Christ, who is afterwards called the *Angel* or
Messenger *of the covenant*. But the word <span
id="iv.iv.i-p18.3"></span>אדון, *Adun*, commonly used for a Mediator, as
in <span id="iv.iv.i-p18.4"></span>[Psalm
110](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#000)<span id="iv.iv.i-p18.4"></span>,
and also in <span id="iv.iv.i-p18.5"></span>[Da
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.i-p18.5"></span>;
where it is expressly said, “Hear, O Jehovah, for the sake of the Lord,”
<span id="iv.iv.i-p18.6"></span>למען אדוני, *lamon Aduni*; the word is
the same as here, *come* then *shall the Lord*. The reason for this mode
of speaking was, because Christ was shown to them under the type which
re presented him. As then the kingdom of David was a representation of
the kingdom of Christ our Lord, it is no wonder that the Prophets
designate him by this title, especially those who were the nearest to
the time of Christ’s manifestation. But he is promised by another title,
*the angel* or messenger *of the covenant*; but it means not the same
here as in the first clause. He called John the Baptist at the beginning
of this verse a messenger, *the messenger* of Jehovah; and now he calls
Christ a messenger, but he is the *messenger of the covenant*;  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) for it was necessary that the covenant
should be confirmed by him. The title of John the Baptist was then
inferior to that of Christ; for though he was God manifested in the
flesh, yet this did not prevent him from being God’s minister and
interpreter in order to confirm his covenant; and we know that the
office of Christ consists in confirming and sealing to us the covenant
of God, not only by his doctrine, but also by his blood and the
sacrifice of his cross.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p20"></span>Malachi then promises here to the Jews
both a king and a reconciler, — a king under tee title of Lord, — and a
reconciler under the title of the messenger of the covenant: and we know
it was the main thing in the whole doctrine of the law, that a Redeemer
was to come, to reconcile the Church to Cod and to rule it.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p21"></span>And he says that the Mediator was *sought*
and *expected* by the Jews; and through him God was to be propitious to
them: but this was not said but ironically. The faithful indeed at this
day have all their desires fixed on Christ, after he has been revealed
in the flesh, until they shall partake at his last coming of the fruit
of his death and resurrection; and under the law we know that the
groaning and the sighings of the godly were towards Christ: but Malachi
here, by way of contempt, checks these unreasonable charges, by which
the Jews accused God, as though he had disappointed their hope and their
prayers. For we have said, and the fact is evident, that God had been
presumptuously and shamefully impeached by them, as though he meant not
to fulfill his promises: hence the Prophet says ironically, and sharply
too, that Christ was expected by the Jews, for they murmured, because
God had too long deferred his coming: “O! where is the Redeemer? when
will he be revealed to us?” Since then they thus pretended that they
earnestly expected the coming of Christ, the Prophet upbraids them with
this, and justly too, for they had expressly manifested their unbelief.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p22"></span>*Behold, he comes, saith Jehovah of hosts*
 <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) Here he introduces the Father
as the speaker, as it has been already stated; and the particle <span
id="iv.iv.i-p25.1"></span>הנה, *ene*, behold, is used for the sake of
removing every doubt; and then he confirms what he says by the authority
of God. He might have asserted this in his own person as a teacher; but
in order to produce an effect on the Jews by the majesty of God, he
makes him the author of this prophecy. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p2"></span>**2.** But who may abide the day of his
coming? and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he *is* like a
refiner’s fire, and like fuller’s soap:

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Et quis sustinebit diem adventus
ejus? et quis consistet in apparitione ejus? quia ipse quasi ignis
purgans, et quasi borith (vel, herba) fullonum.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6"></span>The Prophet in this verse contends more
sharply with the Jews, and shows that it was a mere presence that they
so much expected the coming of the Mediator, for they were far different
from him through the whole course of their life. And when he says that
the coming of Christ would be intolerable, what is said is to be
confined to the ungodly; for we know that nothing is more delightful and
sweeter to us than when Christ is nigh us: though now we are pilgrims
and at a distance from him, yet his invisible presence is our chief joy
and happiness. (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>[Rom.
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>.)
Besides, were not the expectation of his coming to sustain our minds,
how miserable would be our condition! It is therefore by this mark that
the faithful are to be distinguished, — that they expect his coming; and
Paul does not in vain exhort us, by the example of heaven and earth, to
be like those in travail, until Christ appears to us as our Redeemer.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p7"></span>But the Prophet here directs his discourse
to the ungodly, who though they seem to burn with desire for God’s
presence, do not yet wish him to be nigh them, but they flee from him as
much as they can. We have met with a similar passage in Amos,

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8"></span>“Wo to those who desire the day of the
Lord! What will it be to you? for it will be darkness, yea darkness and
not light, a day of sorrow and not of joy.” (<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>[Am
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9"></span>Amos in this passage spoke on the same
subject; for the Jews, inflated with false confidence, thought that God
could not forsake them, as he had pledged his faith to them; but he
reminded them that God had been so provoked by their sins, that he was
become their professed and sworn enemy. So also in this place, *Come*,
the Prophet says, *come shall the Redeemer*; but this will avail you
nothing; on the contrary, his coming will be dreadful to you. We indeed
know that Christ appeared not for salvation to all, but only to the
remnant, and to those of Jacob who repented, according to what Isaiah
says. (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>[Isa.
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>.)
But since they obstinately rejected the favor of God, it is no wonder
that the Prophet excluded them from the blessings of the Redeemer.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10"></span>*Who* then *will endure his coming?*
 <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) *and who shall stand at his
appearance?* as though he had said, “In vain do ye flatter yourselves,
and even upbraid God, that he retains the promised Redeemer as it were
hidden in his own bosom; for he will come in due time, but without any
advantage to you; nor will it be given you to enjoy his favor; but on
the contrary he will bring to you nothing but terrors; for *he will be
like a purifying fire, and as the herb of the fullers*  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) The latter clause may be taken in a
good or a bad sense, as it is evident from the next verse. The power of
the fire, we know, is twofold; for it burns and it purifies; it burns
what is corrupt; but it purifies gold and silver from their dross. The
Prophet no doubt meant to include both, for in the next verse he says,
that Christ will be as fire to purify and to refine the sons of Levi as
gold and silver. With regard then to the people of whom he has been
hitherto speaking, he shows that Christ will be like fire, to burn and
consume their filth; for though they boasted with their mouth of their
religion, yet we know that the Church of God had many defilements and
pollutions; they were therefore to perish by fire. But Malachi teaches
us at the same time, that the whole Church was not to perish, for the
Lord would *purify the sons of Levi*

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p13"></span>There is here a part stated for the
whole; for the promise belongs to the whole Church. The sons of Levi
were the first-fruits, and the whole people were in the name of that
tribe consecrated to God. This is the reason why he mentions the sons of
Levi rather than the whole people; as though he had said, that though
the Church was corrupt and polluted, there would yet be a residue which
God would save, having purified them. The words which I had omitted are
these -

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>**3.** And he shall sit *as* a refiner
and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge
them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the LORD an offering
in righteousness.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Et sedebit purgans et mundans
argentum; et mundabit filios Levi, fundetque (vel, conflabit) eos sicut
aurum et sicut argentum; et erunt offerentes Iehovae oblationem in
justitia.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet says, that Christ would *sit
to purify the sons of Levi*; for though they were the flower, as it
were, and the purity of the Church, they had yet contracted some
contagion from the corruption which prevailed. Such then was the
contagion, that not only the common people became corrupt, but even the
Levites themselves, who ought to have been guides to others, and who
were to be in the Church as it were the pattern of holiness. God however
promises that such would be the purifying which Christ would effect, and
so regulated, that it would consume the whole people, and yet purify the
elect, and purify them like silver, that they may be saved. He tells us
afterwards that the Levites themselves would need a trial to cleanse
them; for they themselves would not be without filth, because they had
mixed with a perverse people, who had wholly departed from the law, and
from the fear and the worship of God.

<span id="iv.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iv.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are by
nature so prone to rash judgement, we may learn to submit to thee, and
so quietly to acquiesce in thy judgements, that we may patiently bear
whatever chastisements thou mayest daily allot to us, and not doubt but
that all is done for our well-being, and never murmur against thee, but
give thee the glory in all our adversities; and may we so labor to
mortify our flesh, that by denying ourselves we may ever allow thee to
be the only true God, and a just avenger, and our Father, and that thus
renouncing ourselves, we may yet never depart from the purity of thy
word, and be thus retained under thy yoke, until we shall at length
attain that liberty which has been procured for us by thine
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-eighth

<span id="iv.iv.v-p2"></span>In our last lecture the Prophet delineated
the office of Christ, that hypocrites might know that they in vain
complained of the tardiness of God, as though he had deserted them at
the very time of their extremity. He further said, that there was need
of purifying, not only as to the people, but as to the priests also; and
hence it appears how corrupt the state of things had become among all
classes. At the same time he seems indirectly to reprove hypocrisy, not
only in the common people, but also in the Levites, for there is a
contrast to be understood between the sacrifices they then offered, and
those offered by their fathers.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p3"></span>By saying then that they would *offer to
Jehovah an oblation in righteousness*, <span
id="iv.iv.v-p3.1"></span>מנחה בצדקה, *meneche* *betsadke*, he intimates
that their sacrifices had not been legitimate, for they had become
polluted, and hence could not rightly minister to God. We hence see that
the Levites are here reproved because they had polluted God’s service in
not offering the right sacrifices such as he had prescribed in his law.
This is not to be applied to the outward acts only, but also to the
feelings and motives, because they did come to God’s altars with minds
well prepared.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p4"></span>To offer in righteousness is a mode of
speaking common in Hebrew, and means to offer in a right way, so that
there should be nothing wrong or worthy of blame. By the verb <span
id="iv.iv.v-p4.1"></span>ישב, *isheb*, to sit, is intimated continuance;
as though the Prophet had said, that corruption was so deeply fixed in
the Levites that it could not in one day or by light means be purged
away: in short, he meant by this one word to exaggerate the corrupt
state of the people, for had only a slight washing been sufficient, he
would have simply said, “he will purify, he will cleanse, he will cast,”
or melt,  <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) for he uses these
three words: but he says, as I have stated, that he will sit to do these
things, in order to show that he would continue in his work and carry it
on for a long time, because the diseases being so inveterate they could
not be easily healed. We now understand what the Prophet means. He
afterwards adds —

<span id="iv.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p2"></span>**4.** Then shall the offering of Judah
and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the LORD, as in the days of old, and as
in former years.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Et gratia erit Iehovae oblatio
Iehudah et Ierusalem, sicut a diebus antiquis et sicut annis pristinis.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p6"></span>This verse shows, that though he had just
spoken of the sons of Levi, he yet had regard to the whole people. But
he meant to confine to the elect what ought not to have been extended to
all, for there were among the people, as we have seen and shall again
presently see, many who were reprobates, nay, the greater part had
fallen away; and this is the reason why the Prophet especially addresses
the few remaining who had not fallen away.

<span id="iv.iv.vi-p7"></span>But he names *Judah and Jerusalem*, for
that tribe had returned to their own country, and sacrifices were
offered at Jerusalem, though not with the splendor of ancient times, the
state of things having become much deteriorated among those miserable
exiles. Hence the Prophet, that he might encourage the faithful, says,
that though the temple was then mean, and the worship of God as then
performed was unadorned and abject, yet there was no reason for the
Levites or for others to despond, because the Lord would again restore
the glory of his temple, and really show that what men viewed with scorn
was approved by him. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p2"></span>**5.** And I will come near to you to
judgment; and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and
against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those
that oppress the hireling in *his* wages, the widow, and the fatherless,
and that turn aside the stranger *from his right*, and fear not me,
saith the Lord of hosts.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Et appropinquabo ad vos in
judicium, et ero testis velox contra praestigiatores, (vel, divinos) et
adulteros, et jurantes ad fallendum, et supprimentes mercedem
mercenarii, viduae, et pupilli, (aut, viduam et pupillum,) et
pervertentes peregrinum, et qui non timuerunt me, dicit Iehova.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet retorts the complaints
which the Jews had previously made. There is here then a
counter-movement when he says, *I will draw nigh to you*; for they
provoked God by this slander — that he hid himself from them and looked
at a distance on what was taking place in the world, as though the
people he had chosen were not the objects of his care. They expected God
to be to them like a hired soldier, ready at hand to help them in any
adversity, and to come armed at their nod or pleasure to fight with
their enemies: this they expected; but God declares what is of a
contrary character, — that he would come for *judgment*; and he alludes
to that impious slander, when they denied that he was the God of
judgement, because he did not immediately, or soon enough, resist their
enemies: “Oh! God has now divested himself of his own nature! for his
judgement does not appear.” His answer is, “I will not forget nay
judgement when I come to you, but I shall come in a way contrary to what
you expect”. They indeed wished God to put on arms for their advantage,
but God declares, that he would be an enemy to them, according to what
he also says by the mouth of Isaiah.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p7"></span>He further says, *I will be a swift
witness*. He sets swiftness here in opposition to their calumny, for
they said that God was slow and tardy, because he had not immediately,
as they had wished, come forth to exercise vengeance on foreign nations:
he, on the other hand, says, that he would be sufficiently swift when
the time came.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p8"></span>And as there are the like blasphemies
prevailing in the world at this day, this passage may be accommodated to
our circumstances. Let us then know, that though God may delay and
connive at things for a time, he yet knows his own opportunities, so as
to appear as the avenger of wickedness as soon as it will be necessary.
But let us ever fear lest our haste should prove our ruin, for he has no
respect of persons, so as to favor our unfaithfulness and to be rigid
towards those who are hostile to us. Let us take heed that while we look
for the presence of God, we present ourselves before his tribunal with a
pure and upright conscience.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p9"></span>He then mentions several kinds of evils,
in which he includes the sins in which the Jews implicated themselves.
He first names *diviners* or sorcerers. It is indeed true, that among
various kinds of superstitions this was one; but as the word is found
here by itself, the Prophet no doubt meant to include all kinds of
diviners, soothsayers, false prophets, and all such deceivers: and so
there is here again another instance of stating a part for the whole;
for he includes all those corruptions which are contrary to the true
worship of God. We indeed know that God formerly had by his word put a
restraint on the Jews, that they were not to turn aside to incantations
and magical arts, or to anything of this kind; but he intimates here,
that they were then so given up to gross abominations, that they
abandoned themselves to magic arts, and to incantations, and the
juggleries of the devil. He mentions, in the second place, *adulterers*,
and under this term he includes all kinds of lewdness; and, in the third
place, he names *frauds*  <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) and
*rapines*; and if we rightly consider the subject, we shall find that
these three things contain whatever violates the whole law.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p11"></span>The design of the Prophet is by no means
ambiguous; for he intended to show how perversely they expostulated with
God; for they ought to have been destroyed a hundred times, inasmuch as
they were apostates, were given to obscene lusts, were cruel,
avaricious, and perfidious.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p12"></span>And this reproof ought to be a warning
to us in the present day, that we may not call forth God’s judgement on
others, while we flatter ourselves as being innocent. Whenever then we
flee to God for help, and ask him to succor us, let us remember that he
is a just judge who has no respect of persons. Let then every one, who
implores God’s judgement, be his own judge, and anticipate the
correction which he has reason to fear. That God therefore may not be
armed for our destruction, let us carefully examine our own life, and
follow the rule prescribed here by the Prophet; let us begin with the
worship of God, then let us come to fornications and adulteries, and
whatever is contrary to a chaste conduct, and afterwards let us pass to
frauds and plunder; for if we are free from all superstition, if we keep
ourselves chaste and pure, and if we also abstain from all plunders and
all cruelty, our life is doubtless approved by God. And hence it is that
the Prophet adds at the end of the verse, *They feared not me*; for when
lusts, and plunder, and frauds and the corruptions which vitiate God’s
worship, prevail, it is evident that there is no fear of God, but that
men, having shaken off the yoke, as it were run mad, though they may a
thousand times profess the name of God.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p13"></span>By mentioning the *orphan, the widow*,
and *the stranger*, he amplifies the atrocity of their crimes; for the
orphans, widows, and strangers, we know, are under the guardianship and
protection of God, inasmuch as they are exposed to the wrongs of men.
Hence every one who plunders orphans, or harasses widows, or oppresses
strangers, seems to carry on open war, as it were, with God himself, who
has promised that these should be safe under the shadow of his hand.
With regard to the expressions, it seems not suitable to say that the
hire of the widow and of the orphan is suppressed; there may therefore
be an inversion of the words  <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) —
they oppressed the widows, the orphans, strangers. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p2"></span>**6.** For I *am* the LORD, I change
not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Quia ego Iehova, non muto (alii
vertunt, non mutor, et ad rem ipsam parum interest;) et vos filii Iacob
non estis consumpti.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet more clearly reproves
and checks the impious waywardness of the people; for God, after having
said that he would come and send a Redeemer, though not such as would
satisfy the Jews, now claims to himself what justly belongs to him, and
says that he changes not, because he is God. Under the name Jehovah, God
reasons from his own nature; for he sets himself, as we have observed in
our last lecture, in opposition to mortals; nor is it a wonder that God
here disclaims all inconsistency, since the impostor Balaam was
constrained to celebrate God’s immutable constancy —

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p7"></span>“For he is not God,” he says, “who
changes,” or varies, “like man.” (<span id="iv.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>[Nu
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p8"></span>We now then understand the force of the
words, *I am Jehovah*. But he adds as an explanation, *I change not*,
or, I am not changed; for if we do not take the verb actively, the
meaning is the same, — that God continues in his purpose, and is not
turned here and there like men who repent of a purpose they have formed,
because what they had not thought of comes to their mind, or because
they wish undone what they have performed, and seek new ways by which
they may retrace their steps. God denies that anything of this kind can
take place in him, for he is *Jehovah*, and *changes not*, or is not
changed.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p9"></span>The latter clause is variously
explained. The verb <span id="iv.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>כלה, *cale*,
means, in the first conjugation, to be consumed; but in Piel, to
complete, or to make an end; and this sense would be very suitable; but
a grammatical reason interferes, for it is in the first conjugation. Did
grammar allow, this meaning would be appropriate, “Ye children of Israel
have not made an end:” Why? “From the days of your fathers,” etc.: then
the verse which follows would be connected with this. But we must be
content with the present reading; and a twofold view may be taken of it:
the copulative “waw” may be taken as an adversative, “Though ye are not
consumed, I yet am not changed:” as though it was said, “Think not that
you have escaped, though I have long spared you and your sins: though
then ye are not yet consumed, as I have borne with you in your great
wickedness, I yet continue to be Jehovah, nor do I change my nature, and
ye shall at length find that I am a just Judge; though I shall not soon
execute my vengeance, punishment being held suspended, or as it were
buried, yet the end will show that I am not changed.”  <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250)

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p13"></span>But the Prophet seems rather to accuse
the Jews of ingratitude in charging God with cruelty or with negligence,
because he did not immediately assist them; and at the same time they
did not consider within themselves that they remained alive because God
had a reason derived from his own nature for sparing them, and for not
rendering to them what they had deserved. The meaning then is this, “I
am God, and I change not; and ought ye not to have acknowledged that
wonderful forbearance through which I have spared you? for how has it
been that you have not perished, and that innumerable deaths have not
swallowed you up? How is it that you are yet alive? Is it because you
have dealt faithfully faith me, so that it behaved me to exercise care
over you? Nay, it is indeed a wonder that I had not fulminated against
you so as to destroy you long ago.” We hence see that he upbraids them
with ingratitude for accusing him, because he did not immediately come
forth in their defense: For he answers them and says, that had he been
rigid and vehement in his displeasure, they could not have continued,
for they had not ceased for many successive ages to seek their own ruin,
as we find in what follows, for he says —

<span id="iv.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>[Mal.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p2"></span>**7.** Even from the days of your fathers
ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept *them*. Return
unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the LORD of hosts. But ye
said, Wherein shall we return?

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p3"></span>**7.** A diebus patrum vestrorum
declinastis a statutis meis (vel, edictis,) et non servastis:
Revertimini ad me, et revertar ad vos, dicit Iehova exercituum; et
dixistis, In quo revertemur?

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p4"></span>**8.** Will a man rob God? Yet ye have
robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and
offerings.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p5"></span>**8.** An diripiet homo Deum (vel, deos,
vel, Iudices,) quia vos diripuistis me? et dixistis, In quo diripuimus
te (vel, expilavimus)? In decimis et oblationibus.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p7"></span><span id="iv.iv.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p8"></span>The Prophet expands more fully what he had
referred to — that it was a wonder that the Jews had not perished,
because they had never ceased to provoke God against themselves. He then
sets this fact before them more clearly, *From the days*  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) *of your fathers*, he says, *ye have
turned aside from my statutes*. He increases their condemnation by this
circumstance — that they had not lately begun to depart from the right
way, but had continued their contumacy for many ages, according to what
the apostles, as well as the Prophets in various places, have testified:

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p10"></span>“Ye uncircumcised in heart, ye have
ceased not to resist the Holy Spirit like your fathers.” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p10.1"></span>[Ac
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p11"></span>“Harden not your hearts as your fathers
did; in the righteousness of your fathers walk not.” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p11.1"></span>[Ps
95:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p12"></span>But I will not multiply proofs, which
very often are to be met with, and must be well known.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p13"></span>We now understand the Prophet’s intention
— that the Jews for many ages had been notorious for their impiety and
wickedness, and that they had not been dealt with by God as they had
deserved, because he had according to his ineffable goodness and
forbearance suspended his rigour, so as not to visit them according to
their demerits. It hence appears how unreasonable they were, not only in
being morose and proud, but especially in being furious against God,
when they accused him of tardiness, while yet he had proved himself to
be really a God towards them by his continued forbearance.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p14"></span>The words, *And ye have not kept them*,
are added for amplification; for he expresses more fully their contempt
of his law, as though he had said, that they were not only
transgressors, but had also with gross wilfulness so departed from the
law as to regard it as nothing to tread God’s precepts under their feet.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p15"></span>He then exhorts then to repentance, and
kindly addresses them, and declares that he would be propitious and
reconcilable to them, if they repented. He has hitherto sharply reproved
them, because their necks being hard they had need of such correction;
for had the Prophet gently and kindly exhorted them, they would either
have kicked or have set on him with their horns; be now mitigates his
sharpness, not indeed with respect to all, but if there were any
healable among the people he meant to try them; and hence he offers them
reconciliation with God, as though he had said, “Though God has been in
various ways wantonly offended by you, and though you have repudiated
his favor, and have become wholly unworthy of being regarded by him, yet
return, and he will meet you.”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p16"></span>We have said elsewhere that all
exhortations would be in vain without a hope of pardon; for when God
commands us to return to the right way, our hearts would never be
touched, nay, they would on the contrary turn away, had we no hope that
he would be reconciled to us. This course the Prophet now pursues, when
in the person of God himself he promises pardon, provided the Jews
repented.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p17"></span>God is said to *return* to us, when he
ceases to demand the punishment of our sins, and when he lays aside the
character of a judge, and makes himself known to us as a Father. We
indeed know that God neither returns nor departs; for he who fills all
places never moves here and there; and we also know that we exist and
live in him, but he shows by outward evidences that he is alienated from
us, and by the same he shows that he is propitious to us; for when he
favors us with fruitful seasons, with peace and with other blessings, he
is said to be near us; but when he lets loose the reins of his wrath, or
exposes us to the assaults of Satan and to the wanton power of men, he
is said to be far removed from us. But this is so well known that I need
not dwell longer on the point.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p18"></span>The promise which the Prophet states
serves to show, that God would manifest tokens of his paternal favor to
the Jews, provided only they were submissive; but that it would be their
own fault, if they did not find through his blessings that he was their
Father. It would be on account of their sins, which, as Isaiah says,
hinder the course of that beneficence to which he is of his own self
inclined, (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p18.1"></span>[Isa
59:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p18.1"></span>.) And he bids them to *return*. Hence the
Papists very foolishly conclude, that repentance is in the power of
man’s free-will. But God requires what is above our strength; and yet
there is no reason why we should complain that there is a too heavy
burden laid on us; for he regards not what we can, or what our ability
admits, but what we owe to him and what our duty requires. Though then
no one can of his own self turn to God, he is not on this account
excusable, because we must consider whence comes the defect; and how
much soever, as I have already said, a man may pretend his own
impotency, he cannot yet escape from being bound to God, though more is
required of him than he of himself can perform. But this subject has
often been discussed elsewhere. The import of what is said here is, —
that men are not miserable through the unjust rigour of God, but always
through their own sins.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p19"></span>It follows, *Ye have said, In what shall
we return?* It is an evidence of perverseness, when men answer that they
see not that they have erred, and that hence conversion is to no purpose
required of them; for this is the meaning of these words, *Whereby shall
we return?* that is, “What dost thou require from us? for we are not
conscious of any defection; we worship God as we ought: now if our
duties are repudiated by him, we see not why he should so expressly
blame us; let him show in what we have offended; for conversion to him
is superfluous, until we be proved guilty of apostasy, or of those sins
which God determines to punish in us.” To this the Prophet answers —

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p20"></span><span id="iv.iv.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p21"></span>*Will a man defraud the gods?* Some give
this version, “Will a man defraud God?” But it is strained and remote
from the Prophet’s design; and they pervert the meaning. For I do not
see what can be elicited from this rendering, “Will a man defraud God?”
But there are other two meanings which may be taken. The first is, “Will
a man defraud his gods?” The word <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p21.1"></span>אלהים, *Aleim*, though it be in the plural
number, is applied, as it is well known, to the true God; but it is
applied also to idols; and in this place the Prophet seems to me to
compare the Jews to the Gentiles, that their impiety might be made more
evident. The same is the object of Jeremiah, when he says,

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p22"></span>“Go, and survey the islands, is there a
nation which has changed its gods, while yet they are no gods.” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p22.1"></span>[Jer
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p22.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p23"></span>Since their blindness and obstinacy held
fast the Gentiles in darkness, that they continued to worship the gods
to whom they had been accustomed, it was an abominable wickedness in the
Jews, that having been taught to worship the true God, they were yet
continually influenced by ungodly levity, and sought new modes of
worship, as though they wished to devise another god for themselves. So
also in this place the Prophet seems to bring forward the Gentiles as an
example to the Jews; for they discharged their duty towards their gods;
but the Jews despised the supreme and the only true God: “Behold,” he
says, “go round the world, and ye shall not find among the nations so
unbridled a liberty as prevails among you; for they render obedience to
their gods, and sacrilege is abominable to them; but ye defraud me. Am I
inferior to idols? or is my state worse than theirs?”

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p24"></span>Some take the word <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p24.1"></span>אלהים, *Aleim*, for judges, as judges are
sometimes so named; but this meaning seems not suitable on account of
the word, Adam. As then this word generally means man, the Prophet, I
have no doubt, intimates what I have stated, — that unbelievers, though
sunk in darkness, are yet restrained by reverence and fear from changing
their deity, and that they dare not to show levity when the name only of
their god is pronounced. Since then such humility prevailed among
unbelievers, could the impiety of that people, who had been trained up
in the law, be excusable? a people too, upon whom God had ever made the
doctrine of the law to shine.  <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p26"></span>He afterwards adds, *Because ye have
defrauded me; and ye have said, Thereby have we defrauded thee? In
tenths and in oblations*  <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253) Here
the Prophet again proves the people guilty of perverseness: it was
indeed hypocrisy, and though gross, it was yet surpassed by impudence;
for they asked, whereby they had defrauded God? and yet this was evident
even to children: for we know, and we have seen elsewhere, that avarice
so ruled among them, that every one, bent on their own profit, neglected
the temple and the priests. Since then they were openly sacrilegious,
how shameless they must have been to ask whereby they had defrauded God!
The thing itself was indeed manifest and commonly known, so that
children could see it. God however deemed it enough to convict them by
one sentence, — that they defrauded him in the tenths and in the
first-fruits; not that any advantage accrued to him from oblations, as
he had no need of any such things; but he rightly calls and counts that
his own which he had appointed for his own service. Since then he had
instituted that order among the Jews, that they might by the tenths
support the priests, and a part also was required for the poor, since
God designed the firstfruits and other things to be offered to him, that
men might thereby be continually reminded, that all things were his, and
that whatever they received from his hand was sacred to him, he had
previously called the bread laid on the table his own, and had called
the sacrifices his own food, as though he did eat and drink. But as I
have already said, we ought to regard the object in view, because his
will was to be thus worshipped, and at the same time to keep as his own
whatever belonged to his service. This then is the reason why he now
complains of being defrauded of the tenths.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p28"></span>But we know that other sacrifices are now
prescribed to us; and after prayer and praises, he bids us to relieve
the poor and needy. God then, no doubt, is deprived by us of his right,
when we are unkind to the poor, and refuse them aid in their necessity.
We indeed thereby wrong men, and are cruel; but our crime is still more
heinous, inasmuch as we are unfaithful stewards; for God deals more
liberally with us than with others, for this end — that some portion of
our abundance may come to the poor; and as he consecrates to their use
what we abound in, we become guilty of sacrilege whenever we give not to
our brethren what God commands us; for we know that he engages to repay,
according to what is said in <span id="iv.iv.ix-p28.1"></span>[Pr
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p28.1"></span>, “He who gives to the poor lends to God.”

<span id="iv.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iv.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
been pleased to choose us as priests to thyself, not that we may offer
beasts to thee, but consecrate to thee ourselves, and all that we have,
— O grant, that we may with an readiness strive to depart from every
kind of uncleanness, and to purify ourselves from all defilements, so
that we may duly perform the sacred office of priesthood, and thus
conduct ourselves towards thee with chasteness and purity; may we also
abstain from every evil work, from all fraud and all cruelty towards our
brethren, and so to deal with one another as to prove through our whole
life that thou art really our Father, ruling us by thy Spirit, and that
true and holy brotherhood exists between us; and may we live justly
towards one another, so as to render to each his own right, and thus
show that we are members of thy only-begotten Son, so as to be owned by
him when he shall appear for the redemption of his people, and shell
gather us into his celestial kingdom. — Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventy-ninth

<span id="iv.iv.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p2"></span>**9.** Ye *are* cursed with a curse: for
ye have robbed me, *even* this whole nation.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p3"></span>**9.** Maledictione vos maledicti estis,
et me vos diripuistis tota gens.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p6"></span>Malachi pursues the same subject; for he
answers the Jews in the name of God — that they unjustly complained of
his rigour as being immoderate, since they themselves were the cause of
all their evils. He says that they were cursed, but he adds that this
happened to them deservedly, as though he had said — “Be that granted
what you say, (for lamentations were continually made,) why is it that
God afflicts us without end or limits?” God seems to grant what they
were wont reproachfully to declare; but he says in answer to this —
“*But ye have defrauded Me*; what wonder then that my curse consumes
you? As then I have been robbed by you, as far as ye could, I will
render to you your just recompense; for it is not right that I should be
bountiful and kind to you, while ye thus defraud me, and take from me
what is my own.”

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p7"></span>The meaning then is this — that it was
indeed true that the Jews lamented that they were under a curse, but
that the cause ought to have been searched out. They indeed wished their
rapines and sacrileges to be forgiven, by which they defrauded God; but
God declares that he punished them justly in consuming them with poverty
and want, since they so sparingly rendered to him what they owed.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p8"></span>He mentions the *whole nation*,  <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) and thus aggravates the wickedness of
the Jews; for not a few were guilty of the sacrilege mentioned, but all,
from the least to the greatest, they all plundered the tenths and the
oblations. It hence follows that God’s vengeance did not exceed due
limits, since there was as it were a common conspiracy; there were not
ten or a hundred implicated in this sin, but, as he says, the whole
people. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p2"></span>**10.** Bring ye all the tithes into the
storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now
herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that *there shall* not *be room*
enough *to receive it*

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p3"></span>**10.** Adducite omnes decimas (vel,
totas) ad domum thesauri (vel, ad repositorium,) et sit cibus in domo
mea; et probate me nunc in hoc, dicit Iehova exercituum, annon aperiam
vobis fenestras coelorum, depromam vobis benedictionem, ut non sit
sufficientia (vel, ut non sit modus sufficientiae.)

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p6"></span>He at length declares that they profited
nothing by contending with God, but that a better way was open to them,
that is, to return into favor with him. After having then repelled their
unjust accusations, he again points out the remedy which he had already
referred to — that if they dealt faithfully with God, he would be
bountiful to them, and that his blessing would be promptly extended to
them. This is the sum of the passage. They had been sufficiently proved
guilty of rapacity in withholding the tenths and the oblations; as then
the sacrilege was well known, the Prophet now passes judgement, as they
say, according to what is usually done when the criminal is condemned,
and the cause is decided, so that he who has been defrauded recovers his
right.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p7"></span>So also now God deals with the Jews.
*Bring*, he says, *to the repository*  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) (for this is the same as the house of
the treasury, or of provisions) *all the tenths*, or the whole tenths.
We hence learn that they had not withholden the whole of the tenths from
the priests, but that they fraudulently brought the half, or retained as
much as they could; for it was not without reason that he said, *Bring
all*, or the whole. They then so paid the tenths as to supply the
priests with a part only, and thus they trifled with God, according to
what hypocrites do, who ever claim to themselves high honor, and try to
perform their duty in such a way as not to discover their own perfidy,
and yet they are not ashamed of the liberty they take to illude God; and
of this we have here a remarkable example. We then see that it is no new
or unusual thing for men to pretend to do the duties they owe to God,
and at the same time to take away from him what is his own, and to
transfer it to themselves, and that manifestly, so that their impiety is
evident, though it be covered by the veil of dissimulation.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p11"></span>He then adds, *Let there be meat in my
house*. We have elsewhere explained this form of speaking, and in the
last lecture the Prophet spoke also of the meat of God, not that God
needs meat and drink, but that whatever he has given us ought to be
deemed his. We have already stated, that it has been recorded for our
sake, that the Jews offered bread, and victims, and things of this kind,
and that they feasted at Jerusalem in the presence of God: for what is
more desirable than that God should dwell in the midst of us? and this
is often repeated in the law. But this could not have been set forth to
us in a way so familiar, as when God is represented as in a manner
sitting at table with us, as though he were our guest, eating of the
same bread and of the other provisions: and hence it is said in the law,
“Thou shalt feast and rejoice before thy God.” (<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p11.1"></span>[De
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p11.1"></span>.) Now as God needs not meat and drink, as
it has been said, and as men in their grossness are ever prone to
superstitions, he substituted the priests and the poor in his own place,
to prevent the Jews from entertaining earthly notions respecting him.
And this kind of modification or correction deserves to be noticed: for
the Lord on the one hand intended to draw men in a kind manner to
himself; but, on the other hand, he proposed to raise their minds upward
to heaven, lest they should ascribe to him anything unworthy of himself,
as is wont to be done, and is very common.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p12"></span>But, at the same time, he again accuses
them of sacrilege, for he complains that he was deprived of meat; *Let
there then be meat in my house; and prove me by this, saith Jehovah, if
I wily not open*, etc. He confirms what he said before, and yet proceeds
with his promise, for by subjecting himself to a proof, he boldly repels
their calumny in saying that they were without cause consumed with want,
and that God had changed his nature, because he had not given a large
supply of provisions. God then briefly shows, that wrong had been done
to him, for he admits of a proof or a trial, as though he had said, “If
you choose to contest the point, I will soon settle it, for if you bring
to me the tenths and them entire, there will immediately come to you a
great abundance of all provisions: it will hence be evident, that I am
not the cause of barrenness, but that it is your wickedness, because ye
have sacrilegiously defrauded me.”

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p13"></span>Then he adds, *If I will not open to
you the windows of heaven*. It is the first thing as to fertility that
the heavens should water the earth, according to what Scripture
declares: and hence God threatens in the law that the heaven would be
iron and the earth brass, (<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p13.1"></span>[De
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p13.1"></span>,) for there is a mutual connection between
the heaven and the earth, and he says elsewhere by a Prophet,

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p14"></span>“The heaven will hear the earth, and
the earth will hear the corn and wine, and the corn and wine will hear
men.”  
(<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p14.2"></span>[Ho
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p15"></span>For when famine urges us, we cry for
bread and wine, as our life seems in a manner to be dependent on these
supplies. When there is no wine nor corn, we meet with a denial; but the
wine and the corn cry to the earth, and why? because according to the
order fixed by God, they seek as it were to break forth; for when the
bowels of the earth are closed, neither the corn nor the vine can come
forth, and then they in vain call on the earth. The sense is the case
with the earth; for when it is dry and as it were famished, it calls on
the heavens, but if rain be denied, the heavens seem to reject its
prayer. Then God in this place shows that the earth could not produce a
single ear of corn, except the heavens supplied moisture or rain. God
indeed could from the beginning have watered the earth without rain, as
Moses relates he did at first, for a vapor then supplied the want of
rain. Though then rain descends naturally, we are yet reminded here that
God sends it. This is the first thing.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p16"></span>But as rain itself would not suffice,
he adds, *I will unsheath*, *etc*.; for <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p16.1"></span>רק, *rek*, means properly to unsheath; but
as this metaphor seems unnatural, some have more correctly rendered it,
“I will draw out” Unnatural also is this version, “I will empty out a
blessing,” and it perverts the meaning. Let us then follow what I have
stated as the first — that a blessing is drawn out from God when the
earth discharges its office, and becomes fertile or fruitful.  <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) We hence see that God is not only in
one way bountiful to us, but he also intends by various processes to
render us sensible of his kindness: he rains from heaven to soften the
earth, that it may in its bosom nourish the corn, and then send it forth
from its bowels, as though it extended its breast to us; and further,
God adds his blessing, so as to render the rain useful.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p18"></span>He subjoins the words <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p18.1"></span>עד-בלי-די, *od-beli-di*, which some render,
“that there may not be a sufficiency,” that is, that granaries and
cellars might not be capable of containing such abundance. They then
elicit this meaning — that so great would be the fruitfulness of the
earth, and so large would be its produce, that their repositories would
not be sufficiently capacious. But others give this version, “Beyond the
measure of sufficiency.” The word <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p18.2"></span>די,
*di*, means properly sufficiency, or what is needful, as by inverting
the letters it <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p18.3"></span>יד, *id*  <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) With regard to the general meaning
there is but little difference. Suitable also is this version, “Beyond
sufficiency;” that is, I will not regard what is needful for you, as
though it were measured, but the abundance shall be overflowing. It
follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#011)<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p2"></span>**11.** And I will rebuke the devourer
for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground;
neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field,
saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p3"></span>**11.** Et increpabo vobis devorantem, et
non corrumpet vobis fructum terrae, et non abortiet vobis vitis in agro,
dicit Iehova exercituum.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p6"></span>God now again confirms the truth, that he
would not in one way only be bountiful to them. He might indeed
distribute to us daily our food, as we know that he thus fed his people
in the wilderness; but his will is that the seed should rot in the
earth, that it should then germinate, and in course of time grow, until
it shoots into ears of corn; but it is still in no small danger, nay the
corn is subject to many evils before it be gathered into the garner; for
the locusts, the worms, the mildew, and other things may destroy it. God
therefore, in order to set forth his kindness to men, enumerates here
the ways and the means by which food is preserved; for it would not be
enough that the seed should germinate, and that there should appear
evidences of a great produce, the ears being fine and abundant, but it
is necessary that the ears of corn themselves, before they become ripe,
should be preserved from above; for on the one hand the chafers, the
locusts, the worms, and other grubs, may suddenly creep in and devour
the corn while in the field, and on the other hand, storms, and hail,
and mildew, and oilier pestilential things, as I have said, may prove
ruinous to the corn.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p7"></span>Hence God shows here, that he takes
constant care of us, and every day and every night performs the office
of a good and careful head of a family, who always watches for its
benefit.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p8"></span>In the word *devourer*, I include all the
evils to which we see that corn is subject; he therefore says, *he shall
not destroy the fruit of the earth; nor bereaved shall be the vine for
you in the fields*. The verb <span id="iv.iv.xiv-p8.1"></span>שכל,
*shecal*, properly means to bereave or to deprive; but as this version,
“bereaved shall not be vine,” would be harsh, some have rendered the
words thus, “Miscarry shall not vine,” which I do not disapprove:
*Miscarry* then *shall not the vine for you in the fields, saith Jehovah
of hosts*  <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p2"></span>**12.** And all nations shall call you
blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p3"></span>**12.** Et beatos dicent vos cunctae
gentes, quia eritis vos terra desiderii (desiderabilis) dicit Iehova
exercituum.

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p6"></span>This verse is taken from the law, in which
among other things God promises so happy a state to his chosen people,
that the nations themselves would acknowledge in them the blessing of
God. There is yet a contrast to be understood, — that having fallen into
such misery, they were become as it were detestable to all nations,
according to what the law also declares concerning them,

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p7"></span>“If thou shalt keep my precepts, all
nations shall call thee blessed; but if thou wilt despise me, thou shalt
be a sport to all nations, all shall shake the head and move the lips;
yea, they shall be astonished at the sight of thy misery, and whosoever
shall hear his ears will tingle.” (<span
id="iv.iv.xv-p7.1"></span>[Deut. 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.xv-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p8"></span>As then the Jews were consumed as it were
in their miseries, the Prophet says, “If you turn to God, that happiness
which he has promised you shall not be withheld; he has it as it were
ready in his hand, like a treasure that is hidden, according to what is
said in <span id="iv.iv.xv-p8.1"></span>[Ps
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.xv-p8.1"></span>,
‘How great is the abundance of thy goodness! but it is laid up for them
who fear thee.’” God then means, that he will not prostitute his
blessing to dogs and swine, but that it is always in reserve for his
children, who are teachable and obedient. *The nations then shall call
you blessed, for ye shall be a land of desire*

<span id="iv.iv.xv-p9"></span>This promise also is taken from the law,
in which God says, that he had not in vain separated that land from the
rest, because it was to be an example or a representation of his
kindness through the whole world. We indeed know that God has ever been
bountiful even to all nations, so as to satisfy them abundantly with
provisions; but the land of Israel is called the land of desire, or a
desirable land, because it was the special scene of God’s bounty, not
only as to meat and drink, but also as to other more excellent
blessings. He now adds —

<span id="iv.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p2"></span>**13.** Your words have been stout
against me, saith the Lord. Yet ye say, What have we spoken *so much*
against thee?

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p3"></span>**13.** Invaluerunt contra me verba
vestra, dicit Iehova; et dixistis, In quo locuti sumus contra te?

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p4"></span>**14.** Ye have said, It *is* vain to
serve God: and what profit *is it* that we have kept his ordinance, and
that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts?

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p5"></span>**14.** Dixistis, Frustra servitur Deo et
quae utilitas? quia custodivimus custodiam ejus, et quia ambulavimus
supplices (vel, humiles; in obscuro vulta, ad verbum) coram facie
Iehovae exercituum.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p6"></span>**15.** And now we call the proud happy;
yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea, *they that* tempt God
are even delivered.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p7"></span>**15.** Et nunc nos beatos dicimus
superbos; etiam aedificantur qui faciunt iniquitatem, etiam tentant Deum
et liberantur.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p9"></span><span id="iv.iv.xvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p10"></span>Here again God expostulates with the
Jews on account of their impious and wicked blasphemy in saying, that he
disappointed his servants, and that he made no difference between good
and evil, because he was kind to the unfaithful and the faithful
indiscriminately, and also that he overlooked the obedience rendered to
him.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p11"></span>He says now that their *words grew
strong*; by which he denotes their insolence, as though he had said,
*Vous avez gagné le plus haut*; for <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p11.1"></span>חזק, *chezak*, is to be strong. He means
that such was the waywardness of the Jews that it could not by any means
be checked; they were like men whom we see, who when once seized by rage
and madness, become so vociferous that they will not listen to any
admonitions or sane counsels. At first they murmur and are only heard to
whisper; but when they have attained full liberty, they then send forth,
as I have said, their furious clamours against heaven. This is the sin
which the Prophet now condemns by saying, that the Jews grew strong in
crying against God.  <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) They again
answer and say, *In what have we spoken against thee?*  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) It appears from these so many
repetitions that the hypocrisy, which was united with great effrontery,
could not be easily corrected in a people so refractory: it ought indeed
to have come to their minds that they had wickedly accused God. But they
acknowledge here no fault, “What meanest thou?” as though they wished to
arraign the Prophet for having falsely charged them, inasmuch as they
were conscious of no wrong.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p20"></span><span id="iv.iv.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p21"></span>He then gives the reason why he said,
that their words grew strong against God, that is, that they daringly
and furiously spoke evil of God; and the reason was, because they *said,
that God was worshipped in vain*. They thought that they worshipped God
perfectly; and this was their false principle; for hypocrites ever lay
claim to complete holiness, and cannot bear to confess their own evils;
even when their conscience goads them, they deceive themselves with vain
flatteries, and always endeavor to draw over them some veil that their
disgrace may not appear before men. Hence hypocrites seek to deceive
themselves, God, angels, and men; and when they are inflated with the
confidence that they worship God purely, rightly, and without any
defect, and that they are without any blame, they will betray the
virulence which lies within, whenever God does not help them as they
wish, whenever he submits not to their will: for when they are
prosperous, God is hauntingly blessed by them; but as soon as he
withdraws his hand and begins to prove their patience, they will then
show, as I have said, what sort of worshippers of God they are. But in
the service of God the chief thing is this — that men deny themselves
and give themselves up to be ruled by God, and never raise a clamor when
he humbles them.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p22"></span>We hence see how it was that the Jews
found fault with God; for they were persuaded that they fully performed
their duty, which was yet most false; and then, they were not willing to
submit to God, and to undertake his yoke, because they did not consider
in how many ways they had provoked God’s wrath, and what just and
multiplied reasons he has for chastising his people, even when they do
nothing wrong. As then they did not seriously consider any of these
things, they thought that he was unjust to them, In vain then do we
serve God. These thoughts, as we have said, sometimes come across the
minds of the faithful; but they, as it becomes them, resist such
thoughts: the Jews, on the contrary, as though they were victorious,
vomited forth these blasphemies against God.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p23"></span>*In vain we serve God; what benefit?
they said: for we have kept has charge, we have walked obscurely, or
humbly, before Jehovah of hosts*;  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) and yet we are constrained to call the
proud, or the impious, *happy*. Here they bring a twofold accusation
against God, that they received no reward for their piety when they
faithfully discharged their duty towards God, — and also that it was
better with the ungodly and the despisers of God than with them. We
hence see how reproachfully they exaggerated what they deemed the
injustice of God, at least how they themselves imagined that he
disappointed the just of their deserved reward, and that he favored the
ungodly and the wicked as though he was pleased with them, as though he
intended the more to exasperate the sorrow of his own servants, who,
though they faithfully worshipped, yet saw that they did so in vain, as
God concealed himself and did not regard their services.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p28"></span>That the good also are tempted, as we
have said, by thoughts of this kind, is no wonder, when the state of
things in the world is in greater confusion. Even Solomon says,

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p29"></span>“All things happen alike to the just and
to the unjust, to him who offers sacrifices, and to him who does not
sacrifice,”  
(<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p29.2"></span>[Ec
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p29.2"></span>,)

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p30"></span>hence the earth is full of impiety and
contempt. There is then an occasion for indignation and envy offered to
us; but as God designedly tries our faith by such confusions, we must
remember that we must exercise patience. It is not at the same time
enough for us to submit to God’s judgement, except we also consider that
we are justly distressed; and that though we may be attentive to what is
just and upright, many vices still cleave to us, and that we are
sprinkled with many spots, which provoke God’s wrath against us. Let us
then learn to form a right judgement as to what our life is, and then
let us bear in mind how many are the reasons why God should sometimes
deal roughly with us. Thus all our envying will cease, and our minds
will be prepared calmly to obey. In short, these considerations will
check whatever perverseness there may be in us, so that neither our
wicked thoughts nor our words will be so strong as to rise in rebellion
against God.

<span id="iv.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iv.xvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we
continue to afford many and various reasons to induce thee to withdraw
thy blessing, and to show thyself displeased with us, — O grant, that we
may patiently bear thy scourges, by which thou chastises us, and also
profit under them, and so contend with all our depraved affections and
the corruptions of the flesh, that we may become partakers of thy
paternal kindness, which thou offerest to us, and also so taste of thy
goodness, which in innumerable ways is manifested towards us, that it
may keep us in the pursuit of true religion; finally, may our tongues be
consecrated to magnify thy judgement and to celebrate thy justice, that
whatever happens to us, we may always serve thee through our whole life
as our Father, and declare also thy goodness towards us, and confess
that we are justly punished whenever thou visitest us with severity,
until we shall at length reach that blessed rest, which is to be the end
of all our evils, and an entrance, not only into life, but also into
that full glory and happiness, which has been procured for us by the
blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Eightieth

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p2"></span>We saw in our last lecture that the
Jews were indignant, because God did not treat them with more kindness,
as they thought that they rightly performed their duty towards Him. We
said that such an expostulation can never be justly made by men; for
though they may find God rigid, there are yet always many reasons why he
should by various troubles exercise them; but hypocrites seem to
themselves to be of all men the most perfect, though they have only the
guise or mask of religion. They indeed say that they have kept the Law,
but when we come to the test, their emptiness is found out; for the main
thing in the Law is wanting, that is, integrity of heart; nay, in the
outward life they are found to be transgressors.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p3"></span>However this may be, they boasted that
they kept the law, as we find in this passage, *We have kept his
charge*. The doctrine of the law is here by a metaphor called a charge
or keeping (*custodia*,) because it rules us, it confines us also within
limits that we may not wander in uncertainty, it restrains our corrupt
desires; in short, it keeps us under the fear of God and in the best
order. Had the Jews considered this, they could never have dared to
ascribe so much to themselves. Now this word, then commonly used, is
adopted by the Prophet, and thus he shows how little attention they gave
to the consideration of God’s law; for they thought that their whole
life was conformable to all the commandments, and. yet they conformed
hardly to the thousandth part of them. They add, *We have walked with a
dark face* or *dress*  <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) There is
here also a metaphor, for they meant that they had been humble and lowly
before God. It is indeed no ordinary thing in God’s service to lay aside
all pride and vain confidence, and to walk humbly with him: but
hypocrites, like apes, imitate what God requires and approves; and at
the same time they say nothing of changing the heart. Fear and sorrow
are required, according to what we have seen in the Prophet Micah; but
hypocrites think that a dejected countenance is enough; and hence they
often pretend sorrow, while they inwardly please and flatter themselves:
and on this account we find in Isaiah, the fifty-eighth chapter, as well
as in this place, that they bring a charge against God, that he did not
regard them, when they walked with a sad countenance, when they
macerated themselves with fastings: in short, when by various other
performances they showed great holiness, they brought an accusation
against God, because he disregarded all these things, or made not that
account of them which they expected.

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p6"></span>Let us then remember, that the Jews
were guilty of two errors; first, they presented to God an empty
appearance for true humility, for they were no doubt swollen with false
confidence though they pretended to be abject and low before God;
secondly, they claimed for themselves more than what was just, for
though there may have been some apparent modesty and submissiveness in
them, yet they exceeded due limits; for we always swell with
presumption, at least we are never thoroughly freed from it. They then
falsely pretended, that they walked lowly and dejectedly before God. It
follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p1"></span>Malichi 3:15

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p2"></span>**15.** And now we call the proud happy;
yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea, *they that* tempt God
are even delivered.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p3"></span>**15.** Et nunc nos beatos dicimus
superbos; etiam aedificantur qui faciunt iniquitatem, etiam tentant Deum
et liberantur.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p6"></span>This verse is connected with the last,
for the force of these words, “We have walked sorrowfully before God and
have carefully kept his precepts,” does not fully appear, except this
clause be added — that they saw in the meantime that the proud
flourished and had their delights, as though they said, “We strive to
deserve well of God by our services; he overlooks all our religious
acts, and pours as it were all his bounty on our enemies, who are yet
ungodly and profane.” We now see how these verses are connected
together, for God disappointed the Jews of the reward they thought due
to them, and in the meantime bestowed on the impious and undeserving his
kindness.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p7"></span>To call any one blessed, as we have
before seen, is to acknowledge that God’s blessing is upon him,
according to what God had promised, “Behold, all nations shall call thee
blessed.” So a changed state of things is here set forth, for the Jews,
when they were miserable, called others blessed; not that they willingly
declared this, but envy forced them to complain of the cheerful and
hamper state of the Gentiles, who were yet ungodly. And by the *proud*
they meant all the despisers of God, a part being mentioned for the
whole; and they were so called, because faith alone humbles us. Many
unbelievers are indeed lauded for their humility, but no one becomes
really humble without being first emptied of every conceit as to his own
virtues. Some rise up against God, and rob him of what is his own, and
then it is no wonder that they act insolently towards their neighbors,
since they dare even to raise up their horns against God himself. And in
many parts of Scripture the unbelieving are called proud, in order that
we may know that we cannot be formed and habituated to humility until we
submit to the yoke of God, so that he may turn us wherever he wishes,
and until we cast aside every confidence in ourselves.  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263)

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p9"></span>*As well as*, they said; for <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p9.1"></span>גם, *gam*, is here repeated, and must be
rendered “as well as,” that is, “All who do iniquity as well as all who
tempt God, *are built up* and *are delivered*. In the first place what
is general is stated, and then what is particular, and yet the Prophet
speaks of the same persons, for he first calls God’s despisers
iniquitous, and he afterwards says, that the same tempted God, which is
more special. The sum of the whole is, — that God’s favor was
conspicuous towards the despisers of the law, for they lived
prosperously, and were also delivered, and found God their helper in
adversity.

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p10"></span>The verb, to *build*, is taken in Hebrew
in the sense of prospering, and is applied to many things. When
therefore any one grows and increases in honors or in riches, when he
accumulates wealth, or when he is raised as it were by degrees to a
higher condition, he is said to be built up. It is also added that they
were *delivered*, for it would not be enough to acquire much wealth,
except aid from God comes in adversity, for no one, even the most
fortunate, is exempt from every evil. Hence to building up the Prophet
adds this second clause, — that God delivered the wicked from all evils,
as though he covered them under his shadow, and as though they were his
clients. With regard to the second verb, when he says that the ungodly
*tempted* God, it is, we know, the work of unbelief to contend with God.
The Prophet used the same word shortly before, when he said, “Prove me
in this:” but God then, after the manner of men, submitted to a trial;
here, on the contrary, the Prophet condemns that insolence which very
commonly prevails in the world, when men seek to confine God, and to
impose on him a law, and to inquire into his judgements: it is in short
as though they had a right to prescribe to him according to their own
caprice, so that he should not do this or that, and which if he did, to
call on him to plead his own cause. We now then perceive what it is to
prove or tempt God. It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p2"></span>**16.** Then they that feared the Lord
spake often one to another: and the Lord hearkened, and heard *it*, and
a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the
Lord, and that thought upon his name.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p3"></span>**16.** Tunc loqunti sunt timentes Iehovam
quisque ad socium suum; et attendit Iehova, et audivit; et scriptus est
liber memoriae (vel, memorialis) coram facie ejus pro timentibus
Iehovam, et cogitantibus de nomine ejus, (vel, in pretio habentibus
nomen ejus.)

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p6"></span>In this verse the Prophet tells us that
his doctrine had not been without fruit, for the faithful had been
stimulated, so that they animated one another, and thus restored each
other to a right course. They who explain the words — that the faithful
spoke, indefinitely, pervert the meaning of the Prophet, and they also
suppress the particle <span id="iv.iv.xx-p6.1"></span>אז, *az*, then.
The very subject proves that a certain time is denoted, as though the
Prophet had said, that before he addressed the people and vehemently
reproved their vices, there was much indifference among them, but that
at length the faithful were awakened.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p7"></span>We are hence taught that we are by nature
slothful and tardy, until God as it were plucks our ears; there is
therefore need of warnings and stimulants. But let us also learn to
attend to what is taught, lest it should become frigid to us. We ought
at the same time to observe, that all were not moved by the Prophet’s
exhortations to repent, but those who feared God: the greater part no
doubt securely went on in their vices, and even openly derided the
Prophet’s teaching. As then the truth profited only those who feared
God, let us not wonder that it is despised at this day by the people in
general; for it is given but to a few to obey God’s word; and the
conversion of the heart is the peculiar gift of the Holy Spirit. There
is therefore no reason for pious teachers to despond, when they do not
see their doctrine received everywhere and by all, of when they see that
but a few make any progress in it; but let them be content, when the
Lord blesses their labor and renders it profitable and fruitful to some,
however small their number may be.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p8"></span>But the Prophet not only says that
individuals were Touched with repentance, but also that they *spoke
among themselves*;  <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) by which he
intimates, that our efforts ought to be extended to our brethren: and it
is an evidence of true repentance, when each one endeavors as much as he
can to unite to himself as many friends as possible, so that they may
with one consent return to the way from which they had departed, yea,
that they may return to God whom they had forsaken. This then is what we
are to understand by the words spoken mutually by God’s servants, which
the Prophet does not express.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p11"></span>He says that Jehovah *attended* and
*heard*, and that a *book of remembrance was written before him*. He
proves here that the faithful had not in vain repented, for God became a
witness and a spectator: and this part is especially worthy of being
noticed; for we lose not our labor when we turn to God, because he will
receive us as it were with open arms.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p12"></span>Our Prophet wished especially to show,
that God *attended*; and hence he uses three forms of speaking. One word
would have been enough, but he adds two more; and this is particularly
emphatical, that there was a *book of remembrance written*. His purpose
then was by this multiplicity of words to give greater encouragement to
the faithful, that they might be convinced that their reward would be
certain as soon as they devoted themselves to God, for God would not be
blind to their piety.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p13"></span>The Prophet at the same time seems to
point it out as something miraculous, that there were found then among
the people any who were yet capable of being healed, since so much
wickedness had prevailed among the people, nay, had become hardened, as
we have seen, to an extreme obstinacy; for there was nothing sound or
upright either among the priests or the common people. As then they had
long indulged with loose reins in all kinds of wickedness, it was
incredible, that any could be converted, or that any piety and fear of
God could be found remaining among them. This then is the reason why the
Prophet says, that God *attended* and *heard*, and that a *book was
written*; he speaks as though of a thing unusual, which could not but
appear as a miracle in a state of things so confused and almost past
hope. The design of the whole is to show, that the faithful ought not to
doubt, but that their repentance is ever regarded by God, and especially
when the utmost despair lays hold on their minds; for it often
distresses the godly, when they see no remedy to be hoped for; then they
think that their repentance will be useless: hence it is that the
Prophet dwells so much on this point, in order that they might feel
assured, that though no hope appeared, yet repentance availed for their
salvation before God; and for this reason he adds, that this *book was
written for those who feared God*  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265)

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p15"></span>With regard to the participle <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p15.1"></span>חשבים, *cheshebim*, the verb <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p15.2"></span>חשב, *chesheb*, means to reckon or to count,
and also to think; and so some render it here, “Who think of his name.”
And doubtless this is a rare virtue; for we see that forgetfulness
easily creeps over us, which extinguishes the fear of God, so that we
take such a liberty, as though they who forget God can sin with
impunity: and hence it is said often in the Psalms, that the fear of God
is before the eyes of the godly. This seems frigid at the first view;
but he who remembers God has made much progress in his religious course;
and we also find by experience that the mere remembrance of God, when
real, is a bridle to us sufficiently strong to restrain all our depraved
lusts. But as the price of a thing is attained by reckoning, the other
version is appropriate, — that the faithful value or esteem the name of
God.  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) It follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p2"></span>**17.** And they shall be mine, saith the
LORD of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare
them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p3"></span>**17.** Et erunt mihi, dicit Iehova
exercituum, die illa qua ego facio, peculium; et parcam eis (super eos
ad verbum) sicuti parcit vir suo filio, qui obsequitur ei.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p6"></span>He shows by the issue itself why a book
of remembrance was written — that God in due time would again undertake
to defend and cherish his Church. Though then for a time many troubles
were to be sustained by the godly, yet the Prophet shows that they did
not in vain serve God; for facts would at length prove that their
obedience has not been overlooked. But the two things which he mentions
ought to be noticed; for a book of remembrance is first written before
God, and then God executes what is written in the book. When therefore
we seem to serve God in vain, let us know that the obedience we render
to him will come to an account, and that he is a just Judge, though he
may not immediately stretch forth his hand to us.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p7"></span>In the first place then the Prophet
testifies that God knows what is done by every one; and in the second
place he adds that he will in his own time perform what he has decreed.
So also in judgements, he preserves the same order in knowing and in
executing. For when he said to Abraham that the cry of Sodom came up to
heaven, (<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p7.1"></span>[Ge
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p7.1"></span>,) how great and how supine was the security
of the city. How wantonly and how savagely they despised every authority
to the very last moment! But God had long before ascended his tribunal,
and had taken an account of their wickedness. So also in the case of the
godly, though he seems to overlook their obedience, yet he has not his
eyes closed, or his ears closed, for there is a book of memorial written
before him.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p8"></span>Hence he says, *They shall be in the day
I make*. The verb is put by itself, but we may easily learn from the
context that it refers to the restoration of the Church. *In the day*
then *in which I shall make*, that is, complete what I have already
said; for he had before promised to restore the Church. As then he
speaks of a known thing, he says shortly, *In the day I shall make*, or
complete my work, *they shall be to me a peculiar treasure*  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) This phrase confirms what I have
already stated — that God has his season and opportunity, in order that
there may be no presumption in us to prescribe to him the time when he
is to do this or that. In the day then when he shall gather his Church,
it will then appear that we are his peculiar treasure.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p13"></span>Thus the Prophet in these words exhorts
us to patience, lest it should be grievous to us to groan under our
burden, and not to find God’s help according to our wishes, and lest
also it should be grievous to us to bear troubles in common with the
whole Church. Were one or two of us subject to the cross, and doomed to
sorrow and grief in this world, our condition might seem hard; but since
the godly, from the first to the last, are made to be our associates in
bearing the cross of Christ, and to be conformed to his example, there
is no reason for any one of us to shun his lot; for we are not better
than the holy patriarchs, apostles, and so many of the faithful whom God
has exercised with the cross. Since then the common restoration of the
Church is here set before us, let us know that a reason is here given
for constancy and fortitude; for it would be disgraceful for us to
faint, when we have so many leaders in this warfare, who by their
examples stretch forth as it were their hands to us; for as Abraham,
David, and other Patriarchs and Prophets, as well as Apostles, have
suffered so many and so grievous troubles, ought not this fact to raise
up our spirits? and if at any time our feet and our legs tremble, ought
it not to be sufficient to strengthen us, that so many excellent chiefs
and leaders invite us to persevere by their example? We then see that
this has not been laid down for nothing, *when I shall make*, or
complete my work.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p14"></span>By the words *peculiar treasure*, God
intimates that the lot of the godly will be different from that of the
world; as though he had said, “Ye are now so mixed together, that they
who serve me seem not to be peculiar any more than strangers; but they
shall then be my peculiar treasure.” This is to be taken, as I have
already mentioned, for the outward appearance; for we know that we have
been chosen by God, before the foundation of the world, for this end —
that we might be to him a peculiar treasure. But when we are afflicted
in common with the wicked, or when we seem to be even rejected, and the
ungodly, on the other hand, seem to have God propitious to them, then
nothing seems less true than this promise. I therefore said that this
ought to be referred to the outward appearance — that the faithful are
God’s peculiar treasure, that they are valued by him, and that he shows
to them peculiar love, as to his own inheritance.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p15"></span>And this mode of speaking occurs in many
parts of scripture; for God is often said to repudiate his people; the
word separation, or divorce, is often mentioned; he is said to have
destroyed his inheritance. Grievous is the trial, when God cherishes as
it were in his bosom the ungodly, and we at the same time are exposed to
every kind of miser; but we see what happened to the ancient Church: let
us then arm ourselves for this contest, and be satisfied with the inward
testimony of the Spirit, though outward things do not prosper.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p16"></span>He adds, *And I will spare them as a man
spares*, etc. He states here a promise which ought especially to be
observed: it contains two clauses; the first is, that the Jews who
remained alive would render obedience to God, by which they would prove
themselves to be children indeed, and not in name only: and the second
is, that God would forgive them, that is, that he would exercise pardon
in receiving their services, which could not otherwise please him. And
there is no doubt but that the Spirit of regeneration is included in the
words, *the son who serves him*; not that the faithful addressed here
were wholly destitute of the fear of God; but God promises an increase
of grace, as though he had said, “I will gather to myself the people who
faithfully and sincerely worship me.” Though then he speaks not here of
the beginning of a religious and holy life, it is yet the same as though
he had said, that the faithful would be under his government, that they
might denote themselves to his service.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p17"></span>The second promise refers to another
grace, — that God in his mercy would approve of the obedience of the
godly, though in itself unworthy to come to his presence. How necessary
this indulgence is to us, they who are really and truly acquainted with
the fear of God, fully know. The sophists daringly prattle about merits,
and fill themselves and others with empty pride; but they who understand
that no man can stand before God’s tribunal, do not dream of any merits,
nor do they believe that they can bring anything before God, by which
they can conciliate his favor. Hence their only refuge is what the
Prophet here teaches us, that God *spares* them.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p18"></span>And it must be observed, that the
Prophet does not speak simply of the remission of sins: our salvation,
we know, consists of two things — that God rules us by his Spirit, and
forms us anew in his own image through the whole course of our life, —
and also that he buries our sins. But the Prophet refers here to the
remission of sins, of which we have need as to our good works; for it is
certain, that even when we devote ourselves with all possible effort and
zeal to God’s service there is yet something always wanting. Hence it is
that no work, however right and perfect before men, deserves this
distinction and honor before God. It is therefore necessary, even when
we strive our utmost to serve God, to confess that without his
forgiveness whatever we bring deserves rejection rather than his favor.
Hence the Prophet says, that when God is reconciled to us, there is no
reason to fear that he will reject us, because we are not perfect; for
though our works be sprinkled with many spots, they will yet be
acceptable to him, and though we labor under many defects, we shall yet
be approved by him. How so? Because he will spare us: for a father is
indulgent to his children, and though he may see a blemish in the body
of his son, he will not yet cast him out of his house; nay, though he
may have a son lame, or squint-eyed, or singular for any other defect,
he will yet pity him, and will not cease to love him: so also is the
case with respect to God, who, when he adopts us as his children, will
forgive our sins. And as a father is pleased with every small attention
when he sees his son submissive, and does not require from him what he
requires from a servant; so God acts; he repudiates not our obedience,
however defective it may be.  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268)

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p20"></span>We hence see the design and meaning of
the Prophet, — that he promises pardon from God to the faithful, after
having been reconciled to him, because they serve God as children
willingly, — and that God also, though their works are unworthy of his
favor, will yet count them as acceptable, even through pardon, and not
on the ground of merit or worthiness.

<span id="iv.iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iv.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as Satan
strives to draw us away from every attention to true religion, when
things in the world are in a state of disorder and confusion, — O grant,
that we may know that thou caress for us; and if we perceive not this by
what we find in the world, may we rely on thy word, and doubt not but
that thou ever watches over our safety; and being supported by this
confidence, may we ever go on in the course of our calling: and as thou
hast deigned to make us partakers of that evidence of thy favor, by
which we know that we are reconciled to thee in thine only-begotten Son;
and being thus made his members, may we never hesitate cheerfully to
offer to thee our services, however defective they may he, since thou
hast once promised to be a propitious Father to us, so as not rigidly to
try what we offer to thee, but so graciously to accept it, that we may
know that not only our sins, which justly deserve condemnation, are
forgiven and remitted to us, but that thou also so bearest with our
infirmities and our defects in our imperfect works, that we shall at
length receive the reward which thou hast promised, and which we cannot
attain through our merits, but through the sanctification of thy Spirit,
and through the sprinkling of the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. —
Amen.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Eighty-first

<span id="iv.iv.xxiii-p2"></span>We saw in the last lecture that no
works of the faithful please God, except through a gratuitous
acceptance: it hence follows, that nothing can be ascribed to merits
without derogating from the grace of Christ; for if the value of works
depends on this, that God is our Father and is reconciled to us in
Christ, nothing can be more absurd than to set up works, which ought to
be subordinated to this paternal favor of God.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiii-p3"></span>We now see how these two things
harmonize — that reward is promised to works, and that works themselves
deserve nothing before God; for though God can justly reject them, he
yet regards them as acceptable, because he forgives all their defects.
Thus have we brief stated the reason why our works are approved by God;
they are not so on account of any worthiness, but through his favor
alone; for there is no work which would not on account of its
imperfection be displeasing to God, were he to require that it should be
according to the rule of his law. Hence God departs from his own law and
turns to mercy, that he may regard works as acceptable, which otherwise
could not, being defective, stand before his presence. It now follows —

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Malachi
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p2"></span>**18.** Then shall ye return, and
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth
God and him that serveth him not.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>**18.** Et convertemini, et videbitis
inter justum et impium, inter servientem Deo et eum qui non servit ei.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p6"></span>This verse at the first view seems to be
addressed to the faithful; for there never has been a turning as to the
reprobate: but as the word has a wide meaning, the passage may be
suitably applied to the whole people, according to what we find in
Zechariah, “They shall see him whom they have pierced;” for we have said
that this might be understood both of the good and of the bad. So also
the whole people might be viewed as addressed in these words. But when
we more minutely examine all circumstances, it seems that Malachi more
particularly addressed the ungodly, and checked again their furious
blasphemies; for we find almost the same sentiment expressed here, as
when he said, “The Lord whom ye expect shall come to his temple, and the
angel of the covenant whom ye seek;” and at the same time he showed that
the coming of Christ, which they said was advancing too slowly, would
not be such as they desired or looked for. “Let not this delay,” he
says, “be grievous to you; for everything terrible which his majesty
possesses will be turned on your heads; for he will come as an angry
judge and an avenger: ye therefore in vain hope for any comfort or
alleviation from his presence.”

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p7"></span>So also he says in this place, *Ye shall
see this difference between the just and the unjust*; that is, “Ye shall
find that God does not sleep in heaven, when the ungodly grow wanton on
the earth and abandon themselves to every kind of wickedness: experience
then will at length teach you, that men shall not thus with impunity
become insolent against God, but that all your wickedness must come to a
reckoning.” When therefore he says, that they would find the difference
between the godly and the ungodly, he means that they would find by the
punishments which God would inflict, that men are not permitted to
indulge their own depraved desires, as though God slept in heaven,
forgetful of his office. Their blasphemy was, “In vain is God
worshipped; what is the benefit? for we have kept his charge, and yet
the proud are more happy than we are.” As then they accused God of such
a connivance, as though he disregarded and cast away his own servants,
and showed favor to the wicked, Malachi returns them an answer and says,
“Ye shall see how much the good differ from the evil; God indeed spares
the wicked, but he will at length rise to judgement, and come armed
suddenly upon them, and then ye shall know that all the deeds of men are
noticed by him, and that wickedness shall not go unpunished, though God
for a time delays his vengeance.”

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p8"></span>We now then perceive the Prophet’s
meaning — that the ungodly who clamor against God, as though he made no
account either of the just or of the unjust, shall find, even to their
own loss, that he is one who punishes wickedness.

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p9"></span>As to the verb *turn*, I have already
said that it has a wide meaning, and does not always mean repentance or
the renovation of man: it may therefore be taken as signifying only a
different state of things; as though he had said, “The dice shall be
turned, and such will be your condition when God shall begin to execute
his judgement, that he will then manifestly show that he has not
forgotten his office, though he does not immediately hasten to execute
his judgements.” *Ye shall return* then *and see*. Yet if any one
prefers to regard returning as the feeling of God’s judgements, by which
even the ungodly shall be touched, though without repentance, the view
will not be unsuitable, and I am disposed to embrace it, that is, that
the Lord will shake off the stupidity in which they were sunk, and will
correct their madness, so that they will not dare to vomit forth so
insolently their blasphemies, as they had been wont to do: Ye then shall
return; that is, “I will make my judgement known to you, and ye shall
not rush on headlong as wild beasts, for being taught by facts, ye shall
learn the difference between the good and the bad.”  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p11"></span>The *just*, and he who *serves* God,
mean the same person. We hence learn that there is no justice where
there is no obedience rendered to God. The first thing then in a good
and an upright life, is to serve God; for it would be but of little
benefit to be harmless towards men, when his right is denied: and we
know that God is not rightly served but according to what his law
prescribes. We must then always come to this, — that men must obey God,
if they desire to form their life aright. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc30022.htm#fr_240) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p10"></span> As quoted by the Evangelists, it is
“before *thy* face.” *Jerome’s* observation is, that the apostles and
evangelists transferred the truth contained in passages without minding
syllables and small words. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc30022.htm#fr_241) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p13"></span> The verb <span
id="iv.iv.i-p13.1"></span>פנה, rendered “purgabit” by *Calvin* in the
sense of clearing, can hardly bear this meaning. It signifies to turn or
look to a thing, and hence to provide or prepare. In this latter sense
it occurs in six other places; and is rendered by the *Septuagint* <span
id="iv.iv.i-p13.2"></span>ἑτοιμάζω, as in <span
id="iv.iv.i-p13.3"></span>[Ge
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#031)<span id="iv.iv.i-p13.3"></span>,
and <span id="iv.iv.i-p13.4"></span>[Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.i-p13.4"></span>,
though here <span id="iv.iv.i-p13.5"></span>ἐπιβλέψεται, according to
its primary meaning. The version of *Theodoret*, here is “<span
id="iv.iv.i-p13.6"></span>ἐτοιμαζει — prepares.” The idea of *Calvin*
may be said to be included; for as *Henderson* justly observes, “The
language is borrowed from the custom of sending pioneers before an
eastern monarch to cut through rocks and forests, and remove every
impediment that might obstruct his course.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc30022.htm#fr_242) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p15"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p15.1"></span>Εξαίφνης
— suddenly,” by the *Septuagint*, “<span
id="iv.iv.i-p15.2"></span>statim — immediately,” by *Jerome*, and by
some others, “unexpectedly.” The meaning is, according to some, that his
coming would be soon after that of John, about six months; or, according
to others, unexpectedly, as a light suddenly arising in darkness,
without any previous symptom of its appearance.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p16"></span>The literal rendering of these two lines
is the following, —

<span id="iv.iv.i-p17"></span>And suddenly shall he come to his
temple,  
The Lord whom ye are seeking.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p18"></span>The remark of *Henderson* and of others on
the <span id="iv.iv.i-p18.1"></span>ה before “Lord” as being emphatic,
is not well founded. It is owing to the relative “whom” which follows,
as it is in our language. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc30022.htm#fr_243) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p18.7"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p19"></span> “A phrase nowhere else in Scripture.” —
*Secker*.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc30022.htm#fr_244) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p23"></span> Owing to this repetition, some of the
fathers, *Theodoret*, *Eusebius*, and *Augustine*, held that this part
refers to Christ’s second coming: but the repetition is only to confirm
what had been previously said, and according to the usual manner of the
Prophets, contains an expansion of the former idea. A literal rendering
of the whole verse would exhibit this as the real meaning, —

<span id="iv.iv.i-p24"></span>Behold I send my messenger, And he shall
prepare the way before me: And suddenly shall he come to his temple, The
Lord whom ye are seeking; Yea, the angel of the covenant, in whom ye
delight, Behold, he is coming, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p25"></span>The four last lines exhibit an example of
parallelism which often occurs. The first and the last line correspond,
and so do the second and the third. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc30022.htm#fr_245) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11"></span> For “who will endure,” the *Vulgate*,
after *Jerome*, has, “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11.1"></span>quis poterit
cogitare — who can think of?” etc. But this is inconsistent with the
*Septuagint* and the *Targum*, and with the context. The verb indeed is
capable of being derived from <span id="iv.iv.ii-p11.2"></span>כל as
well as from <span id="iv.iv.ii-p11.3"></span>יכל; but the latter is the
meaning alone suitable to this passage. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc30022.htm#fr_246) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12"></span> The version of the *Septuagint* is
“<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>ὡς πυρ χωνευτηρίου και ὡς ποια&lt;
pluno&gt;<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12.2"></span>ντων — as the fire of the
crucible (or, of the furnace) and as the herb of the washers.” The word,
<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12.3"></span>מצרף, may be either a participle or a
noun—the refiner or the place or instrument of refining. See <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p12.4"></span>[Prov.
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#003), [Prov.
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.ii-p12.4"></span>. The latter sense is most suitable to this
place. “Herb” is rendered “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12.5"></span>smegma —
soap,” by *Picator*, — “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12.6"></span>Lanaria
-cudwort,” by *Drusius*,—and “alkaline salt,” by *Michaelis*. It was
probably the salt-wort mentioned by an author quoted by *Parkhurst*, a
plant very common in Judea. It was burned, and water was poured on its
ashes. This water became impregnated with strong lixivial salt, “proper
for taking,” he says, “stains and impurities out of wool or cloth.” It
is not supposed that what we call “soap” was known to the Jews. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc30022.htm#fr_247) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p5"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.v-p5.1"></span>Fundet
*vel* conflabit,” so he renders <span id="iv.iv.v-p5.2"></span>זקק,
which signifies to fuse, as given by the *Septuagint*, <span
id="iv.iv.v-p5.3"></span>χεει. It properly means to strain off or
separate, that is, wine from its lees, as in <span
id="iv.iv.v-p5.4"></span>[Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.v-p5.4"></span>;
or, as here, the pure metal from its dross. It intimates such a process
as is successful in separating the gold and silver from the base matter
that may adhere to them. So that the “<span
id="iv.iv.v-p5.5"></span>expurgans — cleansing” of *Piscator*, or the
“<span id="iv.iv.v-p5.6"></span>defaecans — defecating or fining from
dregs,” of *Junius* and *Tremelius*, very nearly expresses the idea.
*Newcome* and *Henderson* translate this verb “refine,” as they do
another verb, or rather participle, at the beginning of the verse. “He
will strain them, (<span id="iv.iv.v-p5.7"></span>*colabit*,)” is the
version of *Jerome*. Our version has “purge,” but “cleanse” is better.
“Defacate” comes nearest to the original word. I would offer the
following version —

<span id="iv.iv.v-p6"></span>**3.** And sit will the fuser and purifier
of silver; And he will purify the sons of Levi, And draw off their dross
as that of silver and gold; And they shall be to Jehovah The offerers of
oblation in righteousness.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p7"></span>The paraphrase of *Dathius* is
substantially faithful —

<span id="iv.iv.v-p8"></span>As the gold-finer (or goldsmith — <span
id="iv.iv.v-p8.1"></span>*aurifaber*) and the purifier of silver sits,
so he will purify the posterity of Levi, and will clarify (<span
id="iv.iv.v-p8.2"></span>*eliquabit*) them as gold and silver, that they
may rightly offer gifts to Jehovah. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc30022.htm#fr_248) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p10"></span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>Jurantes and fallandum — swear to deceive:
the original literally is, “who swear to a lie,” or to a falsehood. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc30022.htm#fr_249) <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p14"></span> There is no need of this inversion, if
we render the word <span id="iv.iv.vii-p14.1"></span>עשק, defraud, or
rob, or deal wrongfully with, which is no doubt its secondary meaning, —

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p15"></span>And against the robbers of the
hireling’s hire, Of the widow, and of the fatherless, And those who
oppress the stranger, And fear not me, saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="iv.iv.vii-p16"></span>The *Septuagint* give the meaning of the
word as above, <span id="iv.iv.vii-p16.1"></span>αποστερουνται —
defrauders, robbers, and supply “tyrannizers — <span
id="iv.iv.vii-p16.2"></span>καταδυναστεύοντας,” before “widow.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc30022.htm#fr_250) <span
id="iv.iv.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p10"></span> The words may be so rendered as to
allow the copulative <span id="iv.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>ו its ordinary
meaning. The verse contains two announcements bearing on the subject in
hand, —

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p11"></span>For I *am* Jehovah, I have not changed;
And ye *are* the house of Jacob, ye have not been consumed.

<span id="iv.iv.viii-p12"></span>This, I conceive, is the natural
rendering of the original. God was not changed, because he was Jehovah;
and they were not consumed, because they were the house of Jacob, a
people in covenant with God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc30022.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p9"></span> The words are singular, “days,” being
preceded by two prepositions, <span id="iv.iv.ix-p9.1"></span>ל and
<span id="iv.iv.ix-p9.2"></span>מ, <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p9.3"></span>למימי, “to — from the days,” etc., which seems
to mean, “To this time from the days of your fathers;” or it may mean,
“To and from the days of your fathers, your immediate predecessors.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc30022.htm#fr_252) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p25"></span> Most differ from *Calvin* as to the word
<span id="iv.iv.ix-p25.1"></span>אלהים in this passage. The *Septuagint*
render it “God — <span id="iv.iv.ix-p25.2"></span>Θεον,” the Targum,
“judges,” but commentators generally “God,” *i.e.*, the true God,
supposing the audacity of the people to be here reprobated. The word for
“defraud or rob,” is only found here and in <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p25.3"></span>[Pr
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p25.3"></span>, and rendered “supplant” by the
*Septuagint*, but “rob — <span id="iv.iv.ix-p25.4"></span>αποστερησει,”
by *Aq.* and *Sym*., the only meaning consistent with the context. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc30022.htm#fr_253) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p27"></span> Literally it is, “in the tenth (or,
tithe) and the heave-offering.” The last word comes from <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p27.1"></span>רם, to raise or lift up, because this
offering was raised or heaved, and thus presented as it were to the
Lord. See <span id="iv.iv.ix-p27.2"></span>[Exod.
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p27.2"></span>.
It is rendered “first-fruits” by the *Septuagint*

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc30022.htm#fr_254) <span
id="iv.iv.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p9"></span> The words are expressive, for literally
they are —

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p10"></span>And me have ye robbed, the nation, the
whole of it.

<span id="iv.iv.xii-p11"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc30022.htm#fr_255) <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p8"></span> The literal rendering is —

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p9"></span>Bring ye the whole of the tenth Into the
house, the treasury, And let the prey be in my house.

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p10"></span>That is — “Let what you rob me of, the
prey, or plunder, be in my house.” The word is <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p10.1"></span>טרף, properly prey, or plunder, and so
rendered by the *Septuagint*, “<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p10.2"></span>διαρπαγὴ—plunder.” It was the *Targum* that
gave a wrong meaning to the word, which most have followed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc30022.htm#fr_256) <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p17"></span> The verb in Hiphil, as it is here, is
applied to the drawing forth of a sword or lance, <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p17.1"></span>[Ex
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p17.1"></span>, and to the drawing out of an army for
battle, <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p17.2"></span>[Ge
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p17.2"></span>. It is rendered, “<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p17.3"></span>εκχεῶ—I will pour out, or forth,” by the
*Septuagint*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc30022.htm#fr_257) <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p19"></span> <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.1"></span>די
not only means sufficiency, but also what is necessary to suffice,
demand, requirement, as in <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.2"></span>[Le
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.2"></span>, <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.3"></span>כדי
גאלתו, according to the demand of his redemption, or what was necessary
or sufficient for his redemption. See <span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.4"></span>[De
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.4"></span>, where it means “according to what his sin
may require,” or literally, “according to the requirement of his sin.”
See also <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.5"></span>[Na
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.5"></span>, <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.6"></span>בדי
גרותיו, “for the demand of his whelps,” or, for what was necessary to
suffice his whelps. There is a similar phrase to what we find here in
<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.7"></span>[Ps
72:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.7"></span>, <span id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.8"></span>עד בלי
ירח, “until no moon,” that is, until there be no moon. The literal
rendering then of the phrase here would be, “until no demand,” that is,
until nothing be required fully to suffice. Corresponding with this is
the version of the *Septuagint* “<span id="iv.iv.xiii-p19.9"></span>εως
το ἱκανωθηναι —until there should be enough.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc30022.htm#fr_258) <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p9"></span> There is no necessity for giving to
<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p9.1"></span>שכל here any other than its ordinary
meaning of bereaving or depriving. The reference is to depredators who
bereaved or stripped the vine of its fruit—an evil common in a confused
and disordered state of things.

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p10"></span>The word <span
id="iv.iv.xiv-p10.1"></span>לכם, “on your account,” is repeated in this
verse three times; and it has no doubt an emphatic meaning. What is
intimate evidently is, that the evils promised here to be removed were
on their account, *i.e.,* for their sins. I render the verse thus, —

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p11"></span>And I will restrain on your account the
devourer, And he shall not destroy on your account the fruit of the
ground, And bereaved on your account shall not be the vine in the field,
Saith the Lord of hosts

<span id="iv.iv.xiv-p12"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc30022.htm#fr_259) <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p13"></span>*Your words have waxen bold against me.*
— Newcome

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p14"></span>*Your words against me have been hard.*
— Henderson.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p15"></span>Ye have made heavy (or, overcharged —
<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p15.1"></span>ἐβαρύνατε) against me your words. —
*Septuagint*

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p16"></span>To “grow strong” is the idea expressed
by *Jerome* and *Marckius*; and it is the common meaning of the verb.
“Strong of forehead” in <span id="iv.iv.xvi-p16.1"></span>[Eze
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p16.1"></span>,
is rendered “impudent” in our version, and very justly. Impudence or
insolence is what is here evidently meant, —

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p17"></span>Insolent against me have been your
words.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p18"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc30022.htm#fr_260) <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p19"></span> Rather, “What have we been talking
together against thee? The verb is in Niphal, and only found so here, in
the sixteenth verse, <span id="iv.iv.xvi-p19.1"></span>[Ps
119:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p19.1"></span>, and <span id="iv.iv.xvi-p19.2"></span>[Eze
33:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p19.2"></span>. It denotes a mutual converse, a talking
together, or a frequent converse. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc30022.htm#fr_261) <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p24"></span> The verse is differently arranged in
our version, and by most interpreters. The first sentence is a general
announcement, and what follows is an expansion and an illustration of
that announcement —

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p25"></span>**14.** Ye have said, “It is vain to
serve God; For what profit is it that we have kept his charge, And that
we have walked mournfully before Jehovah of hosts?

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p26"></span>**15.** We therefore now felicitate the
proud; Even built up have been the workers of wickedness, They have even
tempted God, and escaped.”

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p27"></span>The word for “tempted” is <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p27.1"></span>בחן, which commonly means to try, to prove,
to test a thing; but used here evidently in a bad sense: they
presumptuously tried, as it were, the patience of God, and “escaped,”
*i.e.*, from the punishment which they deserved. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc30022.htm#fr_262) <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p4"></span> “<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p4.1"></span>Ικεται — supplicants,” by the *Septuagint,*
— “<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p4.2"></span>tristes — sad,” by *Jerome*, —
“with a depressed spirit,” by the *Targum*, — “mournfully,” in our
version, and by *Newcome* and *Henderson*. The first meaning of the word
is “black” or “dark;” but it is used to express grief, sorrow, or
mourning. It is rendered “<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p4.3"></span>σκυθρωπαζων
— being gloomy or sorrowful,” by the *Septuagint*, in <span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p4.4"></span>[Ps.
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006), [Ps.
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009), [Ps.
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.xviii-p4.4"></span>. It is here used adverbially, and may be
rendered either sorrowfully or mournfully. “The walking mournfully has
reference to those going about in sackcloth and ashes, pretending to
sorrow on account of their sins.” — *Henderson*

<span id="iv.iv.xviii-p5"></span>“They walked mournfully before God,”
observes *Henry*. “Whereas God had required them to serve him with
gladness, and to walk cheerfully before him. They, by their own
superstitions, made the service of God a task and drudgery to
themselves, and then complained of it as a hard service. The yoke of
Christ is easy, it is the yoke of Antichrist that is heavy.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc30022.htm#fr_263) <span
id="iv.iv.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xix-p8"></span> *Leigh* says, that the verb, from which
the word rendered here “proud” is derived, meand to *deal arrogantly*,
*insolently*, *to be lifted up with swelling pride*. It is applied in
<span id="iv.iv.xix-p8.1"></span>[Ps
124:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.xix-p8.1"></span>, to the swelling waves of the sea. To be
insolent or presumptuous against God seems to be intended here. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc30022.htm#fr_264) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p9"></span> Or, “talked together:” the verb is in
Niphal, as we find it in verse 13. The good as well as the wicked talked
together, mutually conversed, or talked often. The *Targum* renders it,
“They multiplied speech;” our version introduces “often.” *Newcome* give
the simple word, “spake;” and *Henderson* has “conversed.” If the verb
in Niphal has a frequentative meaning, and not a reciprocal, our version
is right, “spake often.” Then it should be so rendered in verse 13. It
is to be observed that what the ungodly often spoke or said, is
mentioned, but not the frequent or the mutual converse of the godly.
*Jerome* imagines it to have been a defense of God’s dealings with them.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p10"></span>The words which follow, “Every one to his
neighbor,” seem to favor the opinion that speaking “often” is the real
meaning of the verb here used; for the fact of speaking “together” is
conveyed in these words: and yet speaking “together” is more suitable in
the thirteenth verse. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc30022.htm#fr_265) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p14"></span> In the “book of remembrance” we have an
allusion to the records kept by kings. See <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p14.1"></span>[Ezr. 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p14.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xx-p14.2"></span>[Esth.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.xx-p14.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc30022.htm#fr_266) <span
id="iv.iv.xx-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p16"></span> This latter meaning is the true one. The
word never means what is understood by “thinking on” a thing; but to
count, to reckon, and hence to contrive, to plan, to devise, and hence
also to make an account of, to value, to regard. To make an account of
and thus to regard and reverence, is its meaning here. The whole verse
may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p17"></span>**16.** Then spake they often who feared
Jehovah, Every one to his neighbor; And hearken did Jehovah and hear;
And there was written a book of remembrance before him, For those who
feared Jehovah, Yea, for those who regarded his name.

<span id="iv.iv.xx-p18"></span>The last two lines describe the same
persons,—they feared God and valued and regarded his name or his
authority. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc30022.htm#fr_267) <span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p9"></span> Such is the arrangement of the sentence
as given in the *Septuagint*, the *Targum*, and by *Jerome*, and most
interpreters. “The peculiar treasure” is connected with “they shall be
to me,” and not with the verb “make,” as in our version, which is that
of *Jun*. and *Trem*. The intervening clause, “In the day,” etc., may be
rendered in a way different. The verb “to make” means something to
appoint, to ordain, to constitute. The following version of *Newcome* is
no doubt the correct one —

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p10"></span>They shall be unto me, saith Jehovah of
hosts,  
In the day which I shall appoint, a peculiar treasure.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p11"></span>The “day” is again mentioned in the next
chapter, verse 3, and the same words come after it, which ought to be
rendered in the same way. *Henderson*’s version is materially the same.

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p12"></span>The word rendered “jewels” in our
version, is everywhere also rendered a peculiar treasure, or a special
property. See <span id="iv.iv.xxi-p12.1"></span>[Ex
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p12.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xxi-p12.2"></span>[De
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p12.2"></span>.
The common rendering of the *Septuagint* is either <span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p12.3"></span>περιποιησιν — a purchased acquisition, as
here, or <span id="iv.iv.xxi-p12.4"></span>περιουσιον — peculiar,
special, as in <span id="iv.iv.xxi-p12.5"></span>[Ex
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p12.5"></span>. The latter is the word used here by
*Symmachus*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc30022.htm#fr_268) <span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p19"></span> There is something more in the verb
here used than the idea of “sparing.” When followed as here by <span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p19.2"></span>על. it is commonly rendered by “having pity
or compassion.” See <span id="iv.iv.xxi-p19.3"></span>[Ex
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p19.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.xxi-p19.4"></span>[1Sa
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p19.4"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xxi-p19.5"></span>[2Ch
36:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.xxi-p19.5"></span>. It means a tender compassion or sympathy
for another, such as felt towards a weak, helpless, or miserable object.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc30022.htm#fr_269) <span
id="iv.iv.xxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xxiv-p10"></span> Both *Newcome* and *Henderson* regard
this verb as used here adverbially. “And ye shall again discern, *or*,
see the difference, between the righteous and the wicked.” The
*Septuagint* give it as a verb “<span
id="iv.iv.xxiv-p10.1"></span>ἐπιστραφήσεσθε—ye shall return.” The same
is done by *Jerome* and *Marckius*; and the latter gives a similar view
of its import to what is given here. *Dathius* takes it meaning to be
the same, “And being better taught (or instructed — <span
id="iv.iv.xxiv-p10.2"></span>*medius edocti*) ye shall then understand
how great is the difference between the godly and the ungodly, between
the worshipper of God and his despiser.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc30023)
