[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc30008)  [Next](cc30010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 30: Zechariah, Malachai*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span>Chapter 6

<span id="iii.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Forty-fourth

<span id="iii.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** And I turned, and lifted up mine
eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came four chariots out from between
two mountains; and the mountains *were* mountains of brass.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Et conversus sum**,** et levavi
oculos meos**,** et aspexi; et ecce quatuor quadrigae egressae e mdio
duorum montium; et montes illi**,** montes aenei.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p4"></span>**2.** In the first chariot *were* red
horses; and in the second chariot black horses;

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p5"></span>**2.** In quadriga prima equi rufi**,**
et in quadriga secunda equi nigri**,**

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p6"></span>**3.** And in the third chariot white
horses; and in the fourth chariot grisled and bay horses.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p7"></span>**3.** Et in quiadriga tertia equi
albi**,** et in quadriga quarta equi grandinei. (vel**,** varii;
םיצומא**,** robusti**,** sed potius subscribo eorum sententiae qui
vertunt subrufos.)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p9"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p10"></span>Here we have another vision; and the
Prophet distinguishes it from the former visions by saying, that he
*turned*, as though he had said, that there had been some intervening
time. They were not then continued visions, but he turned himself
elsewhere, and then he raised up his eyes, and the Lord revealed to him
what he now relates. But as the vision is obscure, interpreters have
given it different meanings. They who think that the four Gospels are
designated by the four chariots, give a very frigid view. I have
elsewhere reminded you, that we are to avoid these futile refinements
which of themselves vanish away. Allegories, I know, delight many; but
we ought reverently and soberly to interpret the prophetic writings, and
not to fly in the clouds, but ever to fix our foot on solid ground.
Others think that those changes are meant which we know happened in
Chaldea and Assyria. As Nineveh was overthrown that Babylon might be the
seat of the empire, they suppose that this is meant by the first
chariot, the horses of which were red. Then they think that the Persian
empire is intended by the second chariot, as the Jews had at the
beginning suffered many grievous evils. Afterwards by the white horses
are signified, as they suppose, the Macedonian power, as Alexander
treated the Jews with humanity and kindness. By the fourth chariot they
understand the Roman Empire, and think that the horses are of different
colors, because some of the Caesars raged cruelly against the Jews and
the Church of God, and some of them showed more lenity.  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) But I know not whether these things are
well founded.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p13"></span>We see that the fourth chariot went to
the south, and wandered through various regions, and almost through the
whole world. As then this cannot be applied to Chaldea, the simpler view
seems to be — that the four chariots signify the various changes which
happened not only in Chaldea and among the Babylonians, but also in
Judea and among other nations: and this may be easily gathered from the
context. But as all these things cannot be stated at the same time, we
shall treat them in the order in which the Prophet relates them. I shall
now repeat what I have elsewhere said respecting the words, that he
*raised up his eyes*, as intimating the divine authority of what is
predicted. The words indeed signify that he did not bring forward what
he had vainly imagined, nor adduce tales which he had himself
fabricated, but he was attentive to what was revealed to him; and also
that he was somewhat separated from common life in order to be an
interpreter between God and men. Hence authority is here ascribed to the
prophecy, as Zechariah did not come forth to speak of uncertain things,
but as one sent by heaven, for he delivered nothing but what he had
received from above.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p14"></span>He now says, that *four* chariots
appeared to him, which came forth from *mountains*, and that the two
mountains where the chariots were seen were *mountains of brass*. The
Prophet no doubt understood by these mountains the providence of God, or
his hidden counsel, by which all things have been decreed before the
creation of the world; and hence he says, that they were mountains of
brass, as they could not be broken. The poets say, that fate is
unavoidable (*ineluctable*); but as this sentiment is profane, it is
enough for us to understand it of God’s eternal providence, which is
immutable. And here is most fitly described to us the counsel of God;
for before things break forth into action they are inclosed as it were
between the narrow passes of mountains, inasmuch as what God has decreed
is not apparent, but lies hid as it were in deep mountains. Hence we
then begin to acknowledge the counsel of God when experience teaches us,
that what was previously hid from us has been in this or in that manner
decreed. But it was not in vain that Zechariah adds, that they were
mountains of brass; it was to teach us that God’s counsel is not
changeable as foolish men imagine, who think that God is doubtful as to
the issue, and is, as it were, kept in suspense: for according to their
notions, events depend on the free-will of men. They entertain the idea
that God foreknows what is to come conditionally: as this or that will
not be, except it shall please men. And though they confess not that God
is changeable, yet we gather from their dotages that there is in God
nothing sure and certain. The Prophet therefore says here, that they
were mountains of brass, because God has fixed before all ages what he
has purposed to be done, and thus fixed it by an immutable decree, which
cannot be broken by Satan, nor by the whole world.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p15"></span>We hence see how suitable is this
representation when the Prophet says, that chariots went forth from
mountains.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p16"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p17"></span>With regard to the chariots, we have
seen elsewhere that angels are compared to horsemen; for these ride
swiftly as it were through the whole world to execute what God commands
them: so also whatever changes take place, they are called the chariots
of God; for either angels are ready at hand to do anything in obedience
to God, or the very events themselves are God’s chariots, that is, they
are as it were swift heralds, who announce to us what was before
unknown. Let us then know that all fortuitous events, as they are called
by the unbelieving, are God’s chariots, are his messengers, who declare
and proclaim what was before concealed from us. And there is not in this
similitude or metaphor anything strained.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p18"></span>As to the color of the horses,
interpreters, as I have already intimated, have toiled with great
anxiety; and though I venture not to assert anything as certain, yet the
probable conjecture is, that by the black and white horses are
designated the Babylonians rather than the Persians, but for a purpose
different from what interpreters have thought. For the reference must be
to the Jews, when it is said, that black horses and then white horses
went forth towards Babylon; for the Holy Spirit intimates, that liberty
was given to the Chaldeans to harass the Jews and to fill all places
with darkness. The blackness then of which the Prophet speaks signifies
the calamities brought on the Jews. The whole of that time was dark,
full of grief and sorrow, during which the Chaldeans possessed the
oriental empire, and Babylon was the supreme seat of government or of
the monarchy. A very different time afterwards succeeded, when the
Babylonians were conquered and the Persian enjoyed the oriental empire.
The color then was white, for the favor of God shone anew on the Jews,
and liberty was immediately given then to return to their own country.
We hence see that the Prophet rightly subjoins, that the color of the
horses was white; for such was the favor shown to the Jews by the
Persian, that the sun of joy arose on them, which exhilarated their
hearts. But the Prophet makes no mention of the first chariot as going
forth, and for this reason, as interpreters think, because the empire of
Babylon was shell overthrown. But they are mistaken in this, as I have
already hinted, because they refer not the colors to the state of God’s
Church. Hence the Prophet, I doubt not, designedly omits the mention of
the going forth of the first chariot, because the Jews had experienced
the riding of God’s judgment in their own land, for they had been
severely afflicted. As God then is wont to execute his judgment first on
his own household, and as it is written, “judgment begins at his own
house,” (<span id="iii.vii.ii-p18.1"></span>[1Pe
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p18.1"></span>,) so he purposed to observe the same order
in this case, that is, to chastise the sins of the chosen people before
he passed over to the Chaldeans and other nations.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p19"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p20"></span>As to the last chariot, the Prophet
says, that it went forth *toward the south*, and then it went elsewhere,
and even through the whole world, for God had so permitted.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p21"></span>Now as to the meaning of this Prophecy
nothing will remain obscure, if we hold these elements of truth — that
all events are designated by the chariots, or all the revolutions which
take place in the world — and that the blind power of fortune does not
rule, as fools imagine, but that God thus openly makes known to us his
own counsel. And why the horses are said to have been, some red, some
black, some white, and some somewhat red,  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) the plain answer is this — because God
had sent forth his chariots over Judea, which was full of blood: by this
then is meant the red color. But he shows also, that their enemies would
have their time, and this had been in part fulfilled; for God had ridden
over them with his chariots, having driven his wheels over their land
when Nineveh was overthrown. And though the Spirit had not simply a
reference to the Assyrians or the Chaldeans, as though he meant by the
black color to designate the wars carried on among then, but rather the
calamities brought by them on the Jews, yet I consider the black color
to mean in general the terrible disturbances which took place through
the whole of the least; and the Jews could not expect anything agreeable
from that quarter, for shortly after a heavier weight fell on their
heads. But in the third place the Prophet adds, that there were white
horses, that is, when the time was accomplished in which God intended to
deliver his Church.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p23"></span>But he says, that the chariots not only
went forth to the East, or to Babylon; but he says, that they also ran
through the south, and then visited the whole world. That we may more
fully understand this, we must regard the design of the Prophet. He
meant here, no doubt, to bring some comfort to the Jews, that they might
not succumb under their evils, however sharply God might chastise them.
And Zechariah sets before them here two things — first, that no part of
the earth, or no country, would be exempt from God’s judgments, for his
chariots would pass through all lands; and secondly, that though the
chariots of God, terrible in their appearance on account of the black
and red color, had visited Judea as well as the north, yet the time had
already come in which God, having been pacified, would change the state
of things; and therefore, in the third place, he sets before them
another color; for God’s chariot had been sent forth through Judea, and
then God’s vengeance had visited Nineveh, and afterwards Babylon: only
this had rested, because it had been already in part fulfilled, for God
had removed the darkness and brought sunshine to the Jews, and that from
Chaldea, inasmuch as the Persian, who then possessed the empire, had
begun to treat the Jews with kindness. It now follows —

<span id="iii.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#005)<span id="iii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p2"></span>**4.** Then I answered and said unto
the angel that talked with me, What *are* these, my lord?

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Et respondi et dixi ad
Angelum**,** qui loquebatur mecum**,** Quid haec sunt**,** Domine mi?

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p4"></span>**5.** And the angel answered and said
unto me, These *are* the four spirits of the heavens, which go forth
from standing before the Lord of all the earth.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p5"></span>**5.** Et respondi Angelus et dixit
mihi**,** Hi quatuor spiritus sunt coelorum**,** egredientes e statione
apud dominatorem cunctae terrae**,** (*alii vertunt*<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p5.1"></span>, Hi**,** *vel*<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p5.2"></span>, hae quadrigae**,** ad quatuor ventos
coelorum egrediuntur e loco ubi stant apud dominatorem**,** etc.)

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p7"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p8"></span>The Prophet asks the angel again; and
by his example we are taught to shake off every indifference, and to
render ourselves both teachable and attentive to God if we desire to
make progress in the knowledge of these predictions; for if Zechariah,
who had separated himself from the world and raised up his eyes and his
mind to heaven, stood in need of the teaching and guidance of the angel
to instruct him, how much folly and arrogance is it in us to trust in
ourselves and to despise the gift of interpretation. But as angels are
not sent to us from heaven to explain to us the prophecies, let us avail
ourselves of those helps which we know is offered to us by God. There is
here prescribed to us both docility, and reverence, and attention. Let
us also remember, that as soon as men submit themselves to God, the gift
of revelation is prepared for them; for it is not in vain that God is
often called the teacher of babes. Whosoever then shall be disposed to
learn with real meekness and humility, shall not be disappointed of his
desire; for we see here that the angel performed his part in teaching
Zechariah.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p10"></span>I come now to the words, *The angel
answered, These are four spirits*, *etc*. Some give another rendering,
*These* chariots *go forth to the four winds*, or parts of heaven; but
this is forced, and the words simply mean, “these are four spirits.” The
word spirit, I have no doubt, has led interpreters astray, for they have
thought it frigid to call different events winds or quarters of the
world. But I take this word in a different sense, that is, as
designating the impulses of God. I do not then understand them to be
four winds, but the secret emotions produced by God. Though God’s Spirit
is one, yet all actions proceed from him, and whatever is done in the
world can with no impropriety be attributed to his Spirit. It is yet
certain, that the Prophet alludes to the four quarters of the world, as
though he had said, that nothing happens in the world which has not been
decreed in heaven; for God’s providence includes under it the whole
world. Though then the universe is designated here, yet by the Spirit
the Prophet means those secret movements which proceed from the eternal
counsel and providence of God. And it is a very apt metaphor; for the
word Spirit is set in opposition to fortune. We have already said, that
profane men imagine that fortune possesses a blind power, but the
Prophet says, that all revolutions seen in the world proceed from the
Spirit of God, and that they are as it were his spirits or ambassadors.
 <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p18"></span>We now then perceive the real meaning
of the Prophet when the angel says, that *these were the four spirits of
heaven*. And the word heaven is by no means added in vain, for the
Prophet seems here to exclude all other causes, so that sovereignty
might remain with God only. For though God works often by instruments,
or intermediate causes, as they say, yet his own hidden decree ought to
be placed first. This is the reason why he says that they were the
spirits of heaven; he says it, that we may not think that God is
dependent on the will of men, or is blended with the intervening causes,
but that he himself has fixed whatever he has in his good pleasure
determined. We hence see, that they who render the words, “into the four
parts of heaven,” have not sufficiently considered the intention of the
Prophet.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p19"></span>He then says, that they *went forth
from their station before the Lord of the whole earth*. Now the Prophet
calls that space between the two mountains of brass their station before
God. Let us hence know that God does not adopt suddenly new counsels,
and that he is not like us who, in emergencies or on occasions unlooked
for, attempt this and then that; but that his course is very different,
and that things in heaven do not revolve up and down, for the chariots
here had a fixed and undisturbed station. For though they were chariots
capable of moving quickly, they yet remained still and, as it were,
fixed, until God permitted their going forth. We hence learn that when
God seems to us to rest, he does not sit idly in heaven, as ungodly men
foolishly talk, but that he there determines whatever he intends at a
suitable time to do. And then when he says, that the *chariots stood
before God*, we may hence conclude, that what seems to be contingently
to us is fixed in God’s counsel, so that there is a necessity at the
same time. How comes it, that the greater part of mankind think that all
things are contingent, except that they continue looking at nature only?
The will of man is changeable; then changeable is everything that
proceeds from the will of man. The tree also either becomes scorched
through heat, or dies through cold, or brings forth fruit. They hence
conclude that everything is contingent, for there appears to be a
changeable variety. When men thus judge of things by nature alone, it is
no wonder that they think that contingency reigns in the world. But the
Prophet distinguishes here between the things of nature and the counsel
of God; for he says, that the chariots stood, and went forth when God
commanded them. Was there no motion in the wheels? nay, the chariots
were from the first ready to move, how was it then that they rested?
even because they were detained by the secret purpose of God. Now when
he sends them forth they show that celerity which was naturally in them.
We hence clearly learn, that those things happen by nature which seem
capable of being done in two ways, and that yet the counsel of God is
always fulfilled, so that immutable necessity presides, which is at the
same time hid from us. The Prophet adds, that the first chariot had red
horses. I have now explained the whole of this: what is subjoined
remains —

<span id="iii.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007)<span id="iii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p2"></span>**6.** The black horses which *are*
therein go forth into the north country; and the white go forth after
them; and the grisled go forth toward the south country.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p3"></span>**6.** In qua sunt equi nigri**,**
exeunt ad terram Aquilonis**,** et albi exeunt post eos**,** et
variegati**,** (*aspersi vario colore***,**) exunt ad terram Australem.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p4"></span>**7.** And the bay went forth, and
sought to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth: and he
said, Get you hence, walk to and fro through the earth. So they walked
to and fro through the earth.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p5"></span>**7.** Et subrufi (*dicam iterum de
voce*) exierunt**,** et postularunt ut perambularent in terra: et
dixit**,** Ite**,** perambulate in terra; et pereambularunt in terra.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p7"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p8"></span>Zechariah explains here each part of the
prophecy; but he shows at the same time that two of the chariots
hastened towards Chaldea, that it might not be grievous to the Jews that
they in the first place had to experience God’s judgment. He then shows
that God sent his messengers to all parts; but that there had been, or
were to be, remarkable and extraordinary changes, especially among the
Babylonians. It hence appeared evident, that God had a care for his own
people, who had been driven there into exile. And I leave already stated
the reason why he speaks here of red horses; for they are mistaken who
think that the first chariot was sent into Chaldea; for I consider that
this refers to the Jews, with whom God’s judgment commenced. He then
says, that two chariots went towards Babylon, the first was drawn by
black horses, and the other by white, because of the kindness shown by
the Persian, by whom a new light of joy was brought to the Jews.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p9"></span>With regard to the *land of the south*,
the Prophet no doubt alludes to the Egyptians. But he afterwards adds,
that the last chariot was conveyed elsewhere, even through the whole
world. Some render <span id="iii.vii.iv-p9.1"></span>אמוצים, *amustim*,
strong; and this is the proper meaning of the word, for <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p9.2"></span>אמץ, *amets*, properly means to fortify, to
strengthen; but as color is intended here, it seems probable to me that
it means somewhat red, as some of the Rabbis teach us; for the Prophet
mentioned another word before, <span id="iii.vii.iv-p9.3"></span>ברדים,
*beredim*, grilled. Hence some interpreters join together the two, and
say that the horses were grisled, or spotted like hail, and then that
they were <span id="iii.vii.iv-p9.4"></span>אמוצים, *amutsim*, somewhat
red. Jerome seems to me to have sufficiently refuted this opinion,
because the other horses were <span id="iii.vii.iv-p9.5"></span>אדמים,
*ademim*, red, but these were of different colors. And further, it can
hardly be suitable to say, that these alone were strong horses who drew
this chariot; for we know that God so wonderfully exercised his power
against the Chaldeans that two chariots went forth to them, and they
would not have been drawn by weak and feeble horses. I hence think that
their color is here designated, and the Prophet calls them once grilled,
and then somewhat red.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p10"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p11"></span>But he says, that being not satisfied
with the land of the south, they asked of God permission to go to and
fro through the whole world. And though neither the devil nor the wicked
regard God’s bidding, but are led, without knowing and against their
will, wherever God drives them; yet the Prophet says, that they *asked*;
for they could not overstep the limits prescribed to them. Though Satan
asked, as to Job, to be allowed to do this and that, we are not yet too
curiously to inquire whether Satan asks leave of God whenever he intends
to attempt anything; for there is no doubt but that he is carried away
by his violent rage to try in every way to overturn the government of
God. But this only ought to satisfy us — that neither Satan nor the
wicked can advance one inch, except as God permits them. The meaning
then is, that after the last chariot went forth first to the land of the
south, a permission was given to it to go through the whole world. He
now adds —

<span id="iii.vii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#008)<span id="iii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p2"></span>**8.** Then cried he upon me, and spake
unto me, saying, Behold, these that go toward the north country have
quieted my spirit in the north country.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p3"></span>**8.** Et vocavit me et locutus est
mecum**,** dicendo**,** Vide**,** qui egrediuntur ad terram Aquilonis
quiescere fecerunt spiritum meum in terra Aquilonis.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p6"></span>From this verse we learn that the chief
object of the vision was — that the Jews might know that the dreadful
tumults in Chaldea, which had in part happened, and were yet to take
place, were not excited without a design, but that all things were
regulated by God’s hidden counsel, and also that God had so disturbed
and embarrassed the state of that empire, that the end of it might be
looked for. There is therefore no reason for any one too anxiously to
labor to understand the import of every part of the prophecy, since its
general meaning is evident. But why does the angel expressly speak of
the land of the south rather than of the land of the north, or of the
whole world? Even because the eyes of all were fixed on that quarter;
for Chaldea, we know, had been as it were the grave of the Church,
whence the remnant had emerged, that there might be some people by whom
God might be worshipped. The angel then invites the Jews here to
consider the providence of God, so that they might know that whatever
changes had taken place in that country, had proceeded from the hidden
counsel of God.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p7"></span>The words, they have *quieted my spirit*,
are understood by interpreters in two ways. Some think that God’s favor
towards his people is here designated, as though he had said, that he
was already pacified; but others, by the word spirit, understand the
vengeance of God, because he had sufficiently poured forth his wrath on
the Chaldeans; and both meanings are well adapted to the context. For it
was no common solace to the Jews, that God had poured forth his wrath on
the Babylonians until it was satiated, as when one ceases not to be
angry until he has fulfilled his desire, and this mode of speaking often
occurs in Scripture. I am therefore disposed to embrace the second
explanation — that God began to be quieted after the second chariot had
gone forth; for he was then reconciled to his chosen people, and their
deliverance immediately followed. That the Jews might know that God
would be propitious to them, he bids them to continue quiet and
undisturbed in their minds, until these chariots had run their course
through the whole of Chaldea; for what the angel now says would be
fulfilled, even that the Spirit of God would be quieted, who seemed
before to be disturbed, when he involved all things in darkness, even in
Judea itself.  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)

<span id="iii.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are
here exposed to so many evils, which often suddenly arise like violent
tempests, — O grant, that with hearts raised up to heaven, we may
acquiesce in thy hidden providence, and be so tossed here and there
according to the judgment of our flesh, as yet to remain fixed in this
truth, which thou wouldest have us to believe — that all things are
governed by thee, and that nothing takes place except through thy will,
so that in the greatest confusions we may always clearly see thine hand,
and that thy counsel is altogether right, and perfectly and singularly
wise and just; and may we ever call upon thee, and flee to this port —
that we are tossed here and there, that thou mayest ever sustain us by
thine hand, until we shall at length be received into that blessed rest
which has been procured for us by the blood of thine only-begotten Son.
— Amen.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Forty-fifth

<span id="iii.vii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
6:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#009)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p2"></span>**9.** And the word of the LORD came
unto me, saying,

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Et fuit sermo Iehovae ad
me**,** dicendo**,**

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p4"></span>**10.** Take of *them of* the
captivity, *even* of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, which are come
from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the house of
Josiah the son of Zephaniah;

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p5"></span>**10.** Sume ex transmigratione**,**
nempe ab Heldai**,** et a Tobia**,** et a Jedaia; et vade tu die
illo**,** inquam**,** ad domum Josiae filii Zephaniae**,** qui venerunt
e Babylone;

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p6"></span>**11.** Then take silver and gold, and
make crowns, and set *them* upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedech,
the high priest;

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p7"></span>**11.** Et sume argentum et aurum**,**
et fac coronas**,** et ponc super caput Iehosuae filii Iozedec**,**
sacerdotis magni.

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p9"></span><span id="iii.vii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p10"></span>This vision was given to Zechariah
that he might inspire weak minds with better hope; for the Jews found
that they were hardly pressed on every side by their neighbors, inasmuch
as enemies rose up against them before and behind, so that there was no
end to their troubles. Hence they who had returned from exile thought
themselves wretched in such a state of things. They might indeed have
lived in quietness among the Babylonians, and they had become accustomed
to that kind of life, so that exile was not so very grievous to them.
Thus then the favor of God was turned unto loathing, and was almost
hated by them; for they thought it better to be deprived of their
country, than to be daily exposed to new assaults. And further, the
possession of the land was not of itself desirable, except with
reference to the hope given them; that is, because God had promised by
his Prophets that the kingdom of David would again be made glorious, and
also that the grandeur and glory of the temple would be greater than
ever before. When the Jews found themselves continually harassed by
their enemies, they thought that all that had been promised was in vain.
There is therefore no doubt but that many complaints and many clamors
were everywhere raised. Hence that they might cease thus to murmur
against God, this vision was given to the Prophet, in which he is bid to
take *silver and gold* from four men, and to make two crowns to be set
on the head of Joshua the high priest. The design was to make the Jews
to feel assured, that the state of the people would be as safe as it was
formerly, when the kingly office and the priesthood flourished: for
these were the chief ornaments, or the two eyes, as it were, of the body
— the priest, a mediator between God and men — and the king, sustaining
the person of God in governing the people.

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p11"></span>We hence see that by the two crowns
is set forth the restoration of the Church: but we must also observe
that the two crowns are placed on the head of Joshua, which was new and
unusual. A mitre, we know, was given to the priests; and we know also
that kings were adorned with a diadem; but no one individual was to wear
a royal diadem and a sacerdotal mitre. Here then we find a union of
royalty and priesthood in the same person, which had never before been
the case; for God had in his law made a distinction between the two
offices. We hence see that something unknown before is set forth by this
prophecy, even this, that the same person would be both a king and a
priest. For what Jerome says, among other things, that there might have
been many crowns, is weak and frivolous; and further, he contradicts the
words of the Prophet; for shortly after he subjoins, that there would be
a counsel of peace between the two; that is, between royalty and
priesthood. As to what the same author thinks, that there was one crown
given to the high priest, it is also false; besides, he subverts as far
as he can the whole doctrine of the Prophet. But I leave these trifles;
for there is no ambiguity in Zechariah’s words when he says, that God
commanded him to take silver and gold, that he might make two crowns to
set on the head of the high priest. We now perceive the design of the
Prophet as to the object of the prophecy, and also the meaning of the
words.

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p12"></span><span id="iii.vii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p13"></span>Let us now inquire, why the Prophet
was bid to take gold from four men; for he says, *Take from the
transmigration*. The word <span id="iii.vii.viii-p13.1"></span>הגולה,
*egule*, is to be taken in a collective sense, as in many other places.
*Take* then from the exiles, who have now returned from Babylon to their
own country. But he afterwards mentions four men; and there is some
abruptness in the passage, but nothing that obscures the meaning of the
Prophet; for he says, *Take frown Heldai, and from Tobiah, and from
Jedaiah*; and then he adds, *go in that day, enter the house of Josiah,
the son of Zephaniah*. The Prophet no doubt had been commanded to go to
these four, and to enter the house of one of them; and this is evident
from the end of the tenth verse, where he says, *who have come from
Babylon*  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) He had spoken only of
Josiah the son of Zephaniah; and then he adds, that they had come from
Babylon. I come now to the answer. Some interpreters think that these
four men supplied the gold and the silver, because they were chief men
among the people, and excelled others in piety. Hence they think that
these four men were chosen, as a mark of distinction, to supply the gold
and the silver to make the crowns: but I conjecture from the end of the
chapter that their weakness is here pointed out, even because they were
weak in faith and did not believe the promises of God, and thus
disheartened others by their example. It is indeed certain that they
were men in high authority, and excelled all others, so that the eyes of
all were fixed on them; this is certain. But yet their want of faith is
what is here reproved, because they did not attend sufficiently to God’s
promises, and thought themselves disappointed of their hope; for they
had left Babylon, where they enjoyed great abundance, and returned to
the holy land, and found it uncultivated and desolate. There was indeed
required great patience, when they had to plow among thorns and
brambles; for that land, as I have already said, had not been regularly
cultivated. Those indeed who had been sent from the East, dwelt here and
there in it; but lions and wild beasts had come into it, so that the
desolation of the land rendered much work necessary, when the Jews
returned. I hence doubt not but that the Holy Spirit does here reprove
these four men, who ought to have been leaders and standard-bearers to
others; on the contrary, they broke down the confidence of the common
people. And this, I say, may be learnt from the end of the chapter,
where God commands the two crowns to be placed in the temple, to be a
memorial to them, that they might see there the condemnation of their
unbelief, as we shall show in its place.

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p20"></span><span id="iii.vii.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p21"></span>The Prophet is bid to *set the two
crowns on the head of the high priest*. This, as I have said, was
intended as a symbol to denote the union of the two dignities in the
person of Christ. It was necessary until the coming of Christ to select
the high priest from the posterity of Aaron; and it was also required
that the kings should be from the seed of David; so that we observe a
distinction between the royal office and the priesthood, not only as to
the persons, but also as to the families. It would have indeed been a
strange thing to see a king from the tribe of Levi; and it would have
been contrary to God’s appointed order to see a priest from the tribe of
Judah and from the family of David. Since then the king was adorned with
his own diadem, and since the high priest had his own proper mitre, what
could this mean, but that the same man was to wear two crowns? Doubtless
we observe that there is here some change in the past order of things,
and that there is something unusual set forth. But there is nothing new
in this, — that the Redeemer, who had been promised, should be eminent
as a king and a priest; for this had been predicted in the hundred and
tenth Psalm, “Jehovah said to my Lord, sit on my right hand,” — this is
what belongs to the right of a king; it afterwards follows, “Thou art a
priest for ever, according to the order of Melchizedec.” Though kings
must then have been chosen from the family of David and the tribe of
Judah, and though priests must have then been taken from the Levitical
tribe, yet the Spirit foretold, that a king would come who was to be a
priest, as had been the case with Melchisedec. This very thing is what
the Prophet now confirms.

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p22"></span>Zechariah being ordered to *set the
crowns* on the head of Joshua, we are not so to regard this, as though
Joshua had immediately undertaken the two offices of a king and a
priest; for he was satisfied with his own: but the Prophet shows in the
type what was to be looked for at the coming of the Messiah; for the
time had not yet come, when Christ should receive the royal diadem, as
it is said in Ezekiel, —

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p23"></span>“Take away the diadem; set it aside,
set it aside, set it aside, until he shall come, whose it is.” (<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p23.1"></span>[Ezek.
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p23.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p24"></span>We here see that the Prophet points
out a length of time, during which the royal diadem was to be trodden as
it were under foot. Though the royal crown had not yet laid in the dust
sufficiently long, yet the Prophet did nothing presumptuously; for the
Jews could not have conceived in their mind what is here promised, had
not the typical priest come forth, wearing the two crowns. Nor could
this have been so suitable to the person of Zerubbabel; for though he
was of the family of David, and was a type of Christ, he had not yet the
name of a king, nor had he any regal power: he could not therefore have
been so suitable a person. It is then no wonder that God brought forth
the high priest Joshua, who was a type and representative of Christ; and
he brought him forth with a double crown, because he who was to come
would unite, according to what follows, the priesthood with the kingly
office.

<span id="iii.vii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Zech.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013)<span id="iii.vii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p2"></span>**12.** And speak unto him, saying, Thus
speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name *is* The
Branch; and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the
temple of the Lord:

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p3"></span>**12.** Et dic ad eum**,** dicendo
(loquere ad eum**,** dicendo; *repetitur bis idem verbum*;) sic dicit
Iehova exercituum**,** dicendo**,** Ecce vir**,** Germen nomen ejus; et
e loco suo germinabit**,** et aedificabit templum Iehovae;

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p4"></span>**13.** Even he shall build the temple
of the Lord; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon
his throne; and he shall be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of
peace shall be between them both.

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p5"></span>**13.** Et ipse aedificabit templum
Iehovae**,** et ipse gestabit decus (*vel***,** gloriam) et sedebit**,**
et dominabitur super solium suum; et erit sacerdos super solium
suum**,** et consilium pacis erit inter hos duos (*vel***,** inter
utrumque.)

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p7"></span><span id="iii.vii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p8"></span>The vision is now explained; for if the
chief priest, without this explanation, had been adorned with two
crowns, there must have been much talk among the people, “What means
this?” God here shows that what he has commanded to be done to Joshua
does not belong to him, but has a reference to another, *Thou shalt say
to him, Behold the Man, Branch is his name*. It is the same as though
the Prophet had expressly testified that Joshua was not crowned, because
he was worthy of such an honor, or because he could look for royal
dignity; but that he was to bear this honor for a time, in order that
the Jews might understand that one was to arise who would be both a king
and a priest. Hence he says, that there would be a *man*, whose name was
to be *Branch*

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p9"></span>As to this name, it has been explained
elsewhere. I omit those refinements with which some are delighted; but
as I have shown in another place, the simple and true reason why Christ
is so called, is, because he was not like a tall tree, with deep and
strong roots, but like a small plant. He is indeed called in another
place, “a shoot from the root of Jesse.” (<span
id="iii.vii.ix-p9.1"></span>[Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vii.ix-p9.1"></span>.) But the meaning is the same; for that
root of Jesse was obscure and of no repute. Besides, this kind of shoot
has nothing in it that is illustrious. We hence see that Christ is
called Branch, because his beginning was contemptible, so that he was of
hardly any repute among heathens; nay even among his own nation. But God
intimates at the same time, that this little plant would be set, as it
were, by his own hand, and thus would gather strength. Though then the
beginning of Christ was humble, yet God declares, that he would give
vigor for continued growth, until he should attain to a great height. In
this sense it is that Christ is called Branch: and we clearly conclude,
that the minds of the people were transferred to Christ who was to come,
that they might not fix their attention on Joshua, who was then but a
typical priest. *Say to Joshua, Behold the man, whose name is Branch*.
Where is that man? He does not speak of Joshua; he does not say, “Thou
art the man;” but he says, *Behold the man, whose name is Branch*, that
is, who comes elsewhere. We then hence learn, that these crowns were
those of Christ, but given to Joshua, that the Jews might see in the
type, what was as yet hid under hope.

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *He shall arise
from himself*, or *grow up from his own place*, literally, from under
himself. Here also some have too refinedly philosophised, — that Christ
arose from himself by his own power, because he is the eternal God. I
think, on the contrary, that all human means are only excluded, as
though the Prophet had said, that though Christ was like a little plant,
he would yet grow up as though he had roots deeply fixed in the earth.
There is indeed no doubt, but that Christ grew up by his own celestial
power, and this is what the words of the Prophet include; but what he
meant was this, — that Christ had nothing in his beginning calculated to
draw the admiration of men. Though then Christ was only a shoot, yet God
had sufficient power, that he should *grow from his own place*,  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) that though human means were absent, it
would yet be enough, that God should bless this branch, so as to cause
it to grow to its proper height.

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p12"></span>He then says, *And he shall build the
temple of Jehovah*. This is a remarkable passage: it hence appears that
the temple which the Jews had then begun to build, and which was
afterwards built by Herod, was not the true temple of which Haggai had
prophesied, when he said,

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p13"></span>“The glory of the second house shall be
greater  
than that of the first.” (<span id="iii.vii.ix-p13.2"></span>[Hag
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)<span
id="iii.vii.ix-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p14"></span>For though the temple of Herod was
splendid, yet we see what the Spirit declares in this place, — that to
build the temple would be Christ’s own work. Hence no one, had he heaped
together all the gold and the silver of the world, could have built the
true temple of which Haggai prophesied, and of which Ezekiel has so
largely spoken near the end of his book. Christ alone then has been
chosen by the Father to build this temple. Christ indeed himself was a
temple as to his body, for the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him,
(<span id="iii.vii.ix-p14.1"></span>[Col
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#006)<span
id="iii.vii.ix-p14.1"></span>;) but he built a temple to God the Father,
when he raised up everywhere pure worship, having demolished
superstitions, and when he consecrated us to be a royal priesthood.

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p15"></span>We now then see what was shown to the
Prophet, — that though the Jews were then exposed to many evils, to
reproaches and wrongs, yet Christ would come to restore all things to a
perfect order, that he would be not only a king but also a priest; and
further, that his beginning would be obscure and despised by the world,
and yet that he would attain without any earthly helps his own
elevation; and, lastly, that his own proper office would be to build a
temple to God.

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p16"></span><span id="iii.vii.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p17"></span>He repeats the last thing which he had
said, *Even he shall build the temple of Jehovah*. The Prophet seems
here to reiterate to no purpose the same words without any additions of
light: but it seems evident to me, that he meant in this way to confirm
and sanction what seemed difficult to be believed. As the temple, then,
begun at that time to be built, had but little splendor and glory
connected with it, and could hardly be expected to become a better or
more adorned building, the Prophet reiterates this promise, *He, he
shall build the temple of Jehovah*; by which he means, “Let not your
eyes remain fixed on this temple, for to look at it weakens your faith
and almost disheartens you; but hope for another temple which ye see not
now, for a priest and a king shall at length come to build a better and
a more excellent temple.”

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p18"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *Bear shall he
the glory, and shall sit and rule on his throne*. He fully confirms what
we have already referred to — that this man, who was to grow by God’s
hidden power, would be made both a king and a priest, but by no earthly
instrumentality. In the words, *bear shall he the glory*, there is no
doubt an implied contrast between Joshua and Christ, the true priest.
For Joshua, though he discharged in his time the office of a priest, was
yet despised; but the Prophet bids his people to hope for more than what
could have been conceived from the view of things at that time; for an
illustrious priest was to come, full of royal dignity. And hence he
adds, *sit shall he and rule on his throne*. This did not properly
belong to the priesthood; but the Prophet affirms, that the man who was
to come from above, would be a king, though he exercised the priestly
office. He was then to be a priest, and yet to be on his throne and to
rule as a king; and ruling is what belongs to a king and not to a
priest.

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p19"></span>At length he concludes by saying, *The
counsel of peace shall be between the two*. I do not think that the
discords which had been between kings and priests are here indirectly
reproved. I indeed allow that such discords had often been seen among
that ancient people; but the Prophet had regard to something far
different, even this — that the priesthood would be united with the
kingly office. He therefore did not refer to different persons who were
to be at peace together; but, on the contrary, spoke of things or of the
two offices; *there shall* then *be the counsel of peace between the
two*, that is, between the kingly office and the priesthood.  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) We hence learn that which I have already
stated — that what is here promised had not been found under the law,
and could not have been expected under it; and that the fulfillment of
this prophecy is the renovation which took place at the coming of
Christ. It follows —

<span id="iii.vii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.x-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.x-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014)<span id="iii.vii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.x-p2"></span>**14.** And the crowns shall be to Helem,
and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a
memorial in the temple of the LORD.

<span id="iii.vii.x-p3"></span>**14.** Et coronae erunt ipsi Chelem
(*pro* Chadai**,** *probabilis conjectura est fuisse hunc binomium*<span
id="iii.vii.x-p3.1"></span>, *sicut etiam Iosia filius Zephaniae vocatur
etiam Chen*; erunt *ergo* tam ipsi Chelem quam) Tobiae et Iodaiae filio
Zephaniae in memoriale in Templo Iehovae.

<span id="iii.vii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.vii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.x-p6"></span>They who think that the crowns were
deposited with these four men, pervert the meaning of the Prophet; for
they were, on the contrary, placed in God’s temple to be a memorial to
them. It hence appears; that, as I have already said, they were not
required to supply the gold, because they excelled all others in piety
and holiness, but because it was necessary to condemn their want of
faith, inasmuch as they thought that their hope was disappointed, as God
did not immediately fulfill what he had promised. *Let* then *these
crowns*, saith the Spirit, *be a memorial to them*, that is, that
whenever they look on these crowns they may check themselves and know
that their expectations are very unreasonable, and that they themselves
are too hasty when they wish all prophecies to be accomplished in one
day; and also that the whole people may know that they had complained
without reason, as these suspended crowns shall be a memorial and a
testimony. We now then see more clearly why the Prophet had been ordered
to take gold and silver from these four men: it was, that he might make
crowns, which were afterwards to be deposited in God’s temple. At length
he adds —

<span id="iii.vii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Zechariah
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#015)<span id="iii.vii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p2"></span>**15.** And they *that are* far off
shall come and build in the temple of the Lord, and ye shall know that
the Lord of hosts hath sent me unto you. And *this* shall come to pass,
if ye will diligently obey the voice of the Lord your God.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p3"></span>**15.** Et longinqui venient**,** et
aedificabunt in templo Iehovae; et scietis quod Iehova ed Iehova
exercituum miserit me ad vos: et erit si audiendo audieritis vocem
Iehovae Dei vestri.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.vii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet also states, that men would
come from remote lands to contribute labor or wealth towards the
building of the temple; for the word building may refer to either of
these two things. *Come* then *shall those from far*. Before this time
gifts had been presented by Gentile nations, but the temple was not
built but by Solomon and his people. God then promises here something
more, and that is, that helpers would assist in building the temple, who
had been till then wholly aliens. It is indeed certain, that in the age
of Zechariah contributions had been made by Cyrus; but the Prophet
refers to nothing of this kind: he promises something more. It hence
follows that this prophecy must necessarily be referred to the
promulgation of the gospel; for then it was that strangers began to
contribute their labor and their wealth towards building a temple to
God. Though then Cyrus gave a large sum of money towards the erection of
the temple, yet the allusion here is not to his liberality. And after
Cyrus no stranger had been so liberal: for Herod, who raised up a great
and a very splendid building, was not from far; nay, he wished to be
thought one of the people. We then see that this prophecy cannot be
otherwise referred than to the building of the spiritual temple, when
Gentiles, formerly remote from God’s people, joined them as friends, and
brought their labor to the work of building the temple, not with stones
or wood, or with other corruptible materials, but with the doctrine and
the gifts of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p7"></span>He then adds, *ye shall know that
Jehovah of hosts has sent me to you*. Of this kind of knowledge we have
spoken elsewhere. It indeed behaved the Jews from the first to feel
assured respecting the truth of this prophecy; but when the effect or
experience itself was added, they then began to know more clearly. It is
then the same as thought the Prophet had said, “God, who speaks by my
mouth, will not disappoint you, as he will at length accomplish what I
now declare; and experience itself will be a witness that I have been a
true and faithful Prophet.” And he calls Him the God of hosts, that the
Jews, hearing that what he had said proceeded from Him whose power is
infinite, might be confirmed in their faith. There was then no reason
for them to doubt as to the accomplishment, for there is nothing that
can resist God, when it pleases him to unfold his power.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p8"></span>It follows, *If by hearing ye will hear
the voice of Jehovah your God*. Zechariah promises to the Jews here
conditionally — if they became obedient to God, and continued in
obedience to his word and in his doctrine; for unbelief deprives men of
all participation in God’s favor. It is indeed true that had all become
unbelieving, Christ would have come; for God as he is true would not
change his purpose were the whole world to become false. Since then the
faithfulness of God depends not on men, we ought not so to take what the
Prophet says here, *If ye will hear the voice of Jehovah*, as though
they could, by being unfaithful to God, have rendered void the
accomplishment of this prophecy. Their defection, then, yea, that of the
whole nation, could not have prevented Christ from coming forth in his
own appointed time. But the Prophet had another thing in view, even this
— that the Jews would become partakers of this blessing, or would enjoy,
so to speak, this favor, if they embraced God’s promise, and obediently
submitted to his law. For though Christ has already come as the Redeemer
of the world, yet we know that this benefit is not come to all, and why?
Because many through unbelief close the door against God and his grace
through Christ. Hence the faithful alone really know that God has
spoken, and really partake of his favor, and for this reason, because
they *hear his voice*; that is, they first by faith receive what God
offers, and then they fall not away from his truth, but continue in the
obedience of faith to the end.

<span id="iii.vii.xi-p9"></span>What the Prophet then had in view, was
to show to the Jews that those things were spoken in vain, as to them,
if they did not attend to God. And he shows the way in which they were
to be attentive, even by hearing the voice of God, that is, by
renouncing their own thoughts, and by not esteeming God untrue, though
he promised what seemed incredible. If then they denied themselves,
banished their own imaginations, wholly attended to God’s word, and
believed what he had said as a Prophet, he assures them that they would
really find that which he taught them to be true to their own salvation,
even this — that Christ would come to be a king and a priest, to secure
perfect happiness to his people.

<span id="iii.vii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.vii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thy Son
has been made known to us, through whom is brought to us the perfection
of all blessings and of true and real glory, — O grant, that we may
continue settled in him, and never turn here and there, nor fluctuate in
any way, but be so satisfied with his kingship and priesthood, as to
deliver up ourselves wholly to his care and protection, and never doubt
but that we are so sanctified by his grace as to be now acceptable to
thee, and that relying on him as our Mediator, we may offer ourselves as
a sacrifice to thee with full confidence of heart, and thus strive to
glorify thee through the whole course of our life, that we may at length
be made partakers of that celestial glory which has been obtained for us
by the blood of thy only-begotten Son. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc30009.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p11"></span> This is the view taken by *Jerome*,
*Cyril*, *Kimchi*, *Newcome*, *Blayney*, and also by *Grotius* and
*Parkhurst*, only that they consider the fourth chariot to represent,
not the Romans, but the Syrians and Egyptians. See *Parkhurst*’s Lex.,
under \[<span id="iii.vii.ii-p11.1"></span>אמף\]. *Henderson* confines
all the chariots to the Medes and Persians, as referring to various
changes and events until the reduction of Egypt by Xerxes, “the south
country” being that land. The basis of every view which may be taken of
the chariots, as *Marckius* justly observes, must be the interpretation
given by the angel in verse 5; which some translate, “these are the four
spirits of the heavens,” that is, angels, as in our version, followed by
*Newcome* and *Henderson*; and others, such as *Marckius* and *Blayney*,
“these are the four winds of heaven;” winds being rendered as a
metaphorical expression for God’s judgments. See <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p11.2"></span>[Jer
49:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#036)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p11.2"></span>; <span id="iii.vii.ii-p11.3"></span>[Re
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p11.3"></span>; and also <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p11.4"></span>[Ps
148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p12"></span>These are the only two renderings of
which the words are capable; and the first seems the most appropriate.
That God employs angels to execute his purpose both of mercy and of
judgment, is a doctrine often taught in Scripture. See <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ps.
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004), [Ezek.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006), [Ezek.
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#024), [Dan.
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010), [Dan.
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021), [Heb.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p12.1"></span>. That angels are intended is the view
taken by *Piscator*, *Drusius*, *Henry*, *Scott*, *Newcome*, and
*Henderson.* It may be said, the chariots represented God’s purposes;
the horses, the angels, and their different colors, the different works
which they had to execute. See <span id="iii.vii.ii-p12.2"></span>[Re
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p12.2"></span>. “The mountains of brss” designate, as
*Calvin*, *Blayney*, and many others think, “the firm and unalterable
decrees of the Almighty.—*Ed.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc30009.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p22"></span> There are two words to designate the
character of the horses belonging to the *fourth* chariot. The first is
commonly rendered “grisled” or spotted, and by *Henderson*, “piebald:”
and the second word is translated “bay” in our version and by *Newcome*;
“grey,” by *Henderson*; and “strong” in the *Vulgate*, and by *Jerome*,
*Dathius*, and *Blayney*. Strong, vigorous, robust, is its common
meaning, and in no other instance it is found to designate a color. The
Septuagint and the Targum have given it this sense; and it is rendered
by the former, “particolored—\[<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p22.1"></span>ψαρους\],” the color of a starling, and by
the latter, “ash-color—cinereos.” But there is no need in this case to
depart from the ordinary meaning of the word, strong, robust; these
horses being different from the others not only in color, but also in
strength. The rendering of Aquila is “\[<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p22.2"></span>κραταιοί\]—strong.” *Marckius* would apply
this term to all the horses, as it stands without a conjunction; but
this cannot be, for in verse 7th “the strong ones” are evidently the
same with the speckled or “the grisled ones” at the end of the 6th
verse.—*Ed.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc30009.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p11"></span> Provided we adopt \[<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p11.1"></span>ב\], countenanced by several MSS., and the
Syriac, instead of \[<span id="iii.vii.iii-p11.2"></span>כ\] in the
received text, that is before the number “four,” this explanation is the
most satisfactory. But if we take the received text, countenanced by a
greater number of MSS., there will be another meaning to the sentence.
*Henderson’s* version is —

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p12"></span>For as the four winds of heaven  
Have I spread you abroad, saith Jehovah.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p13"></span>But its connection with the foregoing
he does not clearly print. The view taken by *Drusius*, followed by
*Grotius* and *Marckius*, seems most satisfactory. They take the verb
\[<span id="iii.vii.iii-p13.1"></span>פרש\] in the sense of expanding,
enlarging, setting at liberty, and that the reference is to the previous
liberty granted to the Jews; and thus the connection with the foregoing
line is obvious and natural —

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p14"></span>He! He!  
Flee now from the land of the north, saith Jehovah;  
For as the four winds of heaven  
Have I expounded you, (or set you free,) saith Jehovah.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p15"></span>They had been allowed liberty to go to
any part of the world, which is signified by the four winds. The next
verse is —

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p16"></span>He! Sion, escape,  
Thou who dwellest with the daughter of Babylon.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p17"></span>The two nations are compared to two
women, dwelling one with another. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc30009.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p8"></span> *Grotius*, *Dathius*, *Newcome*, and
*Henderson* agree in the view given by *Calvin*, regarding “spirit” here
in the sense of wrath or vengeance. See <span
id="iii.vii.v-p8.1"></span>[Jud
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#003)<span id="iii.vii.v-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.vii.v-p8.2"></span>[Isa
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#011)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p8.2"></span>. But *Marckius* and *Blayney* render it
“wind,” as in verse 5th, in the sense of judgment. The latter renders
the sentence thus — “See those that went forth against the north country
have caused my wind to rest on the north country;” and he adds, “So
\[<span id="iii.vii.v-p8.3"></span>רוח\] is used in <span
id="iii.vii.v-p8.4"></span>[Jer. 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#012)<span id="iii.vii.v-p8.4"></span>;
and \[<span id="iii.vii.v-p8.5"></span>הנוח\] signifies *to cause to
rest* or *abide*, that is, *to inflict*. See <span
id="iii.vii.v-p8.6"></span>[Isa
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#032)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p8.6"></span>; <span id="iii.vii.v-p8.7"></span>[Ezek.
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013), [Ezek.
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#013)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p8.7"></span>. And the same verb in *Kal* signifies *to
rest* or *settle upon*, as a calamity doth. <span
id="iii.vii.v-p8.8"></span>[Ex
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#014)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p8.8"></span>.”—*Ed.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc30009.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iii.vii.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p14"></span> It is better to take the following
words as a paranthesis, “and go thou on that day, go even into the house
of Josiah the son of Zephaniah;” then the whole paragraph might be thus
rendered,—

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p15"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p16"></span>**10.** Take from the exiles from
Heldai, from Tobiah, and from Jedaiah, (and go thou on that day, go even
into the house for Josiah the son of Zephaniah,) who have come from
Babylon;

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p17"></span>**11.** Yea, take *from them* silver
and gold, and make a large (or, a double) crown, and set *it* on the
head of Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high priest.

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p18"></span>The first part is rendered by
*Henderson* as above, and according to *Calvin’s* translation; but
*Newcome* and *Blayney* follow our version, which does not seem to be
correct; for the first “Take” is repeated, an dthen what the Prophet was
to take is mentioned, having previously named the persons from whom the
silver and the gold was to be taken.

<span id="iii.vii.viii-p19"></span>As to the crown or crowns, various
opinions have been entertained. The most consistent with the whole
passage is that of *Marckius*, adopted by *Hengstenberg* and *M‘Caul*.
He thinks that the plural here is used, as it is often in Hebrew, to
express what is large, splended, great, or extraordinary, according to
the following examples: \[<span id="iii.vii.viii-p19.1"></span>שמחות\],
gladnesses—great gladness, <span id="iii.vii.viii-p19.2"></span>[Ps
45:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.2"></span>; \[<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.3"></span>חכמות\], wisdoms—chief wisdom or true
wisdom, <span id="iii.vii.viii-p19.4"></span>[Pr
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.4"></span>; \[<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.5"></span>חסדום\], mercies—great mercy, <span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.6"></span>[La
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.6"></span>; \[<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.7"></span>מוצאת\], goings forth—remarkable going
forth, <span id="iii.vii.viii-p19.8"></span>[Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.8"></span>. To which instances may be added these
two: \[<span id="iii.vii.viii-p19.9"></span>כהמות\], beasts—a great
beast, <span id="iii.vii.viii-p19.10"></span>[Ps
73:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.10"></span>; and \[<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.11"></span>עגלות\], calves—a great calf, <span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.12"></span>[Ho
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.12"></span>. In confirmation of this we find the
very word here used in its plural form rendered “a crown” in <span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.13"></span>[Job
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#036)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.13"></span>; and it is followed here, in verse 14,
by a verb in the singular number. A large, or a splendid, or a double
crown is evidently what is meant. Joshua had his sacerdotal mitre
before, see <span id="iii.vii.viii-p19.14"></span>[Jos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.14"></span>; and around this was a crown of gold,
not of silver, see <span id="iii.vii.viii-p19.15"></span>[Exod.
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036), [Exod.
39:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#030)<span
id="iii.vii.viii-p19.15"></span>; but in the present instance there was
to be silver as well as gold. It was therefore an extraordinary crown,
and designed clearly to denote what was extraordinary—a priest ruling on
a royal throne.—*Ed.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc30009.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iii.vii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p11"></span> And he shall branch out from his
place,—*Newcome*. *Henderson* follows our version. The *Targum’s*
version is remarkable, “Behold the man, Messiah is his name; who shall
be revealed.” The metaphor is dropped, and revelation or manifestation
was understood to be the meaning of “growing out of his place.” “Out of
his place,” that is, “out of Bethlehem,” says *Henry*. “Out of David’s
root, tribe and family,” says *Adam Clarke*.—*Ed.*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc30009.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iii.vii.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ix-p20"></span> There are especially two
interpretations of this sentence; the one adopted by *Calvin*, and also
by *Jerome*, *Marckius*, *Drusiu*s, *Dathius*, *Scott*, and *Henderson*;
and the other is, that the “two” are Jehovah, and the Branch or Messiah,
and that the “throne” mentioned is the throne of Jehovah. This is the
interpretation of *Vitringa*, *Cocceius*, *Henry*, *M‘Caul*, and *Adam
Clarke*. The objection of *Dathius* to the last view, that is, that
Jehovah is the speaker, and therefore cannot be understood here as the
third person is used, seems not to be valid, for the third person is
used before in the words, “the temple of Jehovah.” But the first
interpretation seems the most appropriate and significant — the concord
and agreement between the two offers.—*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc30010)
