[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp08)  [Next](orrp10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

# SYRIA.

THE religions of Syria never had the same solidarity in the Occident as
those from Egypt or Asia Minor. From the coasts of Phœnicia and the
valleys of Lebanon, from the borders of the Euphrates and the oases of
the desert, they came at various periods, like the successive waves of
the incoming tide, and existed side by side in the Roman world without
uniting, in spite of their similarities. The isolation in which they
remained and the persistent adherence of their believers to their
particular rites were a consequence and reflection of the disunited
condition of Syria herself, where the different tribes and districts
remained more distinct than anywhere else, even after they had been
brought together under the domination of Rome. They doggedly preserved
their local gods and Semitic dialects.

It would be impossible to outline each one of these religions in detail
at this time and to reconstruct their history, because our meager
information would not permit it, but we can indicate, in a general way,
how they penetrated into the Occidental countries at various periods,
and we can try to define their common characteristics by showing what
new elements the Syrian paganism brought to the Romans.

The first Semitic divinity to enter Italy was *Atargatis*,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

frequently mistaken for the Phœnician Astarte, who had a famous temple
at Bambyce or Hierapolis, not far from the Euphrates, and was worshiped
with her husband, Hadad, in a considerable part of Syria besides. The
Greeks considered her as the principal Syrian goddess, <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) and in the Latin countries she was commonly
known as *dea Syria*, a name corrupted into *Iasura* by popular use.

We all remember the unedifying descriptions of her itinerant priests
that Lucian and Apuleius [5\_1](orrp18.htm#xref_5_1) have left. Led by
an old eunuch of dubious habits, a crowd of painted young men marched
along the highways with an ass that bore an elaborately adorned image of
the goddess. Whenever they passed through a village or by some rich
villa, they went through their sacred exercises. To the shrill
accompaniment of their Syrian flutes they turned round and round, and
with their heads thrown back fluttered about and gave vent to hoarse
clamors until vertigo seized them and insensibility was complete. Then
they flagellated themselves wildly, struck themselves with swords and
shed their blood in front of a rustic crowd which pressed closely about
them, and finally they took up a profitable collection from the
wondering spectators. They received jars of milk and wine, cheeses,
flour, bronze coins of small denominations and even some silver pieces,
all of which disappeared in the folds of their capacious robes. If
opportunity presented they knew how to increase their profits by means
of clever thefts or by making commonplace predictions for a moderate
consideration.

This picturesque description, based on a novel by

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lucius of Patras, is undoubtedly extreme. It is
difficult to believe that the sacerdotal corps of the goddess of
Hierapolis should have consisted only of charlatans and thieves. But how
can the presence in the Occident of that begging and low nomadic clergy
be explained?

It is certain that the first worshipers of the Syrian goddess in the
Latin world were slaves. During the wars against Antiochus the Great a
number of prisoners were sent to Italy to be sold at public auction, as
was the custom, and the first appearance in Italy of the
*Chaldaei* [5\_2](orrp18.htm#xref_5_2) has been connected with that
event. The *Chaldaei* were Oriental fortune-tellers who asserted that
their predictions were based on the Chaldean astrology. They found
credulous clients among the farm laborers, and Cato gravely exhorts the
good landlord to oust them from his estate. [5\_3](orrp18.htm#xref_5_3)

Beginning with the second century before Christ, merchants began to
import Syrian slaves. At that time Delos was the great trade center in
this human commodity, and in that island especially Atargatis was
worshiped by citizens of Athens and Rome. [5\_4](orrp18.htm#xref_5_4)
Trade spread her worship in the Occident. [5\_5](orrp18.htm#xref_5_5) We
know that the great slave revolution that devastated Sicily in 134 B. C.
was started by a slave from Apamea, a votary of the Syrian goddess.
Simulating divine madness, he called his companions to arms, pretending
to act in accordance with orders from
heaven. [5\_6](orrp18.htm#xref_5_6) This detail, which we know by
chance, shows how considerable a proportion of Semites there was in the
gangs working the fields, and how much authority Atargatis enjoyed in
the rural centers. Being too poor to build temples for their national
goddess, those agricultural laborers

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

waited with their devotions until a band of itinerant *galli* passed
through the distant hamlet where the lot of the auction had sent them.
The existence of those wandering priests depended, therefore, on the
number of fellow-countrymen they met in the rural districts, who
supported them by sacrificing a part of their poor savings.

Towards the end of the republic those diviners appear to have enjoyed
rather serious consideration at Rome. It was a pythoness from Syria that
advised Marius on the sacrifices he was to
perform. [5\_7](orrp18.htm#xref_5_7)

Under the empire the importation of slaves increased. Depopulated Italy
needed more and more foreign hands, and Syria furnished a large quota of
the forced immigration of cultivators. But those Syrians, quick and
intelligent as they were strong and industrious, performed many other
functions. They filled the countless domestic positions in the palaces
of the aristocracy and were especially appreciated as
litter-bearers. [5\_8](orrp18.htm#xref_5_8) The imperial and municipal
administrations, as well as the big contractors to whom customs and the
mines were farmed out, hired or bought them in large numbers, and even
in the remotest border provinces the *Syrus* was found serving princes,
cities or private individuals. The worship of the Syrian goddess
profited considerably by the economic current that continually brought
new worshipers. We find her mentioned in the first century of our era in
a Roman inscription referring in precise terms to the slave market, and
we know that Nero took a devout fancy to the stranger that did not,
however, last very long. [5\_9](orrp18.htm#xref_5_9) In the popular
Trastevere quarter she had a temple until the end of
paganism. [5\_10](orrp18.htm#xref_5_10)

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

During the imperial period, however, the slaves were no longer the only
missionaries that came from Syria, and Atargatis was no longer the only
divinity from that country to be worshiped in the Occident. The
propagation of the Semitic worship progressed for the most part in a
different manner under the empire.

At the beginning of our era the Syrian merchants, *Syri negotiatores*,
undertook a veritable colonization of the Latin
provinces. [5\_11](orrp18.htm#xref_5_11) During the second century
before Christ the traders of that nation had established settlements
along the coast of Asia Minor, on the Piræus, and in the Archipelago. At
Delos, a small island but a large commercial center, they maintained
several associations that worshiped their national gods, in particular
Hadad and Atargatis. But the wars that shook the Orient at the end of
the republic, and above all the growth of piracy, ruined maritime
commerce and stopped emigration. This began again with renewed vigor
when the establishment of the empire guaranteed the safety of the seas
and when the Levantine traffic attained a development previously
unknown. We can trace the history of the Syrian establishments in the
Latin provinces from the first to the seventh century, and recently we
have begun to, appreciate their economic, social and religious
importance at its true value.

The Syrians' love of lucre was proverbial. Active, compliant and able,
frequently little scrupulous, they knew how to conclude first small
deals, then larger ones, everywhere. Using the special talents of their
race to advantage, they succeeded in establishing themselves on all
coasts of the Mediterranean, even in

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

Spain. [5\_12](orrp18.htm#xref_5_12) At Malaga an inscription mentions a
corporation formed by them. The Italian ports where business was
especially active, Pozzuoli, Ostia, later Naples, attracted them in
great numbers. But they did not confine themselves to the seashore; they
penetrated far into the interior of the countries, wherever they hoped
to find profitable trade. They followed the commercial highways and
traveled up the big rivers. By way of the Danube they went as far as
Pannonia, by way of the Rhone they reached Lyons. In Gaul they were
especially numerous. In this new country that had just been opened to
commerce fortunes could be made rapidly A rescript discovered on the
range of the Lebanon is addressed to sailors from Arles, who had charge
of the transportation of grain, and in the department of Ain a bilingual
epitaph has been found mentioning a merchant of the third century, Thaïm
or Julian, son of Saad, decurion of the city of Canatha in Syria, who
owned two factories in the Rhone basin, where he handled goods from
Aquitania. [5\_13](orrp18.htm#xref_5_13) Thus the Syrians spread over
the entire province as far as Treves, where they had a strong colony.
Not even the barbarian invasions of the fifth century stopped their
immigration. Saint Jerome describes them traversing the entire Roman
world amidst the troubles of the invasion, prompted by the lust of gain
to defy all dangers. In the barbarian society the part played by this
civilized and city-bred element was even more considerable. Under the
Merovingians in about 591 they had sufficient influence at Paris to have
one of their number elected bishop and to gain possession of all
ecclesiastical offices. Gregory of Tours tells how King Gontrand, on
entering the city of Orleans

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

in 585, was received by a crowd praising him "in the language of the
Latins, the Jews and the Syrians." [5\_14](orrp18.htm#xref_5_14) The
merchant colonies existed until the Saracen corsairs destroyed the
commerce of the Mediterranean.

Those establishments exercised a strong influence upon the economic and
material life of the Latin provinces, especially in Gaul. As bankers the
Syrians concentrated a large share of the money business in their hands
and monopolized the importing of the valuable Levantine commodities as
well as of the articles of luxury; they sold wines, spices, glassware,
silks and purple fabrics, also objects wrought by goldsmiths, to be used
as patterns by the native artisans. Their moral and religious influence
was not less considerable: for instance, it has been shown that they
furthered the development of monastic life during the Christian period,
and that the devotion to the crucifix [5\_15](orrp18.htm#xref_5_15) that
grew up in opposition to the monophysites, was introduced into the
Occident by them. During the first five centuries Christians felt an
unconquerable repugnance to the representation of the Saviour of the
world nailed to an instrument of punishment more infamous than the
guillotine of to-day. The Syrians were the first to substitute reality
in all its pathetic horror for a vague symbolism.

In pagan times the religious ascendency of that immigrant population was
no less remarkable. The merchants always took an interest in the affairs
of heaven as well as in those of earth. At all times Syria was a land of
ardent devotion, and in the first century its children were as fervid in
propagating their barbarian gods in the Occident as after their
conversion they were enthusiastic in spreading Christianity as far

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

as Turkestan and China. As soon as the merchants had established their
places of business in the islands of the Archipelago during the
Alexandrian period, and in the Latin period under the empire, they
founded chapels in which they practised their exotic rites.

It was easy for the divinities of the Phœnician coast to cross the seas.
Among them were Adonis, whom the women of Byblos mourned; Balmarcodes,
"the Lord of the dances," who came from Beirut; Marna, the master of
rain, worshiped at Gaza; and Maiuma, [5\_16](orrp18.htm#xref_5_16) whose
nautical holiday was celebrated every spring on the coast near Ostia as
well as in the Orient.

Besides these half Hellenized religions, others of a more purely Semitic
nature came from the interior of the country, because the merchants
frequently were natives of the cities of the *Hinterland*, as for
instance Apamea or Epiphanea in Coele-Syria, or even of villages in that
flat country. As Rome incorporated the small kingdoms beyond the Lebanon
and the Orontes that had preserved a precarious independence, the
current of emigration increased. In 71 Commagene, which lies between the
Taurus and the Euphrates, was annexed by Vespasian, a little later the
dynasties of Chalcis and Emesa were also deprived of their power. Nero,
it appears, took possession of Damascus; half a century later Trajan
established the new province of Arabia in the south (106 A. D.), and the
oasis of Palmyra, a great mercantile center, lost its autonomy at the
same time. In this manner Rome extended her direct authority as far as
the desert, over countries that were only superficially Hellenized, and
where the native devotions had preserved all their

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

savage fervor. From that time constant communication was established
between Italy and those regions which had heretofore been almost
inaccessible. As roads were built commerce developed, and together with
the interests of trade the needs of administration created an incessant
exchange of men, of products and of beliefs between those out-of-the-way
countries and the Latin provinces.

These annexations, therefore, were followed by a renewed influx of
Syrian divinities into the Occident. At Pozzuoli, the last port of call
of the Levantine vessels, there was a temple to the Baal of Damascus
(*Jupiter Damascenus*) in which leading citizens officiated, and there
were altars on which two golden camels [5\_17](orrp18.htm#xref_5_17)
were offered to Dusares, a divinity who had come from the interior of
Arabia. They kept company with a divinity of more ancient repute, the
Hadad of Baabek-Heliopolis (*Jupiter Heliopolitanus*), whose immense
temple, considered one of the world's
wonders, [5\_18](orrp18.htm#xref_5_18) had been restored by Antoninus
Pius, and may still be seen facing Lebanon in majestic elegance.
Heliopolis and Beirut had been the most ancient colonies founded by
Augustus in Syria. The god of Heliopolis participated in the privileged
position granted to the inhabitants of those two cities, who worshiped
in a common devotion, [5\_19](orrp18.htm#xref_5_19) and he was
naturalized as a Roman with greater ease than the others.

The conquest of all Syria as far as Euphrates and the subjection of even
a part of Mesopotamia aided the diffusion of the Semitic religions in
still another manner. From these regions, which were partly inhabited by
fighting races, the Cæsars drew recruits for the imperial army. They
levied a great number of

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

legionaries, but especially auxiliary troops, who were transferred to
the frontiers. Troopers and foot-soldiers from those provinces furnished
important contingents to the garrisons of Europe and Africa. For
instance, a cohort of one thousand archers from Emesa was established in
Pannonia, another of archers from Damascus in upper Germany; Mauretania
received irregulars from Palmyra, and bodies of troops levied in
Ituraea, on the outskirts of the Arabian desert, were, encamped in
Dacia, Germany, Egypt and Cappadocia at the same time. Commagene alone
furnished no less than six cohorts of five hundred men each that were
sent to the Danube and into Numidia. [5\_20](orrp18.htm#xref_5_20)

The number of inscriptions consecrated by soldiers proves both the ardor
of their faith and the diversity of their beliefs. Like the sailors of
to-day who are transferred to strange climes and exposed to incessant
danger, they were constantly inclined to invoke the protection of
heaven, and remained attached to the gods who seemed to remind them in
their exile of the distant home country. Therefore it is not surprising
that the Syrians who served in the army should have practised the
religion of their Baals in the neighborhood of their camps. In the north
of England, near the wall of Hadrian, an inscription in verse in honor
of the goddess of Hierapolis has been found; its author was a prefect,
probably of a cohort of Hamites stationed at this distant
post. [5\_21](orrp18.htm#xref_5_21)

Not all the soldiers, however, went to swell the ranks of believers
worshiping divinities that had long been adopted by the Latin world, as
did that officer. They also brought along new ones that had come from a
still greater distance than their predecessors, in fact

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

from the outskirts of the barbarian world, because from those regions in
particular trained men could be obtained. There were, for instance,
*Baltis*, an "Our Lady" from Osroene beyond the
Euphrates; [5\_22](orrp18.htm#xref_5_22) *Aziz*, the "strong god" of
Edessa, who was identified with the star
Lucifer; [5\_23](orrp18.htm#xref_5_23) *Malakbel*, the "Lord's
messenger," patron of the soldiers from Palmyra, who appeared with
several companions at Rome, in Numidia and in
Dacia. [5\_24](orrp18.htm#xref_5_24) The most celebrated of those gods
then was the Jupiter of Doliche, a small city of Commagene, that owed
its fame to him. Because of the troops coming from that region, this
obscure Baal, whose name is mentioned by no author, found worshipers in
every Roman province as far as Africa, Germany and Brittany. The number
of known inscriptions consecrated to him exceeds a hundred, and it is
still growing. Being originally nothing but a god of lightning,
represented as brandishing an ax, this local genius of the tempest was
elevated to the rank of tutelary divinity of the imperial
armies. [5\_25](orrp18.htm#xref_5_25)

The diffusion of the Semitic religions in Italy that commenced
imperceptibly under the republic became more marked after the first
century of our era. Their expansion and multiplication were rapid, and
they attained the apogee of their power during the third century. Their
influence became almost predominant when the accession of the Severi
lent them the support of a court that was half Syrian. Functionaries of
all kinds, senators and officers, vied with each other in devotion to
the patron gods of their sovereigns, gods which the sovereigns
patronized in turn. Intelligent and ambitious princesses like Julia
Domna, Julia Maesa, Julia Mammea, whose ascendency was very

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

considerable, became propagators of their national religion. We all know
the audacious pronunciamento of the year 218 that placed upon the throne
the fourteen-year-old emperor Heliogabalus, a worshiper of the Baal of
Emesa. His intention was to give supremacy over all other gods to his
barbarian divinity, who had heretofore been almost unknown. The ancient
authors narrate with indignation how this crowned priest attempted to
elevate his black stone, the coarse idol brought from Emesa, to the rank
of supreme divinity of the empire by subordinating the whole ancient
pantheon to it; they never tire of giving revolting details about the
dissoluteness of the debaucheries for which the festivities of the new
*Sol invictus Elagabal* furnished a
pretext. [5\_26](orrp18.htm#xref_5_26) However, the question arises
whether the Roman historians, being very hostile to that foreigner who
haughtily favored the customs of his own country, did not misrepresent
or partly misunderstand the facts. Heliogabalus's attempt to have his
god recognized as supreme, and to establish a kind of monotheism in
heaven as there was monarchy on earth, was undoubtedly too violent,
awkward and premature, but it was in keeping with the aspirations of the
time, and it must be remembered that the imperial policy could find the
support of powerful Syrian colonies not only at Rome but all over the
empire.

Half a century later Aurelian [5\_27](orrp18.htm#xref_5_27) was inspired
by the same idea when he created a new worship, that of the "Invincible
Sun." Worshiped in a splendid temple, by pontiffs equal in rank to those
of ancient Rome, having magnificent plays held in his honor every fourth
year, *Sol invictus* was also elevated to the supreme rank in the divine
hierarchy, and became the special

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

protector of the emperors and the empire. The country where Aurelian
found the pattern he sought to reproduce, was again Syria. Into the new
sanctuary he transferred the images of Bel and Helios, taken from
Palmyra, after it had fallen before his arms.

\*    \*    \*

The sovereigns, then, twice attempted to replace the Capitoline Jupiter
by a Semitic god and to make a Semitic religion the principal and
official religion of the Romans. They proclaimed the fall of the old
Latin idolatry and the accession of a new paganism taken from Syria.
What was the superiority attributed to the creeds of that country? Why
did even an Illyrian general like Aurelian look for the most perfect
type of pagan religion in that country? That is the problem to be
solved, but it must remain unsolved unless an exact account is given of
the fate of the Syrian beliefs under the empire.

That question has not as yet been very completely elucidated. Besides
the superficial opuscule of Lucian on the *dea Syria*, we find scarcely
any reliable information in the Greek or Latin writers. The work by
Philo of Byblos is a euhemeristic interpretation of an alleged Phœnician
cosmogony, and a composition of little merit. Neither have we the
original texts of the Semitic liturgies, as we have for Egypt. Whatever
we have learned we owe especially to the inscriptions, and while these
furnish highly valuable indications as to the date and area of expansion
of these religions, they tell us hardly anything about their doctrines.
Light on this subject may be expected from the excavations that are
being made in the great sanctuaries of Syria, and also from a more exact
interpretation

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

of the sculptured monuments that we now possess in great numbers,
especially those of Jupiter Dolichenus.

Some characteristics of the Semitic paganism, however, are known at
present, and it must be admitted that it would appear at a disadvantage
if judged by those noticeable features that first attract our attention.
It had retained a stock of very primitive ideas and some aboriginal
nature worship that had lasted through many centuries and was to
persist, in part, under Christianity and Islam until the present
day. [5\_28](orrp18.htm#xref_5_28) Such were the worship of high
elevations on which a rustic enclosure sometimes marked the limits of
the consecrated territory; the worship of the waters that flow to the
sea, the streams that arise in the mountains, the springs that gush out
of the soil, the ponds, the lakes and the wells, into all of which
offerings were thrown with the idea either of venerating in them the
thirst-quenching liquid or else the fecund nature of the earth; the
worship of the trees that shaded the altars and that nobody dared to
fell or mutilate; the worship of stones, especially of the rough stones
called bethels that were regarded, as their name (*beth-El*) indicates,
as the residence of the god, or rather, as the matter in which the god
was embodied. [5\_29](orrp18.htm#xref_5_29) Aphrodite Astarte was
worshiped in the shape of a conical stone at Paphos, and a black
aerolite covered with projections and depressions to which a symbolic
meaning was attributed represented Elagabal, and was transferred from
Emesa to Rome, as we have said.

The animals, as well as inanimate things, received their share of
homage. Remnants of the old Semitic zoolatry perpetuated themselves
until the end of paganism and even later. Frequently the gods were
represented

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

standing erect on animals. Thus the Dolichean Baal stood on a steer, and
his spouse on a lion. Around certain temples there were sacred parks, in
which savage beasts roamed at liberty, [5\_30](orrp18.htm#xref_5_30) a
reminder of the time when they were considered divine. Two animals
especially were the objects of universal veneration, the pigeon and the
fish. Vagrant multitudes of pigeons received the traveler landing at
Ascalon, [5\_31](orrp18.htm#xref_5_31) and they played about the
enclosures of all the temples of Astarte [5\_32](orrp18.htm#xref_5_32)
in flocks resembling white whirlwinds. The pigeon belonged, properly
speaking, to the goddess of love, whose symbol it has remained above all
to the people worshiping that goddess.

"Quid referam ut volitet crebras intacta per urbes  
Alba Palaestino sancta columba Syro?" [5\_33](orrp18.htm#xref_5_33)

The fish was sacred to Atargatis, who undoubtedly had been represented
in that shape at first, as Dagon always
was. [5\_34](orrp18.htm#xref_5_34) The fish were kept in ponds in the
proximity of the temples. [5\_35](orrp18.htm#xref_5_35) A superstitious
fear prevented people from touching them, because the goddess punished
the sacrilegious by covering their bodies with ulcers and
tumors. [5\_36](orrp18.htm#xref_5_36) At certain mystic repasts,
however, the priests and initiates consumed the forbidden food in the
belief that they were absorbing the flesh of the divinity herself. That
worship and its practices, which were spread over Syria, probably
suggested the ichthus symbolism in the Christian
period. [5\_37](orrp18.htm#xref_5_37)

However, over this lower and primordial stratum that still cropped out
here and there, other less rudimentary beliefs had formed. Besides
inanimate objects and animals, the Syrian paganism worshiped personal
divinities especially. The character of the gods that were originally
adored by the Semitic tribes has been

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

ingeniously reconstructed. [5\_38](orrp18.htm#xref_5_38) Each tribe had
its Baal and Baalat who protected it and whom only its members were
permitted to worship. The name of *Ba‘al*, "master," summarizes the
conception people had of him. In the first place he was regarded as the
sovereign of his votaries, and his position in regard to them was that
of an Oriental potentate towards his subjects; they were his servants,
or rather his slaves. [5\_39](orrp18.htm#xref_5_39) The Baal was at the
same time the "master" or proprietor of the country in which he resided
and which he made fertile by causing springs to gush from its soil. Or
his domain was the firmament and he was the *dominus caeli*, whence he
made the waters fall to the roar of tempests. He was always united with
a celestial or earthly "queen" and, in the third place, he was the
"lord" or husband of the "lady" associated with him. The one represented
the male, the other the female principle; they were the authors of all
fecundity, and as a consequence the worship of the divine couple often
assumed a sensual and voluptuous character.

As a matter of fact, immorality was nowhere so flagrant as in the
temples of Astarte, whose female servants honored the goddess with
untiring ardor. In no country was sacred prostitution so developed as in
Syria, and in the Occident it was to be found practically only where the
Phœnicians had imported it, as on Mount Eryx. Those aberrations, that
were kept up until the end of paganism, [5\_40](orrp18.htm#xref_5_40)
probably have their explanation in the primitive constitution of the
Semitic tribe, and the religious custom must have been originally one of
the forms of exogamy, which compelled the woman to unite herself first
with a stranger. [5\_41](orrp18.htm#xref_5_41)

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

As a second blemish, the Semitic religions practised human immolations
longer than any other religion, sacrificing children and grown men in
order to please sanguinary gods. In spite of Hadrian's prohibition of
those murderous offerings, [5\_42](orrp18.htm#xref_5_42) they were
maintained in certain clandestine rites and in the lowest practices of
magic, up to the fall of the idols, and even later. They corresponded to
the ideas of a period during which the life of a captive or slave had no
greater value than that of an animal.

These sacred practices and many others, on which Lucian complacently
enlarges in his opuscule on the goddess of Hierapolis, daily revived the
habits of a barbarous past in the temples of Syria. Of all the
conceptions that had successively dominated the country, none had
completely disappeared. As in Egypt, beliefs of very different date and
origin coexisted, without any attempt to make them agree, or without
success when the task was undertaken. In these beliefs zoolatry,
litholatry and all the other nature worships outlived the savagery that
had created them. More than anywhere else the gods had remained the
chieftains of clans [5\_43](orrp18.htm#xref_5_43) because the tribal
organizations of Syria were longer lived and more developed than those
of any other region. Under the empire many districts were still
subjected to the tribal régime and commanded by "ethnarchs" or
"phylarchs." [5\_44](orrp18.htm#xref_5_44) Religion, which sacrificed
the lives of the men and the honor of the women to the divinity, had in
many regards remained on the moral level of unsocial and sanguinary
tribes. Its obscene and atrocious rites called forth exasperated
indignation on the part of

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the Roman conscience when Heliogabalus attempted to introduce them into
Italy with his Baal of Emesa.

\*    \*    \*

How, then, can one explain the fact that in spite of all, the Syrian
gods imposed themselves upon the Occident and made even the Cæsars
accept them? The reason is that the Semitic paganism can no more be
judged by certain revolting practices, that perpetuated in the heart of
civilization the barbarity and puerilities of an uncultivated society,
than the religion of the Nile can be so judged. As in the case of Egypt
we must distinguish between the sacerdotal religion and the infinitely
varied popular religion that was embodied in local customs. Syria
possessed a number of great sanctuaries in which an educated clergy
meditated and expatiated upon the nature of the divine beings and on the
meaning of traditions inherited from remote ancestors. As their own
interests demanded, that clergy constantly amended the sacred traditions
and modified their spirit when the letter was immutable, in order to
make them agree with the new aspirations of a more advanced period. They
had their mysteries and their initiates to whom they revealed a wisdom
that was above the vulgar beliefs of the
masses. [5\_45](orrp18.htm#xref_5_45)

Frequently we can draw diametrically opposite conclusions from the same
principle. In that manner the old idea of *tabu*, that seems to have
transformed the temples of Astarte into houses of debauchery, also
became the source of a severe code of morals. The Semitic tribes were
haunted with the fear of the tabu. A multitude of things were either
impure or sacred because, in the original confusion, those two notions

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

had not been clearly differentiated. Man's ability to use the products
of nature to satisfy his needs, was thus limited by a number of
prohibitions, restrictions and conditions. He who touched a forbidden
object was soiled and corrupted, his fellows did not associate with him
and he could no longer participate in the sacrifices. In order to wipe
out the blemish, he had recourse to ablutions and other ceremonies known
to the priests. Purity, that had originally been considered simply
physical, soon became ritualistic and finally spiritual. Life was
surrounded by a network of circumstances subject to certain conditions,
every violation of which meant a fall and demanded penance. The anxiety
to remain constantly in a state of holiness or regain that state when it
had been lost, filled one's entire existence. It was not peculiar to the
Semitic tribes, but they ascribed a prime importance to
it. [5\_46](orrp18.htm#xref_5_46) And the gods, who necessarily
possessed this quality in an eminent degree, were holy beings
(ἅγιοι) [5\_47](orrp18.htm#xref_5_47) *par excellence*.

In this way principles of conduct and dogmas of faith have frequently
been derived from instinctive and absurd old beliefs. All theological
doctrines that were accepted in Syria modified the prevailing ancient
conception of the Baals. But in our present state of knowledge it is
very difficult indeed to determine the shares that the various
influences contributed, from the conquests of Alexander to the Roman
domination, to make the Syrian paganism what it became under the Cæsars.
The civilization of the Seleucid empire is little known, and we cannot
determine what caused the alliance of Greek thought with the Semitic
traditions. [5\_48](orrp18.htm#xref_5_48) The religions of the
neighboring nations

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

also had an undeniable influence. Phœnicia and Lebanon remained moral
tributaries of Egypt long after they had liberated themselves from the
suzerainty of the Pharaohs. The theogony of Philo of Byblos took gods
and myths from that country, and at Heliopolis Hadad was honored
"according to Egyptian rather than Syrian
rite." [5\_49](orrp18.htm#xref_5_49) The rigorous monotheism of the
Jews, who were dispersed over the entire country, must also have acted
as an active ferment of transformation. [5\_50](orrp18.htm#xref_5_50)
But it was Babylon that retained the intellectual supremacy, even after
its political ruin. The powerful sacerdotal caste ruling it did not fall
with the independence of the country, and it survived the conquests of
Alexander as it had previously lived through the Persian domination. The
researches of Assyriologists have shown that its ancient worship
persisted under the Seleucides, and at the time of Strabo the
"Chaldeans" still discussed cosmology and first principles in the rival
schools of Borsippa and Orchoë. [5\_51](orrp18.htm#xref_5_51) The
ascendancy of that erudite clergy affected all surrounding regions; it
was felt by Persia in the east, Cappadocia in the north, but more than
anywhere else by the Syrians, who were connected with the Oriental
Semites by bonds of language and 'blood. Even after the Parthians had
wrested the valley of the Euphrates from the Seleucides, relations with
the great temples of that region remained uninterrupted. The plains of
Mesopotamia, inhabited by races of like origin, extended on both sides
of an artificial border line; great commercial roads followed the course
of the two rivers flowing into the Persian Gulf or cut across the
desert, and the pilgrims came to Babylon, as Lucian tells us, to perform
their devotions to the Lady of Bambyce. [5\_52](orrp18.htm#xref_5_52)

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

Ever since the Captivity, constant spiritual relations had existed
between Judaism and the great religious metropolis. At the birth of
Christianity they manifested themselves in the rise of gnostic sects in
which the Semitic mythology formed strange combinations with Jewish and
Greek ideas and furnished the foundation for extravagant
superstructures. [5\_53](orrp18.htm#xref_5_53) Finally, during the
decline of the empire, it was Babylon again from which emanated
Manicheism, the last form of idolatry received in the Latin world. We
can imagine how powerful the religious influence of that country on the
Syrian paganism must have been.

That influence manifested itself in various ways. First, it introduced
new gods. In this way Bel passed from the Babylonian pantheon into that
of Palmyra and was honored throughout northern
Syria. [5\_54](orrp18.htm#xref_5_54) It also caused ancient divinities
to be arranged in new groups. To the primitive couple of the Baal and
the Baalat a third member was added in order to form one of those triads
dears to Chaldean theology. This took place at Hierapolis as well as at
Heliopolis, and the three gods of the latter city, Hadad, Atargatis and
Simios, became Jupiter, Venus and Mercury in Latin
inscriptions. [5\_55](orrp18.htm#xref_5_55) Finally, and most important,
astrolatry wrought radical changes in the characters of the celestial
powers, and, as a further consequence, in the entire Roman paganism. In
the first place it gave them a second personality in addition to their
own nature. The sidereal myths superimposed themselves upon the agrarian
myths, and gradually obliterated them. Astrology, born on the banks of
the Euphrates, imposed itself in Egypt upon the haughty and
unapproachable clergy of the most conservative of all
nations. [5\_56](orrp18.htm#xref_5_56) Syria received

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

it without reserve and surrendered
unconditionally; [5\_57](orrp18.htm#xref_5_57) numismatics and
archeology as well as literature prove this. King Antiochus of
Commagene, for instance, who died 34 B. C., built himself a monumental
tomb on a spur of the Taurus, in which he placed his horoscope, designed
on a large bas-relief, beside the images of his ancestral
divinities. [5\_58](orrp18.htm#xref_5_58)

The importance which the introduction of the Syrian religions into the
Occident has for us consists therefore in the fact that indirectly they
brought certain theological doctrines of the Chaldeans with them, just
as Isis and Serapis carried beliefs of old Egypt from Alexandria to the
Occident. The Roman empire received successively the religious tribute
of the two great nations that had formerly ruled the Oriental world. It
is characteristic that the god Bel whom Aurelian brought from Asia to
set up as the protector of his states, was in reality a Babylonian who
had emigrated to Palmyra, [5\_59](orrp18.htm#xref_5_59) a cosmopolitan
center apparently predestined by virtue of its location to become the
intermediary between the civilizations of the Euphrates and the
Mediterranean.

The influence exercised by the speculations of the Chaldeans upon
Greco-Roman thought can be asserted positively, but cannot as yet be
strictly defined. It was at once philosophic and religious, literary and
popular. The entire neo-Platonist school used the names of those
venerable masters, but it cannot be determined how much it really owes
to them. A selection of poems that has often been quoted since the third
century, under the title of "Chaldaic Oracles" <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) combines the ancient Hellenic theories
with a fantastic

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

mysticism that was certainly imported from the Orient. It is to
Babylonia what the literature of Hermes Trismegistus is to Egypt, and it
is equally difficult to determine the nature of the ingredients that the
author put into his sacred compositions. But at an earlier date the
Syrian religions had spread far and wide in the Occident ideas conceived
on the distant banks of the Euphrates. I shall try to indicate briefly
what their share in the pagan syncretism was.

We have seen that the gods from Alexandria gained souls especially by
the promise of blessed immortality. Those from Syria must also have
satisfied doubts tormenting all the minds of that time. As a matter of
fact the old Semitic ideas on man's fate in after-life were little
comforting. We know how sad, dull and hopeless their conception of life
after death was. The dead descended into a subterranean realm where they
led a miserable existence, a weak reflection of the one they had lost;
since they were subject to wants and suffering, they had to be supported
by funeral offerings placed on their sepulchers by their descendants.
Those ancient beliefs and customs were found also in primitive Greece
and Italy.

This rudimentary eschatology, however, gave way to quite a different
conception, one that was closely related to the Chaldean astrology, and
which spread over the Occident towards the end of the republic.
According to this doctrine the soul returned to heaven after death, to
live there among the divine stars. While it remained on earth it was
subject to all the bitter necessities of a destiny determined by the
revolutions of the stars; but when it ascended into the upper regions,
it escaped that fate and even the limits of time;

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

it shared equally in the immortality of the sidereal gods that
surrounded it. [5\_60](orrp18.htm#xref_5_60) In the opinion of some, the
soul was attracted by the rays of the sun, and after passing through the
moon, where it was purified, it lost itself in the shining star of
day. [5\_61](orrp18.htm#xref_5_61) Another more purely astrological
theory, that was undoubtedly a development of the former, taught that
the soul descended to earth from the heights of heaven by passing
through the spheres of the seven planets. During its passage it acquired
the dispositions and qualities proper to each planet. After death it
returned to its original abode by the same route. To get from one sphere
to another, it had to pass a door guarded by a commandant <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) [5\_62](orrp18.htm#xref_5_62) Only the
souls of initiates knew the password that made those incorruptible
guardians yield, and under the conduct of a
psychopompus [5\_63](orrp18.htm#xref_5_63) they ascended safely from
zone to zone. As the soul rose it divested itself of the passions and
qualities it had acquired on its descent to the earth as though they
were garments, and, free from sensuality, it penetrated into the eighth
heaven to enjoy everlasting happiness as a subtle essence.

Perhaps this doctrine, undoubtedly of Babylonian origin, was not
generally accepted by the Syrian religions, as it was by the mysteries
of Mithra, but these religions, impregnated with astrology, certainly
propagated the belief that the souls of those worshipers that had led
pious lives were elevated to the heights of heaven, where an apotheosis
made them the equals of the luminous gods. [5\_64](orrp18.htm#xref_5_64)
Under the empire this doctrine slowly supplanted all others; the Elysian
fields, which the votaries of Isis and Serapis still located in

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the depths of the earth, were transferred into the ether bathing the
fixed stars, [5\_65](orrp18.htm#xref_5_65) and the underworld was
thereafter reserved for the wicked who had not been allowed to pass
through the celestial gates.

The sublime regions occupied by the purified souls were also the abode
of the supreme god. [5\_66](orrp18.htm#xref_5_66) When it transformed
the ideas on the destiny of man, astrology also modified those relating
to the nature of the divinity. In this matter the Syrian religions were
especially original; for even if the Alexandrian mysteries offered man
just as comforting prospects of immortality as the eschatology of their
rivals, they were backward in building up a commensurate theology. To
the Semitic races belongs the honor of having reformed the ancient
fetichism most thoroughly. Their base and narrow conceptions of early
times to which we can trace their existence, broaden and rise until they
form a kind of monotheism.

As we have seen, the Syrian tribes worshiped a god of
lightning, [5\_67](orrp18.htm#xref_5_67) like all primitive races. That
god opened the reservoirs of the firmament to let the rain fall and
split the giant trees of the woods with the double ax that always
remained his emblem. [5\_68](orrp18.htm#xref_5_68) When the progress of
astronomy removed the constellations to incommensurable distances, the
"Baal of the Heavens" (*Ba‘al šamîn*) had to grow in majesty.
Undoubtedly at the time of the Achemenides, he was connected with the
Ahura-Mazda of the Persians, the ancient god of the vault of heaven, who
had become the highest physical and moral power, and this connection
helped to transform the old genius of
thunder. [5\_69](orrp18.htm#xref_5_69) People continued to worship the
material heaven in him; under the Romans he was still simply called

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Caelus*, as well as "Celestial Jupiter"
(*Jupiter Caelestis*, Ζεὺς Οὐράνιος), [5\_70](orrp18.htm#xref_5_70) but
it was a heaven studied by a sacred science that venerated its
harmonious mechanism. The Seleucides represented him on their coins with
a crescent over his forehead and carrying a sun with seven rays, to
symbolize the fact that he presided over the course of the
stars; [5\_71](orrp18.htm#xref_5_71) or else he was shown with the two
Dioscuri at his side, heroes who enjoyed life and suffered death in
turn, according to the Greek myth, and who had become the symbols of the
two celestial hemispheres. Religious uranography placed the residence of
the supreme divinity in the most elevated region of the world, fixing
its abode in the zone most distant from the earth, above the planets and
the fixed stars. This fact was intended to be expressed by the term
Most-High <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) applied to the Syrian
Baals as well as to Jehovah. [5\_72](orrp18.htm#xref_5_72) According to
this cosmic religion, the Most High resided in the immense orb that
contained the spheres of all the stars and embraced the entire universe
which was subject to his domination. The Latins translated the name of
this "Hypsistos" by *Jupiter summus
exsuperantissimus* [5\_73](orrp18.htm#xref_5_73) to indicate his
preeminence overall divine beings.

As a matter of fact, his power was infinite. The primary postulate of
the Chaldean astrology was that all phenomena and events of this world
were necessarily determined by sidereal influence. The changes of
nature, as well as the dispositions of men, were controlled according to
fate, by the divine energies that resided in the heavens. In other
words, the gods were almighty; they were the masters of destiny that
governed the universe absolutely. The notion of their

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

omnipotence resulted from the development of the ancient autocracy with
which the Baals were credited. As we have stated, they were conceived
after the image of an Asiatic monarch, and the religious terminology was
evidently intended to display the humility of their priests toward them.
In Syria we find nothing analogous to what existed in Egypt, where the
priest thought he could compel the gods to act, and even dared to
threaten them. [5\_74](orrp18.htm#xref_5_74) The distance separating the
human and the divine always was much greater with the Semitic tribes,
and all that astrology did was to emphasize the distance more strongly
by giving it a doctrinal foundation and a scientific appearance. In the
Latin world the Asiatic religions propagated the conception of the
absolute and illimitable sovereignty of God over the earth. Apuleius
calls the Syrian goddess *omnipotens et omniparens*, "mistress and
mother of all things." [5\_75](orrp18.htm#xref_5_75)

The observation of the starry skies, moreover, had led the Chaldeans to
the notion of a divine eternity. The constancy of the sidereal
revolutions inspired the conclusion as to their perpetuity. The stars
follow their ever uncompleted courses unceasingly; as soon as the end of
their journey is reached, they resume without stopping the road already
covered, and the cycles of years in which their movements take place
extend from the indefinite past into the indefinite
future. [5\_76](orrp18.htm#xref_5_76) Thus a clergy of astronomers
necessarily conceived Baal, "Lord of the heavens," as the "Master of
eternity" or "He whose name is praised through all
eternity" [5\_77](orrp18.htm#xref_5_77)--titles which constantly recur
in Semitic inscriptions. The divine stars did not die, like Osiris or
Attis; whenever they seemed to weaken, they were

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

born to a new life and always remained invincible (*invicti*).

Together with the mysteries of the Syrian Baals, this theological notion
penetrated into Occidental paganism. [5\_78](orrp18.htm#xref_5_78)
Whenever an inscription to a *deus aeternus* is found in the Latin
provinces it refers to a Syrian sidereal god, and it is a remarkable
fact that this epithet did not enter the ritual before the second
century, at the time the worship of the god Heaven
(*Caelus*) [5\_79](orrp18.htm#xref_5_79) was propagated. That the
philosophers had long before placed the first cause beyond the limits of
time was of no consequence, for their theories had not penetrated into
the popular consciousness nor modified the traditional formulary of the
liturgies. To the people the divinities were beings more beautiful, more
vigorous, and more powerful than man, but born like him, and exempt only
from old age and death, the immortals of old Homer. The Syrian priests
diffused the idea of a god without beginning and without end through the
Roman world, and thus contributed, along lines parallel with the Jewish
proselytism, to lend the authority of dogma to what had previously been
only a metaphysical theory.

The Baals were universal as well as eternal, and their power became
limitless in regard to space as it had been in regard to time. These two
principles were correlative. The title of "*mar‘olam*" which the Baals
bore occasionally may be translated by "Lord of the universe," or by
"Lord of eternity," and efforts certainly have been made to claim the
twofold quality for them. [5\_80](orrp18.htm#xref_5_80) Peopled with
divine constellations and traversed by planets assimilated to the
inhabitants of Olympus, the heavens determined the destinies of the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

entire human race by their movements, and the whole earth was subject to
the changes produced by their revolutions. [5\_81](orrp18.htm#xref_5_81)
Consequently the old *Ba‘al šamîn* was necessarily transformed into a
universal power. Of course, even under the Cæsars there existed in Syria
traces of a period when the local god was the fetich of a clan and could
be worshiped by the members of that clan only, a period when strangers
were admitted to his altars only after a ceremony of initiation, as
brothers, or at least as guests and
clients. [5\_82](orrp18.htm#xref_5_82) But from the period when our
knowledge of the history of the great divinities of Heliopolis or
Hierapolis begins, these divinities were regarded as common to all
Syrians, and crowds of pilgrims came from distant countries to obtain
grace in the holy cities. As protectors of the entire human race the
Baals gained proselytes in the Occident, and their temples witnessed
gatherings f devotees of every race and nationality. In this respect the
Baals were distinctly different from Jehovah.

The essence of paganism implies that the nature of a divinity broadens
as the number of its votaries increases. Everybody credits it with some
new quality, and its character becomes more complex. As it gains in
power it also has a tendency to dominate its companion gods and to
concentrate their functions in itself. To escape this threatening
absorption, these gods must be of a very sharply defined personality and
of a very original character. The vague Semitic deities, however, were
devoid of a well-defined individuality. We fail to find among them a
well organized society of immortals, like that of the Greek Olympus
where each divinity had its own features and its own particular

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

life full of adventures and experiences, and each followed its special
calling to the exclusion of all the others. One was a physician, another
a poet, a third a shepherd, hunter or blacksmith. The Greek inscriptions
found in Syria are, in this regard, eloquently
concise. [5\_83](orrp18.htm#xref_5_83) Usually they have the name of
Zeus accompanied by some simple epithet: *kurios* <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) (Lord), *aniketos* <span
id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14) (invincible), *megistos* <span
id="fr_15"></span>[3](#fn_15) (greatest). All these Baals seem to have
been brothers. They were personalities of indeterminate outline and
interchangeable powers and were readily confused.

At the time the Romans came into contact with Syria, it had already
passed through a period of syncretism similar to the one we can study
with greater precision in the Latin world. The ancient exclusiveness and
the national particularism had been overcome. The Baals of the great
sanctuaries had enriched themselves with the
virtues [5\_84](orrp18.htm#xref_5_84) of their neighbors; then, always
following the same process, they had taken certain features from foreign
divinities brought over by the Greek conquerors. In that manner their
characters had become indefinable, they performed incompatible functions
and possessed irreconcilable attributes. An inscription found in
Britain [5\_85](orrp18.htm#xref_5_85) assimilates the Syrian goddess to
Peace, Virtue, Ceres, Cybele, and even to the sign of the Virgin.

In conformity with the law governing the development of paganism, the
Semitic gods tended to become pantheistic because they comprehended all
nature and were identified with it. The various deities were nothing but
different aspects under which the supreme and infinite being manifested
itself. Although Syria remained

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

deeply and even coarsely idolatrous in practice, in theory it approached
monotheism or, better perhaps, henotheism. By an absurd but curious
etymology the name Hadad has been explained as "one, one" (*‘ad
‘ad*). [5\_86](orrp18.htm#xref_5_86)

Everywhere the narrow and divided polytheism showed a confused tendency
to elevate itself into a superior synthesis, but in Syria astrology lent
the firmness of intelligent conviction to notions that were vague
elsewhere. The Chaldean cosmology, which deified all elements but
ascribed a predominant influence to the stars, ruled the entire Syrian
syncretism. It considered the world as a great organism which was kept
intact by an intimate solidarity, and whose parts continually influenced
each other.

The ancient Semites believed therefore that the divinity could be
regarded as embodied in the waters, in the fire of the lightning, in
stones or plants. But the most powerful gods were the constellations and
the planets that governed the course of time and of all things.

The sun was supreme because it led the starry choir, because it was the
king and guide of all the other luminaries and therefore the master of
the whole world. [5\_87](orrp18.htm#xref_5_87) The astronomical
doctrines of the "Chaldeans" taught that this incandescent globe
alternately attracted and repelled the other sidereal bodies, and from
this principle the Oriental theologians had concluded that it must
determine the entire life of the universe, inasmuch as it regulated the
movements of the heavens. As the "intelligent light" it was especially
the creator of human reason, and just as it repelled and attracted the
planets in turn, it was believed

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

to send out souls, at the time of birth, into the bodies they animated,
and to cause them to return to its bosom after death by means of a
series of emissions and absorptions.

Later on, when the seat of the Most-High was placed beyond the limits of
the universe, the radiant star that gives us light became the visible
image of the supreme power, the source of all life and all intelligence,
the intermediary between an inaccessible god and mankind, and the one
object of special homage from the
multitude. [5\_88](orrp18.htm#xref_5_88)

Solar pantheism, which grew up among the Syrians of the Hellenistic
period as a result of the influence of Chaldean astrolatry, imposed
itself upon the whole Roman world under the empire. Our very rapid
sketch of the constitution of that theological system shows incidentally
the last form assumed by the pagan idea of God. In this matter Syria was
Rome's teacher and predecessor. The last formula reached by the religion
of the pagan Semites and in consequence by that of the Romans, was a
divinity unique, almighty, eternal, universal and ineffable, that
revealed itself throughout nature, but whose most splendid and most
energetic manifestation was the sun. To arrive at the Christian
monotheism [5\_89](orrp18.htm#xref_5_89) only one final tie had to be
broken, that is to say, this supreme being residing in a distant heaven
had to be removed beyond the world. So we see once more in this
instance, how the propagation of the Oriental cults levelled the roads
for Christianity and heralded its triumph. Although astrology was always
fought by the church, it had nevertheless prepared the minds for the
dogmas the church was to proclaim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[104:1](orrp09.htm#fr_9) Συρία θεά.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[124:1](orrp09.htm#fr_10) Λόγια Χαλδαϊκά.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[126:1](orrp09.htm#fr_11) ἅρχων.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[128:1](orrp09.htm#fr_12) Ὕψιστος.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[132:1](orrp09.htm#fr_13) κύριος.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[132:2](orrp09.htm#fr_14) ἀνίκητος.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[132:3](orrp09.htm#fr_15) μέγιστος.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Persia](orrp10)
