[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](orrp11)  [Next](orrp13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

# THE TRANSFORMATION OF ROMAN PAGANISM.

ABOUT the time of the Severi the religion of Europe must have presented
an aspect of surprising variety. Although dethroned, the old native
Italian, Celtic and Iberian divinities were still alive. Though eclipsed
by foreign rivals, they lived on in the devotion of the lower classes
and in the traditions of the rural districts. For a long time the Roman
gods had been established in every town and had received the homage of
an official clergy according to pontifical rites. Beside them, however,
were installed the representatives of all the Asiatic pantheons, and
these received the most fervent adoration from the masses. New powers
had arrived from Asia Minor, Egypt, Syria, and the dazzling Oriental sun
outshone the stars of Italy's temperate sky. All forms of paganism were
simultaneously received and retained while the exclusive monotheism of
the Jews kept its adherents, and Christianity strengthened its churches
and fortified its orthodoxy, at the same time giving birth to the
baffling vagaries of gnosticism. A hundred different currents carried
away hesitating and undecided minds, a hundred contrasting sermons made
appeals to the conscience of the people.

Let us suppose that in modern Europe the faithful

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

had deserted the Christian churches to worship Allah or Brahma, to
follow the precepts of Confucius or Buddha, or to adopt the maxims of
the Shinto; let us imagine a great confusion of all the races of the
world in which Arabian mullahs, Chinese scholars, Japanese bonzes,
Tibetan lamas and Hindu pundits would be preaching fatalism and
predestination, ancestor-worship and devotion to a deified sovereign,
pessimism and deliverance through annihilation--a confusion in which all
those priests would erect temples of exotic architecture in our cities
and celebrate their disparate rites therein. Such a dream, which the
future may perhaps realize, would offer a pretty accurate picture of the
religious chaos in which the ancient world was struggling before the
reign of Constantine.

The Oriental religions that successively gained popularity exercised a
decisive influence on the transformation of Latin paganism. Asia Minor
was the first to have its gods accepted by Italy. Since the end of the
Punic wars the black stone symbolizing the Great Mother of Pessinus had
been established on the Palatine, but only since the reign of Claudius
could the Phrygian cult freely develop in all its splendor and excesses.
It introduced a sensual, highly-colored and fanatical worship into the
grave and somber religion of the Romans. Officially recognized, it
attracted and took under its protection other foreign divinities from
Anatolia and assimilated them to Cybele and Attis, who thereafter bore
the symbols of several deities together. Cappadocian, Jewish, Persian
and even Christian influences modified the old rites of Pessinus and
filled them with ideas of spiritual purification and eternal

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

redemption by the bloody baptism of the taurobolium. But the priests did
not succeed in eliminating the basis of coarse naturism which ancient
barbaric tradition had imposed upon them.

Beginning with the second century before our era, the mysteries of Isis
and Serapis spread over Italy with the Alexandrian culture whose
religious expression they were, and in spite of all persecution
established themselves at Rome where Caligula gave them the freedom of
the city. They did not bring with them a very advanced theological
system, because Egypt never produced anything but a chaotic aggregate of
disparate doctrines, nor a very elevated ethics, because the level of
its morality--that of the Alexandrian Greeks--rose but slowly from a low
stage. But they made Italy, and later the other Latin provinces,
familiar with an ancient ritual of incomparable charm that aroused
widely different feelings with its splendid processions and liturgic
dramas. They also gave their votaries positive assurance of a blissful
immortality after death, when they would be united with Serapis and,
participating body and soul in his divinity, would live in eternal
contemplation of the gods.

At a somewhat later period arrived the numerous and varied Baals of
Syria. The great economic movement starting at the beginning of our era
which produced the colonization of the Latin world by Syrian slaves and
merchants, not only modified the material civilization of Europe, but
also its conceptions and beliefs. The Semitic cults entered into
successful competition with those of Asia Minor and Egypt. They may not
have had so stirring a liturgy, nor have been so thoroughly absorbed in
preoccupation with a future

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

life, although they taught an original eschatology, but they did have an
infinitely higher idea of divinity. The Chaldean astrology, of which the
Syrian priests were enthusiastic disciples, had furnished them with the
elements of a scientific theology. It had led them to the notion of a
God residing far from the earth above the zone of the stars, a God
almighty, universal and eternal. Everything on earth was determined by
the revolutions of the heavens according to infinite cycles of years. It
had taught them at the same time the worship of the sun, the radiant
source of earthly life and human intelligence.

The learned doctrines of the Babylonians had also imposed themselves
upon the Persian mysteries of Mithra which considered time identified
with heaven as the supreme cause, and deified the stars; but they had
superimposed themselves upon the ancient Mazdean creed without
destroying it. Thus the essential principles of the religion of Iran,
the secular and often successful rival of Greece, penetrated into the
Occident under cover of Chaldean wisdom. The Mithra worship, the last
and highest manifestation of ancient paganism, had Persian dualism for
its fundamental dogma. The world is the scene and the stake of a contest
between good and evil, Ormuzd and Ahriman, gods and demons, and from
this primary conception of the universe flowed a strong and pure system
of ethics. Life is a combat; soldiers under the command of Mithra,
invincible heroes of the faith, must ceaselessly oppose the undertakings
of the infernal powers which sow corruption broadcast. This imperative
ethics was productive of energy and formed the characteristic

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

feature distinguishing Mithraism from all other Oriental cults.

Thus every one of the Levantine countries--and that is what we meant to
show in this brief recapitulation--had enriched Roman paganism with new
beliefs that were frequently destined to outlive it. What was the result
of this confusion of heterogeneous doctrines whose multiplicity was
extreme and whose values were very different? How did the barbaric ideas
refine themselves and combine with each other when thrown into the fiery
crucible of imperial syncretism? In other words, what shape was assumed
by ancient idolatry, so impregnated with exotic theories during the
fourth century, when it was finally dethroned? It is this point that we
should like to indicate briefly as the conclusion to these studies.

However, can we speak of *one* pagan religion? Did not the blending of
the races result in multiplying the variety of disagreements? Had not
the confused collision of creeds produced a division into fragments, a
communication of churches? Had not a complacent syncretism engendered a
multiplication of sects? The "Hellenes," as Themistius told the Emperor
Valens, had three hundred ways of conceiving and honoring deity, who
takes pleasure in such diversity of homage. [8\_1](orrp21.htm#xref_8_1)
In paganism a cult does not die violently, but after long decay. A new
doctrine does not necessarily displace an older one. They may co-exist
for a long time as contrary possibilities suggested by the intellect or
faith, and all opinions, all practices, seem respectable to paganism. It
never has any radical or revolutionary transformations. Undoubtedly, the
pagan beliefs of the fourth century or earlier did not

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

have the consistency of a metaphysical system nor the rigor of canons
formulated by a council. There is always a considerable difference
between the faith of the masses and that of cultured minds, and this
difference was bound to be great in an aristocratic empire whose social
classes were sharply separated. The devotion of the masses was as
unchanging as the depths of the sea; it was not stirred up nor heated by
the upper currents. [8\_2](orrp21.htm#xref_8_2) The peasants practised
their pious rites over anointed stones, sacred springs and blossoming
trees, as in the past, and continued celebrating their rustic holidays
during seed-time and harvest. They adhered with invincible tenacity to
their traditional usages. Degraded and lowered to the rank of
superstitions, these were destined to persist for centuries under the
Christian orthodoxy without exposing it to serious peril, and while they
were no longer marked in the liturgic calendars they were still
mentioned occasionally in the collections of folk-lore.

At the other extreme of society the philosophers delighted in veiling
religion with the frail and brilliant tissue of their speculations. Like
the emperor Julian they improvised bold and incongruous interpretations
of the myth of the Great Mother, and these interpretations were received
and relished by a restricted circle of scholars. But during the fourth
century these vagaries of the individual imagination were nothing but
arbitrary applications of uncontested principles. During that century
there was much less intellectual anarchy than when Lucian had exposed
the sects "for sale at public auction"; a comparative harmony arose
among the pagans after they joined the opposition. One single school,
that of neo-Platonism, ruled all

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

minds. This school not only respected positive religion, as ancient
stoicism had done, but venerated it, because it saw there the expression
of an old revelation handed down by past generations. It considered the
sacred books divinely inspired--the books of Hermes Trismegistus,
Orpheus, the Chaldean oracles, Homer, and especially the esoteric
doctrines of the mysteries--and subordinated its theories to their
teachings. As there must be no contradiction between all the disparate
traditions of different countries and different periods, because all
have emanated from one divinity, philosophy, the *ancilla theologiae*,
attempted to reconcile them by the aid of allegory. And thus, by means
of compromises between old Oriental ideas and Greco-Latin thought, an
*ensemble* of beliefs slowly took form, the truth of which seemed to
have been established by common consent. So when the atrophied parts of
the Roman religion had been removed, foreign elements had combined to
give it a new vigor and in it themselves became modified. This hidden
work of internal decomposition and reconstruction had unconsciously
produced a religion very different from the one Augustus had attempted
to restore.

However, we would be tempted to believe that there had been no change in
the Roman faith, were we to read certain authors that fought idolatry in
those days. Saint Augustine, for instance, in his *City of God*,
pleasantly pokes fun at the multitude of Italian gods that presided over
the paltriest acts of life. [8\_3](orrp21.htm#xref_8_3) But the useless,
ridiculous deities of the old pontifical litanies no longer existed
outside of the books of antiquaries. As a matter of fact, the Christian
polemicist's authority in this instance was Varro. The defenders of the

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

church sought weapons against idolatry even in Xenophanes, the first
philosopher to oppose Greek polytheism. It has frequently been shown
that apologists find it difficult to follow the progress of the
doctrines which they oppose, and often their blows fall upon dead men.
Moreover, it is a fault common to all scholars, to all imbued with book
learning, that they are better acquainted with the opinions of ancient
authors than with the sentiments of their contemporaries, and that they
prefer to live in the past rather than in the world surrounding them. It
was easier to reproduce the objections of the Epicureans and the
skeptics against abolished beliefs, than to study the defects of an
active organism with a view to criticizing it. In those times the merely
formal culture of the schools caused many of the best minds to lose
their sense of reality.

The Christian polemics therefore frequently give us an inadequate idea
of paganism in its decline. When they complacently insisted upon the
immorality of the sacred legends they ignored the fact that the gods and
heroes of mythology had no longer any but a purely literary
existence. [8\_4](orrp21.htm#xref_8_4) The writers of that period, like
those of the Renaissance, regarded the fictions of mythology as details
necessary to poetical composition. They were ornaments of style,
rhetorical devices, but not the expression of a sincere faith. Those old
myths had fallen to the lowest degree of disrepute in the theater. The
actors of mimes ridiculing Jupiter's gallant adventures did not believe
in their reality any more than the author of Faust believed in the
compact with Mephistopheles.

So we must not be deceived by the oratorical effects

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

of a rhetorician like Arnobius or by the Ciceronian periods of a
Lactantius. In order to ascertain the real status of the beliefs we must
refer to Christian authors who were men of letters less than they were
men of action, who lived the life of the people and breathed the air of
the streets, and who spoke from experience rather than from the
treatises of myth-mongers. They were high functionaries like
Prudentius; [8\_5](orrp21.htm#xref_8_5) like the man to whom the name
"Ambrosiaster" [8\_6](orrp21.htm#xref_8_6) has been given since the time
of Erasmus; like the converted pagan Firmicus
Maternus, [8\_7](orrp21.htm#xref_8_7) who had written a treatise on
astrology before opposing "The Error of the Profane Religions"; like
certain priests brought into contact with the last adherents of idolatry
through their pastoral duties, as for instance the author of the
homilies ascribed to St. Maximus of Turin; [8\_8](orrp21.htm#xref_8_8)
finally like the writers of anonymous pamphlets, works prepared for the
particular occasion and breathing the ardor of all the passions of the
movement. [8\_9](orrp21.htm#xref_8_9) If this inquiry is based on the
obscure indications in regard to their religious convictions left by
members of the Roman aristocracy who remained true to the faith of their
ancestors, like Macrobius or Symmachus; if it is particularly guided by
the exceptionally numerous inscriptions that seem to be the public
expression of the last will of expiring paganism, we shall be able to
gain a sufficiently precise idea of the condition of the Roman religion
at the time of its extinction.

One fact becomes immediately clear from an examination of those
documents. The old national religion of Rome was
dead. [8\_10](orrp21.htm#xref_8_10) The great dignitaries still adorned
themselves with the titles of augur and quindecimvir, or of consul and
tribune, but those archaic

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

prelacies were as devoid of all real influence upon religion as the
republican magistracies were powerless in the state. Their fall had been
made complete on the day when Aurelian established the pontiffs of the
Invincible Sun, the protector of his empire, beside and above the
ancient high priests. The only cults still alive were those of the
Orient, and against them were directed the efforts of the Christian
polemics, who grew more and more bitter in speaking of them. The
barbarian gods had taken the place of the defunct immortals in the
devotion of the pagans. They alone still had empire over the soul.

With all the other "profane religions," Firmicus Maternus fought those
of the four Oriental nations. He connected them with the four elements.
The Egyptians were the worshipers of water--the water of the Nile
fertilizing their country; the Phrygians of the earth, which was to them
the Great Mother of everything; the Syrians and Carthaginians of the
air, which they adored under the name of celestial
Juno; [8\_11](orrp21.htm#xref_8_11) the Persians of fire, to which they
attributed preeminence over the other three principles. This system
certainly was borrowed from the pagan theologians. In the common peril
threatening them, those cults, formerly rivals, had become reconciled
and regarded themselves as divisions and, so to speak, congregations, of
the same church. Each one of them was especially consecrated to one of
the elements which in combination form the universe. Their union
constituted the pantheistic religion of the deified world.

All the Oriental religions assumed the form of
mysteries. [8\_12](orrp21.htm#xref_8_12) Their dignitaries were at the
same time pontiffs of the Invincible Sun, fathers of Mithra, celebrants

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

of the taurobolium of the Great Mother, prophets of Isis; in short, they
had all titles imaginable. In their initiation they received the
revelation of an esoteric doctrine strengthened by their
fervor. [8\_13](orrp21.htm#xref_8_13) What was the theology they
learned? Here also a certain dogmatic homogeneity has established
itself.

All writers agree with Firmicus that the pagans worshiped the
*elementa*. [8\_14](orrp21.htm#xref_8_14) Under this term were included
not only the four simple substances which by their opposition and
blending caused all phenomena of the visible
world, [8\_15](orrp21.htm#xref_8_15) but also the stars and in general
the elements of all celestial and earthly
bodies. [8\_16](orrp21.htm#xref_8_16)

We therefore may in a certain sense speak of the return of paganism to
nature worship; but must this transformation be regarded as a
retrogression toward a barbarous past, as a relapse to the level of
primitive animism? If so, we should be deceived by appearances.
Religions do not fall back into infancy as they grow old. The pagans of
the fourth century no longer naively considered their gods as capricious
genii, as the disordered powers of a confused natural philosophy; they
conceived them as cosmic energies whose providential action was
regulated in a harmonious system. Faith was no longer instinctive and
impulsive, for erudition and reflection had reconstructed the entire
theology. In a certain sense it might be said that theology had passed
from the fictitious to the metaphysical state, according to the formula
of Comte. It was intimately connected with the knowledge of the day,
which was cherished by its last votaries with love and pride, as
faithful heirs of the ancient wisdom of the Orient and
Greece. [8\_17](orrp21.htm#xref_8_17) In many instances it was nothing
but a religious form of the cosmology of the

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

period. This constituted both its strength and its weakness. The
rigorous principles of astrology determined its conception of heaven and
earth.

The universe was an organism animated by a God, unique, eternal and
almighty. Sometimes this God was identified with the destiny that ruled
all things, with infinite time that regulated all visible phenomena, and
he was worshiped in each subdivision of that endless duration,
especially in the months and the seasons. [8\_18](orrp21.htm#xref_8_18)
Sometimes, however, he was compared with a king; he was thought of as a
sovereign governing an empire, and the various gods then were the
princes and dignitaries interceding with the rulers on behalf of his
subjects whom they led in some manner into his presence. This heavenly
court had its messengers or "angels" conveying to men the will of the
master and reporting again the vows and petitions of his subjects. It
was an aristocratic monarchy in heaven as on
earth. [8\_19](orrp21.htm#xref_8_19) A more philosophic conception made
the divinity an infinite power impregnating all nature with its
overflowing forces. "There is only one God, sole and supreme," wrote
Maximus of Madaura about 390, "without beginning or parentage, whose
energies, diffused through the world, we invoke under various names,
because we are ignorant of his real name. By successively addressing our
supplications to his different members we intend to honor him in his
entirety. Through the mediation of the subordinate gods the common
father both of themselves and of all men is honored in a thousand
different ways by mortals who are thus in accord in spite of their
discord." [8\_20](orrp21.htm#xref_8_20)

However, this ineffable God, who comprehensively embraces everything,
manifests himself especially in

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

the resplendent brightness of the ethereal
sky. [8\_21](orrp21.htm#xref_8_21) He reveals his power in water and in
fire, in the earth, the sea and the blowing of the winds; but his
purest, most radiant and most active epiphany is in the stars whose
revolutions determine every event and all our actions. Above all he
manifests himself in the sun, the motive power of the celestial spheres,
the inexhaustible seat of light and life, the creator of all
intelligence on earth. Certain philosophers like the senator
Praetextatus, one of the *dramatis personae* of Macrobius, confounded
all the ancient divinities of paganism with the sun in a thorough-going
syncretism. [8\_22](orrp21.htm#xref_8_22)

Just as a superficial observation might lead to the belief that the
theology of the last pagans had reverted to its origin, so at first
sight the transformation of the ritual might appear like a return to
savagery. With the adoption of the Oriental mysteries barbarous, cruel
and obscene practices were undoubtedly spread, as for instance the
masquerading in the guise of animals in the Mithraic initiations, the
bloody dances of the *galli* of the Great Mother and the mutilations of
the Syrian priests. Nature worship was originally as "amoral" as nature
itself. But an ethereal spiritualism ideally transfigured the coarseness
of those primitive customs. just as the doctrine had become completely
impregnated with philosophy and erudition, so the liturgy had become
saturated with ethical ideas.

The taurobolium, a disgusting shower-bath of lukewarm blood, had become
a means of obtaining a new and eternal life; the ritualistic ablutions
were no longer external and material acts, but were supposed to cleanse
the soul of its impurities and to restore its original innocence; the
sacred repasts imparted

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

an intimate virtue to the soul and furnished sustenance to the spiritual
life. While efforts were made to maintain the continuity of tradition,
its content had slowly been transformed. The most shocking and
licentious fables were metamorphosed into edifying narratives by
convenient and subtle interpretations which were a joy to the learned
mythographers. Paganism had become a school of morality, the priest a
doctor and director of the conscience. [8\_23](orrp21.htm#xref_8_23)

The purity and holiness imparted by the practice of sacred ceremonies
were the indispensable condition for obtaining eternal
life. [8\_24](orrp21.htm#xref_8_24) The mysteries promised a blessed
immortality to their initiates, and claimed to reveal to them infallible
means of effecting their salvation. According to a generally accepted
symbol, the spirit animating man was a spark, detached from the fires
shining in the ether; it partook of their divinity and so, it was
believed, had descended to the earth to undergo a trial. It could
literally be said that

"Man is a fallen god who still remembers heaven."

After having left their corporeal prisons, the pious souls reascended
towards the celestial regions of the divine stars, to live forever in
endless brightness beyond the starry
spheres. [8\_25](orrp21.htm#xref_8_25)

But at the other extremity of the world, facing this luminous realm,
extended the somber kingdom of evil spirits. They were irreconcilable
adversaries of the gods and men of good will, and constantly left the
infernal regions to roam about the earth and scatter evil. With the aid
of the celestial spirits, the faithful had to struggle forever against
their designs and seek to avert their anger by means of bloody
sacrifices.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But, with the help of occult and terrible
processes, the magician could subject them to his power and compel them
to serve his purposes. This demonology, the monstrous offspring of
Persian dualism, favored the rise of every
superstition. [8\_26](orrp21.htm#xref_8_26)

However, the reign of the evil powers was not to last forever. According
to common opinion the universe would be destroyed by
fire [8\_27](orrp21.htm#xref_8_27) after the times had been fulfilled.
All the wicked would perish, but the just would be revived and establish
the reign of universal happiness in the regenerated
world. [8\_28](orrp21.htm#xref_8_28)

The foregoing is a rapid sketch of the theology of paganism after three
centuries of Oriental influence. From coarse fetichism and savage
superstitions the learned priests of the Asiatic cults had gradually
produced a complete system of metaphysics and eschatology, as the
Brahmins built up the spiritualistic monism of the Vedanta beside the
monstrous idolatry of Hinduism, or, to confine our comparisons to the
Latin world, as the jurists drew from the traditional customs of
primitive tribes the abstract principles of a legal system that governs
the most cultivated societies. This religion was no longer like that of
ancient Rome, a mere collection of propitiatory and expiatory rites
performed by the citizen for the good of the state; it now pretended to
offer to all men a world-conception which gave rise to a rule of conduct
and placed the end of existence in the future life. It was more unlike
the worship that Augustus had attempted to restore than the Christianity
that fought it. The two opposed creeds moved in the same intellectual
and moral sphere, [8\_29](orrp21.htm#xref_8_29) and one could actually
pass from one to the other without shock or interruption. Sometimes when

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

reading the long works of the last Latin writers, like Ammianus
Marcellinus or Boëthius, or the panegyrics of the official
orators, [8\_30](orrp21.htm#xref_8_30) scholars could well ask whether
their authors were pagan or Christian. In the time of Symmachus and
Praetextatus, the members of the Roman aristocracy who had remained
faithful to the gods of their ancestors did not have a mentality or
morality very different from that of adherents of the new faith who sat
with them in the senate. The religious and mystical spirit of the Orient
had slowly overcome the whole social organism and had prepared all
nations to unite in the bosom of a universal church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](orrp13)
