[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pifs17)  [Next](pifs19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

# XV

### HONEST BIG-EARS

NEARLY all of you have seen pictures of the Burro, the quaint little
donkey of the Southwest. He is very small,--not more than half the
weight of a smallish mule,--but very strong, very sure-footed, and very
reliable. And he is one of the drollest, "cutest," wisest-looking
creatures on earth.

T'ah-hlá-a-hloon, or Big-ears, as the Tée-wahn call him, does not appear
very often in their folklore--and for a very natural reason. Most of
these myths were made centuries before a white man ever saw this
country; and until Europeans came, there were neither horses, donkeys,
sheep, goats, cats, nor cattle (except the buffalo) in either America.
It was the Spanish pioneers who gave all these animals to the Pueblos.
Nor did the Indians have milk, cheese, wheat, or metals of any sort. So
when we see a story in which any of these things are mentioned, we may
know that it was made within the last three hundred and fifty years--or
that an old story has been modified to include them.

There is one of these comparatively modern

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

nursery-tales which is designed to show the honesty and wisdom of the
Burro.

Once Big-ears was coming alone from the farm of his master to Isleta,
carrying a load of curd cheeses done up in buckskin bags. As he came
through the hills he met a Coyote, who said:

"Friend Big-ears, what do you carry on your back?"

"I carry many cheeses for my master, friend Too-wháy-deh," answered the
Burro.

"Then give me one, friend, for I am hunger-dying."

"No," said the Burro, "I cannot give you one, for my master would blame
me--since they are not mine but his, and a man of the pueblo waits for
them."

Many times the Coyote asked him, with soft words; but Big-ears would
not, and went his way. Then Too-wháy-deh followed him behind, without
noise, and slyly bit the bag and stole a cheese. But Big-ears did not
know it, for he could not see behind.

When he came to the pueblo, the man who awaited him unloaded the cheeses
and counted them. "There lacks one," he said; "for thy master said he
would send *so* many. Where is the other?"

"Truly, I know not," answered Big-ears, "but I think Too-wháy-deh stole
it; for he asked me on the way to give him a cheese. But wait--I will
pay him!"

So Big-ears went back to the hills and looked for the house of
Too-wháy-deh. At last he found it, but the Coyote was nowhere, So he lay
down

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

near the hole, and stretched his legs out as if dead, and opened his
mouth wide, and was very still.

Time passing so, the Old-Woman-Coyote came out of the house to bring a
jar of water. But when she saw the Burro lying there, she dropped her
*tinaja*, and ran in crying:

"*Hloo-hli*! <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) come out and see! For a
*buffalo* has died out here, and we must take in some meat."

So Old-Man-Coyote came out, and was very glad, and began to sharpen his
knife.

But his wife said: "But before you cut him up, get me the liver, for I
am very hungry"--and the liver is that which all the foxes like best.

Then the Old-Man-Coyote, thinking to please her, went into the Burro's
mouth to get the liver; but Big-ears shut his teeth on Too-wháy-deh's
head, and jumped up and ran home. The Old-Woman-Coyote followed running,
crying: "*Ay, Nana*! Let go!" But Big-ears would not listen to her, and
brought the thief to his master. When the master heard what had been, he
killed the Coyote, and thanked Big-ears, and gave him much grass. And
this is why, ever since, Big-ears strikes with his hind feet if anything
comes behind him slyly; for he remembers how Too-wháy-deh stole the
cheese.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[105:1](pifs18.htm#fr_60.md) Old Man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. The Feathered Barbers](pifs19.md)
