[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pifs30)  [Next](pifs32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

# XXVIII

### A PUEBLO BLUEBEARD

ANOTHER fragmentary story of the Quères seems to refer to this same
remarkable woman. You will see the connection when you remember that the
Moon disappears every month; and I should judge that the following myth
means that the Storm-King steals her.

Once upon a time a chief of Acoma had a lovely daughter. One day a
handsome stranger stole her and took her away to his home, which was in
the heart of the Snow Mountain (Mt. San Mateo). He was none other than
Mast-Truan, one of the Storm-Gods. Bringing his captive home, the
powerful stranger gave her the finest clothing and treated her very
nicely. But most of the time he had to be away from home, attending to
the storms, and she became very lonesome, for there was no one to keep
her company but Mast-Truan's wrinkled old mother.

One day when she could stand the loneliness no longer, she decided to
take a walk through the enormous house and look at the rooms which she
had not seen. Opening a door she came into a very large room toward the
east; and there were

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

a lot of women crying and shivering with cold, for they had nothing to
wear. Going through this room she came to another, which was full of
gaunt, starving women, and here and there one lay dead upon the floor;
and in the next room were scores of bleached and ghastly skeletons. And
this was what Mast-Truan did with his wives when he was tired of them.
The girl saw her fate, and, returning to her room, sat down and
wept--but there was no escape, for Mast-Truan's old hag of a mother
forever guarded the outer door.

When Mast-Truan came home again, his wife said: "It is now long that I
have not seen. my fathers. Let me go home for a little while."

"Well," said he, "here is some corn which must be shelled. When you have
shelled it and ground it, I will let you out"; and he showed her four
great rooms piled from floor to ceiling with ears of corn. It was more
than one could shell in a year; and when her husband went out, she sat
down again to cry and bemoan her fate.

Just then a queer little old woman appeared before her, with a kindly
smile. It was a *cumúshquio* (fairy-woman).

"What is the matter, my daughter?" asked the old fairy, gently, "and why
do you weep?

The captive told her all, and the fairy said: "Do not fear, daughter,
for I will help you, and we will have all the corn shelled and ground in
four days."

So they fell to work. For two days the girl kept shelling; and though
she could not see the old fairy at all, she could always hear at her
side the click of the ears together. Then for two days

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

she kept grinding on her *metate*, apparently alone, but hearing the
constant grind of another *metate* close beside her. At the end of the
fourth day the last kernel had been scrubbed into blue meal, and she was
very happy. Then the old fairy-woman appeared again, bringing a large
basket and a rope. She opened the doors to all the rooms where the poor
women were prisoners, and bade them all get into the basket one by one.
Mast-Truan had taken away the ladder from the house when he left, that
no one might be able to get out; but with her basket and rope the good
old fairy-woman let them all down to the ground, and told them to hurry
home--which they did as fast as ever their poor, starved legs could
carry them. Then the fairy-woman and the girl escaped, and made their
way to Acoma. So there was a Moon again--and that it *was* the Moon, we
may be very sure; since this same girl became the mother of the Hero
Twins, who were assuredly Children of the Moon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIX. The Hero Twins](pifs32)
