[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pifs06)  [Next](pifs08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

# IV

### THE COYOTE AND THE BLACKBIRDS

ONCE upon a time a Coyote lived near an open wood. As he went to walk
one day near the edge of the wood, he heard the Blackbirds (the Indian
name means "seeds of the prairie") calling excitedly:

"Bring my bag! Bring my bag! It is going to hail!"

The Coyote, being very curious, came near and saw that they all had
buckskin bags to which they were tying lassos, the other ends of which
were thrown over the boughs of the trees. Very much surprised, the
Coyote came to them and asked:

"Blackbird-friends, what are you doing?"

"Oh, friend Coyote," they replied, "we are making ourselves ready, for
soon there will be a very hard hail-storm, and we do not wish to be
pelted to death. We are going to get into these bags and pull ourselves
up under the branches, where the hail cannot strike us."

"That is very good," said the Coyote, "and I would like to do so, too,
if you will let me join you."

"Oh, yes! just run home and get a bag and a lasso, and come back here
and we will help you." said the Pah-táhn, never smiling.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

So the Coyote started running for home, and got a large bag and a lasso,
and came back to the Blackbirds, who were waiting. They fixed the rope
and bag for him, putting the noose around the neck of the bag so that it
would be closed tight when the rope was pulled. Then they threw the end
of the lasso over a strong branch and said:

"Now, friend Coyote, you get into your bag first, for you are so big and
heavy that you cannot pull yourself up, and we will have to help you."

The Coyote crawled into the bag, and all the Blackbirds taking hold of
the rope, pulled with all their might till the bag was swung clear up
under the branch. Then they tied the end of the lasso around the tree so
the bag could not come down, and ran around picking up all the pebbles
they could find. "Mercy! How the hail comes!" they cried excitedly, and
began to throw stones at the swinging bag as hard as ever they could.

"Mercy!" howled the Coyote, as the pebbles pattered against him. "But
this is a terrible storm, Blackbird-friends! It pelts me dreadfully! And
how are you getting along?"

"It is truly very bad, friend Coyote," they answered, "but you are
bigger and stronger than we, and ought to endure it." And they kept
pelting him, all the time crying and chattering as if they, too, were
suffering greatly from the hail.

"Ouch!" yelled the Coyote. "That one hit me very near the eye, friends!
I fear this evil storm will kill us all!"

"But be brave, friend," called back the Blackbirds. "We keep our hearts,
and so should you,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

for you are much stronger than we." And they pelted him all the harder.

So they kept it up until they were too tired to throw any more; and as
for the Coyote, he was so bruised and sore that he could hardly move.
Then they untied the rope and let the bag slowly to the ground, and
loosened the noose at the neck and flew up into the trees with sober
faces.

"Ow!" groaned the Coyote, "I am nearly dead!"

And he crawled weeping and groaning from the bag, and began to lick his
bruises. But when he looked around and saw the sun shining and the
ground dry, and not a hailstone anywhere, he knew that the Blackbirds
had given him a trick, and he limped home in a terrible rage, vowing
that as soon as ever he got well he would follow and eat the Blackbirds
as long as he lived. And ever since, even to this day, he has been
following them to eat them, and that is why the Coyote and the
Blackbirds are always at war.

"Is that so?" cried all the boys in chorus, their eyes shining like
coals.

"Oh, yes, that is the cause of the war," said old Antonio, gravely. "And
now, brother, there is a tail to you," turning to the tall, gray-haired
Felipe <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md); and clearing his throat,
Felipe begins about the Coyote and the Bear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[29:1](pifs07.htm#fr_15.md) Pronounced Fay-lée-peh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Coyote and the Bear](pifs08.md)
