[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](pifs22)  [Next](pifs24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

# XX

### THE TOWN OF THE SNAKE-GIRLS

IN the times that were farthest back, the forefathers of those who now
dwell in Isleta were scattered about in many small villages. You have
already heard the myths of how the inhabitants of several villages
finally abandoned their homes and came to live in the one big town of
the Tée-wahn. Three miles north of Isleta, amid the sandy plain of Los
Padillas, stands the strange round mesa of Shee-em-tóo-ai. It is a
circular "island" of hard, black lava, cut off from the long lava cliffs
which wall the valley of the Rio Grande on the west. Its level top, of
over fifty acres, is some two hundred feet above the plain; the last
fifty feet being a stern and almost unbroken cliff. Upon its top are
still visible the crumbling ruins of the pueblo of Poo-reh-tú-ai--a town
deserted, as we are historically sure, over three hundred and fifty
years ago. The mound outlines of the round *estufa*, the houses and the
streets, are still easy to be traced, and bits of pottery, broken
arrow-heads, and other relics still abound there. In history we know no
more of the pueblo than that it was once there, but had been abandoned
already when Coronado passed in \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

1540; but my aboriginal friends and fellow-citizens of Shee-eh-whíb-bahk
have an interesting legend of the pueblo of Poo-reh-tú-ai and the cause
which led to its abandonment.

When the mesa town was inhabited, so was Isleta; and, being but three
miles apart, the intercommunication was constant. At one time, four
hundred years ago or more, there lived in Isleta a very handsome youth
whose name was Koo-ah-máh-koo-hóo-oo-aí-deh--which means
Young-Man-Who-Embraces-a-Corncob.

In spite of this serious burden of a title, the young man was greatly
admired, and had many friends. Probably they called him something else
"for short," or people would n't have had time to associate with him.
There were two sisters, very pretty girls, living in Poo-reh-tú-ai, and
they fell very seriously in love, both with this same youth. But he had
never really found out how handsome he was, and so thought little about
girls anyhow, caring more to run fastest in the races and to kill the
most game in the hunts. The sisters, finding that he would not notice
their shy smiles, began to make it in their way to pass his house
whenever they came to Isleta, and to say *hin-a-kú-pui-yoo* (good
morning) as they met him on the road. But he paid no attention to them
whatever, except to be polite; and even when they sent him the modest
little gift which means "there is a young lady who loves you!" he was as
provokingly indifferent as ever.

After long coquetting in vain, the girls began to hate him as hard as
before they had loved him. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

They decided, no doubt, that he was *oó-teh*, the Tée-wahn word for "a
mean old thing"; and finally one proposed that they put him out of the
way, for both sisters, young and pretty as they were, were witches.

"We will teach him," said one.

"Yes," said the other, "he ought to be punished; but how shall we do
it?"

"Oh, we will invite him to play a game of *mah-khúr*, and then we'll fix
him. I'll go now and make the hoop."

The witch-sisters made a very gay hoop, and then sent word to the youth
to meet them at the sacred sand-hill, just west of Isleta, as they had
important business with him. Wondering what it could be, he met them at
the appointed time and place.

"Now, Brother Young-Man-Who-Embraces-a-Corncob," said the eldest Sister,
"we want to amuse ourselves a little, so let us have a game of
*mah-khúr*. We have a very nice hoop to play it. You go half-way down
the hill and see if you can catch it when we roll it to you. If you can,
you may have the hoop; but if you fail, you come and roll it to us and
we'll see if we can catch it."

So he went down the hill and waited, and the girls sent the bright wheel
rolling toward him. He was very nimble, and caught it "on the fly"; but
that very instant he was no longer the tall, handsome
Young-Man-Who-Embraces-a-Corncob, but a poor little Coyote, with great
tears rolling down his cheeks. The witch-sisters came laughing and
taunting him, and said:

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

"You see it would have been better to marry us! But now you will always
be a Coyote and an outcast from home. You may roam to the north and to
the south and to the west, but never to the east" (and therefore not
back to Isleta).

The Coyote started off, still weeping; and the two wicked sisters went
home rejoicing at their success. The Coyote roamed away to the west, and
at last turned south. After a time he came across a party of
Isleteños <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) returning from a
trading-trip to the Apache country. He sneaked about their camp,
snapping up odd scraps--for he was nearly starved. In the morning the
Indians spied this Coyote sitting and watching them at a little
distance, and they set their dogs on him. But the Coyote did not run;
and when the dogs came to him they merely sniffed and came away without
hurting him--though every one knows that the dog and the Coyote have
been enemies almost ever since the world began. The Indians were greatly
astonished; and one of them, who was a medicine-man, began to suspect
that there was something wrong. So, without saying anything to the
others, he walked over to the Coyote and said: "Coyote, are you
Coyote-true, or somebody bewitched?" But the Coyote made no reply. Again
the medicine-man asked: "Coyote, are you a man?" At this the Coyote
nodded his head affirmatively, while tears rolled from his eyes.

"Very well, then," said the medicine-man, "come with me." So the Coyote
rose and followed him to the camp; and the medicine-man fed and cared

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

for him as the party journeyed toward Isleta. The last night they camped
at the big barranca, just below the village; and here the medicine-man
told his companions the story of the bewitchment,- for the Coyote had
already told him,--and they were all greatly astonished, and very sad to
learn that this poor Coyote was their handsome friend,
Koo-ah-máh-koo-hóo-oo-aí-deh.

"Now," said the medicine-man, "we will make a nice hoop and try a game."
He made it, and said to the Coyote: "Friend, go and stand over there;
and when I roll this hoop toward you, you must jump and put your head
through it before it stops rolling or falls over upon its side."

The Coyote stood off, and the medicine-man sent the hoop rolling toward
him very hard. just as it came near enough the Coyote made a wonderful
jump and put his head squarely through the middle of it-and there,
instead of the gaunt Coyote, stood the Young-Man-Who-Embraces-a-Corncob,
handsome and well and strong as ever. They all crowded around to
congratulate him and to listen to what had befallen him.

"Now," said the medicine-man, "when we get home, the two witch-sisters
will come to congratulate you, and will pretend not to know anything of
the trouble that befell you, and when you see them you must invite
*them* to a game of *mah-khúr*."

It all came about as he said. When the party got back to Isleta all the
people welcomed the young man whose mysterious disappearance had made
all sad. The news of his return spread rapidly, and soon reached the
village of Poo-reh-tú-ai. \[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

In a day or two the witch-sisters came to Isleta, bringing on their
heads baskets of the choicest foods and other gifts, which they
presented to him in the most cordial manner. To see how they welcomed
him, one would never fancy that they had been the wicked causes of his
suffering. He played his part equally well, and gave no sign that he saw
through their duplicity. At last, when they were about to start home, he
said: "Sisters, let us come to the sand-hill to-morrow to play a little
game."

An invitation--or rather a challenge--of that sort must be accepted
under all Indian etiquette; and the witch-sisters agreed. So at the
appointed hour they met him at the sacred hill. He had made a very
beautiful hoop, and when they saw it they were charmed, and took their
positions at the foot of the declivity. "One, two, three!" he counted;
and at the word, "three!" sent the hoop rolling down to them. They both
grabbed it at the same instant, and lo! instead of the pretty, but
evil-minded sisters of Poo-reh-tú-ai, there lay two huge rattlesnakes,
with big tears falling from their eyes. Young-Man-Who-Embraces-a-Corncob
laid upon their ugly, flat heads a pinch of the sacred meal, and they
ran out their tongues and licked it.

"Now," he said, "this is what happens to the treacherous. Here in these
cliffs shall be your home forever. You must never go to the river, so
you will suffer with thirst and drag yourselves in the dust all the days
of your life."

The Young-Man-Who-Embraces-a-Corncob went back to Isleta, where he lived
to a ripe old

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

age. As for the snakes, they went to live in the cliffs of their own
mesa. The people of Poo-reh-tú-ai soon learned of the fate of the
witch-sisters, and knew that those two great snakes, with tears in their
eyes, were they. That was the beginning of the downfall of
Poo-reh-tú-ai; for the people grew fearful of one another, lest there
might be many more witches, unbeknown, among them. The distrust and
discontent grew rapidly--for to this day nothing on earth will disrupt
any Indian community so quickly or so surely as the belief that some of
the people are witches. In a very short time the people decided to
abandon Poo-reh-tú-ai altogether. Most of them migrated to the
Northwest, and I have not as yet found even a legend to tell what became
of them. The rest settled in Isleta, where their descendants dwell to
this day. There are old men here now who claim that their
great-grandfathers used to see the two huge rattlesnakes basking on the
cliffs of the mesa of Shee-em-tóo-ai, and that the snakes always wept
when people came near them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[133:1](pifs23.htm#fr_74.md) Pronounced
Eez-lay-táyn-yos.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXI. The Drowning of Pecos](pifs24.md)
