[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pifs02)  [Next](pifs04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="img_00100"></span> ![](img/00100.jpg)

THE BROWN STORY-TELLERS

<span id="img_00101"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/00101.jpg) |

FANCY that if almost any of us were asked, "When did people begin to
make fairy stories?" our first thought would be, "Why, of course, after
mankind had become civilized, and had invented writing." But in truth
the making of myths, which is no more than a dignified name for "fairy
stories," dates back to the childhood of the human race.

Long before Cadmus invented letters (and I fear Cadmus himself was as
much of a myth as was his dragon's-teeth harvest), long before there
were true historians or poets, there were fairy stories and
story-tellers. And to-day, if we would seek the place where fairy
stories most flourish, we must go, not to the nations whose countless
educated minds are now devoted to story-telling for the young, but to
peoples who have no books, no magazines, no alphabets--even no pictures.

Of all the aboriginal peoples that remain in North\[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

America, none is richer in folk-lore than the Pueblo Indians of New
Mexico, who are, I believe, next to the largest of the native tribes
left in the United States. They number nine thousand souls. They have
nineteen "cities" (called pueblos, also) in this Territory, and seven in
Arizona; and each has its little outlying colonies. They are not cities
in size, it is true, for the largest (Zuñi) has only fifteen hundred
people, and the smallest only about one hundred; but cities they are,
nevertheless. And each city, with its fields, is a wee
republic--twenty-six of the smallest, and perhaps the oldest, republics
in the world; for they were already such when the first European eyes
saw America. Each has its governor, its congress, its sheriffs,
war-captains, and other officials who are elected annually; its laws,
unwritten but unalterable, which are more respected and better enforced
than the laws of any American community; its permanent and very
comfortable houses, and its broad fields, confirmed first by Spain and
later by patents of the United States.

The architecture of the Pueblo houses is quaint and characteristic. In
the remote pueblos they are as many as six stories in height--built
somewhat in the shape of an enormous terraced pyramid. The Pueblos along
the Rio Grande however, have felt the influence of Mexican customs, and
their houses have but one and two stories. All their buildings,
including the huge, quaint church which each pueblo has, are made of
stone plastered with adobe mud, or of great, sun-dried bricks of adobe.
They are the most comfortable dwellings in the Southwest--cool in summer
and warm in winter.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

The Pueblos are divided into six tribes, each speaking a distinct
language of its own. Isleta, the quaint village where I lived five
years, in an Indian house, with Indian neighbors, and under Indian laws,
is the southernmost of the pueblos, the next largest of them all, and
the chief city of the Tée-wahn tribe. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)
All the languages of the Pueblo tribes are exceedingly difficult to
learn.

Besides the cities now inhabited, the ruins of about fifteen hundred
other pueblos--and some of them the noblest ruins in the country--dot
the brown valleys and rocky mesa-tops of New Mexico. All these ruins are
of stone, and are extremely interesting. The implacable savages by whom
they were hemmed in made necessary the abandonment of hundreds of
pueblos; and this great number of ruins does not indicate a vast ancient
population. The Pueblos never counted above 30,000 souls.

The Pueblo Indians have for nearly two centuries given no trouble to the
European sharers of their domain; but their wars of defense against the
savage tribes who surrounded them completely--with the Apaches, Navajos,
Comanches, and Utes--lasted until a very few years ago. They are valiant
fighters for their homes, but prefer any honorable peace. They are not
indolent, but industrious--tilling their farms, tending their stock, and
keeping all their affairs in order. The women own the houses and their
contents, and do not work outside; and the men control the fields and
crops. An unhappy home is almost an unknown thing among them; and the
universal affection of parents for

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

children and respect of children for parents are extraordinary. I have
never seen a child unkindly treated, a parent saucily addressed, or a
playmate abused, in all my long and intimate acquaintance with the
Pueblos.

Isleta lies on the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad, upon the western bank
of the Rio Grande, on a lava promontory which was once an island--whence
the town takes its Spanish name. Its Tée-wahn title is
Shee-eh-whíb-bak. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) Its population,
according to the census taken in 1891, is a little less than twelve
hundred. It is nearly surrounded by fertile vineyards, orchards of
peaches, apricots, apples, cherries, plums, pears, and quinces, and
fields of corn, wheat, beans, and peppers, all owned by my dusky
neighbors. The pueblo owns over one hundred and ten thousand acres of
land, the greater part of which is reserved for pasturing horses and
cattle.

The people of Isleta are, as a rule, rather short in stature, but
strongly built. All have a magnificent depth and breadth of chest, and a
beautifully confident poise of the head. Most of the men are very expert
hunters, tireless runners, and fine horsemen. Besides ordinary hunting
they have communal hunts--for rabbits in the spring, for antelope and
deer in the fall--thoroughly organized, in which great quantities of
game are killed.

Their amusements are many and varied. Aside from the numerous sacred
dances of the year, their most important occasions, they have various
races

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

which call for great skill and endurance, quaint social enjoyments, and
games of many kinds, some of which are quite as difficult as chess. They
are very fair weavers and pottery-makers. The women are good housewives,
and most of them excellent seamstresses.

Yet, with all this progress in civilization, despite their mental and
physical acuteness and their excellent moral qualities, the Tée-wahn are
in some things but overgrown children. Their secret inner religion <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) is one of the most complicated systems on
earth. Besides the highest deities, all the forces of nature, all
animals, as well as many things that are inanimate, are invested by them
with supernatural powers. They do not worship idols, but images and
tokens of unseen powers are revered. They do nothing without some
reason, generally a religious one, and whatever they observe they can
explain in their own superstitious way. Every custom they have and every
belief they own has a reason which to them is all-sufficient; and for
each they have a story. There is no duty to which a Pueblo child is
trained in which he has to be content with the bare command, "Do thus";
for each he learns a fairy tale designed to explain how people first
came to know that it was right to do thus, and detailing the sad results
which befell those who did otherwise.

It is from this wonderful folk-lore of the Tée-wahn that I have
learned--after long study of the people, their language, customs, and
myths--and

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

taken, unchanged and unembellished, this series of Indian fairy tales. I
have been extremely careful to preserve, in my translations, the exact
Indian *spirit*. An absolutely literal translation would be almost
unintelligible to English readers, but I have taken no liberties with
the real meaning.

The use of books is not only to tell, but to preserve; not only for
to-day, but for ever. What an Indian wishes to perpetuate must be saved
by tongue and ear, by "telling-down," as were the world's first
histories and poems. This oral transmission from father to son is of
sacred importance with the-natives. Upon it depends the preservation of
the amusements, the history, the beliefs, the customs, and the laws of
their nation. A people less observant, less accurate of speech and of
memory, would make a sad failure of this sort of record; but with them
it is a wonderful success. The story goes down from generation to
generation, almost without the change of a word. The fact that it is
told in fixed metrical form--a sort of blank verse--helps the memory.

Here in Isleta, the quaint pueblo of the Tée-wahn, I became deeply
interested not only in the folk-stories themselves, but also in the
manner of handing them down. Winter is the season for story-telling.
Then the thirsty fields no longer cry for water, the irrigating- ditches
have ceased to gnaw at their banks, and the men are often at leisure.
Then, of an evening, if I go over to visit some *vecino* (neighbor), I
am likely to find, in the great adobe living-room, a group of very old
men and very young boys gathered about the queer little

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

 

<span id="img_00700"></span>

[![''AS I COME IN, KINDLY OLD TATA LORENSO IS JUST BEGINNING A
STORY''](tn/00700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/00700.jpg)  
''AS I COME IN, KINDLY OLD TATA LORENSO IS JUST BEGINNING A STORY''  

 

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

corner fireplace with its blazing upright sticks. They, too, have come
a-visiting. The young men are gathered in another corner by themselves,
eating roasted corn, and talking in whispers so as not to disturb their
elders, for respect to age is the corner-stone of all Indian training.
They are not required to listen to the stories, being supposed to know
them already.

 

If in the far, sweet days when I stood at my grandmother's knee, and
shivered over "Bluebeard," or thrilled at "Jack the Giant-killer," some
one could have shown us a picture of me as I was to be listening to
other fairy tales twenty-five years later, I am sure that her eyes would
have opened wide as mine. Certainly neither of us ever dreamed that,
thousands of miles from the old New England fireplace, when the dear
figures that sat with me before its blazing forestick had long been
dust, I would be sitting where I am to-night and listening to the
strange, dark people who are around me.

The room is long and low, and overhead are dark, round rafters--the
trunks of straight pine-trees that used to purr on the sides of the most
famous mountain in New Mexico. The walls are white as snow, and you
would never imagine that they are built only of cut sods, plastered over
and whitewashed. The floor is of adobe clay, packed almost as hard as a
rock, and upon it are bright-hued blankets, woven in strange figures.
Along the walls are benches, with wool mattresses rolled up and laid
upon them. By and by these will be spread upon the floor for beds, but
just now they

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

serve as cushioned seats. Over in a corner are strange earthen jars of
water, with little gourd dippers floating, and here and there upon the
wall hang bows and arrows in sheaths of the tawny hide of the mountain
lion; queer woven belts of red and green, and heavy necklaces of silver
and coral, with charms of turquoise--the stone that stole its color from
the sky.

There is a fireplace, too, and we are gathered all about it, a dozen or
more--for I have become an old friend here. But it is not like the
fireplace where the little sister and I used to roast our apples and pop
our corn. A wee hearth of clay rises a few inches from the floor; a yard
above it hangs the chimney, like a big white hood; and a little wall,
four feet high, runs from it out into the room, that the wind from the
outer door may not blow the ashes. There is no big front log, but three
or four gnarled cedar sticks, standing on one end, crackle loudly.

Some of us are seated on benches, and upon the floor. His back against
the wall, squats my host, who is just going to begin another fairy
story. Such a wee, withered, wrinkled old man! It seems as though the
hot winds of the Southwest had dried him as they dry the forgotten last
year's apples that shrivel here and there upon lonely boughs. He must be
a century old. His children, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and
great-great-grandchildren are all represented here to-night. Yet his
black eyes are like a hawk's, under their heavy brows, and his voice is
musical and deep. I have never heard a more eloquent story-teller,

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

and I have heard some famous ones. I can tell you the words, but not the
impressive tones, the animation of eye and accent, the eloquent gestures
of this venerable Indian as he tells--what? An Indian telling fairy
stories?

Yes, indeed. He is the very man to tell them. If this dusky old
playground for wrinkles, who never saw the inside of a book, could write
out all the fairy stories he knows, Webster's Unabridged Dictionary
would hardly hold them. His father and his father's father, and so on
back for countless centuries, have handed down these stories by telling,
from generation to generation, just as Tata <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) Lorenso is telling his great-great-grandsons
to-night. When these boys grow up, they will tell these stories to their
sons and grandsons; and so the legends will pass on and on, so long as
there shall be a Tée-wahn Indian left in all New Mexico.

But Lorenso is ready with his story. He pauses only to make a cigarette
from the material in my pouch (they call me *Por todos*, because I have
tobacco "for all"), explains for my benefit that this is a story of the
beginning of Isleta, pats the head of the chubby boy at his knee, and
begins again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](pifs03.htm#fr_0) Spelled Tigua by Spanish
authors.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:1](pifs03.htm#fr_1) The name means
"Knife-laid-on-the-ground-to-play-*whib*." *Whib* is an aboriginal
foot-race in which the runners have to carry a stick with their toes.
The name was perhaps suggested by the knife-like shape of the lava ridge
on which the pueblo is built.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:1](pifs03.htm#fr_2) For they are all devout,
if not entirely understanding, members of a Christian church; but keep
also much of their prehistoric faiths.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[11:1](pifs03.htm#fr_3) "Father."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Antelope Boy](pifs04)
