[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pifs26)  [Next](pifs28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

# XXIV

### THE BRAVE BOBTAILS

WHEN it came old Anastacio's turn, one night, to tell a story to the
waiting circle, it was several minutes before he responded to the quaint
summons; and at last Lorenso repeated: "There is a tail to you,
*compadre* Anastacio!" The words seemed to remind him of something; for
he turned to his fat grandson, and said:

"Juan! Knowest thou why the Bear and the Badger have short tails? For
once they had them long as Kéem-ee-deh, the Mountain Lion. *In-dah*?
Then I will tell thee."

 

Once in the Days of the Old, it was that a young man lived here in
Shee-eh-whíb-bak whom they called T'hoor-hlóh-ah, the Arrow of the Sun.
He was not of the Tée-wahn, but a Ute, who was taken in war while yet a
child. When the warriors brought him here, a Grandmother who was very
poor took him for her son, and reared him, loving him greatly, and
teaching him all the works of men. Coming to be a young man, he was a
mighty hunter; but so good in his heart that he loved the animals as
brothers, and they all loved

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

him. When he went out to hunt, the first game he killed he always
dressed and left there for his animal-friends to eat. Sometimes it was
Kéem-ee-deh, king of the four-feet, who came to the feast Sun-Arrow had
made; and sometimes Kahr-naí-deh, the Badger, who is best of all to dig,
and who showed Those of Old how to make their caves; and sometimes the
smaller ones. They were all grateful; for no other was so kind to feed
them.

Now the Grandmother would never let Sun-Arrow go to war, fearing that he
would be killed; and all the other young men laughed at him, because he
had never taken the sacred *oak-bark*. And when the others danced the
great round-dance, he had to stand alone. So he was ashamed, and vowed
that he would prove himself a man; and taking secretly his bow and
arrows and his thunder-knife, he went away by night alone, and crossed
the Eagle-Feather Mountains.

Now in that time there was always great war with the Comanches, who
lived in the plains. They came often across the mountains and attacked
Isleta by night, killing many people. Their chief was
P'ee-kú-ee-fa-yíd-deh, or Red Scalp, the strongest and largest and
bravest of men. For many years all the warriors of Isleta had tried to
kill him, for he was the head of the war; but he slew all who came
against him. He was very brave, and painted his scalp red with
*páh-ree*, so that he might be known from far; and left his scalp-lock
very long, and braided it neatly, so that an enemy might grasp it well.

Now Sun-Arrow met this great warrior; and

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

with the help of an old Spider-woman, <span
id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_83) slew him and took his scalp. When the
people of Isleta saw Sun-Arrow returning, the young men began to laugh
and say: "Va! T'hoor-hlóh-ah has gone to make war again on the rabbits!'

But when he came into the plaza, saying nothing, and they saw that
*oak-bark* which all knew, all cried out: "Come and look! For here is
Sun-Arrow, who was laughed at--and now he has brought the bark of Red
Scalp, whom our bravest have tried in vain to kill."

So when he had taken the scalp to the Cacique, and they had had the
round-dance, and the days of purification were over, they called
Sun-Arrow the greatest warrior of the Tée-wahn, and made him second to
the Cacique. Then all who had daughters looked at him with good eyes,
and all the maidens wished for so brave a husband. But he saw none of
them, except the youngest daughter of the Cacique; for he loved her.
When the Grandmother had spoken to the Cacique, and it was well, they
brought the young people together, and gave them to eat of the betrothal
corn--to Sun-Arrow an ear of the blue corn, and to her an ear of the
white corn, because the hearts of maidens are whiter than those of men.
When both had eaten the raw corn, every seed of it, the old folks said:
"It is well! For truly they love each other. And now let them run the
marrying-race."

Then all the people gathered yonder where are the ashes of the
evil-hearted ones who were burned when Antelope Boy won for his people.
And the

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

elders marked a course, as of three miles, from there to the sacred
sand-hill beside the Kú-mai. When they said the word, Sun-Arrow and the
girl went running like young antelope, side by side. Up to the Place of
the Bell they ran, and turned back running; and when they came to the
people, the girl was a little in front, and all cried:

"It is well! For now Eé-eh-chah has won a husband, and she shall always
be honored in her own house."

So they were married, and the Cacique blessed them. They made a house by
the plaza, <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_84) and Sun-Arrow was given
of the fields, that he might plant.

But of the maidens there was one who did not forgive Sun-Arrow that he
would not look at her; and in her heart she thought to pay him. So she
went to a Spider-woman, <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_85) and said:
"Grandmother, help me! For this young man despised me, and now I will
punish him."

Then the Spider-woman made an accursed prayer-stick of the feathers of
the woodpecker, and spoke to the Ghosts, and said to the girl:

"It is well, daughter! For I am the one that will help you. Take only
this Toad, and bury it in your floor, *this* way, and then ask
T'hoor-hlóh-ah to come to your house."

The girl made a hole in her floor, and buried P'ah-foo-ée-deh, the Toad.
Then she went to Sun-Arrow and said: "Friend T'hoor-hlóh-ah, come to my
house a little; for I have to talk to you."

But when Sun-Arrow sat down in her house, his

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

feet were upon the floor over the hole; and in a moment the Toad grew
very great, and began to swallow him by the feet. Sun-Arrow kicked and
fought, for he was very strong. But he could do nothing; and in a
little, he was swallowed to the knees. Then he called in a great voice
for his wife; and all the people of the Tée-wahn came running with her.
When they saw him so, they were very sad; and Eé-eh-chah took his hand,
and the Grandmother took his other, and all the people helped them. But
all were not so strong as the great Toad; and fast it was swallowing
him, until he was at the waist. Then he said:

"Go, my people! Go, my wife! For it is in vain. Go from this place, that
you may not see me. And pray to the Trues if they will help me." So they
all went, mourning greatly.

In that time it came that Shee-íd-deh, the House-Mouse, stirred from his
hole; and seeing Sun-Arrow *so*, he came to him, weeping.

"Oh, Friend Sun-Arrow!" he cried. "You who have been a father to us all,
you who have fed us, and have proved yourself so brave--it is not
deserved that you should be thus. But we for whom you have cared, we
will be the ones to help you!"

Then Shee-íd-deh ran from the house until he found the Dog, and to him
told it all. And Quee-ah-níd-deh, whose voice was big, ran out into the
plains, up and down, *pregonando* <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_86) to
all the animals; and they came hurrying from all places. Soon all the
birds and all the four-feet were met in

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

council in the room where Sun-Arrow was; and the Mountain Lion was
captain. When he had listened to them, he said:

"Now let each tribe of you choose from it one who is young and strong,
to give help to him who has fed us. For we cannot leave him to die so."

When every kind that walks or flies had chosen its strongest one, the
chosen stood out; and Kéem-ee-deh called them by name to take their
turns.

"Kóo-ah-raí-deh!" he called; and the Bluebird of the mountains came to
Sun-Arrow, who was now swallowed up to his armpits. Sun-Arrow grasped
her long tail with both hands, and she flew and flew with all her might,
not caring for the pain, until her tail was pulled off. But Sun-Arrow
was not budged a hair.

Then the captain called Ku-íd-deh, the Bear, to try. He gave his long
tail to Sun-Arrow to hold; and when he had counted "One, two, *three*!"
he pulled with a great pull, so hard that his whole tail came off And
still Sun-Arrow was not stirred.

Then it was to the Coyote. But *he* said: "My ears are stronger"; for he
was a coward, and would not give to pull on his pretty tail, of which he
is proud. So he gave to Sun-Arrow to hold by his ears, and began to pull
backward. But soon it hurt him, and he stopped when his ears were pulled
forward.

"Now it is to you, Kahr-naí-deh," said the Mountain Lion; and the Badger
came out to try. . First he dug around Sun-Arrow, and gave him to hold
his tail. Then he counted *three*, and pulled greatly, so that his tail
came off--and Sun-Arrow

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

was moved a very little. But the Badger did not fear the pain, and said:

"Let it be to me twice again, Kah-báy-deh." <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_87)

"It is well!" said the Mountain Lion. "So let it be."

So the Badger dug again, and gave the stump of his tail, and pulled. And
Sun-Arrow was loosened a little more; but the stump slipped through his
hands, for it was very short.

"*Around* me, friend," said the Badger, when he had dug a third time;
and Sun-Arrow clasped his hands around the Badger's body, behind the
fore legs. Then for the third time Kahr-naí-deh pulled--so mightily that
he dragged Sun-Arrow clear out from the Toad's mouth. At that, all the
animals fell upon the wicked Toad, and killed it; and gave thanks to
Those Above for the deliverance of their friend.

When they had prayed, Sun-Arrow thanked all the animals, one by one; and
to the Bluebird, the Bear, and the Badger, he said:

"Friends, how shall I thank you who have suffered so much for me? And
how can I pay you for your help, and for the tails that you have lost?"
But to the Coyote he did not say a word.

Then said the Badger:

"Friend T'hoor-hlóh-ah, as for me, your hand has always been held out to
me. You have fed me, and have been as a father: I want no pay for this
tail that I have lost."

And the Bear and the Bluebird both answered the same thing.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

So Sun-Arrow again gave them many thanks, and they went away to their
homes. As for Sun-Arrow, he hurried to the Medicine House, where all the
Tée-wahn were making medicine <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_88) that
he might be saved. And when they saw him entering, his wife ran and
cried on his shoulder, and all the people gave thanks to the Trues.

Sun-Arrow told them all that was; and when the Father-of-all-Medicine
looked in the sacred *cajete* <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_89) he saw
the evil-hearted girl paying the Spider-woman. Then the
Cum-pah-whít-la-wen <span id="fr_91"></span>[3](#fn_90) went running
with their bows and arrows, and brought the girl; and she was punished
as are they that have the evil road. As for the Spiderwoman, she was
already dead of shame; for she knew all that had been.

In a time it came that his father-in-law the Cacique died; and they made
Sun-Arrow Cacique in his place. For many years he was so, bringing great
good to his people; for he was very wise.

As for the Bear, the Badger, and the Bluebird, they would never go to
the medicine-men of their tribes to have their tails mended to grow
again; for they were proud that they had suffered to help their friend.
And to this very day they go with short tails, and are honored by all
the animals, and by all True Believers. But Too-wháy-deh, the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

coward, he who would not hurt himself with pulling--he is a laughed-at
to this day. For his ears cannot lie back, as is well for beasts, but
always point straight forward, as Sun-Arrow pulled them.

 

Any one who has ever seen the Coyote, or any other of the wolf or fox
tribe, must have noticed the alert forward pricking of the ears. Among
the Pueblos, any such peculiarity of nature--and particularly of animal
life--is very sure to have a folk-story hung to it. It has always seemed
to me that the boy who always wants to know "why?" has a better time of
it among my Indian friends than anywhere else. For there is always sure
to be a why, and an interesting one--which is much more satisfactory
than only learning that "it's bedtime now," or that "I'm busy."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[171:1](pifs27.htm#fr_84) About equivalent to
our "fairy godmother."

<span id="fn_84"></span>[172:1](pifs27.htm#fr_85) Public square in the
center of the pueblo.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[172:2](pifs27.htm#fr_86) Here equivalent to a
witch.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[73:1](pifs27.htm#fr_87) The technical (Spanish)
word for the official heralding by which all announcements are still
made among the Pueblos.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[175:1](pifs27.htm#fr_88) Commander.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[176:1](pifs27.htm#fr_89) Not compounding
remedies, but going through the magic dance and incantations to which
the Indians always resort in time of trouble. For a description of a
medicine-making, see "Some Strange Corners of Our Country."

<span id="fn_89"></span>[176:2](pifs27.htm#fr_90) A jar of magic water,
in which the chief conjuror is supposed to see all that is going on in
the world.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[176:3](pifs27.htm#fr_91) Armed guards of the
Medicine House.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV. The Revenge of the Fawns](pifs28)
