[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssug07)  [Next](ssug09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Self-Suggestion and the New Huna Theory of Mesmerism and Hypnosis*, by
Max Freedom Long, \[1958\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

### Chapter 7

After you have learned the knack of concentration and that of charging
the ideas to be used for suggestion purposes, you will be ready to take
up the matter of teaching the low self to relax.

The Huna theories offer a much needed explanation to tell us why the low
self accepts suggestion more readily when we are physically relaxed and
when the mental activities of the low self have been slowed down, even
if not completely stopped.

It is the matter of the charge of vital force again. If the low self and
its body are both normally active, there is a heavy charge of vital
force in its shadowy body. This force is not of the same grade as that
used by the middle self, but we can picture two heavily charged
batteries set together and their terminals connected with the idea that
the battery with the stronger charge will release some of its
electricity to fill the other. If both batteries are at the same level
of charge, there will be no interchange.

Huna tells us that administering suggestion is a process of planting a
powerfully charged thought form idea in the mind of the low self, the
middle self doing the planting.

If the low self is as heavily charged as the middle self, it tends to
reject the offered thought form ideas. But if it is relaxed in body and
mind it be-

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

comes negative. If the middle self and the suggestion structure remain
positive, the low self seems even to attract the suggestion to itself
and to begin at once to react to it.

When the low self is relaxed, it ceases to need more than a minimum
charge, and because of this, the middle self can draw much of the vital
force to its center of consciousness to help it to "think hard" and pour
a charge of added "will" force into the suggestion structure.

The original kahunas must have thought that anyone would know how to
relax, for the word they used for "to relax" was "hoolulu" which also
means "to sow or plant seeds"—the symbol of planting the tiny forms of
the suggestion idea in the low self. However, the kahunas, by this
combining of meanings left no doubt that the low self was to be relaxed
and that something must be planted.

The first step in bringing about low self relaxation of body and mind
must be taken by the middle self. Once more it takes over the handling
of the voluntary muscles, just as in taking over the breathing action.
The low self in the body is commanded by the use of the "will" to obey,
or conform, to the middle self's mental picture of going to a
comfortable chair or couch and making the body comfortable. That done,
the mental picture is held over the low self as a command to cause it to
stop thinking, or at least to slow down its rate of thinking. The
kahunas had a phrase meaning "relax the mind", which translates, "relax
the intestines", in which the intestines symbolize, as always, the low
self, so we know that it is not the middle self which is to be relaxed.
It is to increase its activities even as it uses the "will" to

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

make the low self ease up on its activities. The use of the "will" to
command the low self always has a little of the element of suggestion in
it whether we realize it or not. We command the body to act, and we take
over the voluntary muscles and start the action, usually starting or
triggering a habit of previously learned chain type reaction. For
example, the low self, once started, will turn the eyes to see where
there is a comfortable chair, move the body to it and cause it to sit
down, lean back, and find a comfortable position.

When we wish to relax the body for a purpose other than that of rest or
sleep, we are apt to run head-on into the habit reactions of the low
self which get triggered off as we give it the idea of relaxing. It
cannot use inductive reason, so is easily confused when it does not know
exactly what is wanted or why it is wanted. Also, it may have ideas of
its own, as, in this instance, that it does not need rest or sleep at
this time. If the middle self insists, the low self will usually try to
oblige, after some objection. It will rest obediently, but is apt to
fidget and to let its thoughts go wandering off. If the idea of
relaxation is associated with that of sleep, it may obediently put one
to sleep, and that upsets all the plans, for sleep uncouples the two
selves and cuts off the supply of vital force from the middle self so
that it ceases to function almost entirely.

The hypnotists, under Dr. Braid's leadership, learned that the needed
relaxation could be obtained by tiring the eyes so much that the low
self would rest of its own accord, and in resting, would fall into the
relaxed state in which suggestion is most readily accepted. The eyes use
up most of the vital force

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

when they are put under a muscular strain, and when they tire and close,
the type of relaxation that goes ahead of natural sleep
[comes](errata.htm#3.md) easily. Looking with the eyes strained upward at a
bright point of light or at a whirling disk on which has been painted a
spiral line, tires the eyes quickly and tends to cause relaxation in
modern hypnotic practice.

But the eyes are only a part of the body. In addition to tiring them by
trying for a few moments to stare up at a point between the eyebrows,
which is an experiment one can try, there are other ways to be employed
to tire and relax the whole body.

The "Decubitus" method of relaxation worked out by Dr. Frederick Pierce
can be used. This method should be used following or before or as a part
of the eye tiring exercise. It consists of tiring the main muscles of
the body, then relaxing them by letting go. A tired muscle will relax
far more completely and far sooner than one not first made to use up its
supply of vital force by working under some strain.

Dr. Pierce advised taking the legs, one at a time, then the arms, then
the body and neck. Each was to be lifted, or the muscles tightened and
held as in lifting until they tired slightly, after which the limb or
other part was relaxed, pressed against the chair or couch for a moment
and then let go entirely while the mental command was given to relax
completely.

A "one shot" method is to tense all the muscles throughout the body or
to stretch and yawn vastly and hold the stretch until slightly tired,
then let go all over and command the low self to relax.

When testing out these methods, it has been found good to examine
different parts of the body to see whether there is any remaining
muscular tense-

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

ness. The hands, face and chest muscles are oftenest found still a
little tense and in need of conscious effort to make them let go
completely. Or, the eyes may have opened wide, after having been first
relaxed, in which case they are to be partly drooped or closed, not
fully closed, however, as that 'would invite the low self to put one to
sleep and so upset the apple cart filled with waiting suggestion-ideas.

After the relaxation, the body is allowed to sit or recline inert and
the low self is watched and made to stop churning up thoughts—often
thought trains connected with the activities of the day. These trains
can be stopped or slowed down and they will usually vanish as soon as
one begins slowly to increase the breathing rate and to hold the mental
picture of drawing all the vital force into the middle self center of
consciousness and adding to it while one recalls the ideas one had been
working to perfect, thinking them over backward and forward—"thinking
hard" about them. This will be concentration and will automatically add
the "will" charge and command to the structures. In a matter of from ten
seconds for the experienced person, or a minute or so for the beginner,
the suggestion thought form cluster and its charge of "will" force will
be ready for planting.

The planting is done by telling the low self silently, in a whisper, or,
if no one is near to hear, in a normal voice, to take the mental image
on which you have been working and care for it carefully because all the
things in it are going to be very helpful, very delightful, very useful,
very important and very necessary to bring about. Command it quietly to
begin to do all it can to bring about the desired condition, and promise
that you will do all you can. Be

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

sure you mean it and that you keep your promise. If you leave it all to
the low self and begin to do things contrary to what you plan, the low
self will fall back quickly into its old and habitual way of doing
things, and the suggestion with its charge of force will probably be
disposed of by hitching it to some other set of remembered ideas and
muddling them both.

These muddled suggestions, when strong, may cause the low self to react
in strange and irrational ways in unexpected fields if not kept under
attentive watch by the middle self. In case you, the middle self, decide
to change or cancel a suggestion and give up trying to bring about the
better mood or whatever it may be that you have started to try to get,
do not leave the suggestion lying around in the memory store room like a
time bomb whose firing pin may be pulled inadvertently by the low self
in trying to dispose of it.

Take up the idea to be cancelled and think hard and long to picture it
as cancelled. See it as something no longer wanted. Tell the low self in
a regular relaxation-suggestion session that the other suggestion is
being changed back to a simple memory of something once desired, but no
longer wanted. It is now only a simple memory to be stored in the usual
way. Make a mental effort to draw the forces from the ideas and to
picture them as cancelled.

If a suggestion covers something which the low self can do or bring
about all by itself, and you cannot help, do not let go your hold
entirely when you give the suggestion daily to the low self. Tie a
thread of shadowy body substance to it by holding the attitude of quiet
expectancy whenever the matter embodied in the suggestion is recalled.
Also, as the suggestion

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

comes to mind, say to the low self, "That's right. Keep working on it to
bring it about. Good!" A little praise is a great help, and confident
expectation is a steadying and guiding influence.

After a period of relaxation it is well to tell the low self that the
very pleasing and valuable little session is over and to command it to
get back to the work of the day, full of energy and ready to undertake
anything with enthusiasm. This is a valuable step to take because the
place where suggestion begins to work and where it leaves off is hard to
determine. Also, it varies with the individual. Some of us are very
suggestible and some not. It is always safe to put in what the
Scientologists call "the cancellor".

The hypnotist is always careful to suggest a full recovery from the
receptive condition at a definite time, even if a posthypnotic
suggestion is left in the low self of the subject to be reacted to
later. Usually the command runs something like this, "When I count back
from five to zero you will be wide awake and will feel fine." The
reverse count is made and the subject comes out of the trance, be it
slight or deep.

In mesmerism, if no suggestion is given, the subject comes back to
normal as soon as the stunning charge of vital force has been absorbed
and distributed through the shadowy body of the subject. There is, in
such a case, no need for cancelling because no suggestion has been
given. Ordinarily, it has been found by hypnotists, suggestions begin to
lose their power in a week or ten days. Patients under treatment to
prevent attacks in epilepsy, or to prevent suffering from the pains of
chronic illness, must have suggestions renewed periodically.

The difference between suggestion administered

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

by a hypnotist and by oneself in self-suggestion, is mainly a matter of
whether the operator's middle self or one's own makes the charged set of
ideas and plants them in the relaxed and receptive low self. In the case
of the hypnotist, he has to use either telepathy or words to implant a
suggestion. While rapport is sometimes continued telepathically after a
session, when the operator wishes it to continue, the work is largely
done by the low self as it reacts steadily to the suggestion structures
which it has accepted. As a rule, there is no more use of telepathy
after an "aka" or shadowy thread of connection has been established by
first contact between operator and subject than there is between two
strangers who chance to meet, shake hands, and go their separate ways.

In discussing the details of mesmerism and self-suggestion, it comes to
appear to be a complicated and difficult mechanism, but it is really
very simple. Let us review the few and easy steps which need to be taken
in using self-suggestion.

1\. Decide what you are going to suggest.

2\. Think hard about it to make strong ideas.

3\. Breathe hard and accumulate extra vital force while thinking hard
about the suggestion ideas to charge them with force.

4\. Relax the low self in mind and body.

5\. Speak the suggestion silently or aloud to it.

6\. Finish by telling the low self that the session is over and for it
to stop relaxing and take up the work of the day alertly.

7\. Expect the low self to react. When you recall the suggestion, do it
placidly until the next session, when you will again become

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

very positive in repeating the suggestion.

8\. In case it becomes necessary or good to delay or even give up a
planned effort to accomplish some aim, explain the reasons to the low
self, then make the mental picture of the project being delayed or even
given up completely. Charge the idea and administer it in
self-suggestion in the regular way. Do not let the effort go by default
lest the old suggestion structures worry the low self and cause a mental
clutter. A mental house needs to be kept neat and clean and well ordered
at all times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](ssug09.md)
