[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssug00)  [Next](ssug02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Self-Suggestion and the New Huna Theory of Mesmerism and Hypnosis*, by
Max Freedom Long, \[1958\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SELF-SUGGESTION

##### And the New Huna Theory of Mesmerism and Hypnosis.

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### INTRODUCTION

This information concerning those parts of psychology which we have come
to call hypnosis, mesmerism and suggestion, is being presented as an
addition to the scant literature on the ancient psycho-religious system
of the Polynesians called "Huna" or the "Secret".

It is taken for granted that the reader will already have gone through
the first three books dealing with the rediscovery of Huna (The Secret
Science Behind Miracles, The Secret Science At Work, and Growing Into
Light). But for those who come to this book without knowledge of what
has been uncovered up to the present time, an appendix is supplied
giving a brief outline of the ten simple elements which make possible
the more practical application of certain psychological principles
hitherto unknown, at least in modern days.

Although a perusal of the appendix will enable one to understand the
ideas embodied in Huna, and which are frequently mentioned in this
treatise, it will be well for the serious student who wishes to have all
of the proofs of the verity of Huna beliefs to read the books mentioned
above. In them will be found background materials which will bring one
up to date on what is perhaps the most important specialized collection
of anthropological findings in this century.

A word of thanks is given here for assistance in testing the theories
and methods here presented for

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

validity and practicality. Foremost amongst those to be thanked are the
Huna Research Associates, and, especially, some of the more able
researchers in that widely scattered organization. The secondary thanks
goes to the many men who have explored the field of human consciousness
in the past and who have helped bring to us such psychological knowledge
as we now possess.

Max Freedom Long  
Vista, California, U. S. A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](ssug02)
