[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssug09)  [Next](ssug11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Self-Suggestion and the New Huna Theory of Mesmerism and Hypnosis*, by
Max Freedom Long, \[1958\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

### APPENDIX

In past ages, several arts, sciences and other unclassified but compact
units of knowledge were developed by slow steps to various levels of
perfection.

The science of Mathematics was sufficiently exact to allow almost full
perfection. The several arts which were developed have not been greatly
advanced even in modern times, although such things as Law, Medicine,
Physics and Sociology have advanced to new levels.

Of the unclassified but compact units of knowledge, only one was pushed
almost to the top level. This was the unit which we are coming to call
"Huna" or, to give the word its translation, "The Secret".

Huna is difficult to classify because it includes at least three poorly
developed sciences, two of them still in their infancy, Psychology and
Psychic Science. These are the sciences of man considered as a conscious
being who lives in a physical body during the period of earthly life,
but survives and lives in a different "body" after death. A branch of
Psychology which also needs to be included in any survey, is that now
studied as a condition of consciousness in which the vague thing called
"mind" functions improperly. This is still labeled Abnormal Psychology.
It deals with such things as dual personality changes.

Belonging to this classification also is Religion. It is farthest of all
from reaching scientific standing.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

In sorry fact, it becomes more and more darkened and muddled year by
year as dogmas and cults increase, almost all based on "revelation"
instead of the sciences of consciousness.

Religion is, in reality, the science of the relationship between man and
any living beings higher or more evolved than himself who may have an
influence on his life, either here or hereafter.

Ethics or Morals should be considered as separate departments, and
naturally fall under Sociology, although always mingling with Religion.

The science of Huna can and does cover and include all of the items
listed above. This would make it so complicated that a mountain of books
could not describe it fully were it not for the fact that all the
dogmas, misinformation and speculations which now clutter or block the
paths of the several branches of the one actual science are absent in
the approach to Huna.

The known and deduced history of Huna is a very fascinating chapter
which carries us from the most remote times up to the present moment.

Little is actually known of the origin of Huna. It may be deduced,
however, from the fact that part of the lore can be recognized in the
earliest recorded writings of Egypt, that the priests or "Keepers of the
Secret" (kahunas), had either lived in the land of the Nile or had been
in contact for some time with its peoples .

As Huna possessed a simple version of its secret science as well as a
more complicated and carefully guarded version for the more intelligent,
we find in early Egypt the simple or exoteric part of the knowledge
presented openly and in such a form that

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

even the men of low intelligence could grasp and use some of the values.

The esoteric or initiatory material of Huna was kept within the
hereditary priesthood of the kahunas, never being written down. But in
order to allow a lasting and foolproof account of Huna to be preserved
for all the ages, a special language was invented, providing a means of
giving an inner and outer meaning to any statement of the teachings.
Such statements as were made in this "sacred language" formed a code
which could not be broken unless one already was familiar with at least
part of the Huna lore and with the word-symbols used to name elements of
the system.

It is evident that the kahunas and their people made up a race apart
from the Egyptians and others with whom they either lived or were
closely associated. It is also rather clear that, sometime between the
Mosaic and Christian periods, they left and began a long migration to
find new homes in what we now call "Polynesia". In their new homes,
speaking only the "sacred language", they flourished for a number of
centuries, preserving intact their language and the secret knowledge
which it had been constructed to conceal and yet reveal.

In their new Pacific Island homes, the kahunas used no writing,
depending on memory alone to keep Huna pure and intact. But the initiate
kahunas who remained behind, and who may have been of a different race,
allowed the writing down of teachings from Huna. The writing was never
done in any dialect of the "sacred language", but original statements
were translated invariably into some other tongue. This hid from the
eyes of the curious the words which had

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

originally been made to carry double meanings, and made it all but
impossible for anyone not familiar with the language of the "Secret" to
break the code.

The initiates remaining in the Near East after the migration of the
ancestors of the Polynesians, took it upon themselves to put much of
Huna into the veiled forms of writing. They produced the Gnostic
writings as well as much which was later incorporated with other
materials in assembling the New Testament. Some of the veiled writings
also crept into later parts of the Old Testament which already contained
much Huna legendary lore, of which the story of the Creation and of the
Garden of Eden may be said to be typical.

In late years a long study was conducted in Polynesia which resulted, in
the year 1931, in the discovery that there had been such a secret system
as that of Huna, and in the partial breaking of the code so that the
inner teachings could be laid bare. However, it was not until about the
year 1950 that the coded Huna contained in the Gnostic and New Testament
writings were recognized. At that time it was seen that by translating
these writings back into one of the Polynesian dialects, preferably the
Hawaiian, the inner teachings could be brought to light through the use
of the ancient code.

The inner or esoteric teachings of the Gnostic and Christian writings
were found to be that part of Huna always retained for the initiates.
The parables attributed to Jesus furnished excellent examples of the way
the code was used from times immemorial. The simple outer meaning
intended for the less intelligent masses lies on the surface, teaching
some simple lesson, but hidden by the code is to be found

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

information running parallel with all the best findings of modern
Psychology and Psychic Science, that is, in so far as they have limped
ahead. In addition, the rediscovered Huna system adds much more
information to what we have managed to evolve for ourselves before
arriving at the present stalemate in those lines of research.

Huna corroborates all we know of the subconscious and conscious parts of
mind, but adds much invaluable information about their natures, forces
and special abilities. It presents to us the super-conscious and shows
its characteristics in turn. As to man in his abnormal mental states,
Huna offers some enlightenment where simple disease is not at fault.
But, when it comes to the explanation of the startling things uncovered
by Psychic Science in its studies of spirits and the "supernatural",
Huna offers the only explanations ever found which will explain the
mechanics of everything from telepathy to table tipping: from prediction
and psychometry to the temporary return in the flesh of the
"materialized" dead.

Any person who may wish to check on Huna findings can now purchase a
good Hawaiian-English dictionary and a Hawaiian-English New Testament to
use in examining the surprisingly clever way in which the original
kahunas placed double meanings in words and roots of compounded words to
conceal the inner meanings while laying open the outer. The language is
very simple to work with in this way, and with the addition of the
knowledge of the meaning of a few symbol word meanings, checking can
proceed with ease. The main symbol words are "light", for the High Self;
"water" for any of the three grades of vital force used by the three
"selves" of the man, and

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "heavy breathing"
for the accumulation of extra vital force to be used by the low self in
various activities which fall under the heading of "psychic", these
including telepathy, the use of mesmerism or any form of suggestion,
prayer made in the Huna manner to the High Self, and the production of
spiritistic phenomena by the disincarnate including table tipping,
levitation, poltergeist activities and even full materialization,
apports and transportation. Any mention of the symbol words for "cords,
threads, tubes, water ditches or ropes" will point to the sending of a
flow of vital force through a strand of invisible or "shadowy"
(ectoplasmic) material which may connect the low self with another
person or, especially, with its own High Self. The "knot" indicates any
of the several things which may prevent such a flow of vital force from
the low self to the High Self. A similar symbol meaning is found in any
reference to a block or other obstruction of a path. In the Bible, from
Isaiah through the New Testament, the "stumbling block" in the path is
the symbol most often used, but the "cross" and "crown of thorns" also
symbolize these "knots" which we think of as "fixations, complexes or
spirit obsessions".

Considering the ease with which anyone can run a check on the present
Huna findings, even with no knowledge at all of the Hawaiian language,
there is really no excuse at all for anyone to refuse to consider the
proofs and evidences which are so greatly important to the sciences
covered by Huna in its very wide scope, or the new and penetrating light
which it throws on Religion, especially Christianity and those religions
in which early Yoga forms a part.

Admittedly, it is and will continue to be hard for

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

those who have accepted the religious beliefs of any branch of
Christianity to bring themselves to face the possibility that what they
have come to believe as all the truth possible to obtain, is only the
outer part of a large whole. Those who believe that they have already
taken all needed steps to win "salvation", may be distressed to learn
that there are "mystery" teachings which need to be understood before
the full "salvation" can be attained.

While some mention of the inner teachings have remained in the accepted
New Testament, much has either been lost or edited out, although many
passages containing Huna symbol words have remained, such as, in John I:
10–12:

"The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light (High Self
symbol), that all men might through him believe.

"He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.

"That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the
world."

Two of the early Church Fathers, Clement and Origen, writing in the
years around 200 A.D., gave complete evidence of the existence of the
inner side of the Christian teachings. For an easy checking source of
this material, Annie Besant's book, "Esoteric Christianity", is
recommended. It is to be found in most libraries as it has been placed
there by the Theosophical Society. Here are some passages quoted by Mrs.
Besant:

Clement, in his "Miscellanies":

"The Lord . . . allowed us to communicate of those divine Mysteries, and
of that holy light, to those who are able to receive them. They did not
certainly

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

disclose to the many what did not belong to the many; but to the few to
whom He knew that they belonged, who were capable of receiving and being
moulded according to them. But secret things are entrusted to speech,
not to writing, as is the case with God. And if one say that it is
written, 'There is nothing secret which shall not be revealed, nor
hidden which shall not be disclosed, 'let him also hear from us, that to
him who hears secretly, even what is secret shall be manifested. . . .
And to him who is able secretly to observe what is delivered to him,
that which is veiled shall be disclosed as truth; and what is hidden to
many shall appear manifest to the few. . . . The Mysteries are delivered
mystically, that what is spoken may be in the mouth of the speaker;
rather not in his voice, but in his understanding. . . ."

Note the effort made in this passage to explain and still not explain
fully, the fact that a foreign set of words had to be used, and when
spoken, must be understood by the one to be initiated. For instance, if
the word "water" was used in explaining some part of the Mysteries to
the candidate, it would be meaningless unless its hidden meaning of
"vital force" had been divulged. It is probable that the necessity for
using the words from the "sacred language", caused the eventual loss of
the knowledge of the Mysteries. To memorize and retain the symbol words
without first learning to speak the complete language, would be
difficult. Substituting of words would soon result in the loss or
changing of original meanings. In India it is to be supposed that the
early writers on Yoga were at least partly initiated into Huna, for the
basic Huna method of accumulating extra "mana", or vital force, for
various uses was slowly developed into a

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

set of elaborate breathing exercises, while the Sanskrit word, "prana",
which means "breath" or "to breathe", came into use to replace the Huna
word, "mana". Or it is possible that some effort to give the symbol or
code meaning of Huna, in which "to breathe hard" ("ha") stood for the
accumulation and use of vital force.

To return to the evidence of the existence of the inner teaching in
Christianity, let us consider statements made by Origen:

"The object of Christianity is that we should become wise. If you come
to the books written after the time of Jesus, you will find that those
multitudes of believers who hear the parables are, as it were,
'without', and worthy only of exoteric doctrines, while the disciples
learn in private the explanation of the parables. For, privately, to his
own disciples did Jesus open up all things, esteeming above the
multitudes those who desired to know His wisdom."

Here is another bit from Origen which explains how the inner teachings
were worked as symbols into supposed historical records. "It is
sufficient, however, to represent in the style of a historic narrative
what is intended to convey a secret meaning in the garb of history, that
those who have the capacity may work out for themselves all that relates
to the subject. . . . Now, in the next place, if any one has the
capacity let him understand that in what assumes the form of history,
and which contains some things that are literally true, while yet it
conveys a deeper meaning . . . these remarks are to be understood as
being made by us with a concealed meaning. . . ."

In the Gnostic writings, of course, may be found a large variety of
attempts to record the substance of

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Huna or similar
mystery teachings without revealing too much. Whether or not the kahunas
originated the system of presenting inner and outer teachings, it is not
to be denied that in the early Egyptian times when Huna ideas were being
absorbed and distorted in the process, there was the secret knowledge
reserved for the initiates and mentioned in the inner temple. A similar
tradition existed among the Jews where the "veil" of the sanctuary
symbolized the division into inner and outer teachings.

In giving an outline of the ten simple elements of which Huna is
composed, it can be shown how very simple the system was and is.
However, because these elements name things often completely unfamiliar
to the reader, or because they name something similar to items about
which the reader already has set opinions, there needs to be much
explaining and a very considerable effort to show why the Huna concepts
are more reasonable than those held in the several modern schools of
thought. These expanded presentations may be found in earlier books on
Huna, especially "The Secret Science Behind Miracles".

In Huna man is said to be made up of nine parts which are possessed both
in life and in the condition of survival after death. One more part, the
human physical body raises the count of parts to ten during life on this
level.

Primarily, man is made up of three "selves" or spirits. These count as
three parts of the man.

Each "self" or spirit of the triune man has a thin and invisible body in
which to live. These count as three more parts. They are the "bodies" in
which the "selves" live if separated by any chance during

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

physical life or after death. Normally the low and middle selves blend
and intermix their "Shadowy" bodies and surround and impregnate the
physical body with them during life, but withdraw and live on together
after death as disincarnate spirits. The High Self always lives apart in
its own "Shadowy" or "aka" body, to use the Hawaiian word.

Each self possesses the life force or vital force, which is called
"mana" by the kahunas, and which is symbolized as "water". There are
three grades or potencies of this life force, and each is counted as a
part of the man, adding up to a total of nine.

The physical body counts as one part, when it is being used, and so the
number 10 has come down to us as the "perfect number".

The number 3 is a symbol standing for either the three selves, the three
shadowy bodies or the three grades of mana or vital force.

The number 4 symbolizes the low self, its vital force, its shadowy body
and the physical body, over which it has charge.

All such uses of numbers and geometric figures such as that of the
triangle, the five pointed star and the cross, have been used in the
past, and one who knows the significance of the symbols knows Huna in
broad outline. To know how to use the knowledge of the ten elements is,
of course, less simple.

We have seen that in the use of mesmerism and suggestion, there are
involved elements not included in the list of human elements but similar
in some ways to one of them. For instance, we have the tiny thought
forms which are made by actions of the consciousness of the two lower
selves. These are given bodies made of the shadowy substance of the low
self,

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

and they can float along on a flow of vital force as it moves by way of
a shadowy thread or cord from one person to another, producing a
telepathic response. Or the thought forms may flow with the gift of
empowering vital force to the High Self as the "seed" from which the
answer to the prayer will be grown to maturity and made manifest on the
physical level.

The unrationalized thoughts or impressions held by the low self form the
fixations or complexes which are so important to Huna and are symbolized
by the cross of the crucifixion (or the simple X cross denoting that a
path is closed), as well as the "stumbling block in the path". Here
again we have thought forms in bodies made of the invisible ectoplasmic
substance.

A companion piece to the complex is the disincarnate spirit, be it a low
or a middle self, of the sort referred to as "devils" in the New
Testament. These dead individuals may be made up of a low plus a middle
self, in which case [they](errata.htm#4) are normal spirits. Or the two
selves may have been separated by some accident of death or because of
long illness and unconscious periods prior to death. In any event, the
low self alone (being irrational and so more dangerous) or the normal
two-self spirit may obsess the living to some degree. Complete obsession
means insanity, but partial obsession may show as a large or small
degree of response to the control exerted on the living by the obsessive
dead. While such influencing of the living by the dead is usually bad,
it can be for good, although the spirits moved by a desire to bring good
are seldom long in contact with the physical level of life after their
passing over.

A further addition to the ten elements of man, as

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

found in Huna, relates to spirits or entities ranging higher or falling
lower than man in the evolutionary march. Above the High Selves are said
to be level after level of Higher Beings, some once having been humans,
some not. Below the human level range the lesser entities, most of whom
are evolving slowly upward toward life as men. However, there is ever
provided a body made of the shadowy substance in some degree or other of
rarification for the entity to inhabit, and there is always some potency
of the life force or "mana".

The Huna lore presents no perfected God, but, instead, a great and
ever-evolving conglomerate of consciousness evolving from low to high,
and always embodied in some form of the shadowy substance while
empowered or made alive by the life force in some of its many potencies
or vibrational rates.

Each evolutionary level of life is marked by its characteristic
awareness as a level of conscious being. The low self has only the
reasoning ability of the higher animals, itself still being an animal in
a body. But it has the power of memory.

The middle self does not remember. It relies on the low self to do all
the remembering for the man while it uses inductive reason, which is its
mental gift, and so is able to guide the low self.

The High Self has a still more evolved type of mentation which is
difficult for the lower selves to understand except to see what such
mentation can accomplish in action. It can see into the future to a
certain distance and can change the future to a large extent for the
individual if asked to do so and if given a steady daily supply of the
basic vital force to use in making the changes. It can use the vital
force to

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

make instant changes in physical matter under the right conditions, and
so bring about instant healing. The limits of its ability to make such
miraculous changes remains unknown in so far as that part of Huna which
has been recovered to date is concerned.

 

The departments of Ethics or Morals, in Huna, are covered by the
negative command NOT to hurt others, and on the positive side of the
inner teaching by the command to love and help where this is possible.
One is the command for the animal or low self and for the less evolved
masses. The other is for the more evolved and intelligent as represented
by the middle self, and exemplified in the lives of the High Selves and
Higher Beings of all levels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Addendum](ssug11)
