# Letters From The Earth

  

## by Mark Twain (1909)

The Creator sat upon the throne, thinking. Behind him stretched the
illimitable continent of heaven, steeped in a glory of light and color;
before him rose the black night of Space, like a wall. His mighty bulk
towered rugged and mountain-like into the zenith, and His divine head
blazed there like a distant sun. At His feet stood three colossal
figures, diminished to extinction, almost, by contrast -- archangels --
their heads level with His ankle-bone.

When the Creator had finished thinking, He said, "I have thought.
Behold!"

He lifted His hand, and from it burst a fountain-spray of fire, a
million stupendous suns, which clove the blackness and soared, away and
away and away, diminishing in magnitude and intensity as they pierced
the far frontiers of Space, until at last they were but as diamond
nailheads sparkling under the domed vast roof of the universe.

At the end of an hour the Grand Council was dismissed.

They left the Presence impressed and thoughtful, and retired to a
private place, where they might talk with freedom. None of the three
seemed to want to begin, though all wanted somebody to do it. Each was
burning to discuss the great event, but would prefer not to commit
himself till he should know how the others regarded it. So there was
some aimless and halting conversation about matters of no consequence,
and this dragged tediously along, arriving nowhere, until at last the
archangel Satan gathered his courage together -- of which he had a very
good supply -- and broke ground. He said: "We know what we are here to
talk about, my lords, and we may as well put pretense aside, and begin.
If this is the opinion of the Council -- "

"It is, it is!" said Gabriel and Michael, gratefully interrupting.

"Very well, then, let us proceed. We have witnessed a wonderful thing;
as to that, we are necessarily agreed. As to the value of it -- if it
has any -- that is a matter which does not personally concern us. We can
have as many opinions about it as we like, and that is our limit. We
have no vote. I think Space was well enough, just as it was, and useful,
too. Cold and dark -- a restful place, now and then, after a season of
the overdelicate climate and trying splendors of heaven. But these are
details of no considerable moment; the new feature, the immense feature,
is -- what, gentlemen?"

"The invention and introduction of automatic, unsupervised,
self-regulating *law* for the government of those myriads of whirling
and racing suns and worlds!"

"That is it!" said Satan. "You perceive that it is a stupendous idea.
Nothing approaching it has been evolved from the Master Intellect
before. Law -- *Automatic* Law -- exact and unvarying Law -- requiring
no watching, no correcting, no readjusting while the eternities endure!
He said those countless vast bodies would plunge through the wastes of
Space ages and ages, at unimaginable speed, around stupendous orbits,
yet never collide, and never lengthen nor shorten their orbital periods
by so much as the hundredth part of a second in two thousand years! That
is the new miracle, and the greatest of all -- *Automatic Law!* And He
gave it a name -- the LAW OF NATURE -- and said Natural Law is the LAW
OF GOD -- interchangeable names for one and the same thing."

"Yes," said Michael, "and He said He would establish Natural Law -- the
Law of God -- throughout His dominions, and its authority should be
supreme and inviolable."

"Also," said Gabriel, "He said He would by and by create animals, and
place them, likewise, under the authority of that Law."

"Yes," said Satan, "I heard Him, but did not understand. What *is*
animals, Gabriel?"

"Ah, how should I know? How should any of us know? It is a new word."

\[*Interval of three centuries, celestial time -- the equivalent of a
hundred million years, earthly time. Enter a Messenger-Angel.*\]

"My lords, He is making animals. Will it please you to come and see?"

They went, they saw, and were perplexed. Deeply perplexed -- and the
Creator noticed it, and said, "Ask. I will answer."

"Divine One," said Satan, making obeisance, "what are they for?"

"They are an experiment in Morals and Conduct. Observe them, and be
instructed."

There were thousands of them. They were full of activities. Busy, all
busy -- mainly in persecuting each other. Satan remarked -- after
examining one of them through a powerful microscope: "This large beast
is killing weaker animals, Divine One."

"The tiger -- yes. The law of his nature is ferocity. The law of his
nature is the Law of God. He cannot disobey it."

"Then in obeying it he commits no offense, Divine One?"

"No, he is blameless."

"This other creature, here, is timid, Divine One, and suffers death
without resisting."

"The rabbit -- yes. He is without courage. It is the law of his nature
-- the Law of God. He must obey it."

"Then he cannot honorably be required to go counter to his nature and
resist, Divine One?"

"No. No creature can be honorably required to go counter to the law of
his nature -- the Law of God."

After a long time and many questions, Satan said, "The spider kills the
fly, and eats it; the bird kills the spider and eats it; the wildcat
kills the goose; the -- well, they all kill each other. It is murder all
along the line. Here are countless multitudes of creatures, and they all
kill, kill, kill, they are all murderers. And they are not to blame,
Divine One?"

"They are not to blame. It is the law of their nature. And always the
law of nature is the Law of God. Now -- observe -- behold! A new
creature -- and the masterpiece -- *Man!*"

Men, women, children, they came swarming in flocks, in droves, in
millions.

"What shall you do with them, Divine One?"

"Put into each individual, in differing shades and degrees, all the
various Moral Qualities, in mass, that have been distributed, a single
distinguishing characteristic at a time, among the nonspeaking animal
world -- courage, cowardice, ferocity, gentleness, fairness, justice,
cunning, treachery, magnanimity, cruelty, malice, malignity, lust,
mercy, pity, purity, selfishness, sweetness, honor, love, hate,
baseness, nobility, loyalty, falsity, veracity, untruthfulness -- each
human being shall have *all* of these in him, and they will constitute
his nature. In some, there will be high and fine characteristics which
will submerge the evil ones, and those will be called good men; in
others the evil characteristics will have dominion, and those will be
called bad men. Observe -- behold -- they vanish!"

"Whither are they gone, Divine One?"

"To the earth -- they and all their fellow animals."

"What is the earth?"

"A small globe I made, a time, two times and a half ago. You saw it, but
did not notice it in the explosion of worlds and suns that sprayed from
my hand. Man is an experiment, the other animals are another experiment.
Time will show whether they were worth the trouble. The exhibition is
over; you may take your leave, my lords."

Several days passed by.

This stands for a long stretch of (our) time, since in heaven a day is
as a thousand years.

Satan had been making admiring remarks about certain of the Creator's
sparkling industries -- remarks which, being read between the lines,
were sarcasms. He had made them confidentially to his safe friends the
other archangels, but they had been overheard by some ordinary angels
and reported at Headquarters.

He was ordered into banishment for a day -- the celestial day. It was a
punishment he was used to, on account of his too flexible tongue.
Formerly he had been deported into Space, there being nowhither else to
send him, and had flapped tediously around there in the eternal night
and the Arctic chill; but now it occurred to him to push on and hunt up
the earth and see how the Human-Race experiment was coming along.

By and by he wrote home -- very privately -- to St. Michael and St.
Gabriel about it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="1"></span>Satan's Letter

This is a strange place, and extraordinary place, and interesting. There
is nothing resembling it at home. The people are all insane, the other
animals are all insane, the earth is insane, Nature itself is insane.
Man is a marvelous curiosity. When he is at his very very best he is a
sort of low grade nickel-plated angel; at is worst he is unspeakable,
unimaginable; and first and last and all the time he is a sarcasm. Yet
he blandly and in all sincerity calls himself the "noblest work of God."
This is the truth I am telling you. And this is not a new idea with him,
he has talked it through all the ages, and believed it. Believed it, and
found nobody among all his race to laugh at it.

Moreover -- if I may put another strain upon you -- he thinks he is the
Creator's pet. He believes the Creator is proud of him; he even believes
the Creator loves him; has a passion for him; sits up nights to admire
him; yes, and watch over him and keep him out of trouble. He prays to
Him, and thinks He listens. Isn't it a quaint idea? Fills his prayers
with crude and bald and florid flatteries of Him, and thinks He sits and
purrs over these extravagancies and enjoys them. He prays for help, and
favor, and protection, every day; and does it with hopefulness and
confidence, too, although no prayer of his has ever been answered. The
daily affront, the daily defeat, do not discourage him, he goes on
praying just the same. There is something almost fine about this
perseverance. I must put one more strain upon you: he thinks he is going
to heaven!

He has salaried teachers who tell him that. They also tell him there is
a hell, of everlasting fire, and that he will go to it if he doesn't
keep the Commandments. What are Commandments? They are a curiosity. I
will tell you about them by and by.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="2"></span>Letter II

"I have told you nothing about man that is not true." You must pardon me
if I repeat that remark now and then in these letters; I want you to
take seriously the things I am telling you, and I feel that if I were in
your place and you in mine, I should need that reminder from time to
time, to keep my credulity from flagging.

For there is nothing about man that is not strange to an immortal. He
looks at nothing as we look at it, his sense of proportion is quite
different from ours, and his sense of values is so widely divergent from
ours, that with all our large intellectual powers it is not likely that
even the most gifted among us would ever be quite able to understand it.

For instance, take this sample: he has imagined a heaven, and has left
entirely out of it the supremest of all his delights, the one ecstasy
that stands first and foremost in the heart of every individual of his
race -- and of ours -- sexual intercourse!

It is as if a lost and perishing person in a roasting desert should be
told by a rescuer he might choose and have all longed-for things but
one, and he should elect to leave out water!

His heaven is like himself: strange, interesting, astonishing,
grotesque. I give you my word, it has not a single feature in it that he
*actually values.* It consists -- utterly and entirely -- of diversions
which he cares next to nothing about, here in the earth, yet is quite
sure he will like them in heaven. Isn't it curious? Isn't it
interesting? You must not think I am exaggerating, for it is not so. I
will give you details.

Most men do not sing, most men cannot sing, most men will not stay when
others are singing if it be continued more than two hours. Note that.

Only about two men in a hundred can play upon a musical instrument, and
not four in a hundred have any wish to learn how. Set that down.

Many men pray, not many of them like to do it. A few pray long, the
others make a short cut.

More men go to church than want to.

To forty-nine men in fifty the Sabbath Day is a dreary, dreary bore.

Of all the men in a church on a Sunday, two-thirds are tired when the
service is half over, and the rest before it is finished.

The gladdest moment for all of them is when the preacher uplifts his
hands for the benediction. You can hear the soft rustle of relief that
sweeps the house, and you recognize that it is eloquent with gratitude.

All nations look down upon all other nations.

All nations dislike all other nations.

All white nations despise all colored nations, of whatever hue, and
oppress them when they can.

White men will not associate with "niggers," nor marry them.

They will not allow them in their schools and churches.

All the world hates the Jew, and will not endure him except when he is
rich.

I ask you to note all those particulars.

Further. All sane people detest noise.

All people, sane or insane, like to have variety in their life. Monotony
quickly wearies them.

Every man, according to the mental equipment that has fallen to his
share, exercises his intellect constantly, ceaselessly, and this
exercise makes up a vast and valued and essential part of his life. The
lowest intellect, like the highest, possesses a skill of some kind and
takes a keen pleasure in testing it, proving it, perfecting it. The
urchin who is his comrade's superior in games is as diligent and as
enthusiastic in his practice as are the sculptor, the painter, the
pianist, the mathematician and the rest. Not one of them could be happy
if his talent were put under an interdict.

Now then, you have the facts. You know what the human race enjoys, and
what it doesn't enjoy. It has invented a heaven out of its own head, all
by itself: guess what it is like! In fifteen hundred eternities you
couldn't do it. The ablest mind known to you or me in fifty million
aeons couldn't do it. Very well, I will tell you about it.

1\. First of all, I recall to your attention the extraordinary fact with
which I began. To wit, that the human being, like the immortals,
naturally places sexual intercourse far and away above all other joys --
yet he has left it out of his heaven! The very thought of it excites
him; opportunity sets him wild; in this state he will risk life,
reputation, everything -- even his queer heaven itself -- to make good
that opportunity and ride it to the overwhelming climax. From youth to
middle age all men and all women prize copulation above all other
pleasures combined, yet it is actually as I have said: it is not in
their heaven; prayer takes its place.

They prize it thus highly; yet, like all their so-called "boons," it is
a poor thing. At its very best and longest the act is brief beyond
imagination -- the imagination of an immortal, I mean. In the matter of
repetition the man is limited -- oh, quite beyond immortal conception.
We who continue the act and its supremest ecstasies unbroken and without
withdrawal for centuries, will never be able to understand or adequately
pity the awful poverty of these people in that rich gift which,
possessed as we possess it, makes all other possessions trivial and not
worth the trouble of invoicing.

2\. In man's heaven *everybody sings!* The man who did not sing on earth
sings there; the man who could not sing on earth is able to do it there.
The universal singing is not casual, not occasional, not relieved by
intervals of quiet; it goes on, all day long, and every day, during a
stretch of twelve hours. And *everybody stays;* whereas in the earth the
place would be empty in two hours. The singing is of hymns alone. Nay,
it is of *one* hymn alone. The words are always the same, in number they
are only about a dozen, there is no rhyme, there is no poetry:
"Hosannah, hosannah, hosannah, Lord God of Sabaoth, 'rah! 'rah! 'rah!
siss! -- boom! ... a-a-ah!"

3\. Meantime, every person is playing on a harp -- those millions and
millions! -- whereas not more than twenty in the thousand of them could
play an instrument in the earth, or ever wanted to.

Consider the deafening hurricane of sound -- millions and millions of
voices screaming at once and millions and millions of harps gritting
their teeth at the same time! I ask you: is it hideous, is it odious, is
it horrible?

Consider further: it is a *praise* service; a service of compliment, of
flattery, of adulation! Do you ask who it is that is willing to endure
this strange compliment, this insane compliment; and who not only
endures it, but likes it, enjoys it, requires if, *commands* it? Hold
your breath!

It is God! This race's god, I mean. He sits on his throne, attended by
his four and twenty elders and some other dignitaries pertaining to his
court, and looks out over his miles and miles of tempestuous worshipers,
and smiles, and purrs, and nods his satisfaction northward, eastward,
southward; as quaint and nave a spectacle as has yet been imagined in
this universe, I take it.

It is easy to see that the inventor of the heavens did not originate the
idea, but copied it from the show-ceremonies of some sorry little
sovereign State up in the back settlements of the Orient somewhere.

All sane white people hate noise; yet they have tranquilly accepted this
kind of heaven -- without thinking, without reflection, without
examination -- and they actually want to go to it! Profoundly devout old
gray-headed men put in a large part of their time dreaming of the happy
day when they will lay down the cares of this life and enter into the
joys of that place. Yet you can see how unreal it is to them, and how
little it takes a grip upon them as being fact, for they make no
practical preparation for the great change: you never see one of them
with a harp, you never hear one of them sing.

As you have seen, that singular show is a service of praise: praise by
hymn, praise by prostration. It takes the place of "church." Now then,
in the earth these people cannot stand much church -- an hour and a
quarter is the limit, and they draw the line at once a week. That is to
say, Sunday. One day in seven; and even then they do not look forward to
it with longing. And so -- consider what their heaven provides for them:
"church" that lasts forever, and a Sabbath that has no end! They quickly
weary of this brief hebdomadal Sabbath here, yet they long for that
eternal one; they dream of it, they talk about it, they *think* they
think they are going to enjoy it -- with all their simple hearts they
think they think they are going to be happy in it!

It is because they do not think at all; they only think they think.
Whereas they can't think; not two human beings in ten thousand have
anything to think with. And as to imagination -- oh, well, look at their
heaven! They accept it, they approve it, they admire it. That gives you
their intellectual measure.

4\. The inventor of their heaven empties into it all the nations of the
earth, in one common jumble. All are on an equality absolute, no one of
them ranking another; they have to be "brothers"; they have to mix
together, pray together, harp together, hosannah together -- whites,
niggers, Jews, everybody -- there's no distinction. Here in the earth
all nations hate each other, and every one of them hates the Jew. Yet
every pious person adores that heaven and wants to get into it. He
really does. And when he is in a holy rapture he thinks he thinks that
if he were only there he would take all the populace to his heart, and
hug, and hug, and hug!

He is a marvel -- man is! I would I knew who invented him.

5\. Every man in the earth possesses some share of intellect, large or
small; and be it large or be it small he takes pride in it. Also his
heart swells at mention of the names of the majestic intellectual chiefs
of his race, and he loves the tale of their splendid achievements. For
he is of their blood, and in honoring themselves they have honored him.
Lo, what the mind of man can do! he cries, and calls the roll of the
illustrious of all ages; and points to the imperishable literatures they
have given to the world, and the mechanical wonders they have invented,
and the glories wherewith they have clothed science and the arts; and to
them he uncovers as to kings, and gives to them the profoundest homage,
and the sincerest, his exultant heart can furnish -- thus exalting
intellect above all things else in the world, and enthroning it there
under the arching skies in a supremacy unapproachable. And then he
contrived a heaven that hasn't a rag of intellectuality in it anywhere!

Is it odd, is it curious, is it puzzling? It is exactly as I have said,
incredible as it may sound. This sincere adorer of intellect and
prodigal rewarder of its mighty services here in the earth has invented
a religion and a heaven which pay no compliments to intellect, offer it
no distinctions, fling it no largess: in fact, never even mention it.

By this time you will have noticed that the human being's heaven has
been thought out and constructed upon an absolute definite plan; and
that this plan is, that it shall contain, in labored detail, each and
every imaginable thing that is repulsive to a man, and not a single
thing he likes!

Very well, the further we proceed the more will this curious fact be
apparent.

Make a note of it: in man's heaven there are no exercises for the
intellect, nothing for it to live upon. It would rot there in a year --
rot and stink. Rot and stink -- and at that stage become holy. A blessed
thing: for only the holy can stand the joys of that bedlam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="3"></span>Letter III

You have noticed that the human being is a curiosity. In times past he
has had (and worn out and flung away) hundreds and hundreds of
religions; today he has hundreds and hundreds of religions, and launches
not fewer than three new ones every year. I could enlarge that number
and still be within the facts.

One of his principle religions is called the Christian. A sketch of it
will interest you. It sets forth in detail in a book containing two
million words, called the Old and New Testaments. Also it has another
name -- The Word of God. For the Christian thinks every word of it was
dictated by God -- the one I have been speaking of.

It is full of interest. It has noble poetry in it; and some clever
fables; and some blood-drenched history; and some good morals; and a
wealth of obscenity; and upwards of a thousand lies.

This Bible is built mainly out of the fragments of older Bibles that had
their day and crumbled to ruin. So it noticeably lacks in originality,
necessarily. Its three or four most imposing and impressive events all
happened in earlier Bibles; all its best precepts and rules of conduct
came also from those Bibles; there are only two new things in it: hell,
for one, and that singular heaven I have told you about.

What shall we do? If we believe, with these people, that their God
invented these cruel things, we slander him; if we believe that these
people invented them themselves, we slander them. It is an unpleasant
dilemma in either case, for neither of these parties has done us any
harm.

For the sake of tranquility, let us take a side. Let us join forces with
the people and put the whole ungracious burden upon *him* -- heaven,
hell, Bible and all. It does not seem right, it does not seem fair; and
yet when you consider that heaven, and how crushingly charged it is with
everything that is repulsive to a human being, how can we believe a
human being invented it? And when I come to tell you about hell, the
stain will be greater still, and you will be likely to say, No, a man
would not provide that place, for either himself or anybody else; he
simply couldn't.

That innocent Bible tells about the Creation. Of what -- the universe?
Yes, the universe. In six days!

God did it. He did not call it the universe -- that name is modern. His
whole attention was upon this world. He constructed it in five days --
and then? It took him only one day to make twenty million suns and
eighty million planets!

What were they for -- according to this idea? To furnish light for this
little toy-world. That was his whole purpose; he had no other. One of
the twenty million suns (the smallest one) was to light it in the
daytime, the rest were to help one of the universe's countless moons
modify the darkness of its nights.

<span id="REFLIGHT"></span>It is quite manifest that he believed his
fresh-made skies were diamond-sown with those myriads of twinkling stars
the moment his first-day's sun sank below the horizon; whereas, in fact,
not a single star winked in that black vault until three years and a
half after that memorable week's formidable industries had been
completed.\[[\*\*](#NOTELIGHT.md)\] then one star appeared, all solitary
and alone, and began to blink. Three years later another one appeared.
The two blinked together for more than four years before a third joined
them. At the end of the first hundred years there were not yet
twenty-five stars twinkling in the wide wastes of those gloomy skies. At
the end of a thousand years not enough stars were yet visible to make a
show. At the end of a million years only half of the present array had
sent their light over the telescopic frontiers, and it took another
million for the rest to follow suit, as the vulgar phrase goes. There
being at that time no telescope, their advent was not observed.

For three hundred years, now, the Christian astronomer has known that
his Deity didn't make the stars in those tremendous six days; but the
Christian astronomer does not enlarge upon that detail. Neither does the
priest.

In his Book, God is eloquent in his praises of his mighty works, and
calls them by the largest names he can find -- thus indicating that he
has a strong and just admiration of magnitudes; yet he made those
millions of prodigious suns to light this wee little orb, instead of
appointing this orb's little sun to dance attendance upon them. He
mentions Arcturus in his book -- you remember Arcturus; we went there
once. It is one of the earth's night lamps! -- that giant globe which is
fifty thousand times as large as the earth's sun, and compares with it
as a melon compares with a cathedral.

However, the Sunday school still teaches the child that Arcturus was
created to help light this earth, and the child grows up and continues
to believe it long after he has found out that the probabilities are
against it being so.

According to the Book and its servants the universe is only six thousand
years old. It is only within the last hundred years that studious,
inquiring minds have found out that it is nearer a hundred million.

During the Six Days, God created man and the other animals.

He made a man and a woman and placed them in a pleasant garden, along
with the other creatures. they all lived together there in harmony and
contentment and blooming youth for some time; then trouble came. God had
warned the man and the woman that they must not eat of the fruit of a
certain tree. And he added a most strange remark: he said that if they
ate of it they should surely die. Strange, for the reason that inasmuch
as they had never seen a sample death they could not possibly know what
he meant. Neither would he nor any other god have been able to make
those ignorant children understand what was meant, without furnishing a
sample. The mere word could have no meaning for them, any more than it
would have for an infant of days.

Presently a serpent sought them out privately, and came to them walking
upright, which was the way of serpents in those days. The serpent said
the forbidden fruit would store their vacant minds with knowledge. So
they ate it, which was quite natural, for man is so made that he eagerly
wants to know; whereas the priest, like God, whose imitator and
representative he is, has made it his business from the beginning to
keep him from knowing any useful thing.

Adam and Eve ate the forbidden fruit, and at once a great light streamed
into their dim heads. They had acquired knowledge. What knowledge --
useful knowledge? No -- merely knowledge that there was such a thing as
good, and such a thing as evil, and how to do evil. they couldn't do it
before. Therefore all their acts up to this time had been without stain,
without blame, without offense.

But now they could do evil -- and suffer for it; now they had acquired
what the Church calls an invaluable possession, the Moral Sense; that
sense which differentiates man from the beast and sets him above the
beast. Instead of below the beast -- where one would suppose his proper
place would be, since he is always foul-minded and guilty and the beast
always clean-minded and innocent. It is like valuing a watch that must
go wrong, above a watch that can't.

The Church still prizes the Moral Sense as man's noblest asset today,
although the Church knows God had a distinctly poor opinion of it and
did what he could in his clumsy way to keep his happy Children of the
Garden from acquiring it.

Very well, Adam and Eve now knew what evil was, and how to do it. They
knew how to do various kinds of wrong things, and among them one
principal one -- the one God had his mind on principally. That one was
the art and mystery of sexual intercourse. To them it was a magnificent
discovery, and they stopped idling around and turned their entire
attention to it, poor exultant young things!

In the midst of one of these celebrations they heard God walking among
the bushes, which was an afternoon custom of his, and they were smitten
with fright. Why? Because they were naked. They had not known it before.
They had not minded it before; neither had God.

In that memorable moment immodesty was born; and some people have valued
it ever since, though it would certainly puzzle them to explain why.

Adam and Eve entered the world naked and unashamed -- naked and
pure-minded; and no descendant of theirs has ever entered it otherwise.
All have entered it naked, unashamed, and clean in mind. They have
entered it modest. They had to acquire immodesty and the soiled mind;
there was no other way to get it. A Christian mother's first duty is to
soil her child's mind, and she does not neglect it. Her lad grows up to
be a missionary, and goes to the innocent savage and to the civilized
Japanese, and soils their minds. Whereupon they adopt immodesty, they
conceal their bodies, they stop bathing naked together.

The convention miscalled modesty has no standard, and cannot have one,
because it is opposed to nature and reason, and is therefore an
artificiality and subject to anybody's whim, anybody's diseased caprice.
And so, in India the refined lady covers her face and breasts and leaves
her legs naked from the hips down, while the refined European lady
covers her legs and exposes her face and her breasts. In lands inhabited
by the innocent savage the refined European lady soon gets used to
full-grown native stark-nakedness, and ceases to be offended by it. A
highly cultivated French count and countess -- unrelated to each other
-- who were marooned in their nightclothes, by shipwreck, upon an
uninhabited island in the eighteenth century, were soon naked. Also
ashamed -- for a week. After that their nakedness did not trouble them,
and they soon ceased to think about it.

You have never seen a person with clothes on. Oh, well, you haven't lost
anything.

To proceed with the Biblical curiosities. Naturally you will think the
threat to punish Adam and Eve for disobeying was of course not carried
out, since they did not create themselves, nor their natures nor their
impulses nor their weaknesses, and hence were not properly subject to
anyone's commands, and not responsible to anybody for their acts. It
will surprise you to know that the threat was carried out. Adam and Eve
were punished, and that crime finds apologists unto this day. The
sentence of death was executed.

As you perceive, the only person responsible for the couple's offense
escaped; and not only escaped but became the executioner of the
innocent.

In your country and mine we should have the privilege of making fun of
this kind of morality, but it would be unkind to do it here. Many of
these people have the reasoning faculty, but no one uses it in religious
matters.

The best minds will tell you that when a man has begotten a child he is
morally bound to tenderly care for it, protect it from hurt, shield it
from disease, clothe it, feed it, bear with its waywardness, lay no hand
upon it save in kindness and for its own good, and never in any case
inflict upon it a wanton cruelty. God's treatment of his earthly
children, every day and every night, is the exact opposite of all that,
yet those best minds warmly justify these crimes, condone them, excuse
them, and indignantly refuse to regard them as crimes at all, when *he*
commits them. Your country and mine is an interesting one, but there is
nothing there that is half so interesting as the human mind.

Very well, God banished Adam and Eve from the Garden, and eventually
assassinated them. All for disobeying a command which he had no right to
utter. But he did not stop there, as you will see. He has one code of
morals for himself, and quite another for his children. He requires his
children to deal justly -- and gently -- with offenders, and forgive
them seventy-and-seven times; whereas he deals neither justly nor gently
with anyone, and he did not forgive the ignorant and thoughtless first
pair of juveniles even their first small offense and say, "You may go
free this time, and I will give you another chance."

On the contrary! He elected to punish *their* children, all through the
ages to the end of time, for a trifling offense committed by others
before they were born. He is punishing them yet. In mild ways? No, in
atrocious ones.

You would not suppose that this kind of Being gets many compliments.
Undeceive yourself: the world calls him the All-Just, the All-Righteous,
the All-Good, the All-Merciful, the All-Forgiving, the All-Truthful, the
All-Loving, the Source of All Morality. These sarcasms are uttered
daily, all over the world. But not as conscious sarcasms. No, they are
meant seriously: they are uttered without a smile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="4"></span>Letter IV

So the First Pair went forth from the Garden under a curse -- a
permanent one. They had lost every pleasure they had possessed before
"The Fall"; and yet they were rich, for they had gained one worth all
the rest: they knew the Supreme Art.

They practiced it diligently and were filled with contentment. The Deity
ordered them to practice it. They obeyed, this time. But it was just as
well it was not forbidden, for they would have practiced it anyhow, if a
thousand Deities had forbidden it.

Results followed. By the name of Cain and Abel. And these had some
sisters; and knew what to do with them. And so there were some more
results: Cain and Abel begot some nephews and nieces. These, in their
turn, begot some second cousins. At this point classification of
relationships began to get difficult, and the attempt to keep it up was
abandoned.

The pleasant labor of populating the world went on from age to age, and
with prime efficiency; for in those happy days the sexes were still
competent for the Supreme Art when by rights they ought to have been
dead eight hundred years. The sweeter sex, the dearer sex, the lovelier
sex was manifestly at its very best, then, for it was even able to
attract gods. Real gods. They came down out of heaven and had wonderful
times with those hot young blossoms. The Bible tells about it.

By help of those visiting foreigners the population grew and grew until
it numbered several millions. But it was a disappointment to the Deity.
He was dissatisfied with its morals; which in some respects were not any
better than his own. Indeed they were an unflatteringly close imitation
of his own. They were a very bad people, and as he knew of no way to
reform them, he wisely concluded to abolish them. This is the only
really enlightened and superior idea his Bible has credited him with,
and it would have made his reputation for all time if he could only have
kept to it and carried it out. But he was always unstable -- except in
his advertisements -- and his good resolution broke down. He took a
pride in man; man was his finest invention; man was his pet, after the
housefly, and he could not bear to lose him wholly; so he finally
decided to save a sample of him and drown the rest.

Nothing could be more characteristic of him. He created all those
infamous people, and he alone was responsible for their conduct. Not one
of them deserved death, yet it was certainly good policy to extinguish
them; especially since in creating them the master crime had already
been committed, and to allow them to go on procreating would be a
distinct addition to the crime. But at the same time there could be no
justice, no fairness, in any favoritism -- all should be drowned or
none.

No, he would not have it so; he would save half a dozen and try the race
over again. He was not able to foresee that it would go rotten again,
for he is only the Far-Sighted One in his advertisements.

He saved out Noah and his family, and arranged to exterminate the rest.
He planned an Ark, and Noah built it. Neither of them had ever built an
Ark before, nor knew anything about Arks; and so something out of the
common was to be expected. It happened. Noah was a farmer, and although
he knew what was required of the Ark he was quite incompetent to say
whether this one would be large enough to meet the requirements or not
(which it wasn't), so he ventured no advice. The Deity did not know it
wasn't large enough, but took the chances and made no adequate
measurements. In the end the ship fell far short of the necessities, and
to this day the world still suffers for it.

Noah built the Ark. He built it the best he could, but left out most of
the essentials. It had no rudder, it had no sails, it had no compass, it
had no pumps, it had no charts, no lead-lines, no anchors, no log, no
light, no ventilation, and as for cargo room -- which was the main thing
-- the less said about that the better. It was to be at sea eleven
months, and would need fresh water enough to fill two Arks of its size
-- yet the additional Ark was not provided. Water from outside could not
be utilized: half of it would be salt water, and men and land animals
could not drink it.

For not only was a sample of man to be saved, but business samples of
the other animals, too. You must understand that when Adam ate the apple
in the Garden and learned how to multiply and replenish, the other
animals learned the Art, too, by watching Adam. It was cunning of them,
it was neat; for they got all that was worth having out of the apple
without tasting it and afflicting themselves with the disastrous Moral
Sense, the parent of all immoralities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="5"></span>Letter V

Noah began to collect animals. There was to be one couple of each and
every sort of creature that walked or crawled, or swam or flew, in the
world of animated nature. We have to guess at how long it took to
collect the creatures and how much it cost, for there is no record of
these details. When Symmachus made preparation to introduce his young
son to grown-up life in imperial Rome, he sent men to Asia, Africa and
everywhere to collect wild animals for the arena-fights. It took the men
three years to accumulate the animals and fetch them to Rome. Merely
quadrupeds and alligators, you understand -- no birds, no snakes, no
frogs, no worms, no lice, no rats, no fleas, no ticks, no caterpillars,
no spiders, no houseflies, no mosquitoes -- nothing but just plain
simple quadrupeds and alligators: and no quadrupeds except fighting
ones. Yet it was as I have said: it took three years to collect them,
and the cost of animals and transportation and the men's wages footed up
$4,500,000.

How many animals? We do not know. But it was under five thousand, for
that was the largest number ever gathered for those Roman shows, and it
was Titus, not Symmachus, who made that collection. Those were mere baby
museums, compared to Noah's contract. Of birds and beasts and
fresh-water creatures he had to collect 146,000 kinds; and of insects
upwards of two million species.

Thousands and thousands of those things are very difficult to catch, and
if Noah had not given up and resigned, he would be on the job yet, as
Leviticus used to say. However, I do not mean that he withdrew. No, he
did not do that. He gathered as many creatures as he had room for, and
then stopped.

If he had known all the requirements in the beginning, he would have
been aware that what was needed was a fleet of Arks. But he did not know
how many kinds of creatures there were, neither did his Chief. So he had
no Kangaroo, and no 'possom, and no Gila monster, and no
ornithorhynchus, and lacked a multitude of other indispensable blessings
which a loving Creator had provided for man and forgotten about, they
having long ago wandered to a side of this world which he had never seen
and with whose affairs he was not acquainted. And so everyone of them
came within a hair of getting drowned.

They only escaped by an accident. There was not water enough to go
around. Only enough was provided to flood one small corner of the globe
-- the rest of the globe was not then known, and was supposed to be
nonexistent.

However, the thing that really and finally and definitely determined
Noah to stop with enough species for purely business purposes and let
the rest become extinct, was an incident of the last days: an excited
stranger arrived with some most alarming news. He said he had been
camping among some mountains and valleys about six hundred miles away,
and he had seen a wonderful thing there: he stood upon a precipice
overlooking a wide valley, and up the valley he was a billowy black sea
of strange animal life coming. Presently the creatures passed by,
struggling, fighting, scrambling, screeching, snorting -- horrible vast
masses of tumultuous flesh! Sloths as big as an elephant; frogs as big
as a cow; a megatherium and his harem huge beyond belief; saurians and
saurians and saurians, group after group, family after family, species
after species -- a hundred feet long, thirty feet high, and twice as
quarrelsome; one of them hit a perfectly blameless Durham bull a thump
with its tail and sent it whizzing three hundred feet into the air and
it fell at the man's feet with a sigh and was no more. The man said that
these prodigious animals had heard about the Ark and were coming. Coming
to get saved from the flood. And not coming in pairs, they were *all*
coming: they did not know the passengers were restricted to pairs, the
man said, and wouldn't care a rap for the regulations, anyway -- they
would sail in that Ark or know the reason why. The man said the Ark
would not hold the half of them; and moreover they were coming hungry,
and would eat up everything there was, including the menagerie and the
family.

All these facts were suppressed, in the Biblical account. You find not a
hint of them there. The whole thing is hushed up. Not even the names of
those vast creatures are mentioned. It shows you that when people have
left a reproachful vacancy in a contract they can be as shady about it
in Bibles as elsewhere. Those powerful animals would be of inestimable
value to man now, when transportation is so hard pressed and expensive,
but they are all lost to him. All lost, and by Noah's fault. They all
got drowned. Some of them as much as eight million years ago.

Very well, the stranger told his tale, and Noah saw that he must get
away before the monsters arrived. He would have sailed at once, but the
upholsterers and decorators of the housefly's drawing room still had
some finishing touches to put on, and that lost him a day. Another day
was lost in getting the flies aboard, there being sixty-eight billions
of them and the Deity still afraid there might not be enough. Another
day was lost in stowing forty tons of selected filth for the flies'
sustenance.

Then at last, Noah sailed; and none too soon, for the Ark was only just
sinking out of sight on the horizon when the monsters arrived, and added
their lamentations to those of the multitude of weeping fathers and
mothers and frightened little children who were clinging to the
wave-washed rocks in the pouring rain and lifting imploring prayers to
an All-Just and All-Forgiving and All-Pitying Being who had never
answered a prayer since those crags were builded, grain by grain, out of
the sands, and would still not have answered one when the ages should
have crumbled them to sand again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="6"></span>Letter VI

On the third day, about noon, it was found that a fly and been left
behind. The return voyage turned out to be long and difficult, on
account of the lack of chart and compass, and because of the changed
aspects of all coasts, the steadily rising water having submerged some
of the lower landmarks and given to higher ones an unfamiliar look; but
after sixteen days of earnest and faithful seeking, the fly was found at
last, and received on board with hymns of praise and gratitude, the
Family standing meanwhile uncovered, our of reverence for its divine
origin. It was weary and worn, and had suffered somewhat from the
weather, but was otherwise in good estate. Men and their families had
died of hunger on barren mountain tops, but it had not lacked for food,
the multitudinous corpses furnishing it in rank and rotten richness.
Thus was the sacred bird providentially preserved.

Providentially. That is the word. For the fly had not been left behind
by accident. No, the hand of Providence was in it. There are no
accidents. All things that happen, happen for a purpose. They are
foreseen from the beginning of time, they are ordained from the
beginning of time. From the dawn of Creation the Lord had foreseen that
Noah, being alarmed and confused by the invasion of the prodigious
brevet fossils, would prematurely fly to sea unprovided with a certain
invaluable disease. He would have all the other diseases, and could
distribute them among the new races of men as they appeared in the
world, but he would lack one of the very best -- typhoid fever; a malady
which, when the circumstances are especially favorable, is able to
utterly wreck a patient without killing him; for it can restore him to
his feet with a long life in him, and yet deaf, dumb, blind, crippled,
and idiotic. The housefly is its main disseminator, and is more
competent and more calamitously effective than all the other
distributors of the dreaded scourge put together. And so, by
foreordination from the beginning of time, this fly was left behind to
seek out a typhoid corpse and feed upon its corruptions and gaum its
legs with germs and transmit them to the re-peopled world for permanent
business. From that one housefly, in the ages that have since elapsed,
billions of sickbeds have been stocked, billions of wrecked bodies sent
tottering about the earth, and billions of cemeteries recruited with the
dead.

It is most difficult to understand the disposition of the Bible God, it
is such a confusion of contradictions; of watery instabilities and iron
firmness; of goody-goody abstract morals made out of words, and
concreted hell-born ones made out of acts; of fleeting kindness repented
of in permanent malignities.

However, when after much puzzling you get at the key to his disposition,
you do at last arrive at a sort of understanding of it. With a most
quaint and juvenile and astonishing frankness he has furnished that key
himself. It is jealousy!

I expect that to take your breath away. You are aware -- for I have
already told you in an earlier letter -- that among human beings
jealousy ranks distinctly as a weakness; a trade-mark of small minds; a
property of *all* small minds, yet a property which even the smallest is
ashamed of; and when accused of its possession will lyingly deny it and
resent the accusation as an insult.

Jealousy. Do not forget it, keep it in mind. It is the key. With it you
will come to partly understand God as we go along; without it nobody can
understand him. As I have said, he has openly held up this treasonous
key himself, for all to see. He says, naïvely, outspokenly, and without
suggestion of embarrassment: "I the Lord thy God am a jealous God."

You see, it is only another way of saying, "I the Lord thy God am a
small God; a small God, and fretful about small things."

He was giving a warning: he could not bear the thought of any other God
getting some of the Sunday compliments of this comical little human race
-- he wanted all of them for himself. He valued them. To him they were
riches; just as tin money is to a Zulu.

But wait -- I am not fair; I am misrepresenting him; prejudice is
beguiling me into saying what is not true. He did not say he wanted all
of the adulations; he said nothing about not being willing to share them
with his fellow gods; what he said was, "Thou shalt have no other gods
*before* me."

It is a quite different thing, and puts him in a much better light -- I
confess it. There was an abundance of gods, the woods were full of them,
as the saying is, and all he demanded was that he should be ranked as
high as the others -- not above any of them, but not below any of them.
He was willing that they should fertilize earthly virgins, but not on
any better terms than he could have for himself in his turn. He wanted
to be held their equal. This he insisted upon, in the clearest language:
he would have no other gods *before* him. They could march abreast with
him, but none of them could head the procession, and he did not claim
the right to head it himself.

Do you think he was able to stick to that upright and creditable
position? No. He could keep to a bad resolution forever, but he couldn't
keep to a good one a month. By and by he threw aside and calmly claimed
to be the only God in the entire universe.

As I was saying, jealousy is the key; all through his history it is
present and prominent. It is the blood and bone of his disposition, it
is the basis of his character. How small a thing can wreck his composure
and disorder his judgement if it touches the raw of his jealousy! And
nothing warms up this trait so quickly and so surely and so
exaggeratedly as a suspicion that some competition with the god-Trust is
impending. The fear that if Adam and Eve ate of the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge they would "be as gods" so fired his jealousy that his reason
was affected, and he could not treat those poor creatures either fairly
or charitably, or even refrain from dealing cruelly and criminally with
their blameless posterity.

To this day his reason has never recovered from that shock; a wild
nightmare of vengefulness has possessed him ever since, and he has
almost bankrupted his native ingenuities in inventing pains and miseries
and humiliations and heartbreaks wherewith to embitter the brief lives
of Adam's descendants. Think of the diseases he has contrived for them!
They are multitudinous; no book can name them all. And each one is a
trap, set for an innocent victim.

The human being is a machine. An automatic machine. It is composed of
thousands of complex and delicate mechanisms, which perform their
functions harmoniously and perfectly, in accordance with laws devised
for their governance, and over which the man himself has no authority,
no mastership, no control. For each one of these thousands of mechanisms
the Creator has planned an enemy, whose office is to harass it, pester
it, persecute it, damage it, afflict it with pains, and miseries, and
ultimate destruction. Not one has been overlooked.

From cradle to grave these enemies are always at work; they know no
rest, night or day. They are an army: an organized army; a besieging
army; an assaulting army; an army that is alert, watchful, eager,
merciless; an army that never relents, never grants a truce.

It moves by squad, by company, by battalion, by regiment, by brigade, by
division, by army corps; upon occasion it masses its parts and moves
upon mankind with its whole strength. It is the Creator's Grand Army,
and he is the Commander-in-Chief. Along its battlefront its grisly
banners wave their legends in the face of the sun: Disaster, Disease,
and the rest.

Disease! That is the main force, the diligent force, the devastating
force! It attacks the infant the moment it is born; it furnishes it one
malady after another: croup, measles, mumps, bowel troubles, teething
pains, scarlet fever, and other childhood specialties. It chases the
child into youth and furnishes it some specialties for that time of
life. It chases the youth into maturity, maturity into age, age into the
grave.

With these facts before you will you now try to guess man's chiefest pet
name for this ferocious Commander-in-Chief? I will save you the trouble
-- but you must not laugh. It is Our Father in Heaven!

It is curious -- the way the human mind works. The Christian begins with
this straight proposition, this definite proposition, this inflexible
and uncompromising proposition: *God is all-knowing, and all-powerful.*

This being the case, nothing can happen without his knowing beforehand
that it is going to happen; nothing happens without his permission;
nothing can happen that he chooses to prevent.

That is definite enough, isn't it? It makes the Creator distinctly
responsible for everything that happens, doesn't it?

The Christian concedes it in that italicized sentence. Concedes it with
feeling, with enthusiasm.

Then, having thus made the Creator responsible for all those pains and
diseases and miseries above enumerated, and which he could have
prevented, the gifted Christian blandly calls him Our Father!

It is as I tell you. He equips the Creator with every trait that goes to
the making of a fiend, and then arrives at the conclusion that a fiend
and a father are the same thing! Yet he would deny that a malevolent
lunatic and a Sunday school superintendent are essentially the same.
What do you think of the human mind? I mean, in case you think there is
a human mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="7"></span>Letter VII

Noah and his family were saved -- if that could be called an advantage.
I throw in the *if* for the reason that there has never been an
intelligent person of the age of sixty who would consent to live his
life over again. His or anyone else's. The Family were saved, yes, but
they were not comfortable, for they were full of microbes. Full to the
eyebrows; fat with them, obese with them, distended like balloons. It
was a disagreeable condition, but it could not be helped, because enough
microbes had to be saved to supply the future races of men with
desolating diseases, and there were but eight persons on board to serve
as hotels for them. The microbes were by far the most important part of
the Ark's cargo, and the part the Creator was most anxious about and
most infatuated with. They had to have good nourishment and pleasant
accommodations. There were typhoid germs, and cholera germs, and
hydrophobia germs, and lockjaw germs, and consumption germs, and
black-plague germs, and some hundreds of other aristocrats, specially
precious creations, golden bearers of God's love to man, blessed gifts
of the infatuated Father to his children -- all of which had to be
sumptuously housed and richly entertained; these were located in the
choicest places the interiors of the Family could furnish: in the lungs,
in the heart, in the brain, in the kidneys, in the blood, in the guts.
In the guts particularly. The great intestine was the favorite resort.
There they gathered, by countless billions, and worked, and fed, and
squirmed, and sang hymns of praise and thanksgiving; and at night when
it was quiet you could hear the soft murmur of it. The large intestine
was in effect their heaven. They stuffed it solid; they made it as rigid
as a coil of gaspipe. They took pride in this. Their principal hymn made
gratified reference to it:

The discomforts furnished by the Ark were many and various. The family
had to live right in the presence of the multitudinous animals, and
breathe the distressing stench they make and be deafened day and night
with the thunder-crash of noise their roarings and screechings produced;
and in additions to these intolerable discomforts it was a peculiarly
trying place for the ladies, for they could look in no direction without
seeing some thousands of the creatures engaged in multiplying and
replenishing. And then, there were the flies. They swarmed everywhere,
and persecuted the Family all day long. They were the first animals up,
in the morning, and the last ones down, at night. But they must not be
killed, they must not be injured, they were sacred, their origin was
divine, they were the special pets of the Creator, his darlings.

By and by the other creatures would be distributed here and there about
the earth -- scattered: the tigers to India, the lions and the elephants
to the vacant desert and the secret places of the jungle, the birds to
the boundless regions of empty space, the insects to one or another
climate, according to nature and requirement; but the fly? He is of no
nationality; all the climates are his home, all the globe is his
province, all creatures that breathe are his prey, and unto them all he
is a scourge and a hell.

To man he is a divine ambassador, a minister plenipotentiary, the
Creator's special representative. He infests him in his cradle; clings
in bunches to his gummy eyelids; buzzes and bites and harries him,
robbing him of his sleep and his weary mother of her strength in those
long vigils which she devotes to protecting her child from this pest's
persecutions. The fly harries the sick man in his home, in the hospital,
even on his deathbed at his last gasp. Pesters him at his meals;
previously hunts up patients suffering from loathsome and deadly
diseases; wades in their sores, gaums its legs with a million
death-dealing germs; then comes to that healthy man's table and wipes
these things off on the butter and discharges a bowel-load of typhoid
germs and excrement on his batter-cakes. The housefly wrecks more human
constitutions and destroys more human lives than all God's multitude of
misery-messengers and death-agents put together.

Shem was full of hookworms. It is wonderful, the thorough and
comprehensive study which the Creator devoted to the great work of
making man miserable. I have said he devised a special affliction-agent
for each and every detail of man's structure, overlooking not a single
one, and I said the truth. Many poor people have to go barefoot, because
they cannot afford shoes. The Creator saw his opportunity. I will
remark, in passing, that he always has his eye on the poor. Nine-tenths
of his disease-inventions were intended for the poor, and they get them.
The well-to-do get only what is left over. Do not suspect me of speaking
unheedfully, for it is not so: the vast bulk of the Creator's
affliction-inventions are specially designed for the persecution of the
poor. You could guess this by the fact that one of the pulpit's finest
and commonest names for the Creator is "The Friend of the Poor." Under
no circumstances does the pulpit ever pay the Creator a compliment that
has a vestige of truth in it. The poor's most implacable and unwearying
enemy is their Father in Heaven. The poor's only real friend is their
fellow man. He is sorry for them, he pities them, and he shows it by his
deeds. He does much to relieve their distresses; and in every case their
Father in Heaven gets the credit of it.

Just so with diseases. If science exterminates a disease which has been
working for God, it is God that gets the credit, and all the pulpits
break into grateful advertising-raptures and call attention to how good
he is! Yes, *he* has done it. Perhaps he has waited a thousand years
before doing it. That is nothing; the pulpit says he was thinking about
it all the time. When exasperated men rise up and sweep away an age-long
tyranny and set a nation free, the first thing the delighted pulpit does
is to advertise it as God's work, and invite the people to get down on
their knees and pour out their thanks to him for it. And the pulpit says
with admiring emotion, "Let tyrants understand that the Eye that never
sleeps is upon them; and let them remember that the Lord our God will
not always be patient, but will loose the whirlwinds of his wrath upon
them in his appointed day."

They forget to mention that he is the slowest mover in the universe;
that his Eye that never sleeps, might as well, since it takes it a
century to see what any other eye would see in a week; that in all
history there is not an instance where he thought of a noble deed
*first*, but always thought of it just a little after somebody else had
thought of it and *done* it. He arrives then, and annexes the dividend.

Very well, six thousand years ago Shem was full of hookworms.
Microscopic in size, invisible to the unaided eye. All of the Creator's
specially deadly disease-producers are invisible. It is an ingenious
idea. For thousands of years it kept man from getting at the roots of
his maladies, and defeated his attempts to master them. It is only very
recently that science has succeeded in exposing some of these
treacheries.

The very latest of these blessed triumphs of science is the discovery
and identification of the ambuscaded assassin which goes by the name of
the hookworm. Its special prey is the barefooted poor. It lies in wait
in warm regions and sandy places and digs its way into their unprotected
feet.

The hookworm was discovered two or three years ago by a physician, who
had been patiently studying its victims for a long time. The disease
induced by the hookworm had been doing its evil work here and there in
the earth ever since Shem landed on Ararat, but it was never suspected
to *be* a disease at all. The people who had it were merely supposed to
be *lazy*, and were therefore despised and made fun of, when they should
have been pitied. The hookworm is a peculiarly sneaking and underhanded
invention, and has done its surreptitious work unmolested for ages; but
that physician and his helpers will exterminate it now.

God is back of this. He has been thinking about it for six thousand
years, and making up his mind. The idea of exterminating the hookworm
was his. He came very near doing it before Dr. Charles Wardell Stiles
did. But he is in time to get the credit of it. He always is.

It is going to cost a million dollars. He was probably just in the act
of contributing that sum when a man pushed in ahead of him -- as usual.
Mr. Rockefeller. He furnishes the million, but the credit will go
elsewhere -- as usual. This morning's journal tells us something about
the hookworm's operations:

The poor children are under the Eye that never sleeps, you see. They
have had that ill luck in all the ages. They and "the Lord's poor" -- as
the sarcastic phrase goes -- have never been able to get away from that
Eye's attentions.

Yes, the poor, the humble, the ignorant -- they are the ones that catch
it. Take the "Sleeping Sickness," of Africa. This atrocious cruelty has
for its victims a race of ignorant and unoffending blacks whom God
placed in a remote wilderness, and bent his parental Eye upon them --
the one that never sleeps when there is a chance to breed sorrow for
somebody. He arranged for these people before the Flood. The chosen
agent was a fly, related to the tsetse; the tsetse is a fly which has
command of the Zambezi country and stings cattle and horses to death,
thus rendering that region uninhabitable by man. The tsetse's awful
relative deposits a microbe which produces the Sleeping Sickness. Ham
was full of these microbes, and when the voyage was over he discharged
them in Africa and the havoc began, never to find amelioration until six
thousand years should go by and science should pry into the mystery and
hunt out the cause of the disease. The pious nations are now thanking
God, and praising him for coming to the rescue of his poor blacks. The
pulpit says the praise is due to him. He is surely a curious Being. He
commits a fearful crime, continues that crime unbroken for six thousand
years, and is then entitled to praise because he suggests to somebody
else to modify its severities. He is called patient, and he certainly
must be patient, or he would have sunk the pulpit in perdition ages ago
for the ghastly compliments it pays him.

Science has this to say about the Sleeping Sickness, otherwise called
the Negro Lethargy:

It is he whom Church and people call Our Father in Heaven who has
invented the fly and sent him to inflict this dreary long misery and
melancholy and wretchedness, and decay of body and mind, upon a poor
savage who has done that Great Criminal no harm. There isn't a man in
the world who doesn't pity that poor black sufferer, and there isn't a
man that wouldn't make him whole if he could. To find the one person who
has no pity for him you must go to heaven; to find the one person who is
able to heal him and couldn't be persuaded to do it, you must go to the
same place. There is only one father cruel enough to afflict his child
with that horrible disease -- only one. Not all the eternities can
produce another one. Do you like reproachful poetical indignations
warmly expressed? Here is one, hot from the heart of a slave:

I will tell you a pleasant tale which has in it a touch of pathos. A man
got religion, and asked the priest what he must do to be worthy of his
new estate. The priest said, "Imitate our Father in Heaven, learn to be
like him." The man studied his Bible diligently and thoroughly and
understandingly, and then with prayers for heavenly guidance instituted
his imitations. He tricked his wife into falling downstairs, and she
broke her back and became a paralytic for life; he betrayed his brother
into the hands of a sharper, who robbed him of his all and landed him in
the almshouse; he inoculated one son with hookworms, another with the
sleeping sickness, another with gonorrhea; he furnished one daughter
with scarlet fever and ushered her into her teens deaf, dumb, and blind
for life; and after helping a rascal seduce the remaining one, he closed
his doors against her and she died in a brothel cursing him. Then he
reported to the priest, who said that *that* was no way to imitate his
Father in Heaven. The convert asked wherein he had failed, but the
priest changed the subject and inquired what kind of weather he was
having, up his way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="8"></span>Letter VIII

Man is without any doubt the most interesting fool there is. Also the
most eccentric. He hasn't a single written law, in his Bible or out of
it, which has any but just one purpose and intention -- to *limit or
defeat the law of God*.

He can seldom take a plain fact and get any but a wrong meaning out of
it. He cannot help this; it is the way the confusion he calls his mind
is constructed. Consider the things he concedes, and the curious
conclusions he draws from them.

For instance, he concedes that God made man. Made him without man's
desire of privity.

This seems to plainly and indisputably make God, and God alone,
responsible for man's acts. But man denies this.

He concedes that God has made the angels perfect, without blemish, and
immune from pain and death, and that he could have been similarly kind
to man if he had wanted to, but denies that he was under any moral
obligation to do it.

He concedes that man has no moral right to visit the child of his
begetting with wanton cruelties, painful diseases and death, but refuses
to limit God's privileges in this sort with the children of his
begetting.

The Bible and man's statutes forbid murder, adultery, fornication,
lying, treachery, robbery, oppression and other crimes, but contend that
God is free of these laws and has a right to break them when he will.

He concedes that God gives to each man his temperament, his disposition,
at birth; he concedes that man cannot by any process change this
temperament, but must remain always under its dominion. Yet if it be
full of dreadful passions, in one man's case, and barren of them in
another man's, it is right and rational to punish the one for his
crimes, and reward the other for abstaining from crime.

There -- let us consider these curiosities.

#### *Temperament (Disposition)*

Take two extremes of temperament -- the goat and the tortoise.

Neither of these creatures makes its own temperament, but is born with
it, like man, and can no more change it than can man.

Temperament is the law of God written in the heart of every creature by
God's own hand, and *must* be obeyed, and will be obeyed in spite of all
restricting or forbidding statutes, let them emanate whence they may.

Very well, lust is the dominant feature of the goat's temperament, the
law of God is in its heart, and it must obey it and *will* obey it the
whole day long in the rutting season, without stopping to eat or drink.
If the Bible said to the goat, "Thou shalt not fornicate, thou shalt not
commit adultery," even Man -- sap-headed man -- would recognize the
foolishness of the prohibition, and would grant that the goat ought not
to be punished for obeying the law of his Maker. Yet he thinks it right
and just that man should be put under the prohibition. All men. All
alike.

On its face this is stupid, for, by temperament, which is the *real law*
of God, many men are goats and can't help committing adultery when they
get a chance; whereas there are numbers of men who, by temperament, can
keep their purity and let an opportunity go by if the woman lacks in
attractiveness. But the Bible doesn't allow adultery at all, whether a
person can help it or not. It allows no distinction between goat and
tortoise -- the excitable goat, the emotional goat, that has to have
some adultery every day or fade and die; and the tortoise, that cold
calm puritan, that takes a treat only once in two years and then goes to
sleep in the midst of it and doesn't wake up for sixty days. No lady
goat is safe from criminal assault, even on the Sabbath Day, when there
is a gentleman goat within three miles to leeward of her and nothing in
the way but a fence fourteen feet high, whereas neither the gentleman
tortoise nor the lady tortoise is ever hungry enough for solemn joys of
fornication to be willing to break the Sabbath to get them. Now
according to man's curious reasoning, the goat has earned punishment,
and the tortoise praise.

"Thou shalt not commit adultery" is a command which makes no distinction
between the following persons. They are all required to obey it:

Children at birth.

Children in the cradle.

School children.

Youths and maidens.

Fresh adults.

Older ones.

Men and women of 40.

Of 50.

Of 60.

Of 70.

Of 80.

Of 90.

Of 100.

The command does not distribute its burden equally, and cannot.

It is not hard upon the three sets of children.

It is hard -- harder -- still harder upon the next three sets -- cruelly
hard.

It is blessedly softened to the next three sets.

It has now done all the damage it can, and might as well be put out of
commission. Yet with comical imbecility it is continued, and the four
remaining estates are put under its crushing ban. Poor old wrecks, they
couldn't disobey if they tried. And think -- because they holily refrain
from adulterating each other, they get praise for it! Which is nonsense;
for even the Bible knows enough to know that if the oldest veteran there
could get his lost heyday back again for an hour he would cast that
commandment to the winds and ruin the first woman he came across, even
though she were an entire stranger.

It is as I have said: every statute in the Bible and in the law-books is
an attempt to defeat a law of God -- in other words an unalterable and
indestructible law of nature. These people's God has shown them by a
million acts that he respects none of the Bible's statutes. He breaks
every one of the himself, adultery and all.

The law of God, as quite plainly expressed in woman's construction is
this: There shall be no limit put upon your intercourse with the other
sex sexually, at any time of life.

The law of God, as quite plainly expressed in man's construction is
this: During your entire life you shall be under inflexible limits and
restrictions, sexually.

During twenty-three days in every month (in absence of pregnancy) from
the time a woman is seven years old till she dies of old age, she is
ready for action, and *competent*. As competent as the candlestick is to
receive the candle. Competent every day, competent every night. Also she
*wants* that candle -- yearns for it, longs for it, hankers after it, as
commanded by the law of God in her heart.

But man is only briefly competent; and only then in the moderate measure
applicable to the word in *his* sex's case. He is competent from the age
of sixteen or seventeen thence-forward for thirty-five years. After
fifty his performance is of poor quality, the intervals between are
wide, and its satisfactions of no great value to either party; whereas
his great-grandmother is as good as new. There is nothing the matter
with her plant. Her candlestick is as firm as ever, whereas his candle
is increasingly softened and weakened by the weather of age, as the
years go by, until at last it can no longer stand, and is mournfully
laid to rest in the hope of a blessed resurrection which is never to
come.

By the woman's make, her plant has to be out of service three days in
the month, and during a part of her pregnancy. These are times of
discomfort, often of suffering. For fair and just compensation she has
the high privilege of unlimited adultery all the other days of her life.

<span id="REFSANDWICH"></span>That is the law of God, as revealed in her
make. What becomes of this high privilege? Does she live in free
enjoyment of it? No. Nowhere in the whole world. She is robbed of it
everywhere. Who does this? Man. Man's statutes -- if the Bible *is* the
Word of God.

Now there you have a sample of man's "reasoning powers," as he calls
them. He observes certain facts. For instance, that in all his life he
never sees the day that he can satisfy one woman; also, that no woman
ever sees the day that she can't overwork, and defeat, and put out of
commission any ten masculine plants that can be put to bed to
her.\[[\*\*](#NOTESANDWICH.md)\] He puts those strikingly suggestive and
luminous facts together, and from them draws this astonishing
conclusion: The Creator intended the woman to be restricted to one man.

So he concretes that singular conclusion into *law*, for good and all.

And he does it without consulting the woman, although she has a thousand
times more at stake in the matter than he has. His procreative
competency is limited to an average of a hundred exercises per year for
fifty years, hers is good for three thousand a year for that whole time
-- and as many years longer as she may live. Thus his life interest in
the matter is five thousand refreshments, while hers is a hundred and
fifty thousand; yet instead of fairly and honorably leaving the making
of the law to the person who has an overwhelming interest at stake in
it, this immeasurable hog, who has nothing at stake in it worth
considering, makes it himself!

You have heretofore found out, by my teachings, that man is a fool; you
are now aware that woman is a damned fool.

Now if you or any other really intelligent person were arranging the
fairness and justices between man and woman, you would give the man
one-fiftieth interest in one woman, and the woman a harem. Now wouldn't
you? Necessarily. I give you my word, this creature with the decrepit
candle has arranged it exactly the other way. Solomon, who was one of
the Deity's favorites, had a copulation cabinet composed of seven
hundred wives and three hundred concubines. <span
id="REFPUBLISH"></span>To save his life he could not have kept two of
these young creatures satisfactorily refreshed, even if he had had
fifteen experts to help him. Necessarily almost the entire thousand had
to go hungry years and years on a stretch. Conceive of a man hardhearted
enough to look daily upon all that suffering and not be moved to
mitigate it. He even wantonly added a sharp pang to that pathetic
misery; for he kept within those women's sight, always, stalwart
watchmen whose splendid masculine forms made the poor lassies' mouths
water but who hadn't anything to solace a candlestick with, these gentry
being eunuchs. A eunuch is a person whose candle has been put out. By
art.\[[\*\*](#NOTEPUBLISH.md)\]

From time to time, as I go along, I will take up a Biblical statute and
show you that it always violates a law of God, and then is imported into
the lawbooks of the nations, where it continues its violations. But
those things will keep; there is no hurry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="9"></span>Letter IX

The Ark continued its voyage, drifting around here and there and yonder,
compassless and uncontrolled, the sport of the random winds and swirling
currents. And the rain, the rain, the rain! It kept falling, pouring,
drenching, flooding. No such rain had ever been seen before. Sixteen
inches a day had been heard of, but that was nothing to this. This was a
hundred and twenty inches a day -- ten feet! At this incredible rate it
rained forty days and forty nights, and submerged every hill that was
four hundred feet high. Then the heavens and even the angels went dry;
no more water was to be had.

As a Universal flood it was a disappointment, but there had been heaps
of Universal Floods before, as is witnessed by all the Bibles of all the
nations, and this was as good as the best one.

At last the Ark soared aloft and came to rest on top of Mount Ararat,
seventeen thousand feet above the valley, and its living freight got out
and went down the mountain.

Noah planted a vineyard, and drank the wine and was overcome.

This person had been selected from all the populations because he was
the best sample there was. He was to start the human race on a new
basis. This was the new basis. The promise was bad. To go further with
the experiment was to run a great and most unwise risk. Now was the time
to do with these people what had been so judiciously done with the
others -- drown them. Anybody but the Creator would have seen this. But
he didn't see it. That is, maybe he didn't.

It is claimed that from the beginning of time he foresaw everything that
would happen in the world. If that is true, he foresaw that Adam and Eve
would eat the apple; that their posterity would be unendurable and have
to be drowned; that Noah's posterity would in their turn be unendurable,
and that by and by he would have to leave his throne in heaven and come
down and be crucified to save that same tiresome human race again. The
whole of it? No! A part of it? Yes. Now much of it? In each generation,
for hundreds and hundreds of generations, a billion would die and all go
to perdition except perhaps ten thousand out of the billion. The ten
thousand would have to come from the little body of Christians, and only
one in the hundred of that little body would stand any chance. None of
them at all except such Roman Catholics as should have the luck to have
a priest handy to sandpaper their souls at the last gasp, and here and
there a presbyterian. No others savable. All the others damned. By the
million.

Shall you grant that he foresaw all this? The pulpit grants it. It is
the same as granting that in the matter of intellect the Deity is the
Head Pauper of the Universe, and that in the matter of morals and
character he is away down on the level of David.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="10"></span>Letter X

The two Testaments are interesting, each in its own way. The Old one
gives us a picture of these people's Deity as he was before he got
religion, the other one gives us a picture of him as he appeared
afterward. The Old Testament is interested mainly in blood and
sensuality. The New one in Salvation. Salvation by fire.

The first time the Deity came down to earth, he brought life and death;
when he came the second time, he brought hell.

Life was not a valuable gift, but death was. Life was a fever-dream made
up of joys embittered by sorrows, pleasure poisoned by pain, a dream
that was a nightmare-confusion of spasmodic and fleeting delights,
ecstasies, exultations, happinesses, interspersed with long-drawn
miseries, griefs, perils, horrors, disappointments, defeats,
humiliations, and despairs -- the heaviest curse devisable by divine
ingenuity; but death was sweet, death was gentle, death was kind; death
healed the bruised spirit and the broken heart, and gave them rest and
forgetfulness; death was man's best friend; when man could endure life
no longer, death came and set him free.

In time, the Deity perceived that death was a mistake; a mistake, in
that it was insufficient; insufficient, for the reason that while it was
an admirable agent for the inflicting of misery upon the survivor, it
allowed the dead person himself to escape from all further persecution
in the blessed refuge of the grave. This was not satisfactory. A way
must be conceived to pursue the dead beyond the tomb.

The Deity pondered this matter during four thousand years
unsuccessfully, but as soon as he came down to earth and became a
Christian his mind cleared and he knew what to do. He invented hell, and
proclaimed it.

Now here is a curious thing. It is believed by everybody that while he
was in heaven he was stern, hard, resentful, jealous, and cruel; but
that when he came down to earth and assumed the name Jesus Christ, he
became the opposite of what he was before: that is to say, he became
sweet, and gentle, merciful, forgiving, and all harshness disappeared
from his nature and a deep and yearning love for his poor human children
took its place. Whereas it was as Jesus Christ that he devised hell and
proclaimed it!

Which is to say, that as the meek and gentle Savior he was a thousand
billion times crueler than ever he was in the Old Testament -- oh,
incomparably more atrocious than ever he was when he was at the very
worst in those old days!

Meek and gentle? By and by we will examine this popular sarcasm by the
light of the hell which he invented.

While it is true that the palm for malignity must be granted to Jesus,
the inventor of hell, he was hard and ungentle enough for all godlike
purposes even before he became a Christian. It does not appear that he
ever stopped to reflect that *he* was to blame when a man went wrong,
inasmuch as the man was merely acting in accordance with the disposition
he had afflicted him with. No, he punished the man, instead of punishing
himself. Moreover, the punishment usually oversized the offense. Often,
too, it fell, not upon the doer of a misdeed, but upon somebody else --
a chief man, the head of a community, for instance.

Does that look fair to you? It does not appear that the "heads of the
people" got any of the adultery, yet it is they that are hanged, instead
of "the people."

If it was fair and right in that day it would be fair and right today,
for the pulpit maintains that God's justice is eternal and unchangeable;
also that he is the Fountain of Morals, and that his morals are eternal
and unchangeable. Very well, then, we must believe that if the people of
New York should begin to commit whoredom with the daughters of New
Jersey, it would be fair and right to set up a gallows in front of the
city hall and hang the mayor and the sheriff and the judges and the
archbishop on it, although they did not get any of it. It does not look
right to me.

Moreover, you may be quite sure of one thing: it couldn't happen. These
people would not allow it. They are better than their Bible. *Nothing*
would happen here, except some lawsuits, for damages, if the incident
couldn't be hushed up; and even down South they would not proceed
against persons who did not get any of it; they would get a rope and
hunt for the correspondents, and if they couldn't find them they would
lynch a nigger.

Things have greatly improved since the Almighty's time, let the pulpit
say what it may.

Will you examine the Deity's morals and disposition and conduct a little
further? And will you remember that in the Sunday school the little
children are urged to love the Almighty, and honor him, and praise him,
and make him their model and try to be as like him as they can? Read:

<!-- -->

The Biblical law says: "Thou shalt not kill."

The law of God, planted in the heart of man at his birth, says: "Thou
shalt kill."

The chapter I have quoted shows you that the book-statute is once more a
failure. It cannot set aside the more powerful law of nature.

According to the belief of these people, it was God himself who said:
"Thou shalt not kill."

Then it is plain that he cannot keep his own commandments.

He killed all those people -- every male.

They had offended the Deity in some way. We know what the offense was,
without looking; that is to say, we know it was a trifle; some small
thing that no one but a god would attach any importance to. It is more
than likely that a Midianite had been duplicating the conduct of one
Onan, who was commanded to "go into his brother's wife" -- which he did;
but instead of finishing, "he spilled it on the ground." The Lord slew
Onan for that, for the lord could never abide indelicacy. The Lord slew
Onan, and to this day the Christian world cannot understand why he
stopped with Onan, instead of slaying all the inhabitants for three
hundred miles around -- they being innocent of offense, and therefore
the very ones he would usually slay. For that had always been his idea
of fair dealing. If he had had a motto, it would have read, "Let no
innocent person escape." You remember what he did in the time of the
flood. There were multitudes and multitudes of tiny little children, and
he knew they had never done him any harm; but their relations had, and
that was enough for him: he saw the waters rise toward their screaming
lips, he saw the wild terror in their eyes, he saw that agony of appeal
in the mothers' faces which would have touched any heart but his, but he
was after the guiltless particularly, than he drowned those poor little
chaps.

And you will remember that in the case of Adam's posterity *all* the
billions are innocent -- none of them had a share in his offense, but
the Deity holds them guilty to this day. None gets off, except by
acknowledging that guilt -- no cheaper lie will answer.

Some Midianite must have repeated Onan's act, and brought that dire
disaster upon his nation. If that was not the indelicacy that outraged
the feelings of the Deity, then I know what it was: some Midianite had
been pissing against the wall. I am sure of it, for that was an
impropriety which the Source of all Etiquette never could stand. A
person could piss against a tree, he could piss on his mother, he could
piss on his own breeches, and get off, but he must not piss against the
wall -- that would be going quite too far. The origin of the divine
prejudice against this humble crime is not stated; but we know that the
prejudice was very strong -- so strong that nothing but a wholesale
massacre of the people inhabiting the region where the wall was defiled
could satisfy the Deity.

Take the case of Jeroboam. "I will cut off from Jeroboam him that
pisseth against the wall." It was done. And not only was the man that
did it cut off, but everybody else.

The same with the house of Baasha: everybody was exterminated,
kinsfolks, friends, and all, leaving "not one that pisseth against a
wall."

In the case of Jeroboam you have a striking instance of the Deity's
custom of not limiting his punishments to the guilty; the innocent are
included. Even the "remnant" of that unhappy house was removed, even "as
a man taketh away dung, till it be all gone." That includes the women,
the young maids, and the little girls. All innocent, for they couldn't
piss against a wall. Nobody of that sex can. None but members of the
other sex can achieve that feat.

A curious prejudice. And it still exists. Protestant parents still keep
the Bible handy in the house, so that the children can study it, and one
of the first things the little boys and girls learn is to be righteous
and holy and not piss against the wall. They study those passages more
than they study any others, except those which incite to masturbation.
Those they hunt out and study in private. No Protestant child exists who
does not masturbate. That art is the earliest accomplishment his
religion confers upon him. Also the earliest her religion confers upon
her.

The Bible has this advantage over all other books that teach refinement
and good manners: that it goes to the child. It goes to the mind at its
most impressible and receptive age -- the others have to wait.

That rule was made in the old days because "The Lord thy God walketh in
the midst of thy camp."

It is probably not worthwhile to try to find out, for certain, why the
Midianites were exterminated. We can only be sure that it was for no
large offense; for the cases of Adam, and the Flood, and the defilers of
the wall teach us that much. A Midianite may have left his paddle at
home and thus brought on the trouble. However, it is no matter. The main
thing is the trouble itself, and the morals of one kind and another that
it offers for the instruction and elevation of the Christian of today.

God wrote upon the tables of stone: "Thou shalt not kill," Also: "Thou
shalt not commit adultery."

Paul, speaking by the divine voice, advised against sexual intercourse
*altogether*. A great change from the divine view as it existed at the
time of the Midianite incident.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="11"></span>Letter XI

Human history in all ages is red with blood, and bitter with hate, and
stained with cruelties; but not since Biblical times have these features
been without a limit of some kind. Even the Church, which is credited
with having spilt more innocent blood, since the beginning of its
supremacy, than all the political wars put together have spilt, has
observed a limit. A sort of limit. But you notice that when the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth, adored Father of Man, goes to war, there is no
limit. He is totally without mercy -- he, who is called the Fountain of
Mercy. He slays, slays, slays! All the men, all the beasts, all the
boys, all the babies; also all the women and all the girls, except those
that have not been deflowered.

He makes no distinction between innocent and guilty. The babies were
innocent, the beasts were innocent, many of the men, many of the women,
many of the boys, many of the girls were innocent, yet they had to
suffer with the guilty. What the insane Father required was blood and
misery; he was indifferent as to who furnished it.

The heaviest punishment of all was meted out to persons who could not by
any possibility have deserved so horrible a fate -- the 32,000 virgins.
Their naked privacies were probed, to make sure that they still
possessed the hymen unruptured; after this humiliation they were sent
away from the land that had been their home, to be sold into slavery;
the worst of slaveries and the shamefulest, the slavery of prostitution;
bed-slavery, to excite lust, and satisfy it with their bodies; slavery
to any buyer, be he gentleman or be he a coarse and filthy ruffian.

It was the Father that inflicted this ferocious and undeserved
punishment upon those bereaved and friendless virgins, whose parents and
kindred he had slaughtered before their eyes. And were they praying to
him for pity and rescue, meantime? Without a doubt of it.

These virgins were "spoil" plunder, booty. He claimed his share and got
it. What use had *he* for virgins? Examine his later history and you
will know.

His priests got a share of the virgins, too. What use could priests make
of virgins? The private history of the Roman Catholic confessional can
answer that question for you. The confessional's chief amusement has
been seduction -- in all the ages of the Church. Père Hyacinth testifies
that of a hundred priests confessed by him, ninety-nine had used the
confessional effectively for the seduction of married women and young
girls. One priest confessed that of nine hundred girls and women whom he
had served as father and confessor in his time, none had escaped his
lecherous embrace but he elderly and the homely. The official list of
questions which the priest is required to ask will overmasteringly
excite any woman who is not a paralytic.

There is nothing in either savage or civilized history that is more
utterly complete, more remorselessly sweeping than the Father of Mercy's
campaign among the Midianites. The official report does not furnish the
incidents, episodes, and minor details, it deals only in information in
masses: *all* the virgins, *all* the men, *all* the babies, *all*
"creatures *that breathe*," *all* houses, *all* cities; it gives you
just one vast picture, spread abroad here and there and yonder, as far
as eye can reach, of charred ruin and storm-swept desolation; your
imagination adds a brooding stillness, an awful hush -- the hush of
death. But of course there were incidents. Where shall we get them?

Out of history of yesterday's date. Out of history made by the red
Indian of America. He has duplicated God's work, and done it in the very
spirit of God. In 1862 the Indians in Minnesota, having been deeply
wronged and treacherously treated by the government of the United
States, rose against the white settlers and massacred them; massacred
all they could lay their hands upon, sparing neither age nor sex.
Consider this incident:

Twelve Indians broke into a farmhouse at daybreak and captured the
family. It consisted of the farmer and his wife and four daughters, the
youngest aged fourteen and the eldest eighteen. They crucified the
parents; that is to say, they stood them stark naked against the wall of
the living room and nailed their hands to the wall. Then they stripped
the daughters bare, stretched them upon the floor in front of their
parents, and repeatedly ravished them. Finally they crucified the girls
against the wall opposite this parents, and cut off their noses and
their breasts. They also -- but I will not go into that. There is a
limit. There are indignities so atrocious that the pen cannot write
them. One member of that poor crucified family -- the father -- was
still alive when help came two days later.

Now you have one incident of the Minnesota massacre. I could give you
fifty. They would cover all the different kinds of cruelty the brutal
human talent has ever invented.

And now you know, by these sure indications, what happened under the
personal direction of the Father of Mercies in his Midianite campaign.
The Minnesota campaign was merely a duplicate of the Midianite raid.
Nothing happened in the one that didn't happen in the other.

No, that is not strictly true. The Indian was more merciful than was the
Father of Mercies. He sold no virgins into slavery to minister to the
lusts of the murderers of their kindred while their sad lives might
last; he raped them, then charitably made their subsequent sufferings
brief, ending them with the precious gift of death. He burned some of
the houses, but not all of them. He carried out innocent dumb brutes,
but he took the lives of none.

Would you expect this same conscienceless God, this moral bankrupt, to
become a teacher of morals; of gentleness; of meekness; of
righteousness; of purity? It looks impossible, extravagant; but listen
to him. These are his own words:

The mouth that uttered these immense sarcasms, these giant hypocrisies,
is the very same that ordered the wholesale massacre of the Midianitish
men and babies and cattle; the wholesale destruction of house and city;
the wholesale banishment of the virgins into a filthy and unspeakable
slavery. This is the same person who brought upon the Midianites the
fiendish cruelties which were repeated by the red Indians, detail by
detail, in Minnesota eighteen centuries later. The Midianite episode
filled him with joy. So did the Minnesota one, or he would have
prevented it.

The Beatitudes and the quoted chapters from Numbers and Deuteronomy
ought always to be read from the pulpit together; then the congregation
would get an all-round view of Our Father in Heaven. Yet not in a single
instance have I ever known a clergyman to do this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## **Notes:**

<span id="NOTELIGHT"></span>\*NOTE: It takes the light of the nearest
star (61 Cygni) three and a half years to come to the earth, traveling
at the rate of 186,000 miles per second. Arcturus had been shining 200
years before it was visible from the earth. Remoter stars gradually
became visible after thousands and thousands of years. -- The Editor
\[M. T.\]   \[[Return to Reference](#REFLIGHT.md)\]

<span id="NOTESANDWICH"></span>\*NOTE:  In the Sandwich Islands in 1866
a buxom royal princess died. Occupying a place of distinguished honor at
her funeral were thirty-six splendidly built young native men. In a
laudatory song which celebrated the various merits, achievements and
accomplishments of the late princess those thirty-six stallions were
called her *harem*, and the song said it had been her pride and boast
that she kept the whole of them busy, and that several times it had
happened that more than one of them had been able to charge overtime.
\[M.T.\]  \[[Return to reference](#REFSANDWICH.md)\]

<span id="NOTEPUBLISH"></span>\*NOTE:  I purpose publishing these
Letters here in the world before I return to you. Two editions. One,
unedited, for Bible readers and their children; the other, expurgated,
for persons of refinement. \[M.T.\]  \[[Return to
reference](#REFPUBLISH.md)\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------
