[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rio02)  [Next](rio04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417963468/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Rabbi's Impressions of the Oberammergau Passion Play*, by Joseph
Krauskopf, \[1901\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# A Rabbi's Impressions of the Oberammergau Passion Play

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

<span id="img_01700"></span> ![Decorative title: A Rabbi's Impressions
of the Oberammergau Passion Play](img/01700.jpg)

### I

### Introductory

"Let them hear, and say, It is truth."—[*Isaiah* xliiii,
9](../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#009).

"And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."—[*St.
John* viii, 32](../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032).

WHAT think ye of Christ? This question of questions of the New
Testament, that has been asked<span class="margnote">A universal
question—"What think you of the Passion Play?"</span> and re-asked
countless times by countless people since Christianity entered this
world, has had quite a rival in the past year in the question: "What
think ye of the Passion Play?" Not a day in Europe last summer but that
this question was asked, and answered, almost as diversely as have been
the answers to its rival question of the New Testament. And the question
has spanned the Atlantic, and has become almost as frequent here as
across the seas. Wherever one's having been at Oberammergau becomes
known, the very first question is sure

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

to be, "What think you of the Passion Play?"

Up to this day, my answer has invariably been an evasive one. I could
not praise, <span class="margnote">Reasons why evasively
answered.</span>and I would not condemn. I could not condemn without
probably giving hurt to my Christian interrogator; I could not praise
without doing wrong to my own people. I felt that an intelligent and
purposive answer to so complex a question as this necessitated, as a
prerequisite, either an intelligent questioner, one sufficiently versed
in Biblical lore, more especially in New Testament criticism, or an
unprejudiced listener, one eager to know and willing to hear the truth,
the whole truth, no matter whether the truth heard confirm or subvert
former belief. Such questioners and listeners being very rare, I
believed it wise rather to say nothing than say what, by not being
understood, might make confusion yet more confused.

Here in this pulpit, however, I do not feel this hesitancy. Here that
preparatory work why <span class="margnote">And why full answer given
here</span>in Bible criticism has been done; here that faculty of
listening to stern truth, however destructive it may prove of
long-cherished fancies, has been cultivated so long, that one need have
no dread of telling one's honest thought for fear of giving offense or
meeting with fanatical opposition. Here I even regard it my duty to give
full answer to the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

question "What think you of the Passion Play?" For ever since I have
seen the play have felt that, while on the one side it is no small
compliment to the Jew that a play, it which almost all the actors
impersonate Jewish characters, should have attracted, within one summer,
one quarter of a million of representative people from all parts of the
world, on the other side I know of nothing that could have rooted
deeper, among these people, the existing prejudice against the Jew, and
spread wider, the world's hatred of him, than this Passion Play of
Oberammergau. There were moments, when listening to the play, when
seeing one gross misrepresentation of the Jewish people after the other,
I felt as if I had to rise, and declare aloud to the thousands that
crowded the auditorium, that what they heard and saw, was, as far as it
depicted or typified the Jew, unhistoric in fact, false in
interpretation, cruel in inference.

But, as taught by Shakespeare, sufferance being the badge of all our
tribe, I restrained my feelings, and kept my peace, as we Jews<span
class="margnote">Another instance of "Sufferance is the badge of all our
tribe."</span> have been obliged to do these past eighteen years,
obliged to suffer injustice misrepresentation, contumely, in return for
having given the civilized world many of its noblest characters, most of
its highest ideals, all of its most sacred literature, in return for

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

having given to Christianity its life, and all that mankind values best
therein. As the train pulled out of Oberammergau, one of the last
glimpses I caught of the picturesque little village was that magnificent
group of statuary, representing Christ upon the cross, with the Virgin
Mary and St. John at his feet, erected by the late unfortunate King
Ludwig of Bavaria, on a towering eminence back of the town. That proud
monument had a tragic fate. When being carted to its site up the
mountain road, the wagon slipped on one of the steep inclines, the
statue of St. John fell to the ground, unfortunately upon the body of
the sculptor, its creator, and crushed him to death. "How symbolic the
fate of the sculptor of that colossal group is of the fate of the Jew!"
thought I, as I gave it a last parting look. He it was, the Jew, who was
the mighty sculptor of Christianity; his creative genius it was that
gave it its colossal dimensions; it was his mallet and chisel that
sculptured the towering grandeur of Jesus, and, in return, Christianity
fell upon him when on its ascent to eminence, when on its rise to power,
and pressed him down, down, and crushed him—not to death, for the Jew is
not of mortal clay—crushed him to the dregs of the earth.

But here I am already at the end of the play, and on my way out of the
town, when I

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

have not yet had a word to say of my getting<span
class="margnote">Arrival in Oberammergau.</span> into the town, nor
anything of the play itself, nor of the persons who enacted it. It was a
little after the noon hour, one August day last summer, that our train
reached the far-famed town of Oberammergau. It needed no conductor to
tell us that we had arrived at the goal of our journey, for the bustle
and excitement about the station, the crowding and rushing, the calling
and shouting in a Babel of tongues, were certainly indicative that we
had reached the one village in the world to which such masses of people
could flock at one time, and put up contentedly with such meagre
accommodations. About the first thing that caught my eye upon alighting
was a large train-shed, that towered vast and high above the little
cottages of the mountain-encircled town. So large a train-shed for so
small a place was rather puzzling, but before an hour had passed, I knew
that what I had taken for a train-shed was the theatre in which the
celebrated Passion Play had been performed, twice and three times a
week, since May, before more than a hundred thousand people, and in
which it was to continue to be enacted, the same number of times a week,
till the end of September, before another hundred thousand and more.

While I mistook the theatre, I could not

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

very well mistake the actors. It required no guide to point them out.
The boy that carried<span class="margnote">Characteristics of the
village actors.</span> your grip, the lad that drove you to your
lodgings, the household that received you at the cottage door, the girl
that waited on you at the table, the man that blackened your boots, the
woman that washed your clothes, the children that played at her feet,
the men that served you in the shops or at the stands, in the restaurant
or in the post-office, that tended the sheep and cattle on the pastures,
these were all actors, all easily recognized,—the men and boys by their
long hair reaching down to their shoulders, the women, as well as the
men, by what I might call a Biblical cast of countenance. For so many
generations have the people of this town performed this play, during one
whole summer in every ten years, as a thank-offering, ever since a
certain plague had ceased its ravages in their midst, nearly three
hundred years ago, that it seems to have exercised a psychical influence
on their looks and manners, on their modes of thought and speech. Their
occupation, for an equal length of time, as carvers of crucifixes and
holy images, and the omnipresence of such images in that town wherever
you turn and look, have no doubt exercised an equal influence on the
physical and spiritual nature of these people.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

With a mountain scenery that is almost Palestinian as a background, the
village has the appearance of a bit of Judea transplanted into the heart
of the Bavarian Alps. The people seem to belong more to the past than to
the present. The sound of modern Bible criticism has never re-echoed
within their mountain recesses. They are haunted by no doubts, harassed
by no unbeliefs, because their faith has never been questioned. One is
as much disposed to envy them as to pity them,—to envy the warmth and
depth of their faith, to pity their God-given reason completely fettered
by blind credulity. There is a seriousness in their faces that is
striking. They who impersonate noble parts do not only *act* their parts
on the stage, they *live* them, and live them in their daily lives.
Anton Lang, the village potter, and Anna Flunger, the postman's
daughter, seem as much the Jesus and Mary off the stage as on it. They
play neither for entertainment nor for profit. They have again and again
refused tempting offers to perform their play at Vienna, Paris, New
York. It is not a matter of gold with them, but of religion.

They have their ambitions, like other people, but no ambitions of a
worldly nature. Their fondest hope is to be found worthy to play a
leading part in the Passion Play; their highest ambition is some day to
play the part

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

of Jesus or of the Virgin Mary. For these parts the children seem to be
trained from their very cradles. Life has no higher object; heaven
itself can have no higher honor. If we could read the hearts of the
Oberammergauan mothers, I have no doubt but that we would find graven
there most fervent prayers that they might live to see their children
either as Jesus upon the cross or as Mary or John at his feet,—just as
the pious mother of Israel of old was in the habit of praying that the
expected Messiah might be vouchsafed to her, or, if a daughter be born
instead, that she might be worthy of becoming the Messiah's bride; just
as she trained her boy with the utmost religious care, not knowing at
what moment he might make his Messiahship known, and enter upon the
redemption of Israel. It is said that when word was brought to Josef
Mayr, who had played the rôle of Jesus three consecutive decennials,
that a younger man had been chosen for that part, his heart was almost
broken, and, to save his life, they had to create for him a new part,
the *Choragus* to each of the seventeen acts, It is said that an
Oberammergauan maiden will rather forego marriage than risk losing the
privilege of impersonating the coveted rôle of the *Virgin Mother of
God*, since a married woman is not permitted to take that part. I verily
believe that if the

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Parliament of
Bavaria were to come to some of these villagers, and give them the
choice between becoming King of Bavaria or playing the part of Jesus in
the Passion Play, they would answer without a moment's hesitation:
"Rather one day the rôle of Jesus than a lifetime a real King."

It was certainly a strange experience for me to mingle with so many
saints and heroes of the Church, to break bread in the house<span
class="margnote">Strange experience, that of mingling with Biblical
characters.</span> of him who impersonated Jesus, and with his father,
who enacted the part of King Herod; to see and meet there the villagers
representing characters which we are accustomed to read of in our Bible,
or hear mentioned in churches, or see painted on cathedral walls to meet
them in their everyday character as carvers, carpenters, herdsmen,
milkmaids,. weavers, blacksmiths, traders, and behold them the next day
with crowns and tiaras upon their heads, with silks and satins and gold
and tinsel upon their bodies, walking and talking on the stage with a
grace and eloquence worthy of the most distinguished actors. It was
certainly novel for me, and another Rabbi who was with me, to chat for
hours with Andreas Lang, who impersonated, in the play, the part of the
Rabbi. He was quite astounded to learn that he had spent the evening
with two real Rabbis, and no Jews ever having lived in that town (and

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

only about half a dozen Protestants), he was probably as much surprised
to find us different from what he expected a Jew to be, as we were
pained the next day at the bitterness with which he enacted the part of
the Rabbi. He related to us that two English ladies had refused to
remain as lodgers at his house, upon learning that it was he who so
persecuted Christ; and he told us of the feeling that had been displayed
against Gregor Lechner, who for two decades had enacted the part of
Judas, as his father before him had done, people actually treating them
as traitors, refusing to lodge at their house, often even recoiling from
their touch. When this Lechner was asked whether he was training his
little son to play that part some day, he answered, "God forbid. I love
my child too much to bring the same sufferings upon him which I and my
father before me have been obliged to endure."

When I left my genial informant, I pondered on this display of bigotry,
and wondered<span class="margnote">When mere impersonators of Jewish
characters are hated, what wonder that real Jews should be hated?</span>
not that the world, believing the Jew to have really performed the evil
things falsely charged against him in the New Testament, should have
been, and should still be, so bitter and cruel against him, seeing its
bitterness and prejudice even against those who simply enact such parts
in a play. And on the following evening I could not but think

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

that had I not conversed the night before with Andreas Lang, and had I
not found him a kindly and intelligent man, I might have been led to
judge of his nature by the bitterness of his impersonation of the Rabbi;
and I well understood why so many Christians, who do not know us as we
really are, who do not meet us, or hear our story, judge us by what they
see recorded against us in Christian Scriptures, by what is taught
against us in Christian Sunday-schools, by what is preached against us
from Christian pulpits, by what is published against us in Christianized
literature.

The dawn of the following morning threatened a rainy day. We were not
surprised<span class="margnote">Open air performance given despite the
rain.</span> nor disappointed, having learned by experience that rain is
the rule in Alpine regions, and having been told that almost two out of
every three performances are given, without the omission of a single
scene or line, with the rain descending on the unsheltered stage upon,
at times, hundreds of actors; for there are scenes in this Passion Play
in which nigh unto eight hundred persons, half of the population of the
little village of less than three hundred houses, take part, from the
hoary-headed sire, bending heavily on his cane, to the infant in arms.
We were thankful that enough of the spirit of advance had penetrated
this mountain-village to have moved

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

them, for their last year's play, to the construction of a covered shed,
so that the thousands of spectators, uninured to mountain storms, might
be enabled to enjoy the play, free from discomfort or ill effects. It
did worry us at first to see the rain pouring down upon the artistically
and, at times, gorgeously robed players on the stage, but as they did
not seem to mind it in the least, we gradually ceased troubling
ourselves about their enacting Scriptures for us in the midst of a
drenching rain. If their regard for tradition is so great that they will
not stretch a roof over their stage because their fathers before them
never had such shelter, if their conservatism is so very rigid, it
seemed a waste of sympathy to extend it where none was wanted.

The town, wakened by the sweet chimes of the church, was astir early,
for the play <span class="margnote">The audience.</span>commenced at
eight o'clock sharp, to last, with an hour and a half intermission at
noon, till half past five in the evening,—certainly a hard day's work to
follow a play eight hours long, in a thronged hall, on a small, wooden
seat, in a cramped position. But we had not come for comforts; so there
was no one who complained, either before or after. It was one of the
best-natured crowds I ever saw, and certainly one of the strangest. From
the railroad station, down the mountain-sides, out of the cottages, from
every street and lane and

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

pathway, the people streamed toward the hall, in all sorts of attire,
speaking all kinds of languages, displaying all sorts of physiognomies,
representing all sorts of classes and conditions:—lords and cardinals,
bishops and priests, Jews and Gentiles, generals and privates,
merchant-princes and venders, for all I know, probably also kings and
queens *incognito*. Some came on horseback, some in touring-coaches,
some in liveried carriages, some in hay-wagons; some who had
breakfasted, and some who enjoyed their breakfast while marching along,
a glass of beer in one hand, an opera-glass and a sausage in the other.

Though five thousand people crowded to the doors, there was no confusion
in entering, none in finding our seats. It did not take<span
class="margnote">The play begins.</span> long for the vast hall to fill
to standing-room nor long for the play to commence. Exactly at eight
o'clock the second cannon-shot rang out, and almost immediately the
mystically-quaint strains of an invisible orchestra resounded, and from
the right and left of the stage, thirty-five men and women, beautifully
attired, filed in as a Chorus of Guardian Angels, to enact the Prelude.

If you can imagine this auditorium three times its size, its roof coming
to an end just above these front seats, thus making the hall<span
class="margnote">The theatre and the stage.</span> enclosed on three
sides, and entirely open

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

in front—the fourth side; and if you can imagine this pulpit platform to
be about one hundred and fifty feet wide, constituting the stage,
entirely uncovered and separated from the hall, and in the centre of
this vast platform, toward the rear, a covered and curtained stage, a
stage upon a stage, in which the tableaux and special scenes were
enacted with changeable sceneries; and if you can imagine a passage-way
running from the rear, at right angles to each end of the uncovered
platform, representing picturesque streets of Jerusalem, and each of
these passage-ways flanked at the terminal, on the platform, with a
residence, one the home of the Jewish High Priest, Annas, the other the
home of the Roman Procurator, Pontius Pilate; and, back and over all
this artificial scenery, the natural towering ranges of the rugged,
often cloud-capped Tyrolese Alps,—if you can picture these to
yourselves, you will have some conception of what the place looked like
in which the Passion Play was enacted.

If, in addition, you will picture to yourselves each of the seventeen
acts introduced by <span class="margnote">The manner of
presentation.</span>the Chorus of Guardian Angels, telling in beautiful
*Recitative*, accompanied by the orchestra, the spiritual lesson taught
by the act about to follow, and each *Recitative* followed by the
*Choragus*, the speaker of the *Prologue*, describing, with the aid of
one or

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

two most artistically rendered *Tableaux*, the presumptive foreshadowing
in the Old Testament of the dramatic scenes of the New
Testament,—enacted immediately after the exit of the Chorus and
Choragus,—if this you picture to yourselves, you will have a conception
also of the manner in which the Passion Play was performed.

Up to the commencement of the Prelude I felt the keenest enjoyment in
having come, in the strange sights I had seen, in the<span
class="margnote">Bad impression the moment the play began.</span> quaint
and interesting people I had met. But from the moment the play began,
the enjoyment ceased. I had resolved to look at the play as a sightseer,
not as a critic. I had thought I could deceive myself, but I soon found
I could not. I had made myself believe that I had come as a tourist, to
look at the *Passion Play* as I might look at any other spectacular
performance, as I might look at the *William Tell* play in Switzerland,
or at the *Hiawatha* play in Canada. But I could not. The moment the
play began, and the opening hymn was sung, and the opening lines were
spoken, the tourist turned critic; the traveller, theologian; the
cosmopolitan, Jew. The moment the Prelude began to tell us that we are
under the curse and wrath of God, and that atonement and salvation can
be found only in the blood of His incarnate Son; the moment the tableau
of the expulsion of

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Adam and Eve was
presented, to teach that Paradisian happiness will be forever barred to
us if we do not open our obdurate hearts to the belief in the only
Saviour; the moment we were told of the sweet airs of peace that breathe
through the world since God's only-begotten Son was sent to earth,
commissioned, by his own pre-ordained death, to take upon himself the
sins of human kind,—that same moment the unyielding Jew within me rose
to his full height, to assert anew his deathless allegiance to that pure
form of monotheism from which our fathers never departed, not even in
darkest ages and under direst cruelties. That same moment there came a
vivid remembrance of cruel wars that had been waged in the name of the
Prince of Peace, and of the wars waged by Christian nations, in China,
South Africa, in the Philippine Islands, even while the thanksgiving
hymn was being sung by the Passion Players because of the peace the
only-begotten Son of God had brought into the world. That same moment I
distinctly heard the agonizing cries of my unfortunate fathers, who,
throughout many dark and cruel centuries, were given the choice between
either believing in Hint who had suffered and died for the salvation of
human kind, or suffer and die for not believing in Him; who were
subjected to cruelties, such as find no equal in the bloodstained

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

tomes of history, for refusing to subscribe to a dogma that scripturally
is unfounded, theologically contradictory, philosophically irrational,
scientifically impossible.

And when, immediately after the Prelude, Jesus made his appearance upon
the stage, in that fateful entry of his into Jerusalem;<span
class="margnote">Its powerful anti-Jewish influence shows necessity for
counteractive teaching.</span> and when the hatreds and conspiracies
against him were set in motion, in which his brother Jews are
represented in an infamous light, and in which the grossest violence is
done to Jewish history and laws, to make the innocent Jew responsible
for the Roman's guilt, to heap the blackest crimes upon the defenseless
Jew so that the cruel Roman might be vindicated,—I perceived clearly
that it was not for entertainment I had come, but for present discomfort
and for future work. I had heard of the emotional and hysterical
outbreaks on the part of some of the spectators at the sight of the
outrages perpetrated against the Jesus of the Passion Play; I had heard
that some had been so wrought up by the play as to become temporarily
insane, and run about town haunted by wildest hallucinations, and I
could readily understand why; and I could also imagine the kind of
feelings against Jews that hundreds and thousands of these spectators
would take home with them to all parts of Europe, and to distant lands
across the seas,

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

as a souvenir of Oberammergau. Many an one, I felt, had brought his
craft of credulity into the dry-docks of Oberammergau, much the worse
for its having been tossed and beaten by the tempestuous seas of modern
research, and was having it overhauled, was having its leaky places
pitched, its ropes stretched, its masts reset, its sails mended, its
bolts tightened, ready for a cruise of another decade of years in the
waters of blind belief, for another decade of years never to think it
worth his while to hear the Jew's story, to hear the Jew's version of
what is recorded against him in the New Testament, of what is enacted
against him in the Passion Play of Oberammergau.

And when afterwards I learned how the play had affected some Jewish
people who had<span class="margnote">Show necessity for equipping Jews
with knowledge of true history.</span> witnessed it, how they felt that
but for their being Jews the Passion Play might easily have led them to
hate the Jew ever after, how they instinctively felt that our history
and our laws were being misrepresented in that play, and deplored that
they had not at their command the knowledge with which to answer the
charges made, with which to clear themselves of the guilt accused,—I
recognized yet clearer that it was not for pleasure I had come, but for
work. If the Jew does not defend himself, or cannot, how should the
Christian know that he is wronging him? If

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

the Christian can go to so much trouble in portraying unhistoric Jews,
to the detriment of the Jew, shall not the Jew make known the real
historic Jew? With a quarter of a million of intelligent adults from all
parts of the world, who saw the play last summer, thinking now more or
less unkindly of the Jew,—and it can not well be otherwise,—with
probably thousands of them now talking and preaching and lecturing on
the Passion Play in all parts of the world, with the aid of magic
lantern, cinematograph and panorama; with thousands of newspapers and
magazines publishing illustrated accounts of the Jew's cruelty toward
Jesus, shall the Jew look on silently, and not say a word in his
defense, and not publish a line that might cause if even but a few to
know the Jewish version of the story, that is so realistically, yet so
unhistorically, presented on the boards of Oberammergau?

From the time of Christianity's rise to power till the days of the
Reformation, for<span class="margnote">The Jew being now permitted to
speak, his duty is to make his innocence known.</span> more than a
thousand years, the Jew could not tell his story without paying the
penalty for it in the torture chamber, upon the scaffold, or at the
stake. From the days of the Reformation to the dawn of modern Bible
criticism, he was permitted to speak,—but only in whispers, and only in
the hearing of those to whom truth was authority, and not authority

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

truth. In these days, however, when, thanks to Strauss, Renan and their
noble confrères, the Jew may speak freely, and loudly, and in the
hearing of all the world, all that he has to say in his own defense, he
must speak, or he must cease grumbling at being misunderstood.

Once the Jew shall know and tell his story, which the world, in these
days, really wants <span class="margnote">Once the true story known the
long persecuted will be the honored of men.</span>to hear and know, and
many a dark cloud will disappear, many a grievous error will vanish,
many a long-enduring wrong will be righted. Once the Jew's truth shall
be known, and he will not only be permitted, but will even be asked, to
take his stand as a man among men—more honored than most for the greater
services he has rendered; to take his stand as a brother of Jesus—more
honored than the worshipper of Jesus, because of the greater homage he
has rendered him by speaking of him as an exalted human being, not as a
Being Divine; as a godly preacher, not as a preaching God; as a masterly
divine, not as a Divine Master; to take his stand as a son among the
sons of God—more honored than most, because of his life-long battle to
keep his *One God*, the God of the Decalogue, free from the accretions
of heathen temples, free from the admixtures of pagan pantheons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. In the Forenoon](rio04)
