[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](abr04)  [Next](abr06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<div style="text-align: center;">

<div style="text-align: center;">

<span id="021_071">The Books of Abraham (PUH) and Some of What Was
Revealed By God to Him  
</span>

<div style="text-align: left;">

<span class="small">God had revealed for Abraham twenty books as
reported from the prophet (PUH), and he (the prophet) was asked about
their contents so he said: they were all proverbs and it had: O you
egoist king of many troubles, I did not send you to gather earth all
together, but I sent you to answer the calls of the wronged, for I do
answer his calls even if he was a disbeliever, and every man of thought
unless he was sick, he got three hours a day, an hour for his God, and
an hour to judge himself, and an hour to think about God's deeds to him,
and one more hour for him to take what he likes by ways that God did
allow,for this hour helps him to accomplish the other hours. The man of
thought should live for three: to make a living, to get prepared for his
after-life, or to get satisfied in ways that God allowed. Then a man
asked the prophet (PUH): and what was there in the books of Moses
(PUH)?, he (PUH) answered: they were all examples (lessons) and they
contained: I am amazed for the one who is certain of death, how come he
becomes happy? And for whoever is certain of hell and fire, how come he
laughs? And whoever sees this life and its fluctuations how come he is
certain of safety? And for whoever that believes in destiny how come he
runs after wealth and riches? And for whoever that is certain of the
judgement, why he doesn't work for that day?...etc.  
  
Some tidings about the interpretation of God's saying:</span> <span
id="006_075">Thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the
earth(Al-An\`âm:75) as reported from Al-Bâqir (PUH) a speech that</span>
has the meaning of that God gave Abraham a strength in his sight to see
what is beyond heavens so he saw the Throne and whats beyond it and saw
the earth and what was beneath it, and so God did with his beloved the
prophet (PUH) and the viceroys after him from his Household (PUH). In
some other tidings that Abraham (PUH) saw an angel so he asked: who are
you? He answered: I am the angel of death, so then Abraham said to him:
can you show me in what shape do you take the soul of a faithful man?
Then said the angel of death: turn your face to the other way, and so
did Abraham and then he looked back again at him and he saw a young man
with a nice shape and beautfil clothes and with good scent, then said
Abraham: if the faithful man idn't see in his life except your shape
then he had what he desires in this life, then he said to him: can you
show me how your shape would be if you're going to take the soul of a
disbeliever? So he answered: you won't bear it, but Abraham said: yes I
d, and so the angel said: then turn your face away from me and so he did
and looked back at him and then he saw a blackman with standing hair and
an awful smell with black clothes and flames with smokes going out from
his mouth and nose, so when Abraham saw this he went into a coma, and
then he woke up and saw the angel back again to his original shape so he
said to the angel: O angel of death if the disbeliever just saw your
shape he would stop doing wrongdoings in his life.  
It is reported from Al-Sâdiq (PUH) back from the prince of believers
(PUH) that he said: when God wanted to take the soul of Abraham (PUH) He
sent down the angel of death and he said to him: Peace upon you Abraham,
he then answered: and peace upon you O angel of death, did you come to
me as an inviter or to announce my death? So he answered: but as an
announcer for your death O Abraham so answer the call, then he said: O
angel of death did you see a friend that makes death to his friend? So
then the angel of death got back until he stood between the hands of
God, the Exalted and said: O God You heard the talk of Your friend
Abraham, so then God did say: O angel of death go back to him and ask
him: did you ever saw a lover than don't want to see his love? The great
scholar Al-Sayid Ne\`matullah Al-Jazâ'iri, the one who mentioned this
story, said: inviter here is meant to be as for someone asking and
giving the choices as if someone is inviting some guests, and a death
announcer is meant to be as someone getting what he desires by force. So
when Abraham (PUH) knew that he has the choice, he asked for life to
worship God more.  
We say yes, and such thing would be done by a man like Abraham (PUH)
naturally, and it is possible that he had done such a thing as if he
couldn't imagine the situation and got afraid of moving from one world
to another and there is the grave and the loneliness and judgement, did
you not think about the saying of our prophet (PUH) and his Household
(PUT): Whenever a faithful increase in his faith, the more fearful he
becomes for God? There are certain tidings and speeches of certain
origin and all agreed on their contents that denotes that a believer is
in between fear and hope from God as the hands of a balance. Every
prophet is scared to the maximum of God and at the same time he has the
maximum hope and faith in His mercy. In tidings it is mentioned that
when Al-Bâqir (PUH) at the time of his death cried, and then his son,
Al-Sâdiq (PUH), said to him: O father why are you crying? So he answered
him: for two things, the first is for leaving the beloved and the second
is for the greatness and holiness of this situation. Then the most
apparent clue for this matter, look to the pray of Abi-Hamza Al-Þumâli,
and it is the pray of \`Ali ben Al-Husain (PUH). Whoever investigated
the lives of prophets and viceroys and their followers he would be sure
of what we've mentioned and I think that Abraham refused to move from
this life to the after-life because the situation was so holy and great
for him, and if he was to live all the age of life itself he would spend
it as a worshipper and obeying God without a doubt.  
Yes, Al-Husain ben \`Ali (PUH) at the day of Karbala at the time of his
death and when Al-Shemer ben Ði Al-Jawshan sat over his holy chest, he
(PUH) was smiling and the halo filled his face, and he did not care
about what they did to him beside raising the truth and showing the true
and the false. Can you imagine how the angel of death faced him? I think
he was crying as well. Shiites after his death kept saying as reported
to him (PUH):  

<div style="text-align: center;">

If the religion of Muhammad won't be fixed except by killing me  
Then O swords come and take me  

<div style="text-align: left;">

<span id="021_071"><span class="small"><span class="small"><span
class="small">Yes some tidings say that Abraham made a pilgrimage to the
Holy House at the end of his life, and after the pilgrimage he went back
to the lands of Shem, and then the angel of death came to him to take
his soul but Abraham hated death, so the angel of death got back to his
Lord and said: Abraham hated death, so God then said to him: let go of
Abraham, he likes to worship me. Then he (Abraham) saw an old man eating
and vomitting whatever he eats, so then Abraham hated life and loved
death, then he went into his home and saw a man with a good shape that
he never saw something like it before, so he asked him: who are you? He
answered: I am the angel of death, so then he said: O Holy Lord! Who
hates your closeness and visiting you and you are in such a shape? So he
answered: O friend of God, if God wanted goodness for His slave, He
sends me in this shape, and if He wants evil for His slave, He sends me
in another shape, and so he took his soul in the lands of Shem where his
tomb lies now.  
  
</span></span></span></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Taking Ishmael (PUH) and His Mother Hagar to The Holy
House](abr06.md)

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>
