[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sal02)  [Next](abr01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<div style="text-align: center; font-family: times new roman;">

Abraham The God's Friend (PUH)  

<div style="text-align: left;">

He is the second of the major prophets and one that had general religion
and laws. God did say in the chapter of Al-Nahl: Lo! Abraham was a
nation obedient to Allah, by nature upright, and he was not of the
idolaters; Thankful for His bounties; He chose him and He guided him
unto a straight path.(Al-Nahl:120-121). What is brought by some tidings
about interpreting this holy phrase that he (PUH) had a religion that no
one else had so he was like a nation alone, and obedient means that he
was obeying and faithful. And as reported from Al-Kâthim (PUH): In all
the world save but one that was worshipping God, and if there were
someone else with him then God would add him in His saying "Abraham was
a nation", and then God made for him a company and gave him Ismael and
Isaac, so they became three, and God talked to His beloved the prophet
Muhammad (PUH) and ordered him to follow the religion of Abraham, and in
some news from Al-Husain ben \`Ali (PUH): None is following the path of
Abraham except of us and our followers and all the people are astraying
away from it. Abraham is the son of Terah (Tarah) \[ Hebrew: Terach,
Arabic: Târih\] ben Nahor ben Serug ben Reu \[Arabic: Ar\`u\] ben Peleg
\[Arabic: Fâlig\] ben Eber \[Arabic: \`Âbir\] ben Salah \[Arabic:
Shâlikh\] ben Arfakhshað ben Shem ben Noah (PUT), as it is mentioned in
Murooj Al-Ðahab for Al-Mas\`udi and some stories for Abdul-Wahâb
Al-Najjâr go along with such chain of fathers although there are some
differences in four names, but such differences never harm. His birth
took place in one of Kufa's villages in Iraq that was called Kuþâr and
some said it is called Fadân-Arâm (Paddan-Aram) and his father was one
of people of this village, and the mother of Abraham and the mother of
Lot were sisters and they were daughters of Lâhij and Lâhij was a
prophet but not a messenger, and Abraham got married to Sarah and she
was his maternal cousin and she owned many cattles and a large
landscape, and so then she had put all of that under the control of
Abraham (PUH) and he worked on taking care of it all, and all of that is
taken from a speech for Al-Sâdiq (PUH) and it is long.  
It is also mentioned that Lot was rather the nephew of Abraham (son of
his brother) and there is no conflict in that since that Terah, the
father of Abraham, is the father of Hârân (Haran), the father of Lot, so
then Terah and His son Haran married two sisters and they are the
daughters of Lâhij and they gave birth to Abraham ben Terah and Lot ben
Haran (PUT) and so Lot is the maternal cousin for Abraham and his
brother's son as well, be aware and you will understand, and we've come
to mention before that Sarah was the maternal cousin for Abraham and she
is the sister of Lot but she was the sister of Lot by the mother and not
by the father \[meaning: her father is NOT Haran himself, but someone
else\], because Haran is the brother of Abraham and so Abraham can't get
married to his brother's daughter, but after the death of Haran, the
father of Sarah got married to her mother and she gave birth to Sarah,
so obviously, Sarah is the sister of Lot by his mother and she is the
maternal cousin of Abraham, and Lot is the nephew of Abraham and also
his maternal cousin. It is reported from the book of Barnaba that
Abraham was a lad from Paddan-Aram in Iraq, and his people were pagans
and his father was a carpenter that makes idols and sell it to whoever
worships them, and that Abraham was enlightened by God and guided by Him
and knew that idols don't hear nor see, and they don't hear any call and
can't answer any pray and don't harm nor give benefits, and this is also
what was mentioned in Torah, and in Holy Quran it is mentioned in the
chapter of Al-Anbiyâ': And We verily gave Abraham of old his proper
course, and We were Aware of him, When he said unto his father and his
folk: What are these images unto which ye pay devotion?
(Al-Anbiyâ':51-52), and in the chapter of Al-An\`âm: (Remember) when
Abraham said unto his father Azar: Takest thou idols for gods? Lo! I see
thee and thy folk in error manifest(Al-An\`âm:74), and in the chapter of
Al-Sho\`arâ': Recite unto them the story of Abraham, When he said unto
his father and his folk: What worship ye? They said: We worship idols,
and are ever devoted unto them.(Al-Sho\`arâ':69-71), and also: And
forgive my father. Lo! he is of those who err(Al-Sho\`arâ':86).  
Whoever noticed the conversation between Abraham and his father Azar in
the holy book would see a man with great patience and passion and no one
is like him, and whenever his father steps away from him he goes to him
to guide him for he is afraid for him from the torture in the
after-life, while his father Azar exaggerated with his cruelty, but he
was trying to make him happy and loved by God, but Azar was escaping
away from him and promising him the punishment of the idols and the
judgement of Nemrud. Look by the eye of the heart to this conversation
and to the passion of the friend of God and the cruelty of Azar from the
chapter of Mariam which tells the debate between a pagan that couldn't
catch happiness and a prophet and a messenger of God, Abraham (PUH), and
God said in it (the chapter of Mariam): <span id="019_041">And make
mention (O Muhammad) in the Scripture of Abraham. Lo! he was a saint, a
prophet.</span> <span id="019_042">When he said unto his father: O my
father! Why worshippest thou that which heareth not nor seeth, nor can
in aught avail thee ?</span> <span id="019_043">O my father! Lo! there
hath come unto me of knowledge that which came not unto thee. So follow
me, and I will lead thee on a right path.</span> <span id="019_044">O my
father! Serve not the devil. Lo! the devil is a rebel unto the
Beneficent(Mariam:41-44), and his answer to him was:</span> <span
id="019_046">He said: Rejectest thou my gods, O Abraham ? If thou cease
not, I shall surely stone thee. Depart from me a long while!</span>
<span id="019_047">He said: Peace be unto thee! I shall ask forgiveness
of my Lord for thee. Lo! He was ever gracious unto me(Mariam:46-47).  
Then Abraham (PUH)</span> <span id="009_114">disowned Azar and his deeds
and did not like to live in his place and between his people so he left
them by an order from God to Palestine and Shaam \[Shaam: Syria and the
surroundings\], and Abraham was looking for guiding his father and his
father promised to follow him and for this he did pray for forgiveness
for his father but when he knew that he will keep on worshipping the
idols and stay on the religion of his people he (Abraham) disowned him
and his people and their worshipping, and this is testified by the
chapter of Al-Tawbah:</span> <span id="009_114">The prayer of Abraham
for the forgiveness of his father was only because of a promise he had
promised him, but when it had become clear unto him that he (his father)
was an enemy to Allah he (Abraham) disowned him. Lo! Abraham was soft of
heart, long-suffering(Al-Tawbah:114). In the stories of Abdul-Wahab
Al-Najjâr: Then Abraham did travel to Palestine as a stranger with his
wife Sarah and his nephew Lot and his wife, God did say in the chapter
of Al-\`Ankaboot:</span> <span id="029_026">And Lot believed him, and
said: Lo! I am a fugitive unto my Lord. Lo! He, only He, is the Mighty,
the Wise(Al-\`Ankaboot:26) and so they lived there and it was the land
of Canaanites and he (Abraham) lived in Shakim and it is now the city of
Nabulus but he didn't stay for long time but he kept on moving to the
south as denoted by some Toratic phrases about his journey to Egypt and
to the land of Abi-Mâlik (Abimelech) \[Hebrew: Abiymelek\]. There is a
talk that has some conflicts, and the one that quoted it is hesitated
since the resources for this talk are the Torah and the Bibles mostly,
and still they have some opposition and conflicts in the same resource
and also between each of them, so we don't quote anything unless we make
sure it coincide with what we are sure that it is been told by the holy
prophet (PUH) and the holy quran by the way of his Household the
purified, or whatever is close to that by the way of others which is
accepted by the righteous mind and thought and logic.  
Al-Mas\`udi announced in Muruj Al-Ðahab \[book's name: Plains of Gold\],
that Azar is Terah the father of Abraham, and what is apparent is that
Azar is a character (describtion) for Terah ben Nahor according to him
(Al-Mas\`udi), so he said about it this: and when God took the soul of
Nahor, his son Terah stood after him and he is Azar the father of
Abraham and at his time lived the king Nimrod..etc \[in the book it is
Nimrod ben Canaan, but searching in the old testament the only trace I
had is Nimrod ben Cush\]. It is apparent that most of our brothers of
Islamic scholars and historians believe that the father of Abraham was a
pagan, and one of them also Abdul-Wahâb Al-Najjâr, for this is what is
obvious from the holy phrases. After proving that Azar is Terah ben
Nahor the father of Abraham, he (Abdul-Wahâb) mentioned some
interpretations for the word "Azar" as being a substitute for the word
"father" that was mentioned in quran, or it might be a word for calling
shame upon him (maybe because he stood beside falsehood and paganism)
\[notice: Âzar in Arabic means "he helped"\], or it might mean "to
restrain", and Terah is his name but Azar is a character for him or an
adjective.  
And Al-Râzi said in his interpretation for the holy phrase "</span><span
id="006_074">when Abraham said unto his father Azar"(Al-An\`âm:74): what
this phrase shows is that Azar is the name of Abraham's father. And said
Al-Zajjâj: there is no doubt that his name was Terah. And some people
that have no faith made this a point of crack in holy quran, and there
are some explanations been mentioned about this matter, one of them is
that the father of Abraham (PUH) was Terah and Azar was his uncle, and
the uncle could be called as "father" as it is mentioned by God in
telling the story of the sons of Jacob when they said:</span> <span
id="002_133">We shall worship thy God, the God of thy fathers, Abraham
and Ishmael and Isaac(Al-Baqarah:133), and it is well known that Ishmael
was an uncle for Jacob but they called him as "father" and so it is the
situation here, and then said Al-Zajjâj: the Shiites said that none of
the prophet's (PUH) fathers was a pagan or a disbeliever \[meaning the
prophet Muhammad\] and they mentioned that Azar is his (Abraham's) uncle
and they got the clues for it, so then he mentioned the point of views
and the clues in a long speech and talk and it is well known for them
(Sunnites) in their creed for whoever has the knowledge of it. One of
the point of views is God's saying:</span> <span id="026_218">Who seeth
thee when thou standest up (to pray)</span><span id="026_219">, And
(seeth) thine abasement among those who fall prostrate (in worship)
(Al-Shu\`arâ':218-219), meaning that his halo was moving from one to
another among those who fall prostrate until it became to
\`Abdul-Muttalib \[Grandfather of Muhammad PUH\] and his son \`Abdullah
\[father of Muhammad PUH\] (PUH), so then it became to existance
\[meaning the halo was moving from ancestors until it became apparent by
the existance of Muhammad PUH\], and more explanations will become in
the future by God's own will.  
In summary, they don't believe that his (Abraham's) father was a
faithful, and accoding to their creed (Sunnites) is it not a shame and
accepted for they don't believe in the condition of the infallibility
and faithfulness of the ancestors of prophets and messengers, but our
scholars according to their Imams, the Household of Muhammad (PUH) don't
say this, and they believe absolutely that the prophets and messengers
and their viceroys don't become to existance accept from holy and
faithful and infallible ancestors,  and since this is possible as well
as their assumption and God is able to do it, then why not believing in
it, and how dare we say about a prophet or a messenger from God to His
creation or even about their viceroys that were appointed by God also,
how dare we say that he is a son of a pagan or a fallible person or a
wicked man, and there is more to come about this matter if God allowed
that.  
  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Infallibility of God's Viceroys](abr01.md)

</div>

</div>
