[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](adam10)  [Next](adam12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
(Having a tent for them in the place of the Holy House)

From Abi Jafar Al-Bâqir (PUH) from his fathers (PUT): God sent to
Gabriel (PUH) that I had mercy upon Adam and Eve so get them a tent from
the tents of paradise and make it stand in the place of the House and
its base that was lifted before by the Angels, and so did Gabriel, and
made a stand for it in the place of the House then he got them down from
Al-Safâ and Al-Marwah and gathered them together in the tent. The pillar
of the tent was made of ruby and its light enlightened the mounts of
Mecca, and the light reached the borders of Al-Haram, and it is the
position of Al-Haram nowadays \[meaning borders of Mecca maybe?\], and
so God made it sacred for the tent and the pillar that are from
paradise. Then the tent was stretched and the end of the tent's ropes
were the mosque and it is Al-Masjid Al-Harâm (the Holy "Sacred" Mosque).
Then God revelaed seventy thousands angels to guard the tent against
demons and cheer Adam and Eve, and so they were going around the tent
and guard it.  
It is probable that God after that sent to Gabriel (PUH) to get down to
Adam and Eve and make them depart the place of the House and build it
with stones and raise up its basis and complete it for the rest of the
Angels and the creation of Adam's descendants. So he got down to them
and made them out of the tent and moved them away from the House and the
tent as well. Then Gabriel raised the basis of the House by a stone from
Al-Safâ, and a stone from Al-Marwah, and a stone from the mount of
Sinai, and a stone from the mount of Al-Salâm \[Al-Salâm means The
Peace\] and it is at the hind of the House at the back of Kaba, and made
these stones the corners of the Holy House, and so he completed it by
stones from the mount of Abi-Qubays as he was commanded by God, and made
for it two doors, to the east and to the west. When he was done with its
building, Angels started to go around it and when Adam and Eve saw that,
they also started going around it seven by seven and it is the law that
went on in his (Adam) descendants until the doomsday.  
And in Ilal Al-Sharâye' (Reasons of Laws) from Bakeer ben A'yon he said:
Abu 'Abdullah Al-Sâdiq (PUH) said to me: do you know what it was the
black stone in the Holy corner of Kaba? then he said: I said no, he said
(PUH) then: it was one of the greatest Angels that God, the Exalted, did
Have and when God took the covenant from the Angels, he was the first to
admit it and so God made him the guardian for all of His creation and
Gave him the covenant to keep and Decided to Make all the creations to
renew their covenants with him each year, then God made him in company
with Adam in paradise to remind him of the covenant and renew it each
year, so when Adam did the sin and got out of paradise, God made him
forget the covenant that He took over him and his descendants, for
Muhammad and his viceroy and his descendants the protected against wrong
doings, and Made him buffled and lost, but when He relented toward Adam
He made this Angel in the picture of a white pearl and Sent it down from
paradise to Adam when he was in the lands of India. When Adam saw this,
he got pleased though he didn't know what it was except it is some
treasure, then God made him speak and said: O Adam, did you know me?
then Adam said: no! then he answered: O yes, the demon overcame you and
made you forget to praise your Lord, then he changed to his true shape
as it was in paradise with Adam (PUH) and said to Adam: where is the
covenant? And when Adam remembered that jumped to him and cried and
kissed him and renewed his covenant, then God changed him to a clear
white pearl and Adam (PUH) carried him over his shoulders for his
honour, and when he gets tired, Gabriel (PUH) would take it over, until
they got to Mecca. It was there in Mecca that Adam kept it and renew his
covenant every day and night and when God wanted to build the Kaba and
sent Gabriel for this purpose and started in building, made this stone
and it is the white pearl in the corner that it is in nowadays, and he
(Gabriel) sactified God and praised Him, and that's why the law goes for
praising and sanctifying everytime being in front of the corner that
carries the Holy stone, and so it is until this very day. One of the
religious duties to do when visiting the Holy House is to come to the
Black Stone and kiss it if it was possible, or raise up the hand towards
it and say: O Lord my fidelity I've done, and my covenant I've made to
Testify me with the deed. \[this is a line from a prayer said on
pilgrimage time\] This is the way of Muslims and all who came before
them from the various religions and laws that admit the honour of the
Holy House and the honoured Stone, and it is widely believed by these of
the right wisdom and knowledge that an angel can be shaped in any shape
even a stone, so it not a weird thing that it is indeed an angel in the
shape of a stone \[meaning the Black Stone\], then how you Muslim raise
your hand towards it, and though you speak to your Lord, but you are
pointing toward the Holy stone, and it is not like any stone that appear
to the public.  
Some unbelievers make it as a fictitious tale to mock at it and mock at
what the Muslims do and the people of the past time religions did, so we
take refuse to God the Almighty from these who mock at what God had
ordered to be honoured by His prophets and Ordered His creations to
glorify and honour it."He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no
guide"(Al-Ra'd: 33)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of what was the dog created](adam12)
