[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](adam11)  [Next](adam13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
(Of what was the dog created)

It is mentioned from the prophet (PUH) when he was asked about the dog,
of what he was created, he said (PUH): God created it from the saliva of
Iblis, and the questioner asked: and how was that O prophet of God, he
then said (PUH): when God got Adam and Eve down to earth, He got them
down like shaking chicks, and when their foe Iblis the damned saw them
he ran to the lions ,and they were on earth before Adam, and then said
to them: there are two birds got down from the sky like them no one saw
before, come and eat them. Then the lions ran with Iblis, and they were
in a far place away from them (Adam and Eve) and Iblis went out shouting
and seducing them and tell them of how close they are, and because of
his haste and his many words coming out of his mouth, some saliva came
out and from that saliva did God create two dogs, one male and the other
a female, and they stood before Adam and Eve protecting them from the
lions and they didn't allow the lions to approach and since that day the
dog is an enemy for the lion and the lion is an enemy for the dog.  
It is mentioned also that when God got Adam (PUH) down to earth, Ordered
him to till the land and Gave him plants from paradise, so He gave him
palms, grape, olive and pomegranate and so on, and so he(Adam) planted
them to be for him and for his children and descendants after him and he
ate from the fruits, and the grape were the most aromatic and prettier
than musk and sweeter than honey, and the palm of Mary the daughter of
Amram (PUH) is the Al-'Ajwah \[type of palms, it might be translated as
"pressed dates"\], and it is one of paradise's palms and was revealed in
Kanun \[what is meant here it might be revealed in the month of Kanun as
it is named by people of Iraq and Syria and the surroundings where the
Assyrian names still in use for solar months\], and also revealed with
Adam (PUH) Al-'Ateeq \[another type of palms\] and from it did the palm
get diverse, and it was mentioned before that Adam (PUH) got down with
him some rods and branches that carried every seed for every grain, and
mentioned also many things more than we had said about what did he face
but all left out to mention only the most important things for who got
the heart of caution and an ear to listen, and they mentioned also that
he was seventy arms in length and Eve was thirty five arms in length,
and he lived for nine hundreds and thirty years and was burried in a
cave in the mount of Abi-Qubays and his face to the Kaba, and Eve lived
after him by one year then got sick for fifteen days and died then
burried beside him, and when they died there did exist forty thousands
from their descendants.  
Whoever scans through the life of Adam and Eve (PUT) since they were
created by God until the last day of their lives, he would surely know
that they were and still beloved by God and faithful ones and He only
knows their secrets and what are they in real and they are the parents
of human beings and the prophets and messengers, and everyone is out of
them and their son, though some might be better than them and all on
earth and on earth they live and die and on its surface will be grouped,
and He, praise be to Him, know all that and whatever might happened by
them and what will be from their descendants even before their creation,
since the enterance of Adam and Eve into paradise and their exit and
whatever happened to them before their enterance and after their exit,
for a secret that no one knows but Him and a wisdom of His own and it is
all in His hands and no one would share Him in this or in any other
matter or any command, and so no power and no strength but by Him.  
Meditate, understand and notice the company of Gabriel (PUH) for them
and his contact with Adam (PUH) without any delay and telling him(Adam)
about anything from God and about everything he met and happened with
him, and the consignment of God for him toward Adam in paradise and
after getting out of it and getting him down on earth and amusing
him(Adam) and carrying the Black Stone (the white pearl) with him from
India to Mecca and revealing the tent for him from paradise by
commandment of God and revealing the Angels to his side to amuse him by
commandment of God and teaching him the hermitage of pilgrimage, so how
we would say something that is not proper about him(Adam), and that he
did something wrong against God, the Exalted, and that he refused the
commandment of God by doing such sin, No and Never, and even though God
called it a sin, then it is like that and it is better to leave it for
Him to judge, and we showed something in the introduction of this book
about the infallibility of the prophets.  
And Adam (PUH) did say to Moses the son of Amram (PUH) when God gathered
them together: Take it easy on your father O son..etc, and mentioned
that Moses asked God to gather them together, so then Adam (PUH) did not
let his heart forget about God even for a twinkling of an eye, and God,
the Exalted, blamed him and he knew that he had done something wrong and
regretted about it and been sorry for what he had done by eating from
the tree, and he cried and been sad for so long for the anger of God,
his beloved, his Creator and his Master and Lord, and Who founded him
from nothing and from sand to existence, completed with thought and
sense, and he knew that God did not Want him to eat from the tree that
is well known with its type and he did ate from it by the seduction of
Iblis the damned and it is against the will of the Master, the High, the
Exalted and Almighty, and so the sin of Adam and his deed with the tree
that was prohibited and to Whom prohibited him was great, and not a
taboo, but what he had done was something disliked, and this is the
truth that we believe in and no doubt we have about it for what we had
explained. \[the previous paragraph was a highly philosophical in its
terms and might contain uncorrect translations\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Marriage of Adam and Eve](adam13.md)
