[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dav01)  [Next](dav03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Climbing Into The Champer and Straying of Sheeps Into The Farm

In the chapter of Al-Anbiyâ': And David and Solomon, when they gave
judgment concerning the field, when people's sheep had strayed and
browsed therein by night; and We were witnesses to their judgment. And
We made Solomon to understand (the case); and unto each of them We gave
judgment and knowledge(Al-Anbiyâ':78-79) and in the chapter of Sâd: And
hath the story of the litigants come unto thee? How they climbed the
wall into the royal chamber; How they burst in upon David, and he was
afraid of them. They said: Be not afraid! (We are) two litigants, one of
whom hath wronged the other, therefor judge aright between us; be not
unjust; and show us the fair way. Lo! this my brother hath ninety and
nine ewes while I had one ewe; and he said: Entrust it to me, and he
conquered me in speech(Sâd:21-23).  
Here we have to cases: the straying of the sheeps into the field and the
climbing into the royal champer. The first is shared by David and his
son Solomon (PUT) and the second is special for David, and about the
case of the straying of sheeps it is as attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH)
about this holy phrase is that the rules of prophets before David upto
his time was that the sheeps and other domestic animals like camels and
cows, if they grazed upon some plants then the owner of these plants or
agriculture will be the owner of them and the straying is only done at
night for the owner of the farm must guard his farm at daytime and the
owner of the sheep must guard his sheeps at night time, so David judged
with what the prophets had judged with before him, so then God inspired
to Solomon and he was eleven years old at that time, as it was
mentioned: any sheep that graze in other's farm, then the owner of the
farm has only the right to get what is formed in their bodies, and this
is how it went (for judges) after Solomon, so Solomon ordered to get the
sheeps back for the owner of the farm and get benefit of their milk and
their offsprings and their wools, and the farm shall be in the hands of
the sheeps owners to fix it and get it back as it was before it was
grazed upon, and then after that everything gets back to how it was and
the sheeps get back to their owners and the farm to its owner and this
is the judgement of Solomon that God made him understand, so everyone of
them, David and Solomon, judged with the commands of God and they did
not disobey the commandments of God, and it is by God's saying: and unto
each of them We gave judgment and knowledge(Al-Anbiyâ':79).  
In another narration it is mentioned that God inspired to David to make
a successor for himself from his family because I knew in My ancient
knowledge that I do not send a prophet except with a successor from his
own family, and David had many children that time and the one that was
assigned to be by God was Solomon, and then directly two men came to
David to judge for their farm and sheeps and then God inspired to David
to gather all his sons and whoever judges with a rightful judgement in
this case then he is your successor, so then David gathered all his sons
and when the two men told their stories Solomon said to the farmer: O
farmer, when did this man's sheeps go into your farm? He answered: they
went into it by night, then he said: I judge you O owner of the sheeps
to give the offsprings of your sheeps and their milk and their wools for
the owner of the farm in this year, and then David said to him: how come
you did not judge with giving the sheeps and the scholars of the
Israelites did assure that before and the price of the eaten plants is
the price of the sheeps? Then said Solomon: the plants were not taken
out from the roots but the sheeps did eat its top and this would return
back in the future, and then God inspired to David that the judgement in
this case is what Solomon did judge with. There are other narrations of
the Household (PUT) with the same meaning and some of them include the
addition of the two judgements together where the sheeps did eat the
root and the branch then the farm owner would have the sheep, or
otherwise it is as Solomon did judge with. Solomon also judged to keep
the sheeps by their owners at night and to keep the farm by its owners
at daytime, as it was mentioned before. Meditate!  
As for the case of the climbing into the royal champer they said: David
divided his time and made one day for worshipping and a day for advising
and sermons and a day to judge for the people and a day for his ownself,
and he put some guards on his door so that no one could go inside
without his permission and no one would dare to go inside except by his
agreement. In the day of his worshipping while he stayed away from the
people and praying in his champer, then two men climbed the wall and got
inside while he thought he is in safe from anyone that desires to go
inside because there were guards, so they went down to him from the roof
or the ceiling and he got afraid and they said to him then: do be afraid
we are two men in fight that one had wronged the other so judge between
us with just and do not wrong, meaning do not wrong us with your
judgement, and guide is to the righteous path of just, this is my
brother he has ninety nine ewes and I have only one ewe, and it is the
female of the sheep, and he said to me: entrust it to me, meaning to be
of my own, so that I would have a complete one hundred ewes, and he
conquered me in the speech, so that he won against me and defeated me
and I couldn't do anything, and then David said to the owner of one ewe:
he wronged you by asking you for your only ewe, and David denied the
greed of the owner of many ewes and he described him as a wrong-doer and
made it as a great awful thing is to attack the owner of the one ewe and
he said: many partners oppress one another, save such as believe and do
good works, and they are few(Sâd:24), and then David looked back to the
two of them and found them as angels and not human beings and that God
sent them to him to warn him for something he had done.  
God had tested him with their imaginary fight and in fact there were no
fight and they had nothing but to warn him for what he had done: And
David guessed that We had tried him(Sâd:24), meaning We tested him by
that case and he was aware, and he sought forgiveness of his Lord, and
he bowed himself and fell down prostrate and repented(Sâd:24), meaning
he prostrated to his Lord with humiliation and he felt that he judged so
fast for the owner of the one ewe and called the owner of many ewes as a
wrong-doer and did not ask the man under the charge and did not ask for
clues from the claiming man, and he felt that he did something wrong
against the regulations and what the sacred law did regulate. For this
he did prostrate with regret and humiliation for his Lord and asking for
forigveness. This what happened with him and from him since the time of
angels revelation while he was in his champer. They said about the
reason for revealing these holy phrases is that David was inclined to
marry a woman that her husband died and she completed her mourning
period. The situation is that he is in no need to marry her because he
already had many wives, and for the Israelites that was prohibited
before the time of David but God made it legal for him. What happened
with him is that he married the wife of Uriah after his death and after
she completed the time of mourning , and Uriah was a faithful man and
the neighbour of David and he was killed in the camp of David, so David
married his wife after she had completed the time of her mourning but
the Israelites denied doing this as we mentioned before.  
It is mentioned by Al-Ridhâ (PUH) in a speech for him about the
infallibility of prophets and he mentioned David and made him infallible
and away from any wrong doing and mentioned him with great deeds and
then the Imâm (PUH) asked someone that was attending and he (PUH) knows
better what he is asking about but that was only to make a way for the
speech to come and to obtain the things. So he (PUH) said: what do
people say about the case of David and his mistake? They said: they say
that David was praying in his champer when Iblis (Satan) had the shape
of a bird that no other bird had its beauty, so David then cut off
praying and went to the bird trying to catch him, but the bird went out
into the house and he kept on behind it, but the bird flew to the roof
and he went up there trying to catch him and the bird down to the house
of Uriah (ben Hayyân) and David looked at him there and he found the
wife of Uriah washing herself and she was naked and when he looked at
her he loved her and desired her, and at the time he (David) sent Uriah
for some invasions, so he sent to his friend and the high commander of
the army to make Uriah at the front of the ark, and so he did and he
defeated the enemies and that was hard for David, so he sent again and
commanded to make Uriah at the front again, and so he did and he was
killed then and David married his wife. The narrator then said: then the
Imâm struck his holy forehead with his hand and said: Innâ Lillâh
Wa'Innâ Ilayhi Raji\`un (we are for God and to God we will return) \[a
phrase said when something horrible happens\] you claimed that a prophet
of God took his praying with easiness for a bird and then he commited
adultery and then killed someone. Then they said: O son of the prophet
what was his mistake then? Then he (PUH) said: woe to you! David only
thought that God did not create someone wiser than him so God sent down
for him the two angels and they climbed the wall of the champer and said
to him: two men fought against each other...etc, and David then made a
fast decision against the charged man and said to him (the man
claiming): he had wronged you for asking you for your only ewe, and he
did not ask the claiming man for clues and did not ask the charged man
for explanations, and that was the mistake of David and not what others
do say, didn't you hear God's saying: O David! Lo! We have set thee as a
viceroy in the earth; therefor judge aright between
mankind..etc(Sâd:26). Then they asked the Imâm (PUH): O son of prophet
of God then what is the story of David with Uriah, so Al-Ridhâ (PUH)
then said: the woman at the time of David was never to be married after
the death of her husband, and the first man that God allowed him to
marry a woman that her husband was killed was David, so he married the
wife of Uriah when he was killed and her mourning was over, and for this
was hard for the people. For this it is mentioned by Al-Sâdiq (PUH): the
satisfaction of people is not to be owned and their tongues are not to
be fixed, did not they claim that David followed the bird until he
looked at the wife of Uriah and loved her and he made her husband at the
front of the ark until her husband got killed and he married her then
after? They mentioned that the prince of believers (PUH) said: who
talked about the narration of David as the narrators say it shall be
whipped one hundred and sixty times for claiming killing with attacking
the high place of prophecy. It was one punishment with emphasis on
attacking the prophet's name with lies.  
It is narrated that David (PUH) climbed up a mountain and there was a
prophet called Ezekiel on it and he used to worship God there, so David
took a permission from Ezekiel and God inspired him (Ezekiel) to go and
meet him so he went down to him and took him from his hand and climbed
with him up, and then David said: O Ezekiel, ever thought of doing a
sin? He answered: no, then he (David) said: are you wondering about your
own worshipping for God? He answered: no, then he (David) said: ever
thought of life and desired some of its ornaments? He answered: yes,
maybe that was in my heart, then said he (David): and what do you do
then? He answered: I go into that room and think about what is inside,
so then David went into the room and found a bed made of iron with an
old skull on it and old bones and there were a plate of iron with a
scripture: I am Uri ben Sâlim, ruled for one thousand years and built
one thousand cities and deflowered one thousand maidens, and my end was
that my bed was to the dust and the stones were my pillow and snakes
with worms were my neighbours, and whoever sees me let him never be
tricked by this life.  
It is mentioned before that David married the woman of Uriah after her
husband's death and ending her mourning, and she gave birth to Solomon
for him, and that was mentioned for sure. In God's speech: So We forgave
him that; and lo! he had access to Our presence and a happy journey's
end(Sâd:25), as it is mentioned by Al-Tabarsi: they differed in what was
the purpose of this forigveness, and for why David did ask for
forgiveness, so it was said that he got that by isolation to God and
humiliation to Him by worshipping as it did happen with Abraham as God
did tell it: And Who, I ardently hope, will forgive me my sin on the Day
of Judgment(Al-Shu\`arâ':82), and this is the most probable for the high
level of infalliblity of prophet in all conditions and against all sins
as it was proved before, while some said: it is allowed to say that they
(prophets) do the little sins as it is apparent from God's saying: and
he sought forgiveness of his Lord, and he bowed himself and fell down
prostrate and repented(Sâd:24), and then from God's acceptance for his
forgiveness' seeking: So We forgave him that(Sâd:25), and according to
this they differed also in the case of David, some said: it is that
Uriah asked for proposal to a woman and her family accepted that
marriage but David then went and ased for proposal to her after him
(Uriah) and because of his holiness they made him marry the woman
instead of Uriah, and that was a sin and he was blamed for it, another
saying is that David sent Uriah to some place and he was killed but he
didn't turn sad for him because he was inclined to marry his wife, and
that was a sin so he was blamed by sending down on him the two angels. A
third saying is that when a man was to be dead and leave a woman then
his masters are the ones to take care of her, and thus when Uriah died,
David married his wife and her family did not forbid him from doing so
because of his high place, and that was a sin and so he was to be
blamed, and a fourth saying is that he was blamed for his fast decisions
in judging people when the two men came to him and this is what was
explained afore, and there are other sayings that are needless to say
and what we had mentioned has enough for you, and God is the Bringer of
sucesss.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Some of What Was Inspired to David (PUH) and Some of What Was
Copied From His Sermons](dav03.md)
