[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dav00)  [Next](dav02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Awaited Manifesto

God did say: And assuredly We gave David grace from Us, (saying): O ye
hills and birds, echo his psalms of praise! And We made the iron supple
unto him(Saba':10), and He spoke to His prophet (PUH) by saying: Bear
with what they say, and remember Our bondman David, lord of might, Lo!
he was ever turning in repentance (toward Allah). Lo! We subdued the
hills to hymn the praises (of their Lord) with him at nightfall and
sunrise, And the birds assembled; all were turning unto Him. We made his
kingdom strong and gave him wisdom and decisive speech(Sâd:17-20), and
He said in another chapter: And we preferred some of the prophets above
others, and unto David We gave the Psalms(Al-Isrâ':55), and also He
mentioned as attributed to him (David): And he said: O mankind! Lo! we
have been taught the language of birds, and have been given (abundance)
of all things. This surely is evident favour(Al-Naml:16) \[I belive in
this point the author was mistaken because it seems the Solomon is the
one who said this sentence as mentioned in Quran and not David\], and
there are lot of other holy phrases, so check them out. It is mentioned
that when David used to read the psalms and come cross the lands you
would see the beasts and birds would sanctify with him and all would say
as he is saying as if it was not possible to help about it but to follow
him with what he was saying even if it was about a non-living object,
and that is the miracle of David, or the thing that should be put under
the question, and that is the clue for others to follow him and believe
in him and in his message, because it is heard from the mountains and
the birds their sanctification whenever David does and none before did
hear their way of sanctification, thus it should be known that this is
something from God for him, and all of these things point out to his
highness and his power where He made the mountains under his command and
also the birds when they gather around him when he reads the book of his
Lord, either listening with care or attracted with humiliation and for
the command of their Lord going forth, and driven by the sound of
miracle and the words of the Giver, the Lord of angels and soul.  
He also made the iron supple unto him and made it like wax in his hands
to take whatever he likes from and leave whatever he likes without
putting it to fire and striking by tools and force, and he used to do
the shields with his hands as a miracle for him and abnormal thing,
otherwise it would not be a special thing if he used to use fire to make
it and the miracle of God would not be apparent, and he used to make the
shields out of the iron rings and not iron sheets so they can become
lighter for anyone who wear them and protect him against his enemies and
also to allow some air to go through his body thus he can stay in rest
and safe and never be annoyed with it. God did say: And We taught him
the art of making garments (of mail) to protect you in your daring. Are
ye then thankful?(Al-Anbiyâ':80) so meditate, may God reveal a mercy
upon you, in the way that God mentions His favours, and concentrate on
understanding the wisdom from the speech of your Lord, the Wise, the
Almighty that He pointed out about this, and He also said: We made his
kingdom strong and gave him wisdom and decisive speech(Sâd:20). So, He
made him a wise judge and a prophet and a messenger and a victorious
king against his enemies, before he comes a prophet and a king and then
after as well.  
He remained for long time without any opposition from anyone unless he
had defeated it and God made him strong with his respect and made him
victorious by His strength and by his will and by the believers, and
they say that he prayed to God to teach him how to judge among people
with what God has of facts and realities so then God inspired to him: O
David people won't bear that and I will show you. Then a man came to him
and claimed that another man had wronged him and been aggressive towards
him, so then God inspired to him that the one who is claiming killed the
father of the one who was claimed on without having a right to do so,
and so He commanded him to command the man who was claimed on to kill
the claiming man as a revenge for his father, and so when he did so the
Israelites took that for great and they said: a man came to him (to
David) to complain and he ordered the aggressive one to kill the one of
complaint! and there were lot of sayings and gossip about it and claimed
that David is  wrong-doer and ignorant and so on, and then David asked
God to give him a relief from this trouble and said: O Lord save me from
what I fell in, so God then inspired to him: O David, you asked Me to
inspire you with the judgement with the right I have and so the rightful
judgement was that the (aggressive) man should kill the claiming man as
a revenge for his father, and he (the father) is buried in that place in
a garden under that tree so go one with the Israelites and call him with
his name and he shall answer you and ask him about the one who killed
him and let the Israelites hear his speech so that you will be excused
and your situation is fixed among them and stop to doubt about you, and
so he took them with him to the place of his grave and he called him
with his name and the man answered: here I am O prophet of God, and he
asked him: who killed you? He answered: that man (naming the killer), so
then the Israelites believed in him again and obeyed him when they heard
that. Then God inspired to him: O David the servants will not be able to
bear the judgement with what right I do have so ask the one claiming to
give the clues and swear by My name.  
And God gave him the wisdom and the decisive speech, and the meaning of
"wisdom" as it is defined by the language is to put everything in its
right place and doing the right thing that has no mistakes in it and no
one is able to criticise it, so it has no mistakes and is not
accompanied with regret and sorrow, but it is a complete act, so God
gave him the prophecy and also the wisdom in addition to it. the
prophecy is to receive the commands and the regulations from God by
inspirations and by heart, and the wisdom is something else that God did
give to him as a gift from Him for him without studying or researching
or competing with the soul, and the prophecy can be a road to the wisdom
that God made it special for whom He chose from His servants and He is
the Passionate the Knower.  
We do not about the wisdom of the prophets, and they are the most
complete men at their time among their own people \[some words here I
couldn't understand\] and for this David said to Luqmân the wise: joy
for you O Luqmân, you were given the wisdom and the adversities were
drawn away from you, and it is the leadership and the prophecy. David
had a nice voice and a nice reading and his reading for the psalms had a
passion that would take the hearts of the listeners away and attract
them without their choice and their souls would be affected, I imagine
it as if the legs of the listeners stopped and their hands stopped doing
their jobs and the senses and all the feelings are attracted to what the
ear is listening to of the melodies of David and his passion to be for
his Lord and how he is feeling safe under the protection of his Lord and
how he is in love with his Lord as if his mind is lost for his Lord when
he speaks to Him seeking His satisfaction and afraid of His punishment
and eager for His paradise and its luxuries and whatever the Giver did
make in it for His faith followers who are faithful and eager for His
gifts. In the Zabur there are the sermons and the tidings about what
happened and what will be happening, and in them there is the
sanctifications and the praises for God and humiliations before Him and
before His might and power. The Zabur is the psalms and it is made of
one hundred and fifty psalms.  
About this matter, there are some opinions for people of the scriptures
(Jews,Christians) and others that are not true at all because such
opinions oppose the place of prophecy and its holiness, so there is no
infallibility except for him who did God made him infallible and the
guidance is by God and no power except by Him, the Exalted. As
attributed to Ibn Abi-Al-Hadeed he said that David was given the nice
voice and the nice reading which made the birds fall down for him on his
praying niche and the beasts would hear him and get along among the
people without fearing them because of his nice voice, and in a speech
for the prince of believers (PUH) in Al-Nahj \[a book's name\]: if you
desired I shall make a third for David, the owner of the psalms and the
reader of paradise, for he used to work with the palm leaves with his
hands and then say to his companions: who would be able to sell it and
eat the bread of barley out of its price. They say that David divided
the times of day and night for his family so that no hour passed by
unless one of his children is in prayer, so that God did say: Give
thanks, O House of David!(Saba':13). It is mentioned that the power of
David made him able to take a sheep from his cattle that would be
captured by a lion, out of the lion's mouth by his bare hands, and it is
mentioned that he was a short man with not so much hair, this is what
was mentioned in Safinat Al-Bihâr for Al-Muhaddiþ Al-Qummi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Climbing Into The Champer and Straying of Sheeps Into The
Farm](dav02.md)
