[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dav02)  [Next](dav04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some of What Was Inspired to David (PUH) and Some of What Was Copied
From His Sermons

Al-Mas\`udi mentioned, as we pointed out before, that God revealed on
David (PUH) the Psalms in Hebrew and composed of one hundred and fifty
chapters and it was made of three thirds, and in contained one third
about Nebuchadnezzar and what he will do with the Israelites and about
his future, and another third is about what they will face from their
enemies, and the last third contained sermons and guidance with
attraction and warnings, no commands nor forbids, and as mentioned by
\`Ali ben Tâwoos in the book of Sa\`d Al-Su\`ud that he saw in the
psalms in the third chapter what meant like: O David I made you a leader
on earth and Jesus will be taken as a god instead of Me for the power I
shall give to him and I made him resurrect the dead by My own
permission, O David who did come to Me and sent him away? Who did repent
in front of Me and banished him away? Why don't you all sanctify God and
He is the One who shaped you? Why don't you banish the sins from your
hearts as if you will never die and as if the life is remaining for you?
Also in the chapter: O people do not neglect the after-life, O
Israelites if you thought about your ends and resurrection and
remembered the doomsday and what I had prepared for the sinners, you
would laugh a little and cried a lot, but you have forgotten death, and
you say and do not act, if you thought about the harshness of the ground
and the loneliness of the grave and its darkness your speech would be
less and your sanctifications would increase, you don't meditate in the
creation of heavens and earth and what I made in them of miracles and
warnings, and I made the birds in the skies sanctify and fly in My
properties and I am the Forgiver the Merciful, sanctification be to Him
the Creator of light...and then he mentioned a lot of what he chose from
the chapters of the Psalms that contained the examples and sermons, and
some of them is: O David, if you saw a wrong-doer that life had lifted
him up don't wish his place for he has one end of two: either I appoint
a wrong-doer more than he is so to take revenge of him or I shall make
him pay back at the doomsday, O David, if you just can see the owner of
sins how a collar made of fire is put around his neck, your mind would
be buffled and surprised, so judge yourself and be just toward people
and let life, and some of them is: woe tou you, if you just can see the
paradise and what I made for My followers of luxury then you wouldn't
have medicine for the sake of being healthy, O you who seek the
delicious foods and drinks, where are those who made crying along with
laughters? where are those who are at My worshipping places in summer
and winter? Look today at what your eyes can see, your awake had been
long while people are sleeping so enjoy today whatever you wanted for I
forgave all of you, and your good deeds did banish away My rage against
the people of earth, O David, whoever traded with Me then he is the
winner of all of the traders. Also some of them: if your sins were put
on the mountains they would knock them down, O David, by My own
Exaltation nothing is more harmful to you more than your own money and
children and nothing is dearer to your heart more than them, and also: O
Adam sons, and sons of ignorance, by My Exaltation, do not look to what
I made forbidden for you, if you just saw the end of the sins you would
make it so dirty for yourselves, and if you just saw the scentful women
and how they became cured of the excitation of habits so they are the
satisfied one and never become angry and they are the everlasting ones
and never die, and everytime they are deflowered by their owners they
become virgin again and sweeter than honey, and between the bed and
sitting place there are raging waves, wine and honey every river is
going to the other, woe to you this is the great property and the
eternal luxury and the happiest life and the everlasting joy.  
From the thirtieth chapter of the Psalms as it is mentioned by Ibn
Tâwoos: sons of Adam are captives of the dead, work for your after-life
and buy it with your current life and don't be people of joy and
ignorance, and know that whoever had a loan from Me then his trade is
completed, and who had a loan from the devil he shall be with him, why
do you compete for the life and stray away from the truth? you had pride
in your ancestors but what is the ancestry of a man made of clay? But
for Me it is the faith that counts, sanctification be to Him He who
created the light. In the fourty-seventh chapter: do you know David why
I mutated the Israelites so that I made out of them monkeys and pigs?
Because when a rich come to them with a great sin they passed that and
when a poor man comes to them with something smaller than that they take
revenge of him, I made My curse for every tyrant on earth that does not
judge the poor and the rich in one rule, you follow your ego in this
life, where to escape when you are alone with Me? How many times did I
forbid you to look at the honor of the believers but your tongues
reached the honor of people? Sanctification be to the Creator of light.
It is also mentioned that the psalms have this verse: but they were busy
with life so let them go into it and play in it until My command is
issued and I shall not waste the rewards of the faithful people.
Sanctification be to the Creator of light.  
That was some of what was assured of the sermons in the psalms and it is
some of what was mentioned by Ibn Tâwoos in his book "Sa\`ad Al-Su\`ud"
and I had left most of what he had mentioned, and God knows the truth of
things, and it has nothing that opposes what other prophets and
messangers did bring, and thanks be to God the Lord of worlds.  
it is mentioned that God said to David: love Me and make Me beloved by
My creation, so he said: O Lord, I love You, but how shall I make You
beloved to Your creation? He answered him: mention My favors to them for
if you did that they will love Me. They also say that some of what God
inspired to him: if My servant get to Me by a good deed then My paradise
I shall make for him guaranteed, and then David said: O Lord what is
that good deed? He answered: it is to make My faithful servants happy
even by a date, then David said: it is true for he who knew You never to
lose hope in You.  
As attributed to Al-Bâqir (PUH) that he said: while David was sitting
and with him there was a young man that looked miserable, and he used to
sit with him and be silent all the time, at that time the angel of death
arrived and greeted him (David) and then looked at the young man for
long time, and then David said to him: you looked at that young man? He
answered: yes, I am commanded to take out his soul after seven days in
this position, so David had a mercy for him and said to him: O young
man, do you have a wife? He answered: no I've never married, so then
David said to him: go to that person, who was a great man among the
Israelites, and say to him that David commands you to let me marry your
daughter at this night, and you take whatever you need of expenses, and
then he continued: stay with her O young man for seven days and when the
seven days are passed come to me in this position, so the young man went
along with the message of David and the great man gave him his daughter
as a wife and the young man stayed with her for seven days and came back
to David at the eighth day, so David then said to him: how did you see
what you have been in? He answered: I've never been in such a luxury as
this, and David waited so that his soul is taken, but when the time
passed on, David ordered him to leave and be with his family for seven
days and come back to him later, so the young man went away and came at
the eighth day and sat with him (David), and went away again for another
week and came back to sit with him, and then the angel of death came to
David so David asked him: didn't you tell me that you were ordered for
take the soul of this young man after seven days? He answered: yes, and
eight did pass with eight and eight, and then he continued: O David God
had mercy for him for your mercy for him so He added to his age thirty
more years.  
As attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: God inspired to David
(PUH) that the daughter of Aws is one of paradise's people so tell her
about it and tell her that she's your companion in paradise, so he went
to her and told her so, so she said: it might be a name that is similar
to mine, so he said to her: no it is but you yourself, and then she
said: O prophet of God, I don't claim you are a liar and by God I don't
know in myself whatever you mentioned, then said David: tell me about
your heart and mind, so she said: for this I can tell you about, for
every pain and every need is revealed on me I've been always patient and
I never asked God to give a relief until God Himself give a relief and
never asked for compensation and always thanked God for it, and then
said David: by this you've become to what are you now, and then Al-Sâdiq
(PUH) continued: this is the religion of God that made it for the
faithful, and this level is the highest level of satisfaction with God's
judgements, and the prince of believers (PUH) used to have a pride for
reaching this level and to its core, and he used to say: if God, the
Exalted, put me into the hell for torment I wouldn't say it is hell but
it is paradise, because He, the Exalted, is satisfied to make it for me
and my paradise is His satisfaction, so His wrath is their hell and His
satisfaction is their paradise. This level of satisfaction with His
judgements is not reached except by His faithful followers and the
chosen ones, and whoever claimed it is an arrogant and a liar and no one
can reach it except of the faithful ones that God tested their hearts
with belief: Few of My bondmen are thankful(Saba':13).  
It is mentioned and assured that once the prince of believers (PUH) said
to the prophet (PUH) at the day of Ohod \[Ohod: name of a mountain and
battle that took place near that place. The muslims won the first round
of the battle but lost because they left their locations and the
disbelievers attacked them from behind\] when the muslism did run away
from the prophet and he (\`Ali ben Abi Tâlib) remained alone striking
with his sword defending the prophet, and he then said: O prophet of God
you promised me to be a martyr and today is the day for it but what did
make me lose its joy? Then the prophet (PUH) to him: you will have it
after me when you fight against those who did not fullful their promise
and those who are unjust and those who are against religion, and also he
used to say: by God, the children of Abi Tâlib are satisfied with death
more than a child that is satisfied with the breast of his mother, and
he said to his son Al-Hasan (PUH): your father doesn't care if he looked
for death or death looked for him...etc. So, the prophet and his viceroy
and his Household and their loyality for God and their satisfaction with
God's commandments is something finished and not to be discussed, and it
is more obvious than the sun and more assured than the yesterday, may
God ends our lives with their love and loyality for them, Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mutation of Israelites](dav04)
