[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eja00)  [Next](eja02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

People of The Cave and The Inscription (Seven Sleepers of Ephesus)

God said: Or deemest thou that the People of the Cave and the
Inscription are a wonder among Our portents? When the young men fled for
refuge to the Cave and said: Our Lord! Give us mercy from Thy presence,
and shape for us right conduct in our plight(Al-Kahf:90-10), and then:
And (it is said) they tarried in their Cave three hundred years and add
nine(Al-Kahf:25). The most famous narration is that the people of the
cave were seven and the eighth was there dog and they are from a roman
city that was called Aqsus (Ephesus) and they had a good king but he
died and they got weak and differ among themselves after that, and then
a king from Persia that was called Daqyânus \[Decius, Dacius\] arrived
with one hundred thousand soldiers and invaded Ephesus and made it as a
capital for him and built a castle that got an area of a league by
league and built in that castle a court that was one thousand cubit by
one thousand cubit of area and all made of glass. The talk about that is
long and no need to mention it here for no use of it but to take what is
required for this matter, and some of what they said is that in the
castle there were four thousand golden cylinders and one thousand lamps
made of gold and connected with chains made of silver, and he made for
himself a golden bed with its legs made of silver and spotted with
jewels and to his left and right he made chairs made of gold and silver
for the scholars and the priests and the rulers and workers and also he
had servants and made them wear the silky clothes and made crowns for
them and made them stand over his head with golden columns whenever he
wanted to sit in his court, and he chose six servants as ministers for
himself and made three of them to his right and three of them to his
left and the names of them were: Tamlikhâ (Malcus), Mixelmina
(Maximian), Martoolus (Martinian), Ninonus (John?), Sârinus (Saraphim)
and Daryunus (Dionysius?), and he used to ask for their advice in most
of his matters and they were so close to him, and he made them above all
for certain characteristics that they had and no one did, and then there
is a long story about the conditions of this king with amazing and weird
matters showing how tyrant he was and how arrogant. It is told by the
prince of believers (PUH) by the way of the prophet (PUH) as been told
by the Archangel (Gabriel) (PUH) as said by God, and this narration was
told by the way of Ibn \`Abbâs and it was at the time of the first
caliphate \[first caliphate was Abu-Bakr\] when a group of jewish rabbis
came to him and asked him about the keys of heaven and what are they,
and who warned his people and it wasn't of people nor djinn, and five
things that walked upon the face of earth and weren't created in the
wombs, and some other stuff. The narrator said: the principle knocked
down his head and appointed the prince of believers, \`Ali ben Abi-Tâlib
(PUH) to answer the questions and he did answer them according to what
was mentioned in their Torah, and after each answer he did ask them:
isn't that mentioned in your Torah? and they said: yes it is as you
mentioned exactly, and one of the questions was about the people of the
cave and the inscription and about their king and their land and their
names and what were their jobs and what was their end and how it was
with them when they left their jobs and got out of their land, and the
prince of believers (PUH) answered all of that with details until they
got amazed for it was exactly as it was mentioned in their Torah, and
some of it was: and when the king looked at what God gave him, he turned
to be a tyrant and called himself a god instead of the true God, and
called for that all of his nobles so whoever obeyed him he would give
him gifts and whoever denied so he would kill him.  
He made for them in each year a festival, and while it was their
festival and the priests were on his right and the rulers to his left,
they told him that the persians are invading and the sadness got him
badly that the crown fell down from his head, and then Tamlikhâ (Malcus)
looked at him and he was one of the three men to his right and then he
said to himself: if Dacius was a god as he claims then he shouldn't be
sad and wouldn't be afraid and wouldn't eat or drink and wouldn't sleep
even, and those things are not deeds of a god, and those six ministers
used to gather everyday in a place that belongs to one of them whenever
Dacius didn't need them and at that time they were in Malcus's place
having something to eat, and he said to them: O brothers, there is
something in my heart that kept me away from drinking and eating, and
they said to him then: and what is that? he then said to them: I've
looked for long time into the sky and I asked who did build it and lift
it up high without pillars and without something to hang it with, and
who made a sun and moon to run in it and who did ornament it with stars,
and then I looked to earth and thought about it for long time and I
asked who did make it plane over the waters and who kept it with
mountains and I thought for long time about myself and asked who did
made me out of my mother's womb as a child and who did feed me and who
did make me grow, those things have another maker other than the king
Dacius. After he spoke these words, they fell down over his legs kissing
them and said: by you God had guided us so then tell us what to do? Then
Malcus got up and sell some fruit from his own garden by three thousand
coins and he put them into a bag and they went up their horses and got
out of the city, and when they were away for three miles, Malcus said to
them: O brothers, the after-life came and the ornaments of life are
gone, get off your horses and walk by your legs may God give you a
relief, so then they got off and walked for seven leagues until a
shepherd met them and they said to him: would you give us some milk or
water, and then the shepherd said to them: I have what you like, but I
see that your faces like those of kings and I think you are running away
from Dacius, and he asked many times until they made him to promise, and
they told him their story and he fell down on their legs kissing them
and he told them that he felt in his heart what they felt in his heart,
and then he got the sheeps back to their owners and he came back with a
dog following him. Then the one asking the prince of believers (PUH)
asked: O \`Ali what was the name of the dog and what was his color? Then
said the prince of believers (PUH): the dog was white with some black
spots and his name was Qatmeer, and then the men feared that the dog
would make them obvious for others by his barking and they threw stones
on him and then God made the dog speak and he said to them: let me guard
you against your enemies. Then they went along until they reached a cave
that was called Al-Waseed, and inside the cave there were some trees and
springs, so they ate from the fruit and drank some of the water and
night came over and they remained in the cave and the dog at the cave's
entry, and God then commanded the angel of death to take out their souls
and commanded some angels to flip them to the left and right, and it is
a long story and Quran mentioned in brief the main points of it.  
In general, Dacius then checked them out and asked about them and he had
been told that they escaped away, so he went after their traces until he
reached the cave and he saw them lying like dead he built the door of
the cave and blocked it and said: if I wanted to punish them more I
would be able to punish them more than what they had punished
themselves. Then they remained like that for three hundred and nine
years as it was told by Quran, and then God resurrected them and they
found the spring dry as well as the trees and they were amazed for that
and hunger overtook them, and Malcus went then to bring some food for
them and they were afraid that anyone else would be captured, so he wore
the clothes of the shepherd so that no one would identify him, and when
he reached the city he saw many things changed and saw many roads that
he didn't see before and he saw a flag that was written on it "La Ilaha
Illa Allah, 'Eesâ Rasool Allah" (No god but God, Jesus is the prophet of
God). Then he went into the city and went to a baker and asked him about
the city's name and he answered: Aqsus (Ephesus), then he asked about
the king and he answered: his name is \`Abdul-Rahmân, and then he paid
for him one coin for the bread and the man was amazed for its weight and
shape. Then they took Malcus and got him into the king's court and he
told the king about his story and that his friends are in the cave and
the people got amazed and started to kiss his hands and feet, and then
they went to the cave and before reaching it, Malcus went into the front
so that his folks won't get scared and think that their enemies reached
them, and when he told them the story they said: O Malcus, want to make
us an argument for the worlds? Then they chose that God would take their
souls and so they prayed for that and He answered their prayers and He
knocked down the entry of the cave against people, and then the faithful
king came with group of people and built a mosque (temple, church) over
that place.  
Then said the prince of believers (PUH) to the rabbi that asked: does it
coincide with what was mentioned in your Torah? and he answered: you
didn't add a letter nor neglected a letter and I testify that no other
god but God and that Muhammad is His servant and His prophet. That was
the end of the narration as it was mentioned exactly for sometimes and
by the general meaning for other times. Also, the prince of believers
(PUH) did visit them with a group of people and a group of the prophet's
folks and he did so by a command from the prophet (PUH) and he spoke to
them and they spoke to him and he asked them and they did ask him and he
told them the greets of the prophet (PUH) as it was told in some
narrations that were told by trusted scholars, and Al-Þa\`labi mentioned
that in his interpretations and he mentioned as well miracles of the
prophet (PUH) and of the prince of believers (PUH). And as attirbuted to
Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said that the people of the cave kept their faith
a secret and showed their disbelieving so their reward for showing the
disbelieving was greater than keeping the faith as a secret.  
As for the inscription, as attributed to \`Ali ben Ibrahim that they
were two boards of copper that was written on them the story of the men
and what Dacius wanted from them and how was their end. Some said that
Al-Raqeem (The Inscription) was the name of the valley that had that
cave. Some said that it was the name of the village that they went out
from. Some said that the people of Al-Raqeem (The Inscription) are those
three people  that went into a cave and it was blocked by a stone and
they were saved by saying the best of their deeds and those three are
different from the men of Dacius with the shepherd that joined them.
Quran didn't mention them but history and the narrations told by the
Household pointed out for their existance. As attributed to Al-Sâdiq
(PUH) that he said: three people went out wandering on the lands and
while they were worshipping God in a cave in a mountain, suddenly there
showed up a rock that fell down and blocked the cave, so some of them
said: O servants of God, by God nothing will save you from this unless
you mention what you did purely for the sake of God, and then everyone
of them started to mention what they did purely for the sake of God, and
when all of them said what they have, God then made a relief for them
and the rock was removed from the cave's entry by the power of their
faith, and it was another story, and thanks be to God the One who brings
success.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Owners of The Ditch](eja02)
