[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grp03)  [Next](dav00) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some Conditions of Ðul-Kifl (PUH)

As attributed to Al-Tabarsi: as for Ðul-Kifl many people differ about
him, some said that he was a faithful man and not a prophet, but he
promised a prophet that he will fast the day time and worship at night
and never be angry and work with the truth and so he did so God did
thank him for this, and others said that he is a prophet. As attributed
to \`Abdul-\`Adheem Al-Hasani that he said: I wrote to Al-Jawâd (PUH)
asking him about Ðul-Kifl, about his name and wether he is a prophet or
not? He answered: God sent one hundred and twenty four thousand
prophets, and the messangers of them are three hundred and thirteen men,
and Ðul-Kifl is one of them (PUT), and he came after Solomon ben David
(PUH), and used to judge between people as David used to do and never
been angry except for God and his name was \`Uwidâyâ (Obadiah). God
said: And make mention of Ishmael and Elisha and Dhu'l-Kifl. All are of
the chosen(Sad:48), and also God said: And (mention) Ishmael, and Idris,
and Dhu'l-Kifl. All were of the steadfast. And We brought them in unto
Our mercy. Lo! they are among the righteous(Al-Anbiyâ':85-86).  
As attributed to the prophet (PUH) when he was asked about Ðul-Kifl he
said: he was a man from Hadhramaut (Hazarmaveth) and his name was
\`Uwidâyâ ben Adrim, and when Elisha grew old he said: I want to make a
viceroy after me that works between during my life and see what shall he
do, so he gathered the people and said to them: who shall accept three
from me and I will make him a viceroy after me: to fast the daytime and
worship at night and never be angry, so then a man stood up that the
eyes of men did not like to see him even and said: me! And he was a
prophet. Then the Satan said to his followers: who shall take care of
him? Then one of them, and he was called Al-Abyadh (the white), said:  I
shall take care of him, so then the Satan said: go to him and you might
be able to make him angry, and then Al-Abyadh tried his best to make the
man angry but he could not, so then he got despaired of turning the man
into anger, so then God revealed his story to the prophet to take the
sermons out of it and to be patience for the harm that gets to him as
like the prophets did have patience as well as the messangers of the
Steadfast \[Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and later Muhammad\].  
As mentioned by Al-Þa\`labi as he mentioned by others: Ðul-Kifl was
Bishr ben Job, the prophet of adversities (PUH), and God sent him as a
prophet after his father to the lands of Romans and they believed in
him, and then God ordered him to stand up for fighting the enemy and
make his people stand up as well, but they denied that and said to him:
O Bishr, we love life and hate death, and we hate to rebel and refuse
the commandments of God as well, so if you asked God to make our lives
longer and never make us die unless we wanted to then we shall worship
Him fully and fight against His enemies, and we shall answer you and
obey you with whatever you command us with, then Bishr said to them: you
asked for something great, then he went to pray and asked God and said:
O my Lord, You ordered us to fight Your enemies and You know that I
don't owe anything but myself and that my people asked me what You know
better than me about so do not take me by the mistakes of others, and
then God inspired to him: I heard the request of your people and I gave
them what they want so they shall not die unless they want to, so be
their surety for Me, and then Bishr told them the message of God and so
he was called Ðul-Kifl \[Arabic: kafal = to assure/guarantee/to take
care of\].  
Then they reproduced and grew wider until the lands were full of them
and their lives became harder because of their numbers, so then they
asked Bishr to pray to God to let them back to their original state and
then God inspired to Bishr: did not they know that My choice for them is
better than their choice for themselves, and then God turned them back
to their original state and they died with their appointed times, and
then Al-Þa\`labi said: for this the Romans were so much in number so
that it is said that the five sixth of the world is made of Romans, and
they were called Romans because they are descendants of Roum ben Esau
ben Isaac ben Abraham (PUH), and Bishr lived in the lands of Canaan
until he died, and his age when he died was ninety five.  
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: David (PUH)](dav00)
