[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grp02)  [Next](grp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Elias (Elijah) and Alyasa\` (Elisha) (PUT)

They said a lot about the conditions of Elijah and his stories and in
summary it is that Joshua ben Nun had made a living for the Israelites
in the lands of Canaan after Moses and he divided the lands between
them, so a tribe of them went to Baalbek and spread in its land and it
is the tribe that Elijah came from, so God sent him to them, and they
had an unjust king which made his people worship an idol called Ba\`al
(Baal) and this is mentioned in God's saying: And lo! Elias was of those
sent (to warn), When he said unto his folk: Will ye not ward off (evil)
? Will ye cry unto Baal and forsake the Best of creators, Allah, your
Lord and Lord of your forefathers ? But they denied him, so they surely
will be haled forth (to the doom)..etc(Al-Sâfât:123-127), and they say
that the king had unchaste wife that he would make her in his place
whenever he is away and she judges among the people, and he had a
faithful and a believer writer that helped three hundred believers to
escape from her wrath, and there were no one on earth that were unchaste
as she was, and she got married to seven kings from the Israelites until
she gave birth for ninety children, and the king had a faithful
neighbour and one of the belivers and she killed him and tookover his
fortune and her husband was not satisfied for this as it is mentioned,
and so then God sent Elijah to them to call them back to worship God but
they disbelieved in him and banished him out but he got back to them and
called them again and warning them against the wrath of God and telling
them about the favours of God but all of that increased their tyranny so
he promised himself that the king and his wife will be doomed if they
did not repent and he told them about it, so then their wrath increased
towards him and wanted to torture and kill him but he escaped away from
them into some mountains and he stayed there for seven years eating from
the herbs of the earth.  
Then the king chose fifty men and advised them to trick Elijah and to
tell him that they believed in him and in his Lord so that he would feel
safe towards them and then they can bring him to his court to kill him,
so they went to the mountain where Elijah was and they cried: O prophet
of God, show us yourself for we believed in you, so he (Elijah) loved to
have their faith and he said then: O Lord, if they were true then allow
me to go down for them and if they were not then fire them and burn
them, and as he finished his words a fire from the sky fell upon them
and burned them, and the tidings reached the king and he got more mad,
so then he sent the faithful writer with some people to him (Elijah) and
he advised them to show the faith of the king and his wife and all his
people, and that the king forbade the people to worship the idols and
ordered them to mention the God of the Israelites, so then when the
writer reached the mountain and called for him he recognized his voice
and he got down to him and the faithful writer then said to him: that
tyrant sent me to you, and he told him everything happened in the king's
court and he warned him against their tricks and told him that they have
no goal but to kill him.  
And God inspired to him that everything comes from them is a trick to
get you, and when the faithful writer came back to the king, and the
latter was sad because of the death of his dear son, he (the king) asked
about Elijah, so he (the writer) said: I have no knowledge about it, and
because of the sadness of the king for his son he did not investinage
about it more than that. Then Elijah did pray to God to take revenge
from the wrong-doers and to hold the rains for seven years and God
answered his pray for this and their land became dry and the adversities
came hard upon them and death spread so fast among them and they knew
that it was because of the pray of Elijah. Then they gathered around him
and said to him: we are under your command, so God ordered him to answer
them so he went down to them and with him was his pupil Elisha, so they
met him and asked him for the rain and they shall believe in him and in
his words and obey his Lord if rain fell again, so when he made sure of
their faith he prayed for God and He rained them and made the earth
plant for them, so Elijah left them and they were faithful, but then the
devil tookover them and made them astray so they neglected His favours
and rebelled against His will so God then made an enemy for them to
fight against them and win against them and killed them and also their
king and his wife. It is mentioned that Elijah was ordered by God to
give his advices and will to Elisha and so he did and he advised him
with what God commanded and ordered him with what God commanded and
warned him against what God forbade and God planted the feathers for
Elijah and made him wear the garments of light and raised him to
heavens.  
It is mentioned that Elijah threw his garment from the air upon Elisha
and God made him a prophet upon the Israelites and inspired to him and
made him victorious, so he was among the Israelites a holy person that
guides them to the truth. People differed about Elijah, some said he is
Al-Khidhr (PUH), and some said he is Edris (Enoch), and others said he
is one of the Israelites that God sent him to them as a prophet and he
is a descendant of Aaron ben Amram and the cousin of Elisha, so he is
Elias (Elijah) ben Yâseen ben Nit-hâsâ (Phinehas) ben Eli\`ezer
(Eleazar) ben Aaron ben Amram \[seems the name Yâseen had been
sandwiched for I did not find any trace of a complete ancestry for
Elijah in Torah\].  
As for Elisha, he is Alyasa\` (Elisha) ben Akhtub (Shaphat) \[supposedly
Akhtub is the same as Shaphat, the name mentioned in Torah as the father
of Elisha\], and he is the cousin of Elijah as he is famous for mostly,
and Elijah made him a viceroy over the Israelites when God raised him
and he (Elisha) is the pupil of Elijah as it is mentioned in the books
of biographies, and God prophesized him after him (Elijah) and inspired
to him. In a speech for Al-Ridhâ (PUH) that was to disaprove against the
prelate of the christians about Elisha when he said: Elisha did as Jesus
did, he walked on water surface and resurrected the dead people by the
permission of God and cured the dimsighted and the leper by the
permission of God, but his nation did not take him as a god instead of
the Lord, as it is mentioned in Safinat Al-Bihâr by Al-Muhaddiþ
Al-Qummi. As it is reported by Ibn \`Abbâs and Muhammad ben Is-hâq and
others, they said: God sent Elijah after Ezekiel after many great events
among the Israelites, and Joshua ben Nun had invaded the lands of Canaan
and the Israelites ruled over and he had divided the lands among them,
and so one tribe went to Baalbek and it is the tribe of ELijah and God
sent him as a prophet to his people. Then he (Elijah) went to the
wilderness and made Elisha a viceroy over the Israelites, and God then
raised him up and cut off his lust for food and drink \[meaning he does
not get hungry nor thursty\] and He made feathers as his garments so he
turned to be a human angel from earth and heavens. What is understood
from the speeches of the Household (PUT) is that Elijah did not die and
still living as Al-Khidhr.  
They say that ELijah is the man of lands (deserts) and Al-Khidhr is the
man of islands and they both gather together in the day of \`Arafah \[in
the season of pilgrimage in the 12th month in islamic calendar\] of
every year in \`Arafât \[a mountain name in Mecca\], and it is mentioned
that Elijah had several meetings with the Imams from the Household of
Muhammad (PUT) in Safâ \[Safâ and Marwâ, two hills or mountains that
people cross between them seven times at pilgrimage time to reflect how
Hagar crossed them before looking for water for her son Ishmael (PUH)\].
There are long narrations and lot of them, and one of them is that
Elijah asked Al-Sâdiq (PUH) lot of questions from the wisdom of the
apparent and the disapparent of things, and the Imam (Al-Sâdiq PUH) was
answering every question, and when his questions became so much, the
Imam (PUH) laughed or smiled for the quantity of questions, and the Imam
kept on explaining his answers for the questions, and then ELijah said:
I did not ask about something and I have no knowledge about it, but I
liked this talk to be remembered and known for your followers and to
make them strong. He asked him about the secrets of Imamism and
prophecy, and about the Imam being inspired by God and taught by the
prophet and so on. It is reporterd by Anas ben Mâlik: the prophet (PUH)
heard a voice from the top of a mountain that was saying: O Lord make me
of the forgiven nation, so the prophet went to the direction of the
voice and he found there an old man that was three hundred cubits tall,
and when he saw the prophet (PUH) he hugged him and said: I eat every
year for once and this is the time for it, and then a table came down
from heaven and they ate together, and hewas Elijah (PUH). It is
mentioned that a group of people went to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) and found him
speaking a language other than Arabic and crying as well, so when they
heard him they wondered about what they saw and heard, so they asked him
about it and he (PUH) said: yes, I remembered ELijah and he was one of
the best worshippers among the Israelites so I said as he used to say in
his prostration, then he said it in Syriac and by God we did not see any
prelate nor a priest that can speak it better than him, and then he
interpreted what he said in Arabic, so he said: he (Elijah) used to say
in his prostration: would You punish me with Your hell and my feelings
were thursty for You? Would you punish me and I put my face into the
sand for You? Would You punish me and I avoided sins for You? Would You
punish me and I was awake all my nights for You? ..etc, and God then
inspired to him (Elijah): raise your head up for I will not punish you
for I fullfil the promises that I give. We pointed out that the
narrations about Elijah are a lot, so let us have enough with this much
and it is enough to know him and to take the sermons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Some Conditions of Ðul-Kifl (PUH)](grp04)
