[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hud01)  [Next](hud03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Anti-Critiscism or Imagination

Some people may don't like what we are mentioning here even though with
such clues, because in his point of view they were not important matters
in a time like ours with lot of corruption in it for the abundance of
parties and bad people and the ignorance of religion, or even for the
disbelieving in it and mocking at the people of faith and the total
dedication of souls to this life and its beauty and building up even
though by the name of religion. For all of that it is hard for them to
bear hearing such matters and writing it down or even to look at it.
Notice. But we say to him that the speech that is with people of faith
is right even though their greed to increase their faith had become
lesser for they knew what did the callers for God bear of troubles, and
what the prophets of God and His viceroys did and what hurtings did they
face along with troubles for calling back to God and for the saving of
humanity and for the happiness of the creation, and awakening the
ignorants and stopping the tyrants.  
Then the believer's faith is never complete without admitting the
prophecy of every prophet and messenger sent from God to His creation
even though he knows a little about them, and the best thing to be said
in this location that they are  mentioned (PUT) in dear Quran, and
emphasized on mentioning them many times and explained their stories and
their conditions and all of that was just to think about it as it is
mentioned in these holy phrases, so the believer think about its sermons
and warns by its warnings and avoid the things that bring the torments
and revenge and go along to the things that bring dignity to the
believers in this life and the after-life, so explaining such matters
going deep inside them is only for this purpose, and in fact it is just
an explanation for the holy phrases of God and to interpret what the
Holy Book symbolized.  
With this wind we've become to mention before God bombards mountains and
make it as a plain land without any curves in it or high places. It is
said that it is called Al-\`Aqeem (the wind) \[Arabic: \`Aqeem =
barren\] because it was barren with torment and without any mercy, like
when men and women when they become barren with no children, so it is
said: "Rajol \`Aqeem" (Barren man) and Imra'ah \`Aqeem (Barren woman),
so barrenness is and adjective that describes males and females. And it
is said: when the people of Hud (PUH) became tyrants and they are A'ad
and his people and disbelieved and nothing works with them of sermons or
the warnings of the prophet of God, Hud, God sent to them Al-\`Aqeem
wind (barren wind) so it grinded their castles and forts and cities
until all became like sands, and it came over them for continuous seven
nights and eight days, and you would see the people in them (the cities)
as if they were trunks of palm trees, and it used to lift men and women
up high and throw them back to fall on their heads, so the wind used to
pick up men and women from down their feet and lift them up to the sky
and destroy them, and it worked on mountains as well as it grinded their
homes until they became like soft sand, and it is the one called
Al-Ahqâf (and there is a chapter called for its name and it is the
chapter of Al-Ahqâf), and we've came to mention that they used to cut of
pillars from the mountains as tall as the mountain itself then they move
it and make a stand of it and build castles upon it, and maybe for this
reason it was called "Ðât Al-\`Imâd" \[Arabic: \`Imâd = pillars\] that
nothing was created like it on the lands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: And Here Is An Amazing Story](hud03)
