[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](noa03)  [Next](hud01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hud (PUH)

He is the prophet that was sent to 'Âd ben 'Ewas ben Eram ben Sâm ben
Nuh \[i.e.ben Shem ben Noah\] as it was reported, and Hud (PUH) is the
son of 'Abdullah ben Rabâh ben Khalood ben 'Âd ben 'Ewas ben Eram ben
Sâm ben Nuh (PUH), as mentioned in Safeenat Al-Bihâr \[book's name\] for
Al-Muhaddiþ Al-Qommi, and it is the same as that mentioned in Qisas
Al-Anbiyâ' \[stories of prophets\] for 'Abdul-Wahâb Al-Najjâr. It is
reported also that Hud is the son of Shâlikh ben Arfakhshd ben Shem ben
Noah (PUH), so the number of fathers between the messenger and his
nation is equal so between them and Shem only two and no more, and for
the first report about the fathers of Hud (PUH) there is more than four
fathers obviously. God the Exalted did say: And unto (the tribe of) A'ad
(We sent) their brother, Hud. He said: O my people! Serve Allah. Ye have
no other God save Him. Will ye not ward off (evil) ?(Al-A\`râf:65), and
the meaning, and God knows better, that We sent to 'Âd their brother
Hud, and it is a joining for what was before from the story of Noah
(PUH) by God's saying: We sent Noah (of old) unto his people, and he
said: O my people! Serve Allah. Ye have no other God save Him. Lo! I
fear for you the retribution of an Awful Day(Al-A\`râf:59), and God did
make them the inhabitants of earth after the people of Noah (PUH), and
God did provide them with large bodies, and it was mentioned that one of
them could reach the tallness of seventy to one hundred cubits, and as
reported from Abi Ja\`far Al-Sâdiq (PUH): they were like long palm
trees, one of them can hit the mountain and break a piece of it. And it
was said: as a sign of their might, one man of them can knock of rocks
by his hand. and they used to worship idols that they called gods, and
for this Hud (PUH) said to them: Would ye wrangle with me over names
which ye have named, ye and your fathers, for which no warrant from
Allah hath been revealed?(Al-A'râf:71). They are the people that God
destroyed by the fatal wind, and they used to say to Hud (PUH) when he
used to calls them to worship God and worship no other god with Him: We
think that you've been under the spell of our gods for calling them with
bad names.  
When Hud (PUH) called them to God and to His religion and even
exaggerated in his sermons and guiding them and warned them against the
Will of the Almighty and His punishment in this life and the after-life,
all of that, did not bring anything with them, then God saved the rains
from them until aridity became over them so that they can be aware of
what happened to them and get back to obey God, but that did nothing to
them and their ego increased, and in a speech reported to Al-Sajjâd
(PUH) when someone told him (PUH) by the purpose of criticism that your
grandfather \[the prophet Muhammad PUH\] said: our brothers wronged us
and we fought them for their wrong, so he (PUH) said in his answer: woe
to you, don't you read the Quran? And unto (the tribe of) A'ad (We sent)
their brother, Hud(Al-A'râf:65), And unto Midian (We sent) their
brother, Shu'eyb(Al-A'râf:85), And to (the tribe of) Thamud (We sent)
their brother Salih(Al-A'râf:73), so they are like them, and they were
brothers for them in the tribe and not in religion, and in another
reported speech he said to them: So God destroyed A'ad and saved Hud,
and destroyed Thamud and saved Salih..etc.  
And in Al-Kâfi \[a book's name\] it is reported from Al-Bâqir (PUH),
that Noah brought tidings for Shem in advance for the coming of Hud and
said to him: God will send a prophet called Hud, and he will call his
people to God but they will deny him and He will destroy them with the
wind, so whoever reaches his days let him believe in him and follow him,
and there were prophets between both of them. And in Al-Ikmâl \[a book's
name\] as reported from Al-Sâdiq (PUH) it is that when Noah was about to
die he called his followers and said to them: you have to know that
after my death there will be an absence in which tyrants will appear,
and God will save you by a viceroy from my descendants called Hud, he
has respect and calm look-likes, he looks like me in shape and manner,
and from them also (PUT) \[meaning the Household members PUT\]: when Hud
was sent, he was a descendant of Shem (PUH) and the others said who is
more stronger than we are so they were destroyed by the wind, and Hud
foretold his people about Sâlih (PUH) and advised them to follow him,
and as mentioned from Al-Bâqir (PUH) that prophets were sent in special
and general prophecy, and Hud was sent in a special prophecy to A'ad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Land of A'ad and Their Crafts](hud01)
