[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](abr11)  [Next](lot00.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<div style="text-align: center;">

<span style="font-family: times new roman;">Isaac ben Abraham (PUT)  
</span>  

<div style="text-align: left;">

&lt;&gt;<span class="small"><span
style="font-family: times new roman;">His mother is Sarah the daughter
of Bethuel ben Nahor which is by turn the brother of Terah and the uncle
of Abraham (PUH), so she is the daughter of the cousin of Abraham and
also his maternal cousin, as it was mentioned before, and Isaac was born
after his brother Ishmael by five years, and this is the most famous for
us, and in Torah it is mentioned that he was born and Ishmael was
fourteen years old, and as Al-Mas\`udi mentioned, that Ishmael was born
and Abraham was eighty six years old or eighty seven and Isaac was born
while he was one hundred and twenty years old, and the angels brought
the happy tidings to Abraham about his son Isaac, and Sarah heard the
tidings and laughed for it was weird for her to have children from an
old man and an old barren woman, so the angels said to her: Do you
wonder from the commandments of God? In other phrases God said:
</span></span><span id="037_112"><span
style="font-family: times new roman;">And we gave him tidings of the
birth of Isaac, a prophet of the righteous(Al-Sâffât:112). Also God
said: </span></span><span id="037_113">And We blessed him and Isaac. And
of their seed are some who do good, and some who plainly wrong
themselves(Al-Sâffât:113), and:</span> <span id="019_049">We gave him
Isaac and Jacob. Each of them We made a prophet.</span> <span
id="019_050">And we gave them of Our mercy, and assigned to them a high
and true renown</span><span id="019_049">(Maryam:49-50). God also
said:</span> <span id="051_028">and gave him tidings of (the birth of) a
wise son.</span> <span id="051_029">Then his wife came forward, making
moan, and smote her face, and cried: A barren old
woman!(Al-Ðariyat:28-29).</span>&lt;/&gt;  
&lt;&gt;<span id="051_029">Apparently, in quran there was nothing about
Isaac much more than tidigins brought about him, and about him being a
prophet. Yes, and we've mentioned befoer that in Torah and the Bible,
the one that was to be slained was Isaac and not Ishmael, and we've
mentioned a lot of details about this in the previous section when we
talked about the conditions of Abraham (PUH) and explained what is true
and explained that the one that was to be slained was Ishmael and not
Isaac. It is mentioned that Isaac (PUH) lived for one hundred and eighty
years and was buried in Jirun (Hebron), and it is the city of
Al-Khaleel, in the cave of Al-Makfeelah (Machpelah). Isaac got married
after his father as in some tales by a woman called Youmhâ' the daughter
of Bethuel, and she born him Al-\`Ays (Esau) and Jacob as twins, but
Esau came first then followed by Jacob, and when they were born Isaac
was sixty years old and went blind, this is what was mentioned. He
prayed for his son Jacob to have the leadership of his people and the
prophecy in his descendants, and prayed for his son Esau to get the
kingdom and power and in his descendants as well. He was one hundred and
righty five years old when he died and was buried with his father and
the places for their toms is famous and they are placed almost like
eighteen miles away from Jerusalem in a mosque there called the mosque
of Abraham \[Arabic: Masjid Ibrâhim\], and this is all mentioned in
Muruj Al-Ðahab for Al-Mas\`udi.</span>&lt;/&gt;  
&lt;&gt;<span id="051_029"></span>&lt;/&gt;  

</div>

<div style="text-align: left;">

&lt;&gt;<span id="051_029">What is mentioned in Torah about his
marriage, in summary, is that when Abraham became old and were not able
to work anymore, he commanded his servant, Elazar, and told him to work
on the marriage of his son Isaac and pick for him a wife from his own
tribe and lands in Iraq, and told him to be aware from letting him get
married to a daughter of the Canaanites that were in Palestine, and told
him to never let Isaac get back again to the land that went out from
which is Iraq, and never let him go back there even if his wife denied
coming with him to his lands in Palestine. Then Elazar got ready for the
travel and took with him everything applicable for the wife and her
family, and went to Iraq, to the lands of the family. When he reached
that land he stopped his camels before the town which is Padan-Aram and
it is the town in which Abraham used to live, and his father there was a
carpenter, as it is mentioned in the book of Barnaba, and it is the town
in which his tribe lives with his relatives and there lives the desired
man which is Nahor ben Terah, the brother of Abraham, but he was dead at
that time, and none are left there except his children and their leader
was Bethuel ben Nahor, and when Elazar stopped his camels before the
city and wanted to get in, he saw a beautiful girl getting out of the
city and carrying a jar, so Elazar said to her: get me some water, and
so she did and welcomed him, then he asked about her family and he knew
she is the daughter of Bethuel ben Nahor, so then when he knew her and
her family he became so happy about it and asked about her father and
wether he has a place for hospitality, and she said yes, then he
presented himself as the servant of Abraham and he wants to take a wife
for Isaac, and she is the one desired for this and no one else, then he
made her wore some jewels and golden bracelets and she walked in front
of him telling her family about the happy tidings and the dear guest
from her uncle Abraham, and the girl's name was Refqah (Rebekah). When
the girl told her family about the messenger from Abraham their uncle
and about his living place, immediately Lâbân ben Bethuel (Laban) went
to his place and welcomed him and came with him to his own place and
they were all happy for the visit of the messenger of Abraham, their
uncle. Then after he stayed for a while with them he told them why he is
here and he wants Rebekah for the son of his master and so they answered
him with what he desires, then Elazar, Abraham's messenger, gave her
vessels made of gold and silver with some clothes and ornaments, and
also gave to her brother Laban ben Bethuel and to her mother and
destributed the rest over her family, and after the rest he asked them
to get her prepared, so they answered his request and made her prepared
for such an occasion, and Rebekah then agreed for his request to leave
in a hurry, and so he picked her to the lands of his master, and when
they arrived and Isaac looked at her, he got so happy for her and she
had been a joy for him after the death of his mother Sarah.  
Then Rebekah gave birth to a twin, and they are \`Eesu (Esau) and
Ya\`qoob (Jacob), and she born first Esau then Jacob. We say, we can
agree on both stories, this and the one before, as one story. The
difference are in the names of \`Eesu and Al-\`Ays and that might be
because of expressing in Arabic and Hebrew, and also in wether the
marriage was during the life of Abraham or after his death, and in the
different names of the wife of Isaac, Youmhâ' \[could not trace this
name back to any source\] and Rebekah, and might be that one is a name
and the other is a title, but the story in Torah is more believable for
what it contains and it is more closer to reality, and only God knows.  
As attributed to Al-Râawandi in his tales, there is one tale that has a
connection somehow with out subject, and that is there was at the time
of Abraham (PUH) a man called Mâriyyah ben Aws, and he was six hundred
and sixty years old and he used to live in a place like a peninsula
surrounded by waters and swamps, and he used to go out for people once
every three years and live in the desert, and he had a mosque and he
used to pray to God there and guide people to the religion of God and
teach them the goodness, so one day he went out to the desert as he used
to do and he saw a cattle and as if they had fat upon them, and he was
amazed for that, and saw a young man with it and his face was like the
face of the moon, so he asked him about the cattle and about their
owner, so he answered: they are for Abraham, then he asked him about
himself and he answered: I am his son Isaac. Then Mâriyyah said for
himself: O Lord let me see your friend Abraham before I die. Isaac then
told his father Abraham about what happened between him and Mâriyyah ben
Aws and about his conditions, then after three years he went out as he
used to be and found a man in that place that he never saw before and
the man asked him about his conditions and his place, so Mâriyyah ben
Aws answered him and described his place for him, then the man showed
the passion for staying with Mâriyyah to look at his way of living and
Mâriyyah answered him that he can't pass over to his place, so then the
man asked: why? have you not a bridge? He said: No, but I walk over
water, so the main said: maybe the One that exploited water for you will
exploit the water for me as well, so then they walked together until
they reached the water, then Mâriyyah said: By the name of God, and he
passed over the water surface, then the man said: By the name of God,
and passed over the water surface, then Mâriyyah looked at him while
walking and he was amazed, then they reached the residence of Mâriyyah
and the man stayed with him for three days, and Mâriyyah used to live on
fruit and dries out some of them for winter season. So when the man
wanted to leave him he (Mâriyyah) asked him about his name, so the man
said: I am Abraham, the friend of God, and Mâriyyah before that used to
pray to God to see His friend, so when he heard his name and knew who he
is, he went to him and hugged him adn thanked God for answering his
prays, and there are other long matters that no need to mention here and
what we've mentioned is enough for now and God knows His servants and
creations, and He knows everything.  
</span>&lt;/&gt;

</div>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Prophet Lot (PUH)](lot00.md)
