[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jes06)  [Next](jes08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Injeel (Gospel) is A Heavenly Revealed Book

It is the one that was revealed from God on the heart of His servant
Jesus the son of Mary (PUH) as He revealed the Torah on Moses ben Amram
before him and Quran on Muhammad the chosen (PUH) after him. In some
bibles it is mentioned that the Messiah, Jesus the son of Mary, was
prophecised when he became thirty years old and some historians along
with some Quran interpreters agreed on that.  
The Gospel is a book that contained guidance and light and called the
Israelites to get back to God and worship Him, and prophecised for them
about future events and brought to them the good tidings of the
closeness of the time of the prophet (PUH) that God promised the
Israelites that He will send him to the creations with a new set of laws
and he will be like Moses ben Amram, an owner of a separate set of laws
and regulations, and in it (the Gospel) there are describtions for him
and for his followers. Now, where is the Gospel of the Messiah that was
mentioned in Quran: He hath revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the Scripture
with truth, confirming that which was (revealed) before it, even as He
revealed the Torah and the Gospel(Al-\`Imrân:3), and in the chapter of
Al-Mâ'idah: And We caused Jesus, son of Mary, to follow in their
footsteps, confirming that which was (revealed) before him in the Torah,
and We bestowed on him the Gospel wherein is guidance and a light,
confirming that which was (revealed) before it in the Torah - a guidance
and an admonition unto those who ward off (evil). Let the People of the
Gospel judge by that which Allah hath revealed therein. Whoso judgeth
not by that which Allah hath revealed: such are
evil-livers(Al-Mâ'idah:46-47), and God said: If they had observed the
Torah and the Gospel and that which was revealed unto them from their
Lord, they would surely have been nourished from above them and from
beneath their feet. Among them there are people who are moderate, but
many of them are of evil conduct(Al-Mâ'idah:66), Say O People of the
Scripture! Ye have naught (of guidance) till ye observe the Torah and
the Gospel and that which was revealed unto you from your
Lord(Al-Mâ'idah:68), and God said: Those who follow the messenger, the
Prophet who can neither read nor write, whom they will find described in
the Torah and the Gospel (which are) with them(Al-A\`râf:157), and God
said: Such is their likeness in the Torah and their likeness in the
Gospel - like as sown corn that sendeth forth its shoot and
strengtheneth it and riseth firm upon its stalk(Al-Fat-h:29), and in the
chapter of Al-Hadeed: Then We caused Our messengers to follow in their
footsteps; and We caused Jesus, son of Mary, to follow, and gave him the
Gospel..etc(Al-Hadeed:27), there are many holy phrases in the chapters
of the Quran that tell that the Gospel is only one heavenly revealed
book and no more.  
Is it there then, the Gospel that the Messiah brought and gave it to his
followers and ordered them to spread it? Yes there are the Gospels of
Mattâ (Matthew) and Murqus (Mark) and Luqâ (Luke) and Yohannâ (John) and
these are the gospels that are taken by the chrisitans in the Church and
they work by them, and from them some of the sermons that was spoken by
the Messiah reached the world, and these four gospels are selected from
a large number of other gospels and they were chosen because most of the
bishops agreed on them, and they tell his (the Messiah) stories and his
speeches and sermons and his miracles that God showed upon his hands,
and they include also advices for people to worship the One God and to
obey His commandments and to the goodness of treatment among the people
and to be humble and far away from pride and wrong, and also they order
to do the best for the goodness and not to chase life and its
ornamentations and to consider oneself as a guest or a passerby, and the
traveller don't build castles, and he who gave himself to worship God
how come shouldn't he depend on God and not satisfied with God and how
come he shall fight God and complain about Him to His creations? And he
should not spend his life thinking of his food and drink and his home
and clothes while he claims that God is the One that takes care of him,
and this is an example of what the Gospel contains of manners and
morals, and it is apparent that nothing of it was written at the time of
the Messiah but they were all written after him, and done by some of his
followers and their followers as well, and they wrote many stories and
whoever write one book he would call it a gospel until there were about
one hundred gospels as some said.  
The Church chose of them what doesn't oppose its desires and made it
legal and closed its eyes in front of the differences among them, and
they said that all the gospels have no discrete chain (of attributers)
and there is no single one found with the handwriting of its own author,
look at what was written by Rahmatullah Al-Hindi about the four gospels
in the book of Izhâr Al-Haq:

**The gospel that is attributed to Matthew now is the first of the
gospels and the oldest one for them (christians), it was not of his work
but even what he wrote has no traces now because as people of wisdom
know, it was written in Hebrew and not in Arabic and it was lost and the
one that is translated now is weakly attributed back to him, and the
name of the translator was not known and it is said that Jerome which is
one of their (christians) most virtuous men of old, and they mentioned
in the book of Al-Fâriq Bayn Al-Makhlooq W'Al-Khâliq \[The difference
between the created and the Creator\], some matters related to this
subject and assure what we've mentioned with clues that proves we are
right about what we've just mentioned, check back the book of the Tales
of the Prophets for \`Abdul-Wahâb Al-Najjâr page 400, the third
edition.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gospel of Mark](jes08)
