[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jes03)  [Next](jes05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some Additions of Narrations About The Messiah, Jesus (PUH)

As attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said that Jesus the son of Mary
(PUH) climbed a mountain in the lands of Canaan called Arihâ (Jericho)
and the Satan came to him in the shape of the king of Palestine and he
said to him: O Spirot of God, you resurrected the dead and cured the
blind and the leper, then let yourself down from this mountain, and then
Jesus said to him: all of that was by a permission of God and by His
commandments and that thing He didn't command me to do, and in another
narration it is mentioned that Satan said: don't you claim that you
resurrect the dead? Jesus answered: yes, he said then: then let youself
down from that wall, and the answer was as mentioned before, and the
Satan said: can your Lord get the earth into an egg and the egg as it is
and the earth as it is? He (PUH) answered: God is not described with any
disability and what you said is not to be because it is impossible by
itself because it is a disability in what is possible but not a
disability in the abilities of God.  
As attributed to Al-Bâqir (PUH): Satan met with Jesus the son of Mary
(PUH) and Jesus said to him: did your tricks get some of me? Then Satan
said: when your grandmother gave birth to your mother she said: Lord it
is a female and a male is not like a female and I sake refuge in you for
her offsprings and descendants against the Satan, and so I couldn't harm
you.  
It is mentioned that Al-Ridhâ (PUH) was asked about the reason that
Al-Hawariyoon (The Apostles) were called by this name, and he (PUH)
said: for people they were called like this because they used to clean
up the clothes from dirts, and for us they are called like this because
they are sincere in themselves and used to relief others from the dirts
of their sins by sermons. Then he was asked why Nasârâ (Christians,
Nazarethans) were called by this name? He answered: because they are
from a village called Al-Nâsirah (Nazareth) in the lands of Canaan and
there settled Mary and Jesus after coming back from Egypt.  
It is mentioned that Jesus once said: O Apostles, I have a request would
you fullfil it for me? They said to him: what is your request O Spirit
of God? He said to them: to let me wash your feet, they said then: we
are the ones that supposed to wash them for you, he said to them: No,
this is my request to you. Then he went and washed their feet, and then
he said to them: I am the one to be served by those who have the wisdom,
and I've been humble to you so that you become humble to the people
after me as I am humble to you, and then said Jesus: by being humble,
the wisdom grows but not by ego, and so the grass grows in the plains
but it doesn't grow in mountains.  
In some narrations it is mentioned that Al-Sâdiq (PUH) was asked: why
the folks of Jesus were able to walk on water but the folks of Muhammad
couldn't do so? He (PUH) then answered: the folks of Jesus had their
enough of living and made life so cheap and had their enough in the
grass of the ground, and those, the folks of Muhammad (PUH) were
troubled by the living and the trade. It is mentioned by them (the
Household) (PUT) that the first of nations were three that did not
disbelieve in God for one glance of time: \`Ali ben Abi-Tâlib, the
prince of believers (PUH), and Habeeb Al-Najjâr the believer of Ya Sin
\[please check the chapter of Ya Sin (13-27)\] and the believer of the
family of the pharaoh, Ezekiel \[please check the chapter of Moses\],
and \`Ali ben Abi-Tâlib (PUH) is their best. Jesus the son of Mary had
many strange and amazing tidings that have nothing alike, and one of
those is that once upon a time he passed by a village and he settled as
a guest for an old woman and she had no one with her except of one son
that his father died and was an orphan, and she was so poor and her son
loved the daughter of the king because he saw her in her castle and he
loved her and her love remained in his heart and he turned so dispaired,
so Jesus noticed him and knew that he was so sad and he asked him about
his sadness but he denied to give an answer, but he insisted and said to
him: tell me about your story maybe the cure is with me, and in brief he
told him his story and how despaired he is.  
What happened then is that Jesus sent the young man to the king to ask
to marry his daughter and when he arrived they blocked his way and
mocked at him and were amazed of his request, but he didn't go away
until they let him in to the king and he asked to marry his daughter ,
and then the king said as to mock at him: I shall not give you my
daughter until you bring that much of pearsl and that much of jewels and
that much of rubies, and he described what was not in his own treasury
neither it was in the reasuries of other kings, and then the young man
said: I shall go now and bring you the answer, and when he went back to
Jesus (PUH) and told him of what happened, Jesus took him and went with
him to a deserted place full of stones and rocks and he prayed to God
and all turned to what the king asked for, so the young man took what
the king asked and went to him, and it was even more better than what
the king asked for, and when he arrived to the king he got amazed with
the rest of the people sitting in his court, and then the king said:
this is not enough, and then the young man turned back to Jesus and told
him what happened, and Jesus said: go to the place and take what you
want and go to him, and when he got back to the king with the double of
the first request, he got more amazed and even so his ministers and the
king said then: this young man has a weird affair, and then the king
remained with the young man alone and asked about his story, and he told
him all the story that happened with Jesus the son of Mary (PUH) and how
he loved his daughter, and the king knew that the guest was Jesus the
son of Mary (PUH) and that was his own deed and everything the young man
came up with was from him and he wants to complete the story up to the
young man, and then the king said to the young man: tell the guest to
come up to me and let my daughter marry you, and so Jesus came up and
married the daughter to the young man and the king sent luxurious
clothes to the young man and he wore them and married the daughter at
that night, and when it was the morning, the king asked to bring the
young man and he talked to him and found out that he was a wiseman and
the king had no other son but only this daughter and so the king made
him his successor and he ordered everyone to obey him and on the second
night the king died and the young man turned to a king and everyone
obeyed him, and then Jesus came in the third day to say farewell to him
before travelling out of his old mother's house, and then the young man
said: O wiseman, you have many great favors upon me that I can't thank
for even single one of them, but yesterday a matter passed by my mind
and if you didn't answer me about it then everything I had by now is
useless to me, he (Jesus) said: and what is that? The young man said:
you were able to move me from that low grade to this high position in
just two days so why don't you do the same for yourself and I can see
you in those clothes and in such situation? And he (Jesus) then answered
with something that didn't convince him, and then he insisted and he
swore that he shall not let him go until he knows the truth from him,
and then Jesus (PUH) said: he who knows God and how much are His favors
and His rewards and he who can see how this life will be over and how
cheap it is shall not be chasing such mortal kingdom and we have by the
closeness to Him and by the knowledgement of Him a spirituality, that
beside it we count those mortal lusts as nothing beside it, and when he
(Jesus) told him about the life and its badness and the after-life and
its rewards, the young man then said: then I have another matter shall
be against you, why did you choose what is better for yourself and made
me go along with such troubles? Then Jesus (PUH) said to him: I chose
that for you to test your mind and your wisdom and to make the reward
for you to leave all of those things that are made easy for you and so
you shall be a clue by yourself against others, and when the young man
heard his answer and saw the truth, he left the kingdom and wore his old
clothes and followed Jesus the son of Mary (PUH), so think about it O
people of wisdom.  
It is narrated by Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that once upon a time Jesus the son of
Mary (PUH) went to some destination with three men and he passed by
three golden adobes along the road, and Jesus then said to his
companions: this is the one that kills people, and he passed it and not
so far away one of his companions said: I need to do something, and he
departed and then the other two did the same and left Jesus walking
alone, and he knew what they wanted, and then the three met over the
three adobes, and then the two said to one of them: buy us some food
from the near by village, and he went to buy some food and he put some
poison in it to kill them so that they won't share the gold with him,
and the two said that they shall kill him when he comes back, and when
he got back they killed him and then they had their lunch and died, and
then Jesus came back to them and they are dead and he resurrected them
by the permission of God, and then said to them: didn't I tell you that
this is the one that kills people? And as attributed to Al-Bâqir (PUH)
that he said: when Jesus was born, he was like two months old in one
day, and when he turned to be seven months old, his mother took him to a
teacher and made him sit at his place, and the teacher said to him: say
by the name of God the most beneficent the most Merciful, and so did
Jesus say, and then the teacher said: say Abjad Hawaz \[in fact, they
are the beginning of the alphabet in semitic languages and they are ABJD
HWZ or HVZ\], and before the end of his speech, Jesus left his head and
said: do you know what is Abjad? The teacher then wanted to hit him and
he said to him: O teacher don't hit me, if you know what is it then for
it or ask me to tell you the truth, and he said: tell me, and he (Jesus)
said: A is for the favors of God, and B is for the happiness of God, and
the J for the beauty of God and D for the religion of God, Hawaz: H for
how horrible is hell, W is for woe for the people of hell, and Z for the
breath of the hell, and HTY for: the sins are dropped down for those who
repent, KLMN is for: the words of God that never changed, S\`FSs \[Ss =
Ts in modern Hebrew and Aramaic sometimes\]  is for: eye for an eye,
QRShT is for: He gathered them together \[notice that all of these
interpretations are based mainly on the Arabic language, and might be so
close to the original language of Jesus, Aramaic, since both of them are
semitic languages along with Hebrew and all of them have the same order
for the alphabet\], and then the teacher said to his mother: O lady,
take the hands of your son because he is taught he needs not a teacher.
As attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: Jesus said: I dealth with
sick people and cured them with the permission of God, and cured the
blind and the leper by the permission of God, and I dealth with the dead
and resurrected them by the permission of God, and I dealt with the
stupid but I couldn't cure him, so he was asked: and what is the stupid
O Spirit of God? he answered: he's the one who likes himself and his own
opinion and see that he has all the favors like if they are not done to
him and see that he has all the rights and considers no one has any
rights, so that is the stupid that has no cure.  
It is narrated that Jesus once was wandering and it got stormy with rain
and lightning so he got on looking for a shelter, and he saw a tent far
away and he went to it and there he found a woman so he remained away
from it and then he saw a cave in a mountain and he went there and found
a lion, so he put his hand over his back \[his back might mean the back
of the lion, or his own back\] and lifted his head towards God and said:
O Lord, You made for everything a shelter but me, and then God inspired
to him: your shelter is deep into My Mercy and by My Exaltness I shall
let you marry one hundred nymph that I made by My own hands and I shall
feed in your wedding for four thousand years and each day of them is
like the age of life, and I shall order a caller to call and say: where
are the faithful in this life let them attend the wedding of the
faithful Jesus the son of Mary. They say that life appeared for him in
the shape of an ugly old woman with no teeth and wearing various
ornaments, and then Jesus said to her: how many did you marry? She
answered: I can't count them, and then he said to her: and all of them
died or they divorced you? She said: no but I killed them all, and then
he said to her: woe to them your previous husbands, how come you kill
them one by one and they weren't aware? And there are many other sermons
and advices and miracles that we cannot mention in here and what we have
mentioned in here is only like a drop of his sea, so it is enough to
take this much of his wisdom, may peace be upon him, and our success is
only by God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bell](jes05)
