[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jes01)  [Next](jes03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jesus is One of Those of Will

In lot of tidings and many of them that were brought by men of
confidence, it is mentioned that Those of Will of the prophets are Noah,
Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and the last of the prophets and their master
Muhammad (PUT), so their message is general and not especially made for
one nation and it is dedicated to everyone of thought of Djinn and
people, and it is something that should be out of doubt, especially
concerning the laws of Moses, Jesus and Muhammad (PUT), and the main job
for the prophets with the viceroys and the scholars that were at the
time of each one of them was that to tell the laws of them each one
according to his time, and he (a prophet) might be inspired with other
matters other than those revealed for Those of Will and their viceroys,
and the guidance comes from God and He is the only Guider. The fact that
Noah was sent to his own people and Abraham to Nimrod, and Moses to the
pharaoh, and Jesus to the Israelites, and Muhammad to the Arabs, this
fact does not oppose the idea that their message and laws and their
books were dedicated to all and even though the prophet was not to be
seen, but there should be a media to transfer all of the teachings even
if it was by one thousand transferer, and every general laws take over
the previous general laws, and so the laws of Islam cancelled out all of
the previous laws and it must be worked with until the end of time, and
this is the truth as judged by the mind and those of minds as agreed
upon by all of those who believed in the laws of Islam, and some of such
talk was present in the introduction of this book, notice.  
The narrations that points out that a prophet was sent especially for a
nation or a city, are interpreted that it was desired that he would be
sent personally as it is said that Abraham was a messanger to Nimrod and
Moses is for the pharaoh and Jesus to the Israelites or to Palestine and
in our prophet to the Arabs, and anyhow that does not oppose the idea
that their messages were general and dedicated to all the creatures, and
it is said that the Damned, the Satan, asked the angels about the father
of Jesus the son of Mary and said: who is his father? The angels said:
he is like Adam, then the Satan said: then I shall make four fifths of
the people go astray by him, and it is mentioned that a jew asked the
prophet (PUH) and said to him: you were assigned a prophet before you
were created? he (PUH) answered: yes, and he said: and those who believe
in you are assigned as well before they were created? he (PUH) answered:
yes they are, then the jew said: then why you didn't speak with wisdom
when you went out from the womb of your mother like Jesus the son of
Mary did and you claim that you are a prophet even before creation? Then
said the prophet (PUH): my cause was not like the cause of Jesus the son
of Mary, God created him from a mother without a father as He created
Adam without a mother or a father, and if Jesus went out from her womb
and didn't speak with wisdom then his mother wouldn't have any excuse in
front of the people because she brought him without a father and they
would have stoned her as they usually do while she did no sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Table And The Mutation Among The Israelites](jes03.md)
