[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jes11)  [Next](dan00.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Bukht Nassar (Nebuchadnezzar)

As it is apparent, the situation with Nebuchadnezzar was like that of
Nimrod at the time of Abraham (PUH), and he was a tyrant man and his
capital and the center of his kingdom was in Babel (Babylon) in the
lands of Iraq near by Al-Hillah, and he was a magus and a bastard
(natural son) and had no father, all of that was mentioned. Then he
invaded the holy lands and conquered Jerusalem and destroyed it and
burned the Torah and threw the dead bodies in the Temple and he killed
for the blood of John ben Zacharias (PUH) seventy thousand and he
captivated the others and took their fortunes and brought them to
Babylon and they remained in Babylon for one hundred years as slaves for
the magii. Then God had mercy upon them and so a king of the kings of
Persia who knew God ordered to get them back to their lands, and they
remained for one hundred years doing the goodness and remained on the
straight path, but then they got back to the ill manners and the sins,
so then a king (caesar) of the romans that was called Antiâkhius
\[probably Titus\] so he destroyed Jerusalem again and captivated the
people and they have a long story that shouldn't be mentioned here
because the speech is about Nebuchadnezzar. They say he was called like
that because he was found laying down at an idol called Bukht that
belonged to a king called Nassar (Nezzar), and that was when he was born
and no father nor a mother for him were known, and some say that he was
called by this name because he was breastfeeeded from a she-dog that was
called Bukht and it belonged to a man called Nassar, and he wasn't
circumcised and he invaded Jerusalem with six hundred thousand
legions.  
It is testifed about this matter by God's saying: And We decreed for the
Children of Israel in the Scripture: Ye verily will work corruption in
the earth twice, and ye will become great tyrants. So when the time for
the first of the two came, We roused against you slaves of Ours of great
might who ravaged (your) country, and it was a threat performed. Then we
gave you once again your turn against them, and We aided you with wealth
and children and made you more in soldiery. (Saying): If ye do good, ye
do good for your own souls, and if ye do evil, it is for them (in like
manner). So, when the time for the second (of the judgments) came (We
roused against you others of Our slaves) to ravage you, and to enter the
Temple even as they entered it the first time, and to lay waste all that
they conquered with an utter wasting(Al-Isrâ':4-7), and the meaning of
that and only God knows, that We inspired (mentioned) for the Israelites
in Torah and told them about what shall they do of sins and tyranny and
they will commit many crimes that they should be punished in this life
before the after-life and most important of what they shall commit are
two things: the first is to do against what is mentioned in Torah of
laws and regulations and to rebel against God, and then kill Isaiah and
Jeremiah with no right but because they are prophets calling back to
worship God and order with the goodness and prohibit the ill-manners,
and the second one is that they shall kill Zacharias and John and the
desire to kill Jesus the son of Mary (PUT). About God's saying "So when
the time for the first of the two came, We roused against you slaves of
Ours of great might who ravaged (your) country, and it was a threat
performed" meaning the promise of punishment in this life before the
after-life, at that time We shall send over you servants for us, meaning
Nebuchadnezzar and his soldiers, that shall come and ask for you and
look for you and look for your shameful history and your crimes and
punish you severely, because the wrong disbeliever is God's sword that
God uses to revenge and to punish the rebellious, and then God shall
take revenge of him in the after-life. So he shall be sent over you to
kill you and to captivate you and take all of your fortunes. Then God
shall have mercy upon you and let you back to your lands and homes and
you shall be in safety for some time as long you are on the straight
path, and when your souls turn ill as before and rebelled, God shall
send to you the sword of revenge of what He prepared for such purpose as
He took revenge of you in the first time, and then by a mercy from Him
he got you back home again.  
For God's saying "So, when the time for the second (of the judgments)
came (We roused against you others of Our slaves) to ravage you," it
means that We sent them to let your faces shown up because the traces of
the revenge and the sins are obvious in them, and to lay waste all what
they conquered by their force and their invasion for you and so they
shall be controlling you again, and for this came the invasion of the
king (caesar) of the romans or the king of Persia, both are mentioned.
So God humiliated them by scattering them around and killing them and by
destruction and they entered the Temple as they did in the first time
and they killed their children and humiliated their nobles and their
elders and took their fortunes. It is narrated by the prophet (PUH) that
Nebuchadnezzar ruled for one hundred and eighty seven years, and killed
seventy thousand warriors of jews for the blood of John ben Zacharias
and destroyed the Temple and the jews were scattered all over the lands.
As attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: the earth was ruled by
four, two believers and two disbelievers, as for the believers they were
Solomon ben David (PUH) and Ðul-Qarnain, and as for the two
disbelievers, they were Nimrod and Nebuchadnezzar.  
   
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dâniâl (Daniel) (PUH)](dan00.md)
