[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jes09)  [Next](jes11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Gospel of John

The matter of the gospel of John is even the weirdest of all, and as it
is said, lot of christians thought that John, the author of this gospel,
is in fact one of the twelve apostles of the Messiah and he is the son
of Zabdi the fisherman and he was born in Sayda (Sidon), one of
Al-Jaleel's (Galilee's) villages, and he was the one that was most
beloved by Jesus the son of Mary, but they mentioned that there was a
group of people that used to tell the christians and warn them that the
Messiah is only a human and he was not founded before his mother Mary,
and for this a group of bishops gathered in 96A.D. mostly from the
bishops of Asia and some others, all of them gathered themselves at
John's place and asked him to write about the Messiah and call for a
gospel that was not written by others before, and to write especially
about the divinity of the Messiah, so he couldn't deny and answered
their request, and the christians were confused about the year that John
wrote his gospel in, some say it was 65A.D. and others say it was 96A.D.
and some say it was 98A.D. and lot of christian scholars denied that
this gospel was written by John the one that followed Jesus, but it was
made by a pupil in Alexandria, and a lot was written about that, notice
page 401 and 402 from the tales of \`Abdul-Wahâb Al-Najjâr, and it was
only attributed to John just to make people believe in it, and that
gospel was made of twenty chapters and then after the death of John, the
church of Afâs added the twenty first chapter, check the first part of
Al-Fâriq Bayn Al-Makhlooq W'Al-Khâliq page 341 and 342, and from all of
that it is now known that this gospel was only written for a special
purpose and that is to prove the divinity of the Messiah and to cut of
the teachings that tell that he is only a human and not a god, and from
this point did the gospels differ because the people who made them had
different purposes and opinions, and if you want to check the truth and
how they are different you can check the book of Al-Fâriq Bayn
Al-Makhlooq W'Al-Khâliq, and also Izhâr Al-Haq \[showing the truth\] by
Rahmatullah Al-Hindi, and also the book of Hidâyat Al-Hiyârâ \[the
guidance of the buffled\] by Ibn Al-Qayyim. And God is the Guider to the
straight path.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gospel of Barnaba](jes11.md)
