[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jj04)  [Next](jj06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Getting Joseph Into The Jail

When things got greater for the noble to hide, he did not find any
solution for this except by putting Joseph into the jail to get rid of
the shame and avoid tongues to talk about it, to make people believe
that he did not put him in the jail except for that he is a liar to
claim innocence, and so God said: And it seemed good to them (the
men-folk) after they had seen the signs (of his innocence) to imprison
him for a time(Yousof:35). When he went into the jail and the guard saw
him, he said to Joseph: I like you, then Joseph (PUH) said: nothing
brought me to this condition except love, and so my maternal aunt loved
me and that made her steal me away, and my father loved me and that made
my brothers envy me, and the wife of the noble loved me and so she sent
me to jail for her love..etc. So the reward of he who saved the house
was as the reward of Sanimmâr \[Sanimmâr: they say he was a Roman
architect that built a castle for one Arabian king before Islam that was
called Al-Nu\`mân, after finishing the building of the castle he said to
the king I know only one piece that I know in this castle, if removed
the castle would come down, so the king killed him so no one would know
his secret, and the story went as a proverb for a bad reward in exchange
of the good deeds\], and so the noble did not hurt the one that
sacrified with her reputation and with her dignity and her husband's
dignity, but he used the dignity of the innocent as a ransom for her
reputation, and so it was like life, liked although it hurts a lot, and
although it is known it will end some day. We've pointed out that Joseph
had two men going with him into the jail, one of them was the chief
baker for the king and the second was the cupbearer, and their charge
was betrayal, and then they approached Joseph after they knew his high
place and his knowledge about interpreting the dreams and one of them
told him that he saw that he takes the grapes and make a juice out of it
in the cup of the king and the other said that he saw that he was
carrying a basket of bread and the birds were eating from it,and they
requested from him to interpret their dreams, and when he (Joseph) saw
them as persons that do care about his speech and to be trusted he
showed them the truth about himself and about his beliefs and the he is
following the religion of his fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac and
Jacob, and he is believing in one God, so Joseph wanted them to follow
his path and believe in the One God and he guided them to the straight
way as the prophets and viceroys would do, and he made them special for
telling them about their dreams interpretations, telling them so was a
clue that he was indeed of a high place and a prophet, and to strengthen
their desire to listen to him and trust him he asked them then: Are
divers lords better, or Allah the One, Almighty?(Yousof:39). The purpose
of Joseph (PUH) was to show his religion and call for it and God made
him able to do so and made him able to interpret the dreams, and then he
said to them that no food comes to them that he does not know its
interpretation before it comes to them and all of that is of what God
taught him, and he believes in Him and only Him and disbelieve in all
the gods. Then after telling them all of that he answsered their request
by saying: O my two fellow-prisoners! As for one of you, he will pour
out wine for his lord to drink, and this one is the saved man, and as
for the other, he will be crucified so that the birds will eat from his
head. Thus is the case judged concerning which ye did inquire. The truth
was as it had been told by him, and he asked the saved man to remember
him in the presense of his lord and ask the noble of Egypt to release
him, but the devil made him forget all of that and for this Joseph
stayed in the jail for more years.  
As attributed to \`Ali ben Ibrâhim that he said: when the king (or
noble) ordered for Joseph to be imprisoned, god inspired him with the
ability to interpret the dreams, and so he interpreted the dreams for
the prisoners until the two men asked him about the interpretations for
their dreams, and when he interpreted their dreams he said to the one
that would be saved: remember me in the presense of thy lord, and he did
not ask God for such thing, then God inspired unto him: who made you see
the dream, and he means the first dream as was told by God: I saw in a
dream eleven planets..etc(Yousof:4), and who made you beloved to your
father, and who guided the caravan to your place, and who taught you how
to call (pray) so I made you out of the well, and who made the child
speak so to make you innocent, and who made you able to interpret the
dreams? Then he said: You O my Lord, then God said to him: then how come
you asked for help from someone else other than Me, and seeked hope from
one of My servants to remember you in the presense of a creature of My
own creations, and so he stayed then some more years in jail. As
attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said they were seven years. Then
Joseph said: I ask You by the rights of my fathers to release me, so
then God inspired to Joseph: O Joseph, what rights your fathers have?
Your father Adam I made him with My own Hands and breathed in him from
My soul and made him dwell in My paradise and ordered him not to eat
from that tree but he did what I prohibited, and asked for repentace and
I gave it to him, and your father Noah I did choose him among the rest
of My creation and I made him a prophet to his people, and when they
refused him he prayed to Me and I answered him and saved him and his
followers in the ark, and your father Abraham I did choose him as a
friend and saved him from the fire, and your father Jacob I gave him
twelve sons and I made only one of them absent and he kept on crying
until his sight begone and sat on the roads complaining, so what rights
do your fathers have? Then Gabriel said: O Joseph say: O I ask You by
Your great gifts and by Your old Goodness, and then when he said it, the
king saw that dream and then he was released from the jail.  
It is said that when the period of time is almost over and God permitted
his release, he put his cheek on the ground and said: O God, if my sins
wore out my face in front of You, then I shall ask You, by the faces of
my faithful fathers, Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob, to release
me, and so then God released him, and then the Imam (PUH) was asked
\[the author did not mention which Imam is meant here\]: shall we pray
with in similar manner? He (PUH) said: pray the same and say: O God if
my sins wore out my face in front of You then I shall ask you by Your
prophet, the prophet of mercy, Muhammad and \`Ali, and Fâtima and
Al-Hasan and Al-Husain and the nine Imams from the descendants of
Al-Husain to do (whatsoever here and mention your own request).  
As attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: when Joseph was in jail he
complained to God about eating the bread alone and asked for some
variation, and he had at that time lot of dry bread pieces, so He
ordered him to make all the bread in one basket and pour water on it
with some salt and then it becomes easy to eat, and he (PUH) said also:
the Criers are five, Adam, Jacob, Joseph, Fâtima the daughter of
Muhammad (PUH), and \`Ali ben Al-Husain (PUH), for Adam he cried for
paradise until his tears made like valleys on his face, and Jacob cried
for Joseph until he became blind, and Joseph cried for Jacob until the
prisoners were annoyed and said to him: either you cry in daytime and be
silent at night or cry at night and be silent at daytime, and so he
agreed on one of the choices, and for Fâtima (PUH) she cried for her
father the prophet Muhammad (PUH) until the people of Medina were
annoyed of her and said to her: you annoyed us for your crying, so then
after that she started to go out to the graves of martyrs and cry there
and when she finishes she gets back home, and for \`Ali ben Al-Husain
(PUH) he cried for forty years for his father Al-Husain ben \`Ali (PUH),
and no food nor a drink would be presented to him without him been
crying until a servant for him said to him: O may I be a ransom for you,
I am afraid that your doom is close for all of this, so he answered him:
but I complain about my sadness to God and I know from God what you know
not, and everytime I remember the troubles of the children of Fâtima I
can not stop crying.  
And as attributed to Ibn \`Abbâs that he said: Joseph stayed in the
house of the king (or noble) and Zalikhâ for three years and then she
loved him and asked him the evil act, and they say that she kept his
love for seven years while he was in her house and she used to look at
him while she used to stand on her feet's fingers while he used to keep
his eyes to the ground for his faith in God, and she said to him one
day: lift up your head and look at me, he said: I am afraid of becoming
a blind, she said then: O how beautiful are your eyes! He then said:
they will be the first to fall down on my cheek when I am in my grave,
she said then: O how beautiful is scent, he answered then: if you
smelled me after three days after my death you would escape away from
me. She said then: why don't you get closer to me? He answered: I wish
by that the closeness to my God, she said: to my silky bed to satisfy
me, he said then: I am afraid that my share of paradise I will lose,
then she said: I will put you under torture, he said then: God is enough
for me. It is mentioned that the women that were gathered by Zalikhâ
then said to Joseph: go and obey your lady for she is wronged and you
are unjust to her. God said: Lo! the guile of you is very
great(Yousof:28), for their guile is more greater than the guile of the
devil for they show it apparently and their guile get to the heart, but
the guile of the devil is done in secret, so the guile of women is
greater than the guile of devil.  
It is mentioned that Zalikhâ said to her husband: this slave defamed me
among the people and I can not give an excuse for this, so either you
allow me to get out to the public and apologize or you imprison him as
you are imprisoning me, and so he did although he knew his innocence,
and some interpretations about Joseph saying: O my Lord! Prison is more
dear than that unto which they urge me(Yousof:33), that Joseph chose
that as to escape from their guile, and he did not chose God's willings
and His choice, and not as our prophet (PUH) that used to take refuse in
God whenever he is in need and pray with the pray of Al-Iftiqâr \[the
name of the pray\] and he used to say whenever he is in need: O Flipper
of hearts and sights, make my heart stable for obeying You, and so God
then answers his requests nad fulfills his needs, and saved him against
his enemies, and made him infallible in public and in secret, and Joseph
by his choice was sent to jail, and not as our prophet (PUH) for he
chose God to make the choices for him and not making them by himself,
and Jacob when trusted his children to take care of Joseph and then they
threw him into the well and took his shirt by force while he was saying:
O brothers do not do that to me and give me the shirt to cover myself
with, and they said to him: let the sun and the moon with the eleven
planets amuse you, and then they put him in the well and when he reached
the middle of it they threw him to the ground asking for his death and
the well had some water so he fell on it and stood upon a rock that was
there and his brother Judah used to bring him food as historians said,
and they say that the well was enlightened as a mercy from God unto him
and the water was turned to be so fine that it made him satisfied away
from other foods and drinks and then his brothers sold him to the
caravan, and all of that happened because they did not follow the choice
of God since the beginning although they were so faithful, and we've
mentioned that tests from God to His prophets and viceroys are faster to
occur than His tests to His enemies, and God draws them and make them
get more into their wrong-doings as if the life was their paradise and
then in the after-life they have no other choice but hell, and then when
Jacob took refuse in God for his son Benjamin when he sent him with his
brothers and he depended on God to save him and said: Allah is better at
guarding, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show
mercy(Yousof:64), only then God made him on the throne of the kingdom
and got Joseph back to him and got the people out of their troubles, so
meditate O people of hearts and get benefit from God's mercy for eternal
gifts.  
As attributed to many trusted sources they reported to Al-Sâdiq (PUH)
that he said about the sadness of Jacob for Joseph: it was like the
sadness of seventy women lost their children. It is mentioned also that
when Joseph was in the prison, Gabriel (PUH) came down and said: God had
tested you and your father and God will release you from this jail so
ask God by Muhammad and his Household to release you from this, so then
Joseph said: O God I ask You by Muhammad and his Household to release me
and make me out of my troubles, so then Gabriel said: O Righteous, God
will release you after three days and will give you the kingdom of Egypt
and their people, and then at that night the king saw a dream that made
him afraid and he told it to his assistors but they did not how to
interpret it, and then the man that was saved from the jail remembered
Joseph and said: O king send me to the jail for there are a righteous
wise man, and I with that man that you crucified him after his killing,
we both saw dreams and he interpreted them for us and it was as he said,
and that man was crucified and I was saved, so the king to said to him:
go to him and ask him about my dream, and so he went and asked Joseph:
Joseph! O thou truthful one! Expound for us the seven fat
kine..etc(Yousof:46), and when he gave his message to the king and told
him about what will happen as told by the king's dream, the king said
then: Bring him unto me that I may attach him to my person, and when
they told Joseph the king's message, Joseph said then: how shall I be
safe with him and he imprisoned me for years although he knows my
innocence? So when the king heard about his answer he sent his
messangers to the women and asked them: What happened when ye asked an
evil act of Joseph? They answered: Allah Blameless! We know no evil of
him(Yousof:51), so he (the king) sent to him and got him out of the
jail, and when he talked to him, he liked his speech and his wisdom, so
then said the king: tell my dream, I want to hear it from you, so then
Joseph mentioned it as the king saw in his sleep and then interpreted
the dream for the king, and then the king said: you told the truth, so
who will save me from such troubles? Then said Joseph: God inspired to
me that I will take care of the matter in these fertile coming years and
I will keep food stored in the granaries for the years of famine, by the
will of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Getting Out From The Jail to The King of Egypt](jj06.md)
