[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jj07)  [Next](jj09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Another Tale

As attributed to \`Ali ben Ibrâhim that he said: the distance between
Joseph and his father took eighteen days to travel, and he was in a
desert and the people went to Egypt to get some food, and Jacob with his
children were in a desert that had some moqal (it is a type of plants
that was used for fire at that time as it is known in the langiuage) \[I
could not find an exact translation for this plant's name so I typed it
as it is\], so the brothers of Joseph took of that moqal and carried it
to Egypt to buy with it some food, and some said that their trade were
some shoes, and Joseph used to take care of the selling by himself, and
when they went to him he knew them but they did not know him, and he
prepared them well and then said to them: who are you? They said: we are
the children of Jacob, so he said to them: what is your father's craft?
They said: he is a weak old man, he said: you have another brother? They
said: we have a brother from our father but not our mothers, then he
said: when you get back to me get him with you, and if you did not then
no food to sell to you and never get closer, they said then: we will
trick our father to take him, so then Joseph ordered for their stuff to
be with them so when they see it they come back to him, and when they
got back to their father they said: O our father! What (more) can we
ask? Here is our merchandise returned to us, The measure is denied us,
so send with us our brother Benjamin that we may obtain the measure,
surely we will guard him well, then said Jacob: Can I entrust him to you
save as I entrusted his brother to you aforetime? I will not send him
with you till ye give me an undertaking in the name of God that ye will
bring him back to me, unless ye are surrounded and can not protect him
anymore, so they took him and went out and Jacob told them: do not go
there from one gate but go in from several gates, and I can not protect
you against God's will for He has the judgement, and when they went as
their father ordered them nothing saved them but God, and it was for a
purpose that Jacob kept in his soul and he was a wise man.  
It is mentioned that when Benjamin went with them he did not use to sit
with them or talk to them or even eat with them, and when they went to
Joseph, he (Joseph) knew him just by looking, and he sat away from the
rest, so then said Joseph: are you their brother? He said: yes, he asked
then: why don't you sit with them? He said: for they went out with my
brother from my own mother and father and came back claiming that the
wolf devoured him so I promised myself not to sit with them ever as long
as I am alive.He asked him then: did you get married and got some
children? He answered: yes, three children, I called one of them "the
wolf" and the second I called "the shirt" and the third I called "the
blood", so then Joseph said to him: how did you choose these names? He
answered: so I will not forget my brother, and so whenever I call one of
my children I remember my own brother, and when the children of Jacob
wanted to go out, Joseph said to his brother: I, even I, am thy brother,
therefore sorrow not for what they did, then he said to him: I would
like to keep you with me, so he said: my brothers will not let me for
they promised my father to bring me back to him, so then he said: I have
a trick, and then when he prepared them and gave them what they need, he
(Joseph) said to some of his assistors: put this cup in the saddlebags
of Benjamin, and the cup was made of gold and they put it in his
saddlebag and no one could notice, and when they got up to travel back,
Joseph ordered for them to be imprisoned and then ordered someone to
call O camel-riders! Lo! ye are surely thieves! Then Joseph brothers
said: what are you missing? They answered: We have lost the king's cup,
and he who bringeth it shall have a camel-load, and I (said Joseph) am
answerable for it, they said: By God, well ye know we came not to do
evil in the land, and are no thieves, then Joseph said: And what shall
be the penalty for it, if ye prove liars? They said: then the penalty of
the one who got the cup is to be imprisoned, and then he started
searching in their bags before the bag of his brother, and then he got
it out from the bag of his brother, God said: Thus did We contrive for
Joseph. He could not have taken his brother according to the king's law
unless Allah willed(Yousof76), and also He said: And when he provided
them with their provision, he put the drinking-cup in his brother's
saddlebag..etc(Yousof:70), and in a speech attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH):
it was a cup of gold and it was for Joseph and when they measure, they
measure with it.  
Also attributed to Al-Bâqir (PUH) that he said: it was a bowl that was
used to drink and to measure, and both speeches have the same meaning
anyway.  
It is mentioned that after this even the brothers of Joseph came to
their brother Benjamin and said to him: you defamed us, when did you
take this cup? Then he said: this cup was put in my bag by the one who
put your merchandise back in your bags in the first time. About calling
them thieves it is said that it was meant to be that they stole Joseph
and betrayed their father about him, and they did not steal the cup and
Joseph did not lie as well. When the cup was found in the bag of
Benjamin they said: If he stealeth, a brother of his stole before, and
they meant by that Joseph, for he was before his troubles' beginning
with his aunt and his father wanted to take him back from her, so she
made him wear a girdle and he did not know, and in their laws at that
time the thief was to be owned by the one that was stolen from, so then
his aunt claimed that her built was stolen by him (Joseph) and then she
kept him with her for a while until he got out then with his brothers
and they did what they did with him, and his aunt all of that for she
used to love him so much, and for this matter they said: f he stealeth,
a brother of his stole before, and they meant Joseph by that, and when
Joseph heard that he kept it as a secret and said to them: Ye are in
worse case, and Allah knoweth best (the truth of) that which ye
allege(Yousof:77), and the meaning is that God knows better about the
case of stealing for him and for his brother Benjamin and He knows they
are innocents, but the one who stole is you and not Joseph and not
Benjamin.  
They say that they gathered around Joseph and their skins dropping a
yellow blood and they debated with Joseph about Benjamin and about the
heavy promises they made for their father about Benjamin, and when the
children of Jacob get angry, the hair of their body gets out of their
clothes with a yellow blood, and in that situation they said to Joseph:
O king his father is an old man so take one of us for we see you a good
man, then Joseph said: God forbid that we should seize save him with
whom we found our property, and when they got despaired and wanted to go
back to their father, Judah said: did not you know that you made heavy
promises for your father? You get back to your father but I will stay
here until my father allows me to do so or until God make his judgement
for me.  
God said: Return unto your father and say: O our father! Lo! thy son
hath stolen. We testify only to that which we know; we are not guardians
of the Unseen(Yousof:34), and when they got back to Jacob and told him
about the story he said: Nay, but your minds have beguiled you into
something. (My course is) comely patience! It may be that Allah will
bring them all unto me(Yousof:83) and he meant by that Joseph, Benjamin
and Judah that stayed in Egypt, and then he went away from them and
said: Alas, my grief for Joseph! And his eyes were whitened with the
sorrow that he was suppressing(Yousof:83), and when they wanted to go
back to their father, the king (Joseph) sent a messanger to Jacob
telling him: This is your son I bought him with a cheap price and he is
Joseph and I made him a slave, and this is your son Benjamin I took him
and I found my cup with him so I made him a slave. Nothing harder could
pass over Jacob more than this message, so he ordered the messanger to
write down: By the name of God, the most Merciful, from Jacob, Israel of
God ben Isaac ben Abraham the friend of God, I understood your message
that says that you've bought my son and made him a slave, and the
troubles are always waiting for the children of Adam, and my grandfather
Abraham was thrown into the fire by Nimrod but he did not burn by
anyhow, and for my father, God ordered my grandfather to slain him by
his own hands and when he wanted to do so God gave a ransom for him, and
I had a child that no one was beloved to me more than him and he went
out with his brothers and they got back to me claiming that the wolf
devoured him, and for this my back was bent and my eyes went white and
blind because of crying, and he had a brother from his own mother that
was my joy and he went out with his brothers to you to buy some food and
they got back telling me that he stole the cup of the king and you've
put him in prison and we are a family that known for honour and not a
suitable thing to be called for stealing or doing evil-acts, and I ask
you by the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob to release him back to me
may you be closer to God by doing so. So, when the message reached
Joseph, he put it over his face and cried loudly, then he looked at his
brothers arriving with the message and he said to them:Know ye what ye
did unto Joseph and his brother in your ignorance? They said: you are
Joseph! Then he said: I am Joseph and this is my brother and God gifted
us, then they said: God preferred you to us and we were wrong, then he
said: Have no fear this day! May Allah forgive you..etc(\`Yousof:92),
the narrator said: they knew him by his smile for when they saw his
teeth that were like pearls they remembered Joseph and some said that
they knew him when he lifted the crown from his head.  
It is mentioned that when the messanger went out from Jacob to the king
(Joseph), Jacob raised his hands then to the sky and said: O best of
Friends and Generous One, O God of Goodness, give me hope and end up my
troubles, so then Gabriel (PUH) came down and said to him: O Jacob,
Shall I teach you a pray that may God give you back your sight and your
sons? He said: yes, he said then: then say: O One that no one knows how
He is except of He, O One who blocked the air and pressed the earth over
water and chose the best of names for Hisself, give me hope and end up
my troubles, then the narrator said: and it was the next morning when
the shirt came up and was thrown over his face and his became normal and
his sons came back to him, and as attributed to Al-Mofadhal Al-Ja\`fi he
said: I said to Al-Sâdiq (PUH): tell me about the type of Joseph's
shirt, he (PUH) answered: when Abraham (PUH) was to be thrown into the
fire, Gabriel came down with a shirt from paradise and made him wear it,
and so no fire or coldness affected him ever, so when Abraham then was
about to die, he wrapped it in a piece of skin and hanged it on Isaac,
and Isaac later on hanged it on Jacob, and when Jacob had Joseph as a
child he hanged it on him, and when Joseph took it out of the skin,
Jacob smelled the scent and said: Truly I am conscious of the breath of
Joseph, though ye call me dotard(Yousof:94). Then the one asking and he
is Al-Mofadhal Al-Ja\`fi said to Al-Sâdiq (PUH): O may I be a ransom for
you, who owned the shirt later on? He (PUH) answered: to his own people,
and then he continued: every prophet that inherited a wisdom or anything
else, are all at the end at the hand of Muhammad and his Household
(PUT), and Jacob was at that time in Palestine, and when the caravan
departed Egypt, Jacob smelled that scent of Joseph from the shirt that
was brought from heavens.  
They say that Joseph said: the one who got my shirt with blood in the
first time shall go now with my shirt, so then Judah said: I went with
the blood-polluted shirt, so he said: then go with my shirt to my father
and tell him I am alive and make him happy as you made him sad before,
so he took the shirt and went out with bare-feet until he reached him
(Jacob), and he had seven pieces of bread and the distance was eighty
leagues and still he did not consume all his bread pieces, then Jacob
travelled from the desert with his household after getting the shirt to
him and being able to see, and they said to him: O our father! Ask
forgiveness of our sins for us, and he said: I will. Some mentioned that
he waited until the late night time to ask for forgiveness for their
sins because it is a time when prays are answered, and when they reached
Egypt, Joseph sat on the throne and put the crown over his head for he
wanted his father to see him like that, and when his father went in, he
did not stand up for him, and they fell prostrating so then Joseph said:
O my father! This is the interpretation of my dream of old. My Lord hath
made it true(Yousof:100). It is attributed to Al-Kâðim (PUH) that he
said: the prostrating of Jacob and his sons was not for Joseph in his
person, but was to obey God's commandment and as a greeting for Joseph
as angels did prostrate for Adam before, for it was not for Adam but
they obeyed God's commandment and as a greeting for Adam, so Jacob and
his children prostrated to God as to thank God for gathering them
together again, and Joseph said as it had been told by quran: O my Lord!
Thou hast given me (something) of sovereignty and hast taught me
(something) of the interpretation of events - Creator of the heavens and
the earth! Thou art my Protecting Guardian in the world and the
Hereafter. Make me to die muslim (unto Thee), and join me to the
righteous(Yousof:101), and it is said that Joseph sent one hundred
messangers (travellers) to bring his family, providing them with what
they need for travelling, and when Jacob got closer to Joseph, Jacob
started by greeting and said: O peace upon you grieves taker, and then
they hugged and cried while Joseph kept on kissing the fingers of his
father and can not stop crying because of his happiness and surprise,
for the situation of Jacob when he met Joseph can not be described and
nothing like it except going into paradise and hugging the nymphes of
paradise by the viceroys of God and His beloved servants, may God make
us one of them with the rest of the blievers by His prophet, the prophet
of mercy and his Household (PUT).  
They say that they (Israelites) got into Egypt and they were seventy
three, and then they went out at the time of Moses (PUH) and they were
around six hundred thousand and five hundred and seventy men, and the
time elapsed between Moses and Joseph was four hundred years, and after
the arrival of Jacob to Egypt and after having some rest, he said to
Joseph: tell me son, what did they do to you when they took you from me?
He said: release me from doing so father, he then said: tell me some of
it, then said Joseph: O father, when they put me in the well they said:
take off your shirt, so I said to them: O brothers fear God and do not
take off my things, then they showed a knife towards me and said: if you
did not take off your shirt surely we will slay you, so I took off the
shirt and they put me in the well naked, so then Jacob had a deep breath
and fell down in a coma, and when he woke up again he said: O son, tell
me, then Joseph said to him: O father I ask you by the God of Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob to release me from doing so, and so Jacob then
released him from doing so. They say that Jacob lived for seventeen
years after arriving to Egypt, and he was at that time one hundred and
forty seven years old, and he asked to be buried beside his father and
his grandfather after his death, so Joseph then ordered the physicians
to mummify him and so they did and his body was carried to Palestine and
was buried there as he asked, and Jacob was the leader and the kingdom
was for Joseph, and when he died the leadership became for Joseph.  
Then the brothers of Joseph, save but Benjamin, were honoured and
respected for the presense of their father, and after the death of their
father, they say that they fell at the feet of Joseph seeking repentance
and forgiveness for they were afraid that he might be harsh on them
after the death of their father, for they thought that he was nice to
them only for their father presense, and they said to him: out father
told us to ask you to forigve us for our sins toward you, and they
presented themselves as slaves to him, so then Joseph cried, and when he
calmed down he explained to them how their wrong-doing brought goodness
to the people on earth and that God wanted all of that for a mercy
towards His servants, and Joseph then lived for one hundred and ten
years, and it is mentioned that when Joseph died in Egypt they buried
him in the Nile in a box made of marble, and this is because that when
he died people almost fought together to let his body buried in their
places seeking his blesses, and so they buried him in the Nile to end up
the fights and the Nile is common among all the people and everyone
drinks from it and so the blesses would go to the all, and it stayed
there until Moses carried it when he went out of Egypt and buried him
with his fathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in Palestine and their
monuments are famous there.  
Some archaeological historians said: I've visited Hebron and the
monument of Abraham, and I saw there when I entered to the place of
their graves and close to their graves, a monument called the monument
of repentance, and some natives there say that this is the tomb of
Joseph (PUH) and he is buried there in that cave, and some said that he
is buried in Nabulus and he has a monument there and people visit it,
and some said that they made sure as witnessed by some natives there
that the grave of Joseph is there in Nabulus and not in Hebron, and this
is what is mentioned in Torah as well, and only God knows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lot of Sermons in The Josephite Virtues](jj09.md)
