[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isa00)  [Next](lot01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<div style="text-align: center;">

The Prophet Lot (PUH)  

<div style="text-align: left;">

We've pointed out before that the story of Lot is connected to the story
of Abraham (PUH) and also connected to the stories of his sons Ishmael
and Isaac for they are mentioned with him in many holy phrases and tales
because they all share the same call to God and they all lived in the
same time, and the religion of all is the same religion of Abraham
(PUH), and he is their master and the one that was a subject to many
troubles, and God revealed upon him only the books that explain the
religion and laws, and they followed him for whatever he said, and Lot
got out with him when he was banished from his own lands and he was the
first to believe in him, and Lot is the nephew and the maternal cousin
for Abraham and this matter had been investigated when we talked about
the conditions of Abraham. God said: <span id="029_026">And Lot believed
him, and said: Lo! I am a fugitive unto my Lord(Al-\`Ankabut:26). Lot
was mentioned in quran in fourteen chapters: Al-An\`âm, Al-A\`râf, Hud,
Al-Hijr, Al-Anbiyâ', Al-Haj, Al-Shu\`arâ', Al-Naml, Al-\`Ankabut,
Al-Sâffât, Sâd, Qâf, Al-Qamar, Al-Tahreem. We mentioned before that when
quran comes to mention about any prophet's conditions, it either mention
their conditions in details or in brief.  
They mentioned that Lot owned many riches and cattles of camels, horses,
sheeps and cows and other animals, along with servants and gold and
silver, like his uncle Abraham, and only God knows, and after they had
travelled out of Iraq to the lands of Shem and Palestine, Lot (PUH) most
probably settled in Jordan, and the village he settled in was called
Sadoom (Sodom) and beside it the village of \`Âmoorâ' (Gomorrah). This
is what Al-Mas\`udi said in Muruj Al-Ðahab: And God sent Lot to Sodom
and its five villages are: Sabghah, \`Amrah, Edmâ', Sabugh and Bâli\`
\[maybe the Hebrew names are: Gomorrah, Admah, Zeboiim, Bela and Zoar\],
and the people of Lot are Al-Mu'tafika, and this name is derived from
"Ifk" which means "lying" and this is the opinion of whoever followed
derivation method, and God said:</span> <span id="053_053">And
Al-Mu'tafikah He destroyed(Al-Najm:53), and this land is located in the
lands of Shem after Jordan and Palestine, and torturing stones there can
be seen by travellers, and Lot lived there for something more than
twenty years and used to call the people for God but they did not
believe in him so then they were taken away by God's punishment
according what God mentioned about them (in quran), then God punished
the people of Lot at the time of Abraham (PUH) for their deeds and
doings.  
The people of Lot were people of evil and took off the cover of shyness,
and they were never shy to do the bad things that even animals deny to
do as well as the human souls, and they were never shy of each other to
do the most awful things, so all would gather, the old and the young,
the father and the son, the master and the slave, they all gather
together to commit sodomy with a strange man even in front of their
women and daughters, and they used to fart in their gatherings and clubs
as it is interpreted by God's saying:</span> <span id="029_029">and
commit ye not abomination in your meetings(Al-\`Ankabut:29).  
  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Some Funny Stories](lot01)

</div>

</div>
