[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lot02)  [Next](lot04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

<div style="text-align: center;">

<span id="003_182">Presenting His Daughters to The People of His Village
and His Wife Conditions  
</span>

<div style="text-align: left;">

What is apparent in quran that Lot was giving his daughters to his
people whenever they want to harm his guests and some holy phrases say:
<span id="015_071">Here are my daughters, if ye must be doing
(so)(Al-Hijr:70). This is something that faithful souls deny and no man
with a bit of jealousy accept such a thing even if it was for something
important like protecting his guests against the disbelievers and
tyrants, so just doing this by giving up his daughters for the
wrong-doing is something denied by the mind and can not be done by a
faithful man of jealousy. So, how come it is done by a prophet, that is
an example of dignity and honour and he is the guidance of God to the
people, and it is attributed to the prophet (PUH) and his Household
(PUT) what includes the meaning of: whoever started a good habit, then
he has its reward and the rewards of people who do it after him until
the doomsday, and whoever started an evil habit then he has its
punishment and the punishments of people who do it after him until the
doomsday. Some people interpreted that just from its apparent meaning,
and still it has the same result of meaning, so how about if we were
talking about a prophet of God for the people that by him laws and
regulations of the religion would be taken and taught and within his
hands the right to ban the evil-doings and allow the good-deeds, so just
doing such a thing is greatly denied for it is something denied by the
mind and also banned by the laws of religion in all religions and it is
never found to be allowed since the beginning of creation until this
very day, but for protection against such a thing blood had been shed
and it is the law that must be kept, and if it was not so then every son
of a female even if he has no religion he won't be traced back to an
honourable root.  
The deeds of the religious authority are subject to be followed and it
is taken by people either they believed in such authority or not to take
such deeds as clues and people keep telling the stories about such an
authority and the tidings would keep up by time, and if it was such deed
is bad, then people would mock at religions and take it as something
ridiculous and such a thing is against the purpose that for which God
sent His prophet, and such deeds would not be issued by a wiseman, and
impossible to be issued by a wiseman.  
The talk of Lot that was told in quran in the chapter of Hud:</span>
<span id="011_078">O my people! Here are my daughters! They are purer
for you. Beware of Allah, and degrade me not in (the person of) my
guests. Is there not among you any upright man ?(Hud:78), and in the
chapter of Al-Hijr:</span> <span id="015_070">They said; Have we not
forbidden you from (entertaining) anyone ?</span> <span id="015_071">He
said: Here are my daughters, if ye must be doing (so)(Al\_hijr:70-71),
such talk is not interpreted on its apparent basis but it is interpreted
on the basis of a righteous judgement of religion, and only God knows
its exact interpretations and them who are in deep wisdom of this, and
they are the ones that quran was revelaed in their homes and that is the
prophet (PUH) and his viceroys that are his Household (PUT). It is said
about this matter, that what is meant by his daughters is their wives,
because people are connected to the prophet sent to them by father, so
Lot did not offer his own daughter, but he offered the daughters of the
village and they are their own wives as to prevent them from doing the
bad deed (sodomy), and some said that what is meant by this is that he
offered them for marriage and not adultery which is something allowed,
and it is far away from what is apparent, and also it is said that he
offered them but not seriously for that they might get back and stop
harming him for they know that they would not do such a deed but it was
just an exaggeration from him (Lot) to show his unsatisfaction for
harming his guests and to show his denial for such bad-doings, and it is
like a way to stop the fight between two persons, like coming to one of
them and saying "hit me but not him" and if he knew that this person
will hit him indeed he wouldn't come to do it, and this last
interpretation might be the most probable, but anyway we know that what
is meant by the holy phrase is not what is apparent, be aware, and only
God knows.  
  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wife of Lot (PUH)](lot04)

</div>

</div>
