[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jet00)  [Next](mos01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Musa ben \`Imrân (Moses ben Amram) (PUH)

He is Moses ben Amram ben Waheeb ben Lâwi (Levi) ben Jacob ben Isaac ben
Abraham (PUH) \[Waheeb might be equivalent to the name of Kohath in
Torah\], and some said that he is Moses ben Amram ben Yas-hor ben Fâhib
ben Levi ben Jacob..etc, and the mother of him and of Hârun (Aaron) was
Yukhâbid (Jochebed), and some said that her name was Afâhiyyah. Moses
was born in Egypt at the time of the tyrant pharaoh Al-Waleed ben
Mos\`ab ben Mu\`âwiyah ben Abi-Nameer ben Al-Hilwâs ben Layþ ben Harrân
ben \`Umar ben \`Imlâq \[I grow suspecious about such a name for an
Egyptian pharaoh but anyway this is the author's own point of view and
his own tracing\], and he was the fourth pharaoh for Egypt, and his age
grew longer and his body grew greater and the children of Israel were
turned into slaves after the death of Joseph the righteous (PUH) and the
adversities upon them increased, and they say they were people of
cattles and they were known as "the shepherds" and used to live in the
desert to the north of Egypt by a recommendation from Joseph (PUH), and
then the priests and astrologers and magicians told the pharaoh that
there will be a child that will be born and remove his kingdom and do
great things in the lands of Egypt, and so the pharaoh got afraid and
scared and ordered to kill the children, and as for Moses, it was as God
ordered his mother, to throw him into the water and so she did and it
was the Nile, as it is mentioned in Muruj Al-Ðahab (PUH), and more to
come in details so just wait.  
They say that the pharaoh had a dream, and saw that a great fire was
coming from Jerusalem and got into Egypt and burnt everything except of
the children of Israel, and the pharaoh was so scared so he called for
the priests and interpreters and they said that a man will be born among
the children of Israel and your end with the kingdom's end will be done
by his hands, and so then he ordered to kill the children of Israelites.
They say that Moses lived for two hundred and forty years, and the time
period between him and Abraham was five hundred years, and the period
between Moses and Jesus was one thousand and eight hundred years, and
the period between Abraham and Shem ben Noah was around eight hundred
years, and Abraham lived for one hundred and seventy five years, and the
total of years in the period starting from Shem ben Noah until our time
in this year (1971AD) is five thousand and three hundred years almost,
and only God knows.  
It is mentioned by the prophet (PUH): God chose from the prophets four
for the sword: Abraham Moses David and me, and chose from the families
four so He said: Lo! Allah preferred Adam and Noah and the Family of
Abraham and the Family of 'Imran above (all His) creatures. They were
descendants one of another. Allah is Hearer, Knower(Âl \`Imrân:33-34).
This speech will be mentioned else where by God's will with some
additions later on.  
As mentioned by Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that God inspired to Moses saying: O
Moses, do you know why I chose you from among My creation and chose you
for My words? He said: no my Lord, so then God inspired to him: I looked
to earth and I found no one like you being so humble towards Me, and
then Moses fell prostrating and put his cheeks into the ground as a
humiliation to his Lord, so then God inspired to him: O Moses, lift up
your head and expand your hand to the position of your prostrating and
pass over your face and body for it is a cure for every illness and
disease and handicap. And as attributed to Al-Bâqir (PUH) he said: God
inspired to Moses: do you know why I chose you? Then said Moses: no my
Lord, so then God said: O Moses I looked into My servants and I did not
find anyone like you in humiliation for Me, O Moses, you put your cheeks
into the dust when you pray.  
It is said that whenever Moses comes to pray he never finished unless he
put his cheeks into the ground, and it is not something to hide that
prostrating on the dust and putting the forehead and the cheeks into the
ground is something allowed and adorable for us (Shiite muslims), and it
is mentioned that it is adorable during the pray and after praying and
when receiving the great gifts and when pushing back the adversities is
desired, and it is the prostrating position that is called "prostration
of praising," and such prostration is adorable in whatever condition for
every faithful believer, because the faithful man do not ever stop
thinking about the greatness of God from time to time and about His
gifts and mercy towards himself from the beginning of his life until the
end: And if ye would count the favour of Allah ye cannot reckon
it(Al-Nahl:18). What do you want me to mention about the gifts of God?
Would the mind of a thoughtful man be able to reckon it? Whatever human
being you are you are still unable to count them, and if it was only the
gift of being alive, then that would be enough for you as a great gift
that can not be rewarded in exchange even if you would fall prostrating
on live coal instead of the ground, and the greatest gift after being
alive is the gift of being guided and have faith in Him and believing in
His prophets and His viceroys and obeying His commands by His own
guidance, and not to mention the other gifts of apparent senses the
hidden ones and that amazing expanding world. The prince of believers
(\`Ali ben Abi Tâlib) (PUH) said:

**Do you claim you are a small planet**  
**And within you the great world did hide**

And whatever gift you might see, you can thank for it even you spent
your life time in one prostrating or spent your life time fasting at the
daytime and praying at night, for the prostrating of praising in such
moments is one of the most honorable worshipping duties and the best of
all offerings for Him, and it is allowed as we pointed out and the Imams
and the Household of the prophet (PUT) kept on doing it in their lives,
and the people of the house know better what is inside. \[The last
phrase is a proverb-like sentence in Arabic\].  
It is mentioned that Al-Sâdq (PUH) was once asked about wether Aaron or
Moses died first, so he said: Aaron died before Moses, and he was asked
also who was older, so he said: Aaron, and Aaron had two sons, one of
them is called Shubbar and the other was called Shubair \[notice: in
Torah, Aaron is said to have four children: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar,
Ithamar\] and in Arabic they are called Al-Hasan and Al-Husain. It is
attributed to the prophet (PUH) that he said: I saw Abraham and Moses
and Jesus, and as for Moses he was a long man for they were known for
their height and bravery with nobility and one man of them was like a
lion, and as for Jesus he was a red man with a curly hair, then he went
silent and they said to him: O prophet of God what about Abraham? He
said: then look to your fellow, meaning himself (PUH).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Birth of Moses (PUH)](mos01.md)
