[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos05)  [Next](mos07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Aaron as A Henchman as Moses Requested

Thr request of Moses to make his brother Aaron as a henchman for him
because he was more eloquent in speech than him is something weird since
before and then after, and it might be as a joke and a mysterious
secret. They said many things about it, and it is weird because God is
the One that sent him (as a prophet) and everything is under His
control, so as He sent him as a prophet and taught him and made him able
and made his stick do many amazing deeds, He, the Exalted, was able also
to make him the most eloquent of all the creations, and as He wants and
wishes, and if He wanted Moses to be the most eloquent in every tongue
and language He would make him, as He gave him the miracles in lot of
situations, for He does what He wants and does not do what He wants as
well and He shall not be asked about His deeds but only them would be
asked. God has a wisdom in everything He does that a servant may catch
some of it or may catch nothing of it, some gave reasons for such a
request from Moses to God, to make Aaron as his henchman and a messanger
to the pharaoh, which is something considered as we appointed before,
and that is because Moses had an accent in his language and that because
when he was a child at the house of the pharaoh, he (the pharaoh) put
him on his lap and he (Moses) cought his beard and the pharaoh got
frustrated and wanted to kill him but his wife Âsiyyah bent Mozâhim made
an excuse for this and said: he has no mind and not able to think, and
suggested to test him by putting dates and live coals in front of him,
and when they did so, he (Moses) took a live coal abd put it into his
mouth and so it had an effect on his tongue, and for this Moses grew up
with some difficulties in his speech, but some other said that when his
mother put him in the ark and threw him into the waters and then been
picked up by the household of the pharaoh, God forbade the midwives for
him and he stayed for three days without breastfeeding until his mother
came, so they made this as a reason for his speech problem.  
They say also that Moses went out of Egypt a long time ago and he stayed
in Midian for a long time so he forgot the Egyptian language which is
the language of the coptic people and because there are no one that
could speak to him with this language, but as for Aaron he was living
among the Egyptians and so he had more knowledge in their language, and
so on of such useless stories they said about this matter that must not
be discussed or even looked at but only to know what had been said. Yes,
Aaron being more eloquent in speech than Moses is something that quran
mentioned as attributed to Moses, so God said: My brother Aaron is more
eloquent than me in speech. Therefor send him with me as a helper to
confirm me(Al-Qasas:34), and also quran pointed out that there was a
problem with the speech of Moses for God's saying: And loose a knot from
my tongue, That they may understand my saying(TaHa:27-28), and the
pharaoh mocked at him because of his problem in speech by saying: I am
surely better than this fellow, who is despicable and can hardly make
(his meaning) plain!(Al-Zokhrof:52), and yes it might be that they
barely understood him and they did not understand his language clearly
as they do understand each other, for any reason, and we shall say: at
any time or place did kings follow the truthful men? Needless to say
those who called themselves as gods and everyone else are servants for
them just as the pharaoh, and at any time did the Israelites feel safe
with him while he was killing their children and captivate their women
and see no dignity for any elder or chief? But as for Aaron he was, for
the pharaoh, an innocent man that had no sins or crimes recorded against
him and he spent a long time among them (the coptic people) without any
problems and everyone used to hear to him when he speaks and his
intercession was accepted, but as for Moses (PUH) he was grown up in the
house of the pharaoh and he was beloved, but at the end they considered
him a betrayer and so he had no dignity in their eyes, but for them he
is the first enemy, and so how come they accept any sermon or hear for
him while he is their enemy, and they knew for sure that he was the one
that commited the crime when he fled away after discovering his deed,
and he addmited: He said: My Lord! Lo! I killed a man among them and I
fear that they will kill me(Al-Qasas:33), and also he said: And they
have a crime against me, so I fear that they will kill
me(Al-Shu\`arâ':14), and so if this is his situation with them how come
they will listen to him or even look at any condition of his conditions?
The tyranny of the pharaoh and his pride, and he is the one who said: I
(Pharaoh) am your Lord the Highest(Al-Nâzi\`ât:24) and also he said:  I
know not that ye have a god other than me(Al-Qasas:38), they keep
listening to Moses far away and this tyrant would not understand the
speech of Moses because of his tyranny, and does anyone hope that this
tyrant would listen to the one who he had grown up in his house and then
killed someone from his people? No and No, and for this reason Moses
asked from his Lord to make Aaron a henchman for him to express for them
what he wants because he can make them understand what they do not
understand from Moses (PUH).  
Some faithful sermons sayers said about Moses' saying: And loose a knot
from my tongue, That they may understand my saying(TaHa:27-28) what has
a general meaning of that he was speaking to his Lord saying that "I am
shy to speak to You with my tongue that I do use to speak with others,
thus my shyness had become a knot in my tongue so Loose it," and they
said about his saying: Appoint for me a henchman from my folk, Aaron, my
brother(TaHa:29-30), that he was asking God to appointment Aaron as his
henchman to avoid speaking to them with a tongue that he spoke to God
with. That might be of truth somewhat, although prophets used to speak
to God and His enemies with the same tongue and it is better to reach
the desired results and among them (the prophets) there are who is even
of higher place than Moses and among His enemies there are who is worse
than the pharaoh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Taking Off The Shoes in The Valley of Tuwa](mos07.md)
