[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos11)  [Next](mos13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Pharaoh Wants to Kill Moses and The Believing Man From The Pharaoh
Family Defending Him

When the wizards were defeated and they all believed in Moses and what
he had come with and they all fell prostrating to God, most of the
people from the Israelites did believe as well so the pharaoh captivated
them and used them for hard works and heavy adversities fell upon them,
then after years of the signs of dryness, flood, locusts, vermin, frogs,
blood, and terror (or pollution), he (the pharaoh) released them for
Moses, but the pharaoh did not believe in Moses but insisted on his
ideas and his rebellious nature neglecting the signs that Moses brought
to him, but his people seduced him to run after Moses blaming him to let
Moses go with his people to corrupt the lands as they claimed, and stop
working for them as they used to do, and they cut off worshipping the
pharaoh, and he (the pharaoh) used to calm them down by promising that
he will kill Moses and his people and enslave their women depending on
the power of his solders and their numbers and proud of his power, so
then the pharaoh and his assistors started with torturing and the
Israelites complain to Moses for what they are facing, and Moses call
them to have some patience toward this adversity and commanded them to
take refuge in God against what is coming in their way and he used to
promise them with victory and they said to him: we've been under torture
before and after your arrival.  
He (Moses) promised them that their enemy will be destroyed and their
adversities will be over and that they will rule the lands that it was
promised for them, then the pharaoh wanted to kill Moses for he was
afraid that he would change their religion and corrupt in the lands as
they claim, but Moses (PUH) took refuge in God, the One, against the
evil of every one of pride that does not believe in the day of
Reckoning. In the chapter of Al-A\`raf: The chiefs of Pharaoh's people
said: (O King), wilt thou suffer Moses and his people to make mischief
in the land, and flout thee and thy gods? He said: We will slay their
sons and spare their women, for lo! we are in power over them. And Moses
said unto his people: Seek help in Allah and endure. Lo! the earth is
Allah's. He giveth it for an inheritance to whom He will. And lo! the
sequel is for those who keep their duty (unto Him). They said: We
suffered hurt before thou camest unto us, and since thou hast come unto
us. He said: It may be that your Lord is going to destroy your adversary
and make you viceroys in the earth, that He may see how ye
behave(Al-A\`râf:127-129). In the chapter of Ghâfir: And verily We sent
Moses with Our revelations and a clear warrant. Unto Pharaoh and Haman
and Korah, but they said: A lying sorcerer! And when he brought them the
Truth from Our presence, they said: Slay the sons of those who believe
with him, and spare their women. But the plot of disbelievers is in
naught but error. And Pharaoh said: Suffer me to kill Moses, and let him
cry unto his Lord. Lo! I fear that he will alter your religion or that
he will cause confusion in the land. Moses said: Lo! I seek refuge in my
Lord and your Lord from every scorner who believeth not in a Day of
Reckoning(Ghâfir:23-27).  
Then the pharaoh made a plot with his people to kill Moses and started
to watch for opportunities to do so for he was afraid that people would
say he was not able to face Moses for his miracles, and Moses turned to
be powerful among his people and the believers also, and the pharaoh was
afraid of him because all of that, especially the staff and its deeds,
and he thinks that if Moses wanted to destroy the pharaoh and his people
and every enemy for him (Moses) with that staff he would do it without a
doubt, and for this he was afraid of Moses, otherwise, he was a tyrant
man, and then supposing that he is much more stronger than Moses and can
assassinate him by any way, he was more afraid of the great shame that
is to be said that he killed Moses for he could not face him, and what
is the guilt of Moses to come with miracles, so then he would be signed
with shame among people, especially poor ones.  
The the pharaoh gathered for him the wizards but Moses defeated them and
they believed in him. Lot of people believed in Moses after that wizards
believed in him, thus the pharaoh was afraid to kill him to avoid the
response for he had no rights against Moses as they can see and killing
Moses might cause them to change their religion as well and doubt about
his holiness, and here there was a way for the believing man of the
pharaoh family to protect Moses, and he was the maternal cousin of the
pharaoh and some say that he was his paternal cousin, and he is Hazaqeel
(Ezekiel) (PUH) \[The man is supposed to be Egyptian, but the name is of
Hebrew origin, but this is how it was mentioned, but it differs from
Ezekiel the prophet for sure although the author mentioned "PUH" after
his name\] and they say that he hid his faith for six hundred years as
Taqiyyah \[Arabic: Taqiyyah = Preservation, Protection. This action was
spread among Shiite people so wide to get along with other communities
for the long history of adversities and hostilities against them. It is
done by acting, wearing and behaving like the community that a man would
live in to get along with people and hide his faith in something\], and
as attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH): the Taqiyyah is of my religion and the
religion of my fathers, and there is no religion for the one that has no
Taqiyyah, for Taqiyyah is the shield of God on earth, for the believing
man of the pharaoh would be killed if he showed his faith, and it is
attributed to the prophet (PUH) that he said: the righteous are three
and Ezekiel the believing man of the pharaoh family is considered one of
them..etc, so Ezekiel in this story was defedning Moses freely for he
was not afraid of being charged, for the pharaoh and his people are
plotting against Moses.  
Since the right is shown to be beside Moses and nothing can beocme
higher than him, Ezekiel stood up to protect Moses that God appreciated
that for him, and he did well with that fearing no one, and without a
doubt he is a believer in Moses and in the Lord of Moses, and he
explained for them that it is not approperiate to kill him just because
he said that my Lord is "Allah" because his claims do not deserve to be
killed for, and he came with his obvious miracles that proves his
truthfulness, and then Ezekiel avoided being discovered so he said: if
he was a liar then no harm of his lies, and if he was true, then some of
his promises would be fullfilled against you, and by saying this he is
pulling them gradually toward believing and admitting his truthful calls
and proving that they are wrong and to ask them not to be
fundamentalists, but the pharaoh opposed him in opinion and said to some
people that agree with him against him (Ezekiel), then he (the pharaoh)
said: I do but show you what I think, and I do but guide you to wise
policy(Ghâfir:29), and the believing man of the pharaoh family did not
stop just by telling them his opinion but also called to God and warned
them against God's will and what happened to the ancient nations and how
God deals with those who disbelieve in His prophets, and He took revenge
of Noah's people and drawned them and destroyed A\`ad and Þamud, and
explained to them what happened to the various nations because of their
deeds and reminded them that the calls of Moses are not something new,
and Joseph ben Jacob (PUH) came with such tidings and calls before and
when he passed away to his Lord they said that God will never send
another prophet while before him came his fathers Abraham, Ishmael,
Isaac and Jacob, and all of them were prophets and all came with clues
and miracles and some of them God had guided and some others were not to
be guided at all, and nothing can be hid from God in earth or heaven,
and He never neglect the good and bad deeds and rewards everyone
according to his deeds, thus believers will be in paradise nad eternal
luxury, \[some lines come here with tricky order that I could not
translate, but it has the meaning of: Ezekiel is calling them to
happiness and faith and they are calling to sorrow and hell\].  
They started to plot against Ezekiel as they did with Moses and they
felt that he was believing in the religion of Moses for his obvious
defense for Moses but God protected him against their plotting, and his
end was to happiness and the pharaoh's end with his people to hell.  
In an interpretation for Al-\`Askari (PUH) as attributed to his fathers
as they reported to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) that he said: Ezekiel, the believing
man of the pharaoh family, a believer in the Oneness of God and a
believer in the prophecy of Moses, and in preferring Muhammad (PUH) to
all prophets and preferring \`Ali ben Abi-Tâlib (PUH) and the rest of
the Imams (PUT) to all other viceroys and he was a disbeliever in the
sacredness of the pharaoh and what his people believe in, so some
betrayers betrayed him and told the pharaoh about him and said: Ezekiel
calls against you and helps your enemies, so he said to them: he is my
cousin and my viceroy over my kingdom so if he did as you said then he
deserves the punishment for neglecting my favours towards him and if you
were liars then you deserve the extreme punishment for interfering with
him, so Ezekiel then brought and was said to him: you disbelieve in the
pharaoh and neglect his favours, so Ezekiel said then: O king, did you
ever witness my lying? He answered: no, he (Ezekiel) said then: ask them
then who is their lord? They all said: the pharaoh, he said then: who is
your creator? They said: the pharaoh, he said: who is the one that gives
you life and make a living for you and protect you? They said: this
pharaoh! Then said Ezekiel: O king then witness and all of the people in
your presence that their Lord is my Lord and their Creator is my Creator
and the One who makes life for them is the One that makes life for me as
well, and I make you witness with all people around you that every other
god but their God I do disbelieve in. He said all of that meaning God,
the One, the Lord of the worlds.  
It is said that then the pharaoh turned his face to the betrayers and
said: O people that seek corruption in my kingdom and desire sedition
between me and my cousin, you are the ones that desire my punishment for
your desires to kill my cousin, and then he ordered to put wedges in
their legs and their chests and ordered to brush their bodies with iron
brushes, and this is about God's saying: So Allah warded off from him
the evils which they plotted, while a dreadful doom encompassed
Pharaoh's folk(Ghâfir:45), so their betraying for Ezekiel was a reason
for their destruction.  
The holy phrases from the chapter of Ghâfir: And a believing man of
Pharaoh's family, who hid his faith, said: Would ye kill a man because
he saith: My Lord is Allah, and hath brought you clear proofs from your
Lord ? If he is lying, then his lie is upon him; and if he is truthful,
then some of that wherewith he threateneth you will strike you. Lo!
Allah guideth not one who is a prodigal, a liar. O my people! Yours is
the kingdom to-day, ye being uppermost in the land. But who would save
us from the wrath of Allah should it reach us ? Pharaoh said: I do but
show you what I think, and I do but guide you to wise policy. And he who
believed said: O my people! Lo! I fear for you a fate like that of the
factions (of old); A plight like that of Noah's folk, and A'ad and
Thamud, and those after them, and Allah willeth no injustice for (His)
slaves(Ghâfir:28-31), until God mentioned what he did say: And verily
Joseph brought you of old clear proofs, yet ye ceased not to be in doubt
concerning what he brought you till, when he died, ye said: Allah will
not send any messenger after him. Thus Allah deceiveth him who is a
prodigal, a doubter(Ghâfir:34), and God then said: And he who believed
said: O my people! Follow me. I will show you the way of right
conduct(Ghâfir:38), and also: And ye will remember what I say unto you.
I confide my cause unto Allah. Lo! Allah is Seer of (His) slaves. So
Allah warded off from him the evils which they plotted, while a dreadful
doom encompassed Pharaoh's folk, The Fire; they are exposed to it
morning and evening; and on the day when the Hour upriseth (it is said):
Cause Pharaoh's folk to enter the most awful doom(Ghâfir:44-46). In a
narration attributed to Al-Sâdiq (PUH) about Ezekiel: by God, they
turned him into pieces, but God warded off the evils of being a
disbeliever. They said that he hid his faith until Moses appeared and
defeated the wizards so he showed his faith with the wizards and so he
was crucified with them.  
Although Moses was so cautious toward the pharaoh and his tyranny he did
not stop calling him to believe in God and work with the righteous
religion seeking that if he believed then all people would do so as well
because they all follow him, so his wish to make the pharaoh believe was
to let all people believe as well, thus all in Egypt would believe in
God, so his true gain is to make all people believe in God and His
religion and work according to His laws, and Moses increased his calls
towards the pharaoh to believe after that wizards believed in him
neglecting the tyranny of the pharaoh, and Moses were calling and asking
him to believe in God and release the Israelites.  
The pharaoh did exaggerate in his response and saw that it is something
so great for him to believe in Moses and follow his religion with such
power and riches he had and all the people were his slaves, and Egypt
with its Nile and its branches that run all over the lands pour into his
riches, and so he was taken away with his material soul that sees no
dignity except by riches so he said: I am surely better than this
fellow, who is despicable and can hardly make (his meaning)
plain!(Al-Zokhrof:52), and also said: Why, then, have armlets of gold
not been set upon him, or angels sent along with him?(Al-Zokhrof:53),
and the damned neglected what Moses brought with him which was greater
than what he wished, and if Moses brought what he wished he would still
say it is but magic, but he works with his forked tongue in front of the
poor people and by these sayings his people did follow him for they used
to follow him to wherever he wants and so they sold their after-life and
their religion and their souls for the sake of the life of the pharaoh
and so they lost the life and the after-life and this is the great loss,
and that made him gather the people from every where and say to them: I
(Pharaoh) am your Lord the Highest. God did tell his story in the
chapter of Al-Zokhrof: And Pharaoh caused a proclamation to be made
among his people saying: O my people! Is not mine the sovereignty of
Egypt and these rivers flowing under me? Can ye not then discern? I am
surely better than this fellow, who is despicable and can hardly make
(his meaning) plain! Why, then, have armlets of gold not been set upon
him, or angels sent along with him? Thus he persuaded his people to make
light (of Moses), and they obeyed him. Lo! they were a wanton
folk(Al-Zokhrof:51-54). And in the chapter of Al-Nâzi\`ât: Then turned
he away in haste, Then gathered he and summoned, And proclaimed: "I
(Pharaoh) am your Lord the Highest." So Allah seized him (and made him)
an example for the after (life) and for the former(Al-Nâzi\`ât:22-25),
and the former is when he said: I know not that ye have a god other than
me, and the after (life) is when he said: I (Pharaoh) am your Lord the
Highest. Thus, when pride conquered the pharaoh with tyranny and
rebelled against the commandment of God and exaggerated in disbelieving
Moses and kept on torturing the Israelites and humiliating them, God
then ordered Moses to tell the pharaoh and his people that God will
reveal His punishment upon them, and thus whenever an adversity comes
over them they knew its reason and it is only because of the prays of
Moses and he had promised them with that, so they had to come to Moses
and promise him with believing in God to have a relief, and when God
take off His punishment they would get back to tyranny, and so on until
the great adversity fell upon them and that is by drawning the pharaoh
and his people and destroying them, and that was the great happy tidings
for the Israelites in this life for their victory and been safe and the
destruction of their enemy.  
The adversities that came over them after that Moses showed his miracles
and clues are: the dry years, loss of plants, flood, locusts, vermin,
frogs, blood and terror (or pollution), and before that the staff and
the hand, and they are nine and Moses had lot of miracles before these
previous miracles and after the death of the pharaoh and we will point
out the strangest of them so just wait. Some concluded that these
previously mentioned miracles are not the same as the miracles that
Moses was sent with to the Israelites, and that by God's saying: Do but
ask the Children of Israel how he came unto them(Al-Isrâ':101), and the
miracles (or tokens) that are special for the Israelites are considered
to be laws and regulations as it is mentioned that a jew asked the
prophet (PUH) about these phrases (or tokens) so he (PUH) said: they
are: do not believe in other god but the Lord, do not steal, do not
commit adultery, do not kill the soul that God fobade unless by a right,
do not take an innocent man to the ruler to kill him, do not commit
magic and witchcraft, do not deal in usury, do not claim bad things on a
faithful woman, do not escape from fighting, and for you jews in special
do not transgress the Sabbath, so when the prophet (PUH) finished his
talk the jew man stood up and took his hand and kissed it and said: I
swear that you are a prophet.  
Thus, the miracles or phrases that are special for the Israelites were
as regulations and laws for all people of all creeds and religions that
were before them or that will be after them until the doomsday which are
fixed in all religions, and what we believe is that everything that
Moses brought of regulations was for all sane persons of coptic people
or the Israelites and others as well of djinn and human beings, because
his regulations are for the public and it banishes what came before it,
and for no doubt Moses is considered one of stout of heart among the
messengers \[messangers of stout hearts is an expression used to denote
prophets or messangers that their message and religion was for all
people and not only one tribe or nation, and they are five: Noah,
Abraham, Moses, Jesus, Muhammad (PUT)\], for he is a messanger in the
first place from God to Egypt, to the pharaoh and Haman and Korah and to
release the Israelites from the hands of the tyrant pharaoh, and in
reality he is a messanger to all people that do understand at his time
and so on until his religion is to be changed and banished by another
prophet that God would send after him, and it had been banished with
religions that came after by the religion of Islam by the hands of its
prophet, the Hashimite, may peace be upon him and upon his Household and
upon the rest of the messangers and prophets.  
We say also that everyone had to ask for a miracle as a proof for what
he came with, and the Israelite is like anyone else to ask for miracles
and the regulations and laws for all, and as for the pharaoh and his
tyranny he was faced with miracles such as the staff and others in
public, and this is by God's saying: Go thou unto Pharaoh! Lo! he hath
transgressed (the bounds)(TaHa:24), do not be confused. Look to the many
doubts of the Israelites and they had like any other nation, the
believer and the hypocrite, and when they went out of the sea after the
destruction of their enemy, they saw some people worshipping an idol for
them so then they said to Moses: O Moses! Make for us a god even as they
have gods(Al-A\`râf:138), and when Moses went away from them to get the
commandments from God they rebelled against his viceroy, his brother
Aaron, and followed As-Samiri (the Samarian) with the worshipping of the
calf, and the Samarian was one of them, and Korah was also one of them,
so notice, but they had been divided to many branches as well as nations
before, and so all of that requires a miracle to be shown up for them,
or even for some special people of them as well as it was done with
others before, and they did take refuge in him because of their
adversities only, but we do not deny that there are faithful believers
that were waiting for him to appear as we've mentioned before, and they
had to ask for miracle as well, and what was mentioned of holy phrases
are all mentioned in the chapters of Al-A\`râf, Al-Isrâ', TaHa, Al-Naml,
Al-Qasas, Al-Zokhrof, Al-Qamar, Al-Nâzi\`ât and so on and they are all
give the brightest clues for the noble thinker and would make his
darkness brighter and they are a refreshment for the heart, so how great
are these miracles and holy phrases that leave no excuse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Exit of The Israelites From Egypt to Palestine](mos13)
