[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos10)  [Next](mos12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Ash\`abite Imaginations of The Pharaoh

Ash\`ab, and he is the one that was famous for his silly imaginations
and his bad opinions, and one of his stories as it was mentioned that
once he kept some children away from him by lying at them, and he told
them there is a wedding some where and they give some money in that
wedding for the children, so the children went away from him trying to
reach that wedding for the money, so when they went away he followed
them hoping that what he did say is true and get something from that
money that is distributed in that wedding! When the pharaoh asked Moses
and Aaron about their Lord by saying: who is your Lord O Moses? He said:
the Lord of the earth and heavens and what is between them, so he
thought from Moses' speech that their Lord is found some where in heaven
because the Almighty that can be up never comes down, and he made his
people think that he is able to fight him and kill him as well and that
climbing to the sky is something that he can do, so he issued a command
to his minister, Haman, to build for him a tower reaching the sky to see
the Lord of Moses, and then mentioned his thought about the lies of
Moses. When Haman built the tower and made it so tall so that the
pharaoh can reach the Lord of Moses, a wind came and knock it down from
its base so it was ruined and the idea of the the pharaoh did fail and
he was never guided, then he commanded to make an ark and on all of its
corners some tightened pillars, then he (Haman) brought lot of hungry
eagles and tightened them by the legs to the pillars and hanged on each
pillar some meat, then both of them (the pharaoh and Haman) went into
the ark and it went flying high because of the eagles and their hunger
and the meat upon the pillars, so they flew with the ark all daytime and
the pharaoh were asking Haman from time to time about what was upon them
and what was beneath them, until they reached so high and he (the
pharaoh) thought that he would be dead, he then commanded to be back to
earth so he (Haman) got the meat down for the eagles and they all came
down to earth in safe, for a wisdom only God knows.  
In the chapter of Al-Qasas: And Pharaoh said: O chiefs! I know not that
ye have a god other than me, so kindle for me (a fire), O Haman, to bake
the mud; and set up for me a lofty tower in order that I may survey the
god of Moses; and lo! I deem him of the liars(Al-Qasas:38). Kindling the
fire is supposed to make the bricks from the mud to build the tower with
after burning it with fire, so that he (the pharaoh) can reach the Lord
of Moses and solve the problem with Him by an agreement or by killing
each other, and this is only because of his Ash\`abite imaginations. In
the chapter of Ghâfir: And Pharaoh said: O Haman! Build for me a tower
that haply I may reach the roads, The roads of the heavens, and may look
upon the god of Moses, though verily I think him a liar. Thus was the
evil that he did made fairseeming unto Pharaoh, and he was debarred from
the (right) way. The plot of Pharaoh ended but in ruin(Ghâfir:36-37).  
So Moses insisted on the pharaoh to believe in God while he was among
his own people and this is something that breaks off his picture and get
his place among his people down and it opposes the tyranny of the
pharaoh, the one who owns the necks and the power over all the land and
worshipped by the people, and who can compete with him and he is the one
that said "I (Pharaoh) am your Lord the Highest" and "I know not that ye
have a god other than me," and for this God did say to his messanger
Moses (PUH): Go, both of you, unto Pharaoh. Lo! he hath transgressed
(the bounds), And speak unto him a gentle word, that peradventure he may
heed or fear(TaHa:43-44). Moses then did not leave any gentle way unless
he had used and no door of guidance he did not enter for make the
pharaoh happy with his people, but they do not like people that give
advices. Some interpreters say that Haman did build the tower for the
pharaoh until he reached an end that he could not continue building and
then the pharaoh went upon it and directed an arrow to the sky and the
arrow came back with some blood so then the pharaoh said: I killed the
god of Moses, but this narration is full of doubt and it is but lies,
for the pharaoh knows clearly that he is lying about what he claimed to
himself and most of his followers did know that but because of his power
they could not say it frankly, as it is for all the people in every time
and every place, except those that God did make them succeed and happy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pharaoh Wants to Kill Moses and The Believing Man From The
Pharaoh Family Defending Him](mos12)
