[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos19)  [Next](mos21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Place of Revelation of Torah

It is mentioned that the place of revelation of the tablets and books of
Torah that contained the knowledgement of the first and last nations and
the regulations of the religion of Moses was the mountain of Sinai, so
there speaking to God did exist and there the Torah was revealed, and to
that blessed spot he (Moses) did stay away from his people while he made
his brother Aaron to take the leadership over them, and there he fasted
for forty years and there he lived while he was fasting as a humiliating
himself towards God and asking for the satisfaction of God, and there he
did ask to see God as an answer to his chosen chieftains among all of
his people and the answer of God was a reason to make it knocked down,
and Moses fell down in a coma as God did say: My Lord! Show me (Thy
Self), that I may gaze upon Thee(Al-A\`râf:143), and then God inspired
to him: you cannot but look at the mountain if you saw it knocked down
in its place then you will see me, so God then removed the veil and look
at the mountain so it was knocked down from the base as if it was never
there.  
In a narration reported to the Household of the chosen prophet (PUT)
they said that the angels came down and opened the gates of heavens so
then God inspired to them to take care of Moses, and it is (the
mountain) that God lift up upon the Israelites as a torment to let them
accept the Torah and that is by God's saying: And when We shook the
Mount above them as it were a covering, and they supposed that it was
going to fall upon them(Al-A\`râf:171).  
There are some narrations that we understand from them that the
mountains that were knocked down were seven and they were moved to Hijâz
and Yemen and of them were the mountain of Ohod and Warqân nearby Medina
and Þawr and Þubair in Mecca and Hawâ in Yemen..etc, and we do not see
any important benefits of discussing this in a long speech and what
Quran mentioned is enough, and there are in many occasions and in what
was mentioned by the Household in their prays to God, it is understood
from them that there are holy places that God did talk to his servant
Moses from other than the mountain of Sinai, and other places also that
He showed His signs to His servants like Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and
Moses and others before and after them, and it is obvious in the pray of
Al-Samât \[a famous pray or ritual for Shiites\], and there are places
that God showed His signs for His servants in them but are almost
unknown by the scholars and the scientists in our recent days, and some
of them are known like the mosque of Al-Khayf in Minâ \[in KSA\], so he
(\`Ali ben Abi Tâlib PUH) said: O Lord and I shall ask You by Your Glory
that You spoke with with Moses ben Amram in the holy places, upon the
sense of Al-Karrubiyeen \[Al-Karrubiyeen: people differ in the meaning
of this word, but most of them said it is the name (plural) for the
angels that carry up the Throne\], upon the clouds of light, upon the
ark, in the column of fire and in the mountain of Sinai and in the
mountain of Hureeþ \[Hureeþ is close to Horeb the one mentioned in
Torah, but as it is interpreted by Torah it is just another name for the
mountain of Sinai, but here the prince of believers (PUH) makes a
difference between the two\], in the holy valley, in the holy spot of
the right side of the tree...and in the gushing out that You made
wonders with in the sea of Suf \[this name I could not translate to any
other versions by means of Torah\]...etc, until he (PUH) says: the one
that You showed Yourself by for Moses in the mountain of Sinai...and for
Abraham in the mosque of Al-Khayf...and for Isaac in the well of Shee\`
(Shebah) and for Jacob in the house of Eel (?)..etc, and by Your Glory
that appeared for Moses on the Qubbat Al-Rummân (dome of pomegranates)
\[I belive the full story is mentioned in the Exodus\], until he (PUH)
says: and by Your light that made the mountain of Sinai knocked
down...and by Your face's light that You showed to mountain and made it
down and Moses fell senseless...and by Your signs in Sâ\`eer (Seir), and
Your presence in the mount of Fârân (Paran) in the holy hills...and at
the end the Imam (PUH) says: my Lord by this pray, and by the rights of
these names that no one knows their interpretations save but You...etc.
Actually, God showed His prophet (PUH) about these names in general to
let him know that they do exist and to ask by them for their holiness,
and the prophet showed that to his viceroy and the other viceroys of
Imams after him to ask the Lord by these names for their holiness and
they (the viceroys) showed these names for the public of muslims to let
them get the benefit as well and only God knows.  
In some narrations it is told that Al-Ma'mun, the abbaside caliphate,
asked Al-Ridhâ (PUH) about the meaning of God's saying: And when Moses
came to Our appointed tryst and his Lord had spoken unto him, he said:
My Lord! Show me (Thy Self), that I may gaze upon Thee(Al-A\`râf:143),
and the question was: how come that Moses the prophet of God and he did
not know that God is not to be seen to ask for such question? Then
Al-Ridhâ (PUH) said in his answer: Moses ben Amram (PUH) knew that God
was not to be seen, but when He talked to him and made him closer to Him
and he went back to his people telling them that God talked to him they
did not believe in him and said: we will not believe in you unless we
hear Him as well as you, and they were at that time seven hundred
thousand, so he chose seventy thousand, and then chose from them seven
thousand, and then he chose out of them seventy men to be with him when
facing God, so he went out with them to the mountain of Sinai and stayed
there with them, and then Moses went up to the mountain and asked God to
talk to him and let them hear Him as well, so God talked to him and they
heard His voice from everywhere around them for God did make it in the
tree and made it spread all around them, so then they said to him
(Moses): we will not believe that what we heard was God's voice unless
we see God, so when they said this great saying God did send a thunder
upon them and took them away for their wrong-doing and they were
destroyed. Then Moses said: O Lord what shall I say for the Israelites
when I get back to them and when they would say that I got them out and
killed them for I was not truthful in what I claimed? Then God made them
alive again and sent them with him, so they said to him: if you asked
God to allow you to see Him He would surely accept and then you would
tell us how He is so we shall know Him better, so then Moses said to
them: O folks, God is not to be seen with the eyes but He is known for
His miracles and signs, then they said to him: we shall not believe in
you until you ask Him, so then Moses said: O Lord, You heard them and
You know better how faithful they are, so then God inspired to him: O
Moses ask Me what they did ask you for I shall not charge you for their
ignorance, so then Moses said: O Lord, allow me to see You, so then He
said: you will not be able to see Me but see the mountain if it was
knocked down in its place you will see Me, so when God looked at the
mountain it was knocked down and Moses fell down senseless in a coma,
and when he woke up he said: Sanctification be to You, to You I made my
repentance and I am the first of believers..etc, and in the book of
Ihtijâj that of Al-Tabarsi it is mentioned that a man came to the prince
of believers (PUH) and said to him: O prince of believers, tell me about
God, did you see Him when you worshipped Him? He (PUH) answered: I am
not someone that worships something that he did not see, so the man
said: how did you see him O prince of believers? He (PUH) answsered: woe
to you! The eyes did not see Him by means of sightness, but hearts see
Him by means of the facts of the faith, known by clues and called by the
signs, not to be measured by people and not to be felt with the usual
senses, so the man left the place saying: God knows better where to put
His message.  
In Muruj Al-Ðahab for Al-Mas\`udi in the part concerning the stories of
Moses, after God had destroyed the pharaoh, He commanded Moses to get
the Israelites out into the deserts (the Wandering) and they were six
hundred thousand adults added to them non-adults, and the tablets that
were revealed upon Moses at the mountain of Sinai were made of green
emerald and the writings were made of gold, so then when he got down
from the mountain he saw some people from the Israelites that were
worshipping a calf that they made so he got shocked and the tablets fell
down from his hand and got broken and then he gathered it all and put
them into the ark and made it into the temple, and Aaron was a priest
and the head of the temple, and God revealed all the Torah on Moses
while he was in the Wandering (or Exodus), and God took back the soul of
Aaron during the Wandering  and he was buried in the mountain of Marân
in the direction of the mountain of Al-Shirâ' that lies after the
mountain of Sinai, and his grave is famous there in a normal cave that
produces horrible sounds at nights that make everyone scared...until he
(the narrator) said: and God had revealed on Moses ten books so it was
completed to one hundred books \[maybe the narrator means the total
books revealed since the days of Adam added to the books of Moses would
complete one hundred books\], then God revealed on him the Torah that
contained the commands and what is allowed and what is not and
regulations and that was in five books (the pentateuch) \[then the
author explains the meaning of a word in Arabic which is used for books
of Torah in special, but for translation purposes it can not be put
here. Book of Torah is called Sifr pl. Asfâr\].  
What is understood from Al-Mas\`udi is that the tablets is something
different from the books and they are different from Torah, and the
tablets are what reached the prophet (PUH) and he commanded his viceroy
the prince of believers to copy them and keep them and they are the
Cipher that has the knowledgement of the first and last nations and we
mentioned that a while ago, and the one hundred books are what God said
about in His holy book: Lo! This is in the former scrolls. The Books of
Abraham and Moses(Al-A\`lâ:18-19), and the Torah is something else other
than these and we had explained what was the Torah for, and everything
including the prophecial heritages with it (the Torah) and other things
are all kept in the hands of the last hidden viceroy the son of
Al-\`Askiri (PUH) may our souls be a ransom to him, so peace upon him
and upon his infallible purified fathers, and mercy of God and His
blessings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Worshipping The Calf](mos21.md)
