[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](noa00)  [Next](noa02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Ark of Noah and its creation

It is mentioned in some tales that are traced back to Al-Sâdiq (PUH)
that when Gos showed the prophecy of Noah and his followers knew that
the relief is coming and he will gain victory over his enemies of
disbelievers after a patience of long time over great troubles. Whenever
Noah used to call them to the religion of truth and to work by it and
worshipping the Truth (True God) they used to revolt against him and
hurt him badly with his followers and that was in a time period of three
hundreds years since the day of his sending, and he used to in that time
period to call them by day and night but they run away from him and then
he called them in secret and they didn't answer also, and called them in
public but they ignore him for their pride and never cared about him or
about his calls, then he started to call for their destruction, so then
Angels came down to him ordering him to stop calling for their
destruction and to take patience and bear them to complete the reason
for that, so he answered and obeyed, and started to work again calling
them to worship God and left out calling for their destruction and
started trying to guide them as he used to be before for another three
hundreds years, until then when this time period was over and had been
dispaired for their unbelieving, started to call for their destruction
again, but then angels came down with orders from God for him to be
patient and so he obeyed, then he got back calling his people to worship
God for a three hundred years, but nothing worked with them, and he
continued with them until the end of this time period for nine hundreds
years, then the patience of his followers was over and went to him
complaining for what they did and still facing from the people in public
and from the tyrants.  
Then they asked him for the relief and calling for their relief and so
he answered their request then went to pray and calling over them so
then Gabriel came down sent from God and said to him: God had answered
your call over your people, but before doing so God wants you to order
your followers to plant some seeds, and he had appointed some quantity
of it, and they should take care of it so that when it grows and gave
the fruit God will give relief over them, and then he (Gabriel) taught
them what to do, so then they went happy and knew that the relief is
close and that God will give victory to His religion with no way out
even if the disbelievers did not like it.  
Then they obeyed what they had been commanded to do so, they planted the
seeds and served them as perfectly as possible so then when it gave the
fruit and they ate them they came back to Noah to see his promise, so he
got back to his Lord and He commanded him with what He commanded in the
first time and so they did what they did before for planting the seeds
and serving them. Then they got back again to Noah and he asked God
again and God commanded him as the first and second time so they doubted
about his religion and his calls for there is a contradiction and two
thirds of them quitted their religion and only one third stayed
faithful, but that was faced with the fear of their enemies and bearing
the disrespect from the disbelievers, then the believers and them who
stayed faithful insisted on him to call for the relief and for the
destruction of disbelievers so he called God and asked Him to do what
was promised and for the relief and He answered his calls and ordered
him to make the Ark.  
This dilation was to filter out the hypocrites that worship God and they
are on the edge, so that when they get goodness they are fine with it
and when they get badness they revolt and then lost the life and the
after-life, this is the obvious losing, and to keep the true faithfuls
and distinguish between them and the bad mixture, and they said to him
(Noah): no one stayed from us except this little group and they are
afraid for themselves to be doomed if the relief is delayed, then Noah
prayed and asked his God to do what is promised for the destruction of
the enemies of the religion so God inspired to him that your call had
been answered so go ahead and make the Ark, so there was fifty years
between the answer of the call and the flood.  
And from the great prophet (PUH): When God wanted to destroy the people
of Noah, He inspired to him(Noah) to cut boards of teak (teak is a great
tree doesn't grow except in the land of India, its wood is black and
thick and hard to decay, as mentioned in the closest language resources)
\[the previous note is exactly what is written in Arabic in the book and
not my own notes\], so when he cut them out he did not know what to do
with it, so then the Angel Gabriel came down to him and showed him the
shape of the Ark and there was with him a box that had one hundred and
twenty nine thousands nails in it, so he nailed all the nails and they
were exactly enough for the Ark, and God ordered Gabriel to teach Noah
how to do it. Its length was measured on the ground to be of one
thousand and two hundreds arms and its width was eight hundreds arms,
and its depth was eighty arms, then Noah said: O Lord who will make it
and help me to do it, so God inspired to him to call for his people and
in the public and whoever can work to work with him for an exchange of
good wages, so Noah called in his people and told them whoever worked
with him with goodness of will as I order him to do he will get a nice
reward and a nice wage, so they answered and started to work everyone
with his own experience and his job and so they helped him to make it.  
They even used to mock at him and say that he is making a ship on land,
and in some tales it is told that the Ark was covered on top with a
great cover (dish-like cover) to avoid the rains and the heat of the
sun, and of course it had ways to the outside from doors and windows to
let some air in and for the breathe of the animals and the rest of
creatures inside it, all of that was made perfectly. It is mentioned
also that it had great two pearls, one of them light in the day time by
sun, and the other light in the night time by the moon and by them they
used to know the timings for the prayers, and they stayed in the Ark
before landing on earth again for one hundred and fifty days and nights,
and also said they were six months.  
In tidings, that after he finished creating the Ark, God ordered him to
call in Syriac, and it was their language that day, for all the people
and animals so that no one person nor one animal shall be absent, so
when all came, every type of animals got inside in pairs, and the people
that answered his calls and been faithful to him were eighty men, so
then God said: take with you two of each pair. And in some tales that
the period of creating the Ark was one hundred years and then God
ordered him to take two of each  pair, and the eight pairs that God
mentioned in His Holy Book are the ones that Noah carried in the Ark, so
God said (in the Holy Book): and He hath provided for you of cattle
eight kinds(Al-Zumar:6), two of sheeps and two of goats and two of
camels and two of cows, so it was two pairs of sheeps: one is the known
to people and used breed, and the other was a wild one used to be on
mountains and God allowed eating from its meat, and also two of goats,
pair people used to breed, and another one which was wild and that is
the gazelle, and two of cows, one people used to breed and the other one
is the wild one, and two of camels and they are "Al-Bokhâti" and
"Al-'Orâbi" \[seems they are Arabic names for well known types of
camels, could not find any translation for these two names\], and both
of them people used to breed. So these are the eight pairs that Adam got
out from paradise with him or might be revealed on him after he was down
from it to make a living from them for his children and him from their
meats and their milks and their breeds and their hairs and wools as
drinks and food and clothes and forniture.  
The creation of the Ark was in the location of Al-Kufa mosque, so when
God wanted to destroy the people of Noah and Noah did take for every
type of animals a special position in the Ark and prepared necessary
things of food and water, and until all animals were in the Ark from
various birds and beasts and no one is awaited to be in from people nor
animals, then waters started going out from earth by springs and the sky
started to hammer with non stopping rains, so God did say in the chapter
of Al-Qamar (The Moon): Then opened We the gates of heaven with pouring
water, And caused the earth to gush forth springs, so that the waters
met for a predestined purpose, And We carried him upon a thing of planks
and nails(11-13). The meaning and God only knows: so We made the the
earth full of springs and then the water of the sky and the water of
earth did meet together, so water flood everything and everything sank
and thearth shaked and the sun eclipsed, then Noah said: Embark therein!
In the name of Allah be its course and its mooring. Lo! my Lord is
Forgiving, Merciful(Hud:41), then the Ark moved and turned around to
where God desired, and Noah looked to his son and he was confused
standing and falling, so he called him: O my son! Come ride with us, and
be not with the disbelievers(Hud:42), so his son answered: I shall
betake me to some mountain that will save me from the water(Hud:43),
then Noah said: This day there is none that saveth from the commandment
of Allah save him on whom He hath had mercy. And the wave came in
between them, so he was among the drowned(Hud:43), then Noah asked God
to save his son from being drowned, so he raised his eyes to his Lord
calling for help and taking refuge in God's mercy then he said: My Lord!
Lo! my son is of my household! Surely Thy promise is the truth and Thou
are the Most Just of Judges(Hud:45), so He said: He said: O Noah! Lo! he
is not of thy household; lo! he is of evil conduct, so ask not of Me
that whereof thou hast no knowledge. I admonish thee lest thou be among
the ignorant(Hud:46), this is the speech of the Exalted who takes
revenge from every one of pride and doesn't believe in the doomsday, to
His obeying slave, who works sincerely towards his Lord, and who's
thankful for His gifts, who obeys His commandments and stays away from
whatever He forbids, and he is His slave and His creature, and He had
gifted him his prophecy and his message and Sent him to his people and
his time, so it was like if Noah was unaware and surprised for what his
Lord wants, and that the relation of family has no value without
believing in God, so when God awared him for what has to be from him
towards his Master, he woke up and apologized saying: My Lord! Lo! in
Thee do I seek refuge (from the sin) that I should ask of Thee that
whereof I have no knowledge. Unless Thou forgive me and have mercy on me
I shall be among the lost(Hud:47).  
So it is traced back to Abi Ja'far Muhammad ben 'Ali Al-Bâqir (PUH) in a
long speech for him: There is no relation between God and anyone else,
the most beloved by God whoever is faithful to Him and obeying His
commandments, then he (PUH) said: I swear by God that no slave can
approach to God except by obeying (worshipping), we don't have any
relief from hell and no one has any reason before God, and whoever is
obeying God then he's a follower for us, and whoever is against God,
he's an enemy for us, and our love is taken except by the faith and the
good of deeds. So, the Ark then sailed in waves like mountains until it
reached Mecca and went around the Holy House, and everyone on earth did
sink even the high mountains and nothing survived except the Holy
House.  
In some tales it is told that it was called the "Protected House"
because it was protected from being drowned, and it was told also that
the flood and the water from skies and earth from springs continued for
forty mornings until the water was above everything and sank everything
and everything that had a soul died, so then Noah raised his hands to
the sky and said: O Lord, your mercy, your mercy, Have mercy on us, so
then the rain stopped and the springs stopped and the clouds were gone
and the weather came back again as normal as it was and the winds
stopped down and everything was calm, and the whole world was all water
and the earth as one one passage way, and then God ordered the earth to
swallow its waters and the water of the sky remained on the face of
earth and so from it were the seas of this world for God, the Exalted,
ordered Gabriel (PUH) to drive the waters to its current form, and God
had stopped it by His own power and His will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The coming down of Noah and his fellows from the Ark](noa02)
