[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dast11)  [Next](dast13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Dakshinamurti Stotra*, translated by Alladi Mahadeva Sastri, \[1920\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

### MAYA.

#### Eighth Stanza of the Hymn.

To the Atman who, deluded by Mâyâ, sees, in jâgrat or svapna, the
universe in variety, as cause and effect, as master and servant, as
teacher and disciple, as father and son, and so on to Him who is
incarnate in the Teacher, to Him in the Effulgent Form Facing the South,
to Him (Siva) be this bow!

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

#### What is Bondage, Liberation and Maya?

1\. If, apart from the Light, no object exists, then how arises all the
experience ending with initiation into the Supreme Truth?

2–3. Who is bound and liberated? Why is one bound? What may be the
definition of Mâyâ? Thus may an enquirer ask. With a view to answer
these questions, and in order (that the disciple may) understand the
matter with ease, what has been taught in the seven stanzas is again
told in brief.

4\. Repetition in word or sense can be no fault here (in this Sâstra).
Frequent

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

reiteration only shows how momentous the theme is.

<span class="small">The meaning of the eighth stanza may be explained as
follows:—</span>

#### All experience is a Fiction.

5–6. To imagine in Paramesvara, in the One Self-luminous Existence, the
relation of cause and effect and other things of various sorts, is like
imagining, the head of Râhu, empty space in âkâsa, 'my self,' the body
of an idol, and so on,—as not referring to distinct realities.

<span class="small">Rahu and Ketu are, respectively, the head and the
trunk of one Rakshasa's body severed into two; so that, when one speaks
of the head of Rahu, we cannot suppose that the head exists distinct
from Rahu. The two are, in fact, one. Similarly when Paramesvara is
spoken of as the cause of the universe, we should not understand that
the universe is distinct from Paramesvara. There is only one existence,
namely, Paramesvara.</span>

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

7\. Isvara amuses Himself assuming, of His own accord, the forms of
worshipper and the worshipped, of teacher and disciple, of master and
servant, and so on.

8\. He who is a son with reference to his father is himself the father
with reference to his son; one alone, indeed, is imagined in various
ways according to mere words.

9\. Therefore, on investigating supreme truth, we find that the Light
alone exists. False (mithyâ) indeed is all notion of difference in
Atman, caused as it is by Mâyâ.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

#### The meaning of "mithya"

10\. Falseness (mithyâtva) consists in being nullified when right
knowledge arises. Then, the master instructing the disciple and all else
appear like a dream.

#### Truth taught through fiction.

11\. The Vedanta, though in itself false may enable one to understand
the Real Truth, like the idol of a God, or like a drawing, or like a
reflection.

#### Maya nullified by knowledge.

12\. All our mundane experience is a display of Mâyâ. Like unto
sushupti, Mâyâ is nullified by knowledge of Atman.

#### Maya defined.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

13\. The name 'mâyā' is given to an appearance which cannot be accounted
for. It is not non-existent, because it appears; neither is it existent,
because it is nullified.

14\. It is not distinct from the Light, as the dark shadow is distinct
from the sun. Neither is it identical with the Light because it is
insentient. Nor can it be both distinct from and identical with the
Light, because it is a contradiction in terms.

<span class="small">Or, Maya may be compared to the shadow which
conceals the sun from the view of those who are blind by day. Here the
sun's light itself appears to be a shadow; and the shadow, therefore,
has no distinct existence from the light.</span>

15\. It is not said to be made up of parts, because no parts caused it.
Neither

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

is it devoid of parts, since in the effects it is made up of parts.

16\. This harlot of a Mâyâ, appearing only so long as not scrutinised,
does deceive the Atman by her false affectations of coquetry.

#### Moksha is the eradication of Maya.

17\. Some seek not her radical destruction. How, in their view, can
there be a release from manas?

18\. Manas is subject to the three avasthas of jagrat, svapna, and
sushupti, which revolve like a wheel, as the chief cause of the
illusions of duality.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

19\. On account of these (illusions) manas performs acts and is again
bound by them. A mere witness of manas is the Atman beyond, just as the
sun (is the witness of our acts).

20\. Just as the sun is never affected by acts which are done by
creatures below, so also, Atman, witness as He is, is never bound by the
doings of manas.

21\. That Atman does acts, that He is bound by them, and that He is
released from them, is true only in a figurative sense; it is a mere
illusion.

22\. Just as the sun, though untouched by smoke, clouds, dust and fog,
yet looks as if he were covered by them, so

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Atman looks as if
He were covered by Mâyâ.

23–24. Just as a young lad whirling round and round in sport, sees the
world around him revolving round and round and the heavens containing
hundreds of moons; so Jiva, deluded by Mâyâ, in virtue of the vâsanâs
(tendencies caused by former experience) sees this whole universe
revolving in various forms.

25\. In contact with manas, the Divine Atman looks as if He were
coursing through the world, just as the sun, by contact with water,
appears to move in many a form.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

26\. That man who, by practice of Yoga, has freed manas from objects,
becomes abstracted from this world, and he shall, at once, grow into a
Jivanmukta.

27\. The Sruti says: By Mâyâ, Siva became two birds always associated
together; the One, clinging to the one unborn (Prakriti), became many as
it were (vide Mundaka-Up. 3-1; Yâjniki-Upanishad 12–5).

28\. Thus ends the Eighth chapter in brief in the work called
Mânasollâsa which expounds the meaning of the Hymn to the Blessed
Dakshinâmurti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Devotion to Isvara](dast13.md)
