[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dast04)  [Next](dast06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Dakshinamurti Stotra*, translated by Alladi Mahadeva Sastri, \[1920\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### CHAPTER I.

### ATMAN AS THE EGO.

#### First Stanza of the Hymn.

To Him who by illusion of Atman, as by sleep, sees the universe existing
within Himself—like a city seen to exist within a mirror—as though it
were manifested without; to Him who beholds, when awake, His own very
Self, the second-less; to Him who is incarnate in the Teacher; to Him in
the Effulgent Form Facing the South, to Him (Siva) be this bow!

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

1\. Felicity to me may Vinâyaka grant!  
Felicity to me may Sarasvatî grant!  
Felicity to me may Mahesvara grant!  
Felicity to me may Sadâsiva grant!

#### The purpose of the Hymn.

2\. The sages hold that there is no greater gain. than the gain of
Atman, the Self. With a view to this gain, the sage adores his own Self,
the Paramesvara.

3\. In this Hymn is adored the Paramesvara Himself, who, having entered
into the Universe created by His own will, manifests Himself in the mind
of every one.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

#### The fundamental questions.

As a result of the accumulated good Karma of many past births, a man
attains some control over his mind, conceives a certain amount of
indifference to worldly objects, obtains slight glimpses of truth, is
able to discriminate the real and permanent from the unreal and
impermanent, and is led to a study of the scriptures. After a cursory
study of the scriptural teaching and of human experience, he becomes the
disciple of a Teacher and asks him the following questions:

4\. *Question* 1.—We speak of things as *existing* and *appearing*.
Wherein does this *existence* abide, as also the *light* by which they
appear?

5\. Is it in the things themselves severally, or in Isvara, the very
Self of all?

<span class="small">Though the external phenomena themselves vary from
moment to moment, the ideas of *being* and *consciousness* invariably
associated with all of them do not vary. Hence the question as to</span>

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="small">wherein they essentially abide. Do they inhere in
each object separately like its specific size, etc., as it is quite
natural to suppose that they abide where they are observed; or do they
inhere in the one Isvara who is said to exist everywhere in the universe
as the Self of all, like the genus in the individuals, as the Sruti
declares in the Isavasyopanishad, "By Lord is all this to be dwelt in,"
no distinction being observed as to being and consciousness in all
objects of perception except what prevails among the individual objects
themselves?</span>

*Q*. 2.—What is Isvara?

<span class="small">Is Isvara, the author of the universe, quite
external to it? Or, does He form the very basis wherein the universe has
its being?</span>

*Q*. 3.—What is Jîva?

<span class="small">Is it in the very nature of Pratyagatman to be Jiva?
Or, is it accidental, due to His connection with an upadhi?</span>

*Q*. 4.—What is meant by "the Self of all?"

<span class="small">Is the Isvara, as a matter of fact, the Self of all?
Or, is He so described by courtesy?</span>

6\. *Q*. 5.—How has Jîva to understand it?

<span class="small">What is the right knowledge of these things?</span>

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

*Q*. 6.—What is the means to that knowledge?

*Q*. 7.—What good accrues to him from the knowledge?

*Q*. 8.—How can Jîva and Isvara be one?

7\. How can Atman, the Self, be the All-knower and All-doer? To the
pupil thus asking, the Guru proceeds to say as follows.

Being mutually opposed in their nature, either they (Jiva and Isvara)
are said to be one only by courtesy; or, if they be one in reality, they
are mutually opposed only in appearance. Which of these alternatives is
meant here?

In answer to these questions, the Teacher chants this (Hymn to the
Blessed Dakshinamurti).

The meaning (of the first stanza) may be explained as follows:

#### The Universe exists in the Self.

8\. All the things which we perceive exist here within (in our Self—the
Paramâtman,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the Highest Self). Within is the whole of this universe. By Mâyâ it
appears as external, like one's own body in a mirror.

9\. Just as in svapna (dream) the universe existing in one's own Self is
seen as if it were external, so, be it known that even in the jâgrat
(waking) state this universe exists within and yet appears to be
external.

10\. It is certain that the existence of objects seen in svapna is not
independent of the existence of one's own Self. What difference is there
in the objects of jâgrat consciousness, impermanent and insentient
(jada) as they always are?

#### The Universe shines by the light of the Self.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

11\. In svapna, things appear by the light of one's own Self. There is
then indeed no other light. The wise have concluded that the case is
just the same even in jâgrat.

#### Realisation of Non-duality.

12\. Just as, when awake, a man sees not the things which were presented
to his view during sleep, so, subsequently to the rise of right
knowledge, he sees not the universe.

13\. "When Jiva is awakened from the sleep of delusion which has no
beginning, then does he realise the Unborn, the Sleepless, the
Dreamless, the One without a second." (*Gaudapadacharya's Karikas on the
Mandukya Upanishad*, i. 16).

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

14–15. When, by Sruti, by the master's favour, by practice of Yoga, and
by the Grace of God, there arises a knowledge of one's own Self, then,
as a man regards the food he has eaten as one with himself, the Adept
Yogin sees the universe as one with his Self, absorbed as the universe
is in the Universal Ego which he has become.

<span class="small">Thus far has the first stanza been literally
interpreted. Now the Vartikakara proceeds to develop answers to other
questions. First he shows, on the analogy of svapna, how by Maya the one
conscious Atman becomes Isvara and Jiva:</span>

#### Atman as Isvara and Jiva.

16\. Just as in svapna a man becomes a king, enjoys all the pleasures
that can be wished for, conquers the enemy in the battle-field with the
aid of a well-equipped army;

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span class="small">That is to say, like a man who in svapna regards
himself to be an independent king, the Chidatman, the self-conscious
Self, becomes Isvara, having subjected all external beings to his own
control, and regarding Himself as the independent Lord of them all.
Similarly, the Jiva state of the Atman is illustrated as follows:</span>

17\. then being defeated by the enemy, he goes to the forest and
practises penance; in one short hour, he imagines himself to have lived
for a long period;

<span class="small">That is to say, Atman is regarded as Jiva when he is
under the control of another, and seeks unattained objects of
desire.</span>

18\. so also, in jâgrat state, he imagines a fancied world of his own;
he is not aware of life coming to an end in the swift current of Time.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

19\. Like the sun veiled by the cloud, Paramesvara, the Supreme Lord
Himself, quite deluded by Mâyâ, appears to be of limited power and
limited knowledge.

<span class="small">Isvara is Himself called Jiva when subject to the
control of Maya. There is no independent entity called Jiva.</span>

20\. Whenever one does or knows a thing independently by one's own
power, it is then that Paramesvara is said to be a king, a sage, a lord.

<span class="small">Thus the question as to what is meant by Isvara and
Jiva has been answered. Atman becomes Isvara and Jiva by Maya. He is
said to be Jiva or Paramesvara under certain conditions, but not in
Himself.</span>

#### Isvara is the Self in all.

21\. All Jivas are endued with intelligence and activity, because they
are one with Siva. Because Jivas are endued with

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the powers of Isvara, we may conclude that they are (identical with)
Isvara.

<span class="small">Intelligence [and](errata.htm#11) activity, *jnana*
and *kriya*, are found associated with Jivas because these are identical
with Siva, the Paramatman who alone has the power of knowing and acting
quite independently of all. A mass of iron is said to burn only when
regarded as identical with the fire burning in it. All Jivas being thus
identical with Isvara, He is said to be Sarvatman, the Self in
all.</span>

#### Isvara's consciousness is one and self-luminous.

22\. In all our cognitions of external objects, such as are expressed in
the words 'this is a pot,' 'this is a cloth,' it is the consciousness,
forming the very nature of the Self, which manifests of itself, like the
sun's light.

23\. If consciousness were not self-manifested, then the universe would
be blind darkness.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

#### Isvara's activity.

If there be no activity whatever in Him, how can any one be spoken of as
the doer of an act?

<span class="small">Though formless, Isvara must possess activity
inherent in Him, inasmuch as He is spoken of as the Creator, etc. What
sort of activity it is, is explained in the next verse:</span>

24\. Activity, which is either motion or change of condition, becomes
manifested as an offshoot of consciousness moving towards the external.

<span class="small">The sort of activity here defined is possible even
in the formless Being when associated with an upadhi. When consciousness
is in a state of motion as it were, when it is associated with manas set
vibrating by the sense-organs coming in contact with sense-objects,
then, as an effect thereof, the prana which is inseparable from the
manas wherein consciousness abides is thrown into a state of vibration
which expresses itself as some form of activity in the physical body
ensouled by the prana. Thus the activity of prana, etc., being</span>

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="small">dependent on the presence of the indwelling
Controller, the Isvara, all activity seen in any being whatsoever
pertains to none other than the Isvara. (*Vide* Chap. IV., 7–8).</span>

<span class="small">Thus far activity manifested in the form of
vibration has been illustrated. Its manifestation as change of condition
is shown as follows:</span>

25\. Activity manifests itself in connection with a thing to be
produced, or reached, or ceremonially regenerated, or modified in form;
as when we say, he makes a thing, he goes to a place, he wipes off a
sacrificial twig, he cuts a twig asunder.

#### Isvara and Jiva differentiated by Upadhi.

<span class="small">Now he proceeds to show that Omniscience and finite
knowledge pertain to the One alone according to the upadhi with which He
is associated:</span>

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

26–27. Siva manifests Himself as the Omniscient in the bodies of Brahma
and the like; and in Devas, lower animals and man, He manifests Himself
with a finite knowledge of various degrees. There are four kinds of
bodies, the womb-born, the egg-born, the sweat-born, and the
earth-born,—arranged in their descending order.

#### All differentiation is due to Maya.

28\. When the Paramâtman of infinite light is intuitively realized, all
creatures from Brahmâ down to the lowest plant melt into an illusion
like unto a dream.

29\. Vedas speak of Him as smaller than an atom and greater than the
great; and the Rudra-Upanishad, too, extols Siva as the Sarvâtman, the
Self of all.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

30\. To Him who is manifested in the different forms as Isvara, as the
Teacher, as the Self; who is all pervading like unto ether; to
Sri-Dakshinâmûrti,—to the Effulgent Form Facing the South; to Him (Siva)
be this bow!

<span class="small">To bow to the Supreme Lord means to offer one's own
Self to Him in the thought that the two are one and identical. The term
'Dakshinamûrti' is variously explained: (1) it is applied to a special
incarnation of Siva in the form of a Teacher, who, seated at the foot of
a fig-tree with His face towards the south, is engaged in imparting
spiritual instruction to the highest sages of the world such as Sanaka.
(2) It is applied to Siva who, in His mighty form composed of Existence,
Intelligence and Bliss, and with His beginningless and unthinkable power
of Maya, can create, preserve and destroy the universe, and yet who has
really no form whatever. (3) Siva is so called because the spiritual
wisdom forms the only means by which He can be known and
realised.</span>

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

31\. Thus ends the first chapter in brief in the work called Mânasollâsa
expounding the meaning of the Hymn to the Blessed Dakshinâmûrti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Atman as the First Cause](dast06)
