[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dast06)  [Next](dast08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Dakshinamurti Stotra*, translated by Alladi Mahadeva Sastri, \[1920\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

### CHAPTER III.

### UNITY OF ATMAN.

#### Third Stanza of the Hymn.

To Him in the Effulgent Form Facing the South, whose light, which is
Existence itself, shines forth entering the objects which are almost
non-existent,—to Him incarnate in the Guru who instructs the disciples
in the Vedic text "That thou art;"—to Him who being realized there will
be no more return to the ocean of samsâra, to Him (Siva) be this bow!

1\. How have existence and light come to be conjoined with all existing
things?

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus questioning
on the analogy of mirror and reflection, the disciple is enlightened (by
the third stanza of the Hymn).

It has been said above that *being* and *light* manifested in objects do
not inhere in the objects themselves, and that they are the attributes
of the perceiver. Then the following question arises: If they do not
inhere in the objects perceived, how is it that they are perceived in
connection with them? It cannot be that they are manifested in objects,
either by way of being reflected in them as in a mirror, or by way of
actually conjoining with them as fire conjoins with a mass of iron; for
existence and consciousness which are formless in themselves are
incapable of being reflected in the objects or of conjoining with them.

The meaning of the stanza may be explained as follows:

#### Absolute unity of Atman.

2\. The existence and light in all phenomenal things, which are
insentient, momentary and almost non-existent, proceed from the eternal
Isvara and become conjoined with them.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

3\. These things have their being in the being of Atman, and no more;
and so also, the light by which they shine is the light of Atman and no
more.

<span class="small">The questioner's standpoint may be either that the
phenomenal things exist quite apart from Atman like the mirror existing
apart from the objects which are reflected in it; or that they exist
independently of Atman and shine by a light of their own, so that they
do not depend on Atman for their existence and light. In the first case
the Teacher answers as follows: The phenomena have no separate
existence; they are unreal because they are inert and momentary, like
the illusory serpent,—where a rope is mistaken for a serpent. Atman
alone exists and appears as the things which we perceive, like a rope
appearing to be a serpent. When we speak of the existence and light of
Atman as conjoining with the phenomenal things, we mean only that Atman
puts on the appearance of these phenomenal things. If these things could
exist separately and shine by themselves, then they would have appeared
independently of Atman, like the mirror appearing independently of the
objects reflected in it. The</span>

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

phenomenal things having thus no separate existence from that of Atman,
we cannot speak of the existence and light of Atman either as being
*actually* reflected in them or as *actually* conjoining with them.

If the question had been asked from the second standpoint of view, it
may be answered as follows:

4\. The manifold cognitions and their objects also are fast bound to the
Ego, as pearls are strung on a thread.

The existence of phenomena and the light by which they shine pertain to
the Ego, the self-conscious Existence, and reach them through the
antah-karana with which the Ego identifies himself.

The two standpoints from which the question has been answered in the two
different cases differ only in this respect: in the first case the
answer has been given from the standpoint of Absolute Reality, and in
the second case, from the standpoint of things regarded as phenomenally
real.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

5\. To every living being this universe appears as quite inseparate from
the Light. Billows and bubbles have no existence apart from water.

<span class="small">Whatever depends on something else for its existence
and manifestation is only an imaginary form of that other thing, like
the billows and bubbles which are only imaginary forms of water.
Accordingly the phenomenal things which depend for their existence and
light on the self-conscious Atman are only imaginary forms of Atman.
Atman alone exists, one without a second.</span>

6\. The very consciousness which, first entering into phenomenal things,
expresses itself in the words 'I know,' then returns to rest in the Self
within, expressing itself in the words 'It is known by me.'

<span class="small">It is true that the object of cognition is present
in both the expressions of consciousness. In the first, however, the
mere act of cognising the object is alone intended, while the second
conveys the idea that that act is conceived to inhere in the Ego.</span>

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

7\. All products such as pots rest in (their causes) such as clay. (So)
the universe, as one with the Light, must rest in the Supreme Lord.

An effect does not exist apart from its cause. A pot, for example, does
not exist apart from clay, its material cause. Likewise, the universe
whose material cause is Atman is one with Atman and has no independent
existence. Atman alone really exists, the universe being a mere illusory
appearance thereof.

While in vartika 6 it has been shown that the Light by which the
phenomenal things shine is no other than the light of Atman, the vartika
7 shows that the things themselves have no existence independent of
Atman's existence.

#### Avidya the cause of delusion.

8\. Just as the mirror is dimmed by a stain attaching to it, so
knowledge is veiled by avidyâ, and thereby creatures are deluded.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="small">All creatures are deluded alto the real nature of
Atman by avidya which leads them to look upon as real all distinctions
in the phenomenal world such as perceiver and objects perceived, cause
and effect, and so on.</span>

#### The body separates Jiva from Isvara.

9\. As the âkâsa within a jar is marked off from the infinite (Mahâ)
âkâsa by the upâdhi of the jar, so is the distinction between Jîvâtman
and Paramâtman caused by the upâdhi of the body.

<span class="small">Like akasa, Atman is indivisible. All distinctions
ascribed to Atman are due to the distinctions pertaining to the bodies.
It is hard to make out any real connection between Atman and the bodies,
so that all limitations ascribed to Atman are false and
imaginary.</span>

#### Their unity taught in the Sruti "That thou art."

10\. By scriptural texts, such as "That thou art," their unity is indeed
taught.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On saying, for
instance, "He is this person," one man alone is referred to.

11\. The world 'that' denotes the Principle which is the cause of the
universe; while Jiva limited by the body, etc., is denoted by the word
'thou.'

<span class="small">The word 'that' denotes Isvara, the self-conscious
Atman, regarded by the Individual Ego as external to himself, embodied
in the universe as a whole which has been evolved out of ajnana,
otherwise called Maya whose characteristic function consists in
*vikshepa*, in projecting the Self in the form of the external universe.
The word 'thou' refers to Jiva, the self-conscious personal Ego,, the
same self-conscious Atman viewed in association with the physical and
subtle—*sthula* and *sukshma*—bodies born of ajnana, otherwise called
avidya, whose characteristic function consists in *avarana*, in veiling
the true nature of the Self.</span>

In the sentence "he is this (person),"

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

12\. A person seen at a former time and place and under the then state,
etc., is spoken of as 'he'; and the same person seen now and here is
spoken of as 'this.'

13–14. Just as the sentence "He is this person" points to an identical
man, while the specific circumstances referred to by 'he' and 'this' are
lost sight of, so, losing sight of inwardness and outwardness, the
passage "That thou art" points to the identity of *Jivâtman* and
*Paramâtman*.

<span class="small">As absolute Consciousness they are identical.</span>

15\. Here the two words—'that' and 'thou '—bear to each other the
relation of *apposition* (*sâmânâdhi-karanya*); and the things denoted
by them are said to bear

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

an *attributive* relation (*viseshana-viseshya-bhâva*) to each other.

16\. The sentence as a whole teaches identity, the words being
understood in a secondary sense (*lakshana*).

When two words in a sentence are put in apposition to each other, we are
to understand that the things denoted by them can be predicated of each
other. But the Isvara and Jiva, primarily denoted by the words 'that'
and 'thou,' are so opposed to each other that neither can be predicated
of the other. The unity of Jive, and Isvara taught in the Sruti is
possible only when from each of them are eliminated such of the
attributes as are opposed to those of the other, *i.e.*, when we discard
the primary sense of the words and understand them in a secondary sense.

The secondary sense of a word may either include or exclude the primary
sense; or it may even include one part of the primary sense and exclude
the other part. In the sentence 'That thou art.'

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

16–17. The secondary sense is not altogether exclusive of the primary
sense, unlike that in the expression "a village on the Ganges"; nor is
it altogether inclusive of the primary sense, unlike that in the
expression "A white (*i.e.*, a white horse) runs."

17–18. The secondary sense of sentences like "That thou art" is
partial,—partially inclusive and partially exclusive of the primary
sense,—like that of the sentence "He is this person," and the like.

<span class="small">In the above, the word 'Ganges ' which primarily
means the stream has to be understood in the sense of 'the bank of the
Ganges,' so that the whole of the primary sense is excluded. The word
'white' which primarily means 'white colour' has to be understood in the
sense of 'a white horse,' so that the whole of the primary sense is
included in the secondary. On the other hand, 'that' and 'thou' cannot
be understood in either of the two ways. The primary sense of the word
cannot be wholly lost sight of, since, then, there will be left</span>

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="small">nothing of which unity can be predicated. Neither
can it be wholly included, inasmuch as the mutual opposition between
Jiva and Isvara will render it impossible to predicate a unity of them.
When we eliminate from the primary sense of each word all that is alien
to sentiency, which is common to both Isvara and Jiva, consciousness
alone will be left; and thus the sentence 'That thou art' teaches the
identity of Jiva and Isvara as the one indivisible, colourless, Absolute
Consciousness.</span>

18–19. The relation of apposition here (in vârtika 15) spoken of
consists in words of different origin referring all to one and the same
thing.

#### The Sruti points to no sort of distinction between Jiva and Isvara.

1g-21. The sentence cannot mean that Jîva is either a *part* or a
*modification* of the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Supreme, since, in
the form of Jîva, He (Isvara) Himself has entered into the forms created
by His own Mâyâ. By Sruti as well as reason we are given to understand
that He is partless and changeless, just as âkâsa in the jar is neither
a part nor a modification of the infinite âkâsa.

<span class="small">The course of reasoning here referred to may be
explained as follows: If Isvara, the First Cause, the Author of the
Universe, were Himself made up of parts, He would have been preceded by
those parts of which He was made. He would fall under the category of
effects, and, as such, cannot constitute the Omniscient and Omnipotent
Creator of the whole universe. Moreover, as an effect made of parts, He
would have had a Creator preceding Him, and that other Creator would
have had another preceding Him, and so on.</span>

21\. It cannot indeed mean mere *praise*, as does the sentence "thou art
Indra."

<span class="small">When he who is not Indra is addressed as such, it is
nothing hut a mere praise. The passage "That thou art" does not mean
mere praise, because it occurs in a section which, interpreted</span>

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="small">according to recognised principles of construction,
points to nothing but absolute unity of Isvara and Jiva, and leaves no
room for the alleged interpretation.</span>

22\. The passage cannot point to mere *similarity*, as the sentences
like "The disciple is fire."

Nor does it signify a relation of *cause and effect* as does the
sentence, "A pot is (mere) clay."

"The disciple is fire" means that the disciple is as pure as fire
itself, and thus points to a similarity between the disciple and fire as
regards purity. Similarity consists in one thing possessing some parts
or attributes in common with another. Isvara being devoid of parts and
attributes, He cannot be spoken of as similar to Jiva.

As devoid of parts, Isvara cannot be spoken of as actually giving rise
to effects according to any of the theories of creation.

23 The sentence does not point to

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

a relation as *genus and individual*, as does the sentence "This lame
(animal) is a Cow."

The sentences does not refer to a relation of *substance and
attributes*, as does the phrase "the blue lotus."

The genus being regarded as insentient in itself, the sentient Isvara
cannot be a genus.

If Jiva be an attribute of Isvara, then the latter would be a samsarin,
of limited knowledge and power, subject to happiness and misery; which
is opposed to the Sruti declaring that He is omniscient, etc. If, on the
other hand, Isvara be an attribute of Jiva, then the Jiva would not be a
samsarin; and all teaching as to bondage and liberation would be of no
purpose.

24\. Nor does the sentence point to mere *contemplative worship*, like
the contemplating of idols as God.

Nor does the sentence imply mere *courtesy* as when a king's servant is
addressed as king (by courtesy.)

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

The sentence "That thou art," does not enjoin the contemplating of Jiva
as Isvara or vice versa, because there is no word or particle in the
passage warranting such an interpretation. On the other hand, the word
'art' occurring in the passage signifies, not a command in the
imperative, but a law of nature, a matter of fact.

If it were only by courtesy that Jiva is spoken of as one with Isvara,
then there would be no occasion to emphasise the statement as is done in
the Upanishad (*Vide* Chhandogya-Upanishad, 6) by way of reiterating it
in nine different sections treating of the subject from as many
standpoints. A statement made for courtesy's sake cannot bear emphasis
by reiteration.

The reason why the sentence can be interpreted in none of the foregoing
alternative ways is stated as follows:

25\. For, Isvara is declared in the Sruti to have Himself entered into
the universe as Jiva.

<span class="small">Wherefore the sentence 'that thou art' signifies
that the Ego, regarded as Jiva only when viewed in relation to an
upadhi, is in fact identical with Brahman.</span>

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

#### Atman identified with the body, etc, by ignorance.

25–26. When Atman becomes blended with the aggregate composed of Deha
(body), Indriyas (sense-organs), Manas (mind), Buddhi (intellect), Prâna
(vitality), and Ahankâra (egoism), the aggregate itself is regarded by
the ignorant as the Atman, just as a piece of wood or a metallic mass
blending with fire is regarded as the fire itself.

#### Atman's manifestation in the five Kos’as.

<span class="small">Now, by way of distinguishing the essential nature
from the accidental aspects of Jiva and Isvara, the Vartikakara proceeds
to show that the teaching of Sruti as to their identity is founded on
fact:</span>

27\. Entering the *Annamaya-kosa*, the

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

physical body, Atman becomes self-conscious as stout, youthful, lean,
dark, as belonging to a distinct caste and a religious order.

28\. And in the *Prâna-kosa*, in the vital body, He feels thus: I am
alive, I feel hungry, and thirsty. In the *Manomaya-kosa*, in the body
of thought, Atman feels: I doubt, I feel sure, I think.

29–30. Entering the *Vijnânamaya-kosa*, He dwells in the consciousness
"I understand." And in the Ahankâra, the Ego, called *Anandamaya-kosa*,
the body of bliss, in virtue of His former good deeds and ways of
devotion He joys in the consciousness "I am happy."

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

30–31. Thus garmented with the five kosas (sheaths), with five coats as
it were, the Paramesvara, the Supreme Lord, though all-pervading,
appears as though He were limited by them.

31–32. As the sun, entering water, appear as many, so, entering the
bodies, does Isvara appear as many.

#### Jiva and Isvara one in essence.

32–33. To speak of them as the cause and the effect is to define them by
their accidental attributes, like defining the moon as being on the
branch of a tree. Never is this deemed an essential definition.

33–34. The essential definition of the moon consists in speaking of it
as a great

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

luminary. So the essential definition of Isvara and Jîva consists in
describing them as *Sat-chit-ânanda*, as Existence, Consciousness and
Bliss.

34–35. Unity of the two beings as one in their essential nature is
taught by the scriptural text "That thou art." Hence the truth that the
One Light is the Self in all.

35–36. Devas, animals and men have no existence apart from the Light. As
one with the Light, Jîva is designated the Sarvâtman, the Self in all.

#### Realization of Atman's unity leads to Liberation.

36–37. When this conviction of being one with the Light is steadied, one
attains

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

to *Kaivalya*, to the state of Liberation, from which there is no more
return.

37–33. Even he, who by chance but once cherishes the notion that he is
the Self in all, is freed from all sins, is adored in Siva-loka, adored
as Siva Himself.

38–39. That Mahâtman, that mighty-souled Being whose contemplation of
the one Self in all has been perfected, He is the very Deliverer (of
all) from samsâra, He is the Supreme Lord Himself.

39–40. Thus ends the third chapter, in brief, of the work called
Mânasollâsa which expounds the meaning of the Hymn to the Blessed
Dakshinâmûrti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Atman the One Existence and Light](dast08.md)
