[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dast08)  [Next](dast10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Dakshinamurti Stotra*, translated by Alladi Mahadeva Sastri, \[1920\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

### CHAPTER V.

### FALSE PERSONATIONS OF ATMAN.

#### Fifth Stanza of the Hymn.

Those who contend that the Ego is the body, or the vitality, or the
sense-organs, or the fickle Buddhi, or the void, they are verily on the
same level with women and children, with the blind and the possessed:
they are quite deluded. To Him who destroys the mighty delusion set up
by the play of Mâyâ's power, to Him who is incarnate in the Teacher, to
Him in the Effulgent Form Facing the South, to Him (Siva) be this bow!

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

#### Atman identified with the physical body.

1\. Pratyaksha is the sole authority; the four bhûtas (elements) are
alone real. There is no moksha other than death; love and wealth
comprise the end of man.

<span class="small">No anumana or inference can be relied on till it is
confirmed by the senses. Such things as akasa which cannot be perceived
by the senses do not exist. Carnal gratification is the primary end of
man, while wealth, as conducing to this primary end, forms but a
secondary end of man.</span>

2\. There is indeed no Isvara, the Creator; vain is all talk of the
other world.

<span class="small">Things grow and change their form by *svabhava*, of
their own accord; we see no agent at the back of every substance acting
by way of changing its form; none, for instance, pushes an arrow forward
once it has been discharged from the bow; once the seed is sown, none
constantly helps it to grow into a tree. This is a fact of immediate
experience. What need is there to postulate an Isvara? Again, variety in
the amount of happiness found among</span>

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="small">living beings can be traced to their own nature
(svabhava); there is no need to suppose a super-sensuous cause such as
Dharma.</span>

2–3. If Atman exist apart from the body, let it be seen like a pot in
front. It is the body that is perceived as short or tall, as a youth or
a child.

<span class="small">All evidence goes to prove that the body is the
Self, while there is none whatever pointing to the existence of a
disembodied Self.</span>

3–4. The six changes of phenomenal existence,—namely, being, birth,
growth, change of form, diminution or decay, and death,—all these
pertain to the body.

<span class="small">They are not spoken of as
[pertaining](errata.htm#14) to an Atman distinct from the body. There is
no need to suppose the existence of an Atman distinct from the body, as
the subject of these changes.</span>

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

4–5. Distinctions of caste and religious order are based on the bodies
alone; such sacraments as jâta-karma (the birth-ceremony) are enjoined
with reference to the body alone. It is with reference to the body that
they pronounce the benediction "may thou live a hundred years."

6\. Thus does the small-witted Chârvâka delude the world.

#### Atman identified with Prana.

6–7. I breathe, I am alive, I feel hungry, I feel thirsty: on the
strength of these and other notions of the sort, some conclude that
Prâna is Atman.

<span class="small">Finding that the dead body which is to all
appearance quite of the same nature as the living is yet not
self-conscious and does not breathe or perform other functions of a
living being, they hold that Atman must be the Prana, the vital</span>

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="small">principle, whose presence in the body makes it alive
and whose departure reduces it to a corpse.</span>

#### Atman identified with the sense-organs.

7–8. I hear, I see, I smell, I cause motion: from an experience of this
sort, some rise higher and look upon the indriyas, the sense-organs, as
Atman.

As self-consciousness arises only when the sense-organs are active,
Atman must be identical with the sense-organs. There is no evidence of
the existence of Prana distinct from the senses; for no motion is
observed during sleep when the senses are quiescent: and breathing, &c.,
visible during sleep are a mere illusion. As the sense-organs do not
perceive objects simultaneously, *i.e.*, as the scope of each
sense-organ is restricted to one kind of objects and as there are
several sense-organs occupying the body, each of them is an Atman by
itself.

The logical order of this and the foregoing theory is reversed in the
Vartikakara's exposition, which has only followed the order in which
they are mentioned in the Hymn. The fact of Prana not ceasing to
function during sleep when all the

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

sense-organs are quiescent, would naturally lead to the conclusion that
Prana is the self more than the sense-organs. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2)

15\. On the strength of the notion "I understand," others regard Buddhi
(Intellect) as the Atman.

#### The body, etc., cannot be Atman.

9–10. (The fifth stanza) is intended to refute the theories of those
whose intellects are thus deluded by Máyà.

<span class="small">The meaning of the stanza may be explained as
follows:</span>

How can objects like the physical body which are insentient like stones,
and are so different from, Atman, ever feel as the Ego, except by the
Lord entering into them?

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

#### Why the body is not Atman.

10–11. Now, the physical body cannot be Atman, because like a pot it is
visible, insentient, endued with colour, etc., made up of parts and
evolved out of matter.

<span class="small">*Visible:* Depending on something else for its
manifestation. *Insentient:* as opposed to self-conscious.</span>

11–12. Even in swoon, sushupti and death, the physical body is seen;
then, being distinct from the physical body, etc., Atman is not seen.

12–13. The sun is the primary cause of all activities in the world; just
so is Atman the chief cause of the activities of the physical body, etc.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

13–14. "This is my body;" thus feels a woman, a child, and even the
blind man; none ever feels "I am the body."

It cannot be contended that the feeling "I am a man " points to a valid
experience of the body being the Ego,; for man sometimes dreams of
himself being a tiger. Here the consciousness of Ego, the feeling of "I,
"remains the same, unaffected by the different bodies with which the Ego
has been associated in the two states of jagrat and svapna.

Now, as to the contention that *anumana* or inference cannot constitute
an [authority](errata.htm#15) in itself. Our every day experience
furnishes so many instances of our conduct being consciously based on no
better authority than *anumana*. What basis, for instance, other than
*anumana* or inference from past experience, is there for our belief
that the food we are going to eat next moment will appease our hunger?
But for this faith in *anumana* as the right source of knowledge, how
can any one get on in life?

As to the remaining negative assertions of a sweeping character in the
Charvaka's system, it is unnecessary to enter into a detailed
discussion.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

#### Why the sense-organs cannot be Atman.

14\. Not even the sense-organs are Atman, since they are mere
instruments like a lamp.

15\. Like a musical instrument such as vînâ, the ear is a means of
perceiving sound. The eye, like the three lights (sun, moon and fire),
is a means of perceiving form and colour.

16\. The nose is a means of perceiving smell, like a flower-vase, etc.,
and the tongue is a means of perceiving taste, like curd, honey, or
clarified butter.

17\. "The sense-organs I have not; I am dumb, I am deaf." Thus say the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

people who are wanting in the sense-organs. Are they selfless?

#### Why Prana is not Atman.

18–19. Not even Prâna is Atman; for there is no consciousness in times
of sushupti. When man goes to sushupti to gain a respite from the worry
caused by jâgrat and svapna life, Prâna acts for the mere preservation
of the body, wherewith to reap the fruits of karma yet unspent.

20–21. If Prâna's unconsciousness then (in sushupti) be due to the
inactivity of the sense-organs, how, then, while Prana acts, can the
senses be inactive? When

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

the king is still engaged in battle, the army cannot, indeed, cease to
fight. Prâna, therefore, cannot be the Lord of the sense-organs.

<span class="small">If Prana be the Atman seeking rest in sushupti, then
it should be inactive. On the other hand, during sleep Prana is as
active as before; it breathes and discharges other functions. If Prana
be really the self-conscious Atman whose instruments of action and
knowledge are the sense-organs, then it would be impossible for the
latter to be inactive so long as the former remains active; and sushupti
would not then be a period of inactivity.</span>

22\. Atman, the director of manas, ceasing to work, then all
sense-organs cease to work. Their lord is therefore Atman.

<span class="small">Thus, Atman, the ruler of manas and other
sense-organs, is distinct from Prana.</span>

#### Why Buddhi is not Atman.

<span class="small">Now the Vartikakara proceeds to refute the
Buddhistic theory that Atman is none other than the momentary state of
consciousness (Kshanika-Vijnana).</span>

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

23\. Be it known that Buddhi is but a momentary thing which comes and
goes. Illumined only by Atman's reflection, it illumines the universe.

<span class="small">Buddhi cannot be Atman as depending on another for
its light. This is explained as follows:</span>

24\. In Atman is Buddhi born, in Atman alone does it dissolve;
non-existent before and after, by itself it does not exist.

The origin and the end of a thing cannot be perceived by itself; and
these cannot be facts of experience unless perceived by some conscious
entity. It being thus necessary that there should be a self-conscious
entity perceiving the changes which the Buddhi undergoes from moment to
moment, no further evidence is necessary to show that Buddhi is not
Atman.

To avoid this difficulty some contend that Atman is not a single
detached momentary state of consciousness; that, on the other hand,
Atman is a stream of states of consciousness of an infinite

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="small">number running in a current, each preceding state of
consciousness giving rise to the next succeeding one and vanishing away
as the latter arises. This stream of consciousness has neither a
beginning nor an end, though the individual states of consciousness of
which it is a stream are momentary in themselves. Even this theory is
open to objection:</span>

25\. If each preceding cognition should give rise to the next succeeding
cognition, there would be a simultaneous presence of innumerable
cognitions at every moment.

26\. No cognition can give rise, subsequently to its disappearance, to
another cognition; because it does not then exist.

<span class="small">The Vijnana-Vadin may be asked: Does the preceding
cognition exist or not exist in the succeeding one to which it .gives
rise? In the first case, all cognitions being momentary, in every
cognition will be present all the preceding cognitions which are
infinite in number: a conclusion opposed to experience. If this
simultaneousness should be avoided, the Vijnana-Vadin will have to give
up the hypothesis that each state of consciousness</span>

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="small">exists for only one single moment. In the second
case, *i.e.*, if the preceding cognition does not exist in the
succeeding one, it is tantamount to saying that each cognition arises
out of nothing. If so, everything may come into existence at one and the
same moment.</span>

#### Why the aggregate of the body, etc., is not Atman.

26–27. Even supposing the aggregate of these be Atman: then when one
part is severed, there could be no sentiency, because of the absence of
an integral whole.

Here a question arises: Does the aggregate as a whole possess sentiency,
or is each constituent of the whole sentient in itself? In the first
case, when even one constituent—the eye or the ear—is severed from the
aggregate, what remains should lose all sentiency. But, as a matter of
fact, we see the deaf and the blind leading a sentient life all the
same.

Neither can the other alternative be maintained; for,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

27–28. If it be held that there are many sentiencies in the aggregate,
then this composition of the many sentiencies will at once break up, or
it will come to a stand-still.

<span class="small">Each member in the aggregate may seek to go in an
opposite direction to others. One pulling thus one side and another on
another side, the system may altogether be broken up; or even if such an
extreme contingency be averted, life-functions would, at any rate, come
to a standstill.</span>

#### Atman is all pervading.

<span class="small">Though Atman has thus been proved to be distinct
from the body, from the sense-organs, from the vital principle, from the
intellect and from the aggregate of these, still there arises a doubt as
to His size. The Jainas, who follow the teachings of the Arhats, hold
that Atman is of the same size as the body in which He dwells for the
time; some of the so-called Vedantins regard Him as atomic, as
infinitesimally small in .size, while the Sankhyas maintain that He is
infinite, all-pervading. The Vartikakara now proceeds to discuss the
question:</span>

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

28–29. Though dwelling within the body, Atman, to be sure, must be
all-pervading. If He be of the size of an atom, He cannot pervade the
whole body.

<span class="small">For, then, there could not happen that simultaneous
sensation of heat and cold and of the like pairs of opposites, which we
so often feel in the different parts of the body. Further, it militates
against the fact of more than one member of the body being
simultaneously put in action or withdrawn from action.</span>

29–30. If Atman be of the size of the body, he who was the youth cannot
be the same as he that is now old. If Atman be subject to change like
the body, like it He shall also perish.

<span class="small">Atman cannot have a definite limited size of its
own; for, one and the same Atman, having to reap the fruits of karmas of
a great variety necessitating birth in various kinds of bodies, one body
may be found too small for Him and another too big. Suppose, on the
other hand, Atman is all-pervading; then,</span>

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

30–31. As karma is ripe, Atman, all-pervading as He is, enters into the
body of a worm, or of an elephant, and so on, like âkâsa (entering into)
a pot or the like.

<span class="small">Though manifested in bodies of a limited size Atman
is all-pervading. For instance:</span>

31–32. He shines in manas which is infinitesimally small; in svapna, the
universe, animate and inanimate, abides in Atman alone.

<span class="small">These two facts point to the all-pervading nature of
Atman.</span>

#### The illusion.

32–33. The illusion that the physical body or the like is the Self
arises from (avidyâ which is the cause of) samsâra. "The Lord has
entered within" (*Taittirîya-Aranyaka* 

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 3–11); thus the
Sruti has taught with a view to liberation.

33–34 Thus, this mighty Mâyâ deludes even these disputants; for, once
Sadâsiva is seen, it immediately vanishes away.

34–35. To Him who has neither body, nor sense-organs, nor vital airs,
whose nature is inaccessible to all organs of perception, who is
Consciousness and Bliss in essence, to Him in the Effulgent Form Facing
the South, be this bow!

35–36. Thus ends the fifth chapter, in brief, in the work called
Mânasollâsa which expounds the meaning of the Hymn to the Blessed
Dakshinâmûrti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[101:\*](dast09.htm#fr_2) One of the manuscripts
of Manasollasa consulted for this edition gives the text in the logical
order of the two theories. Evidently the gloss-writer whose exposition
of the Vartika I followed in my translation and notes had not this
reading before him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Atman the Eternal Existence](dast10)
