[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dast09)  [Next](dast11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Dakshinamurti Stotra*, translated by Alladi Mahadeva Sastri, \[1920\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

### ATMAN THE ETERNAL EXISTENCE.

#### Sixth Stanza of the Hymn.

To the Atman who, going to sushupti on the withdrawal of sense-organs,
becomes the One Existence, enshrouded by Mâyâ like unto the sun or moon
in eclipse, and whose then existence is recognised on waking in the
consciousness "I have slept till now;" to Him who is incarnate in the
Teacher, to Him in the Effulgent Form Facing the South, to Him (Siva) be
this bow!

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

#### Buddhistic Nihilism (sunyavada).

<span class="small">In the preceding chapter, it has been shown that the
whole universe we perceive in the jagrat state is only an illusion set
up by Maya on the basis of Atman, the Paramesvara, and that Atman,
subject to this illusion, is eternal, one, and immutable. As against
this view the Buddhist asks:</span>

1\. If, as in svapna, the whole universe exists within even in jâgrat,
(then tell me), does anything appear to any one in sushupti? Who
persists there as a conscious entity?

<span class="small">The Nihilist means that there is no conscious entity
present in sushupti; that there is no entity whatever conscious of
anything in sushupti. Therefore, no eternal Atman exists, such as the
one spoken of by Vedantins. The Buddhistic Nihilist states his doctrine
as follows:</span>

2\. Everything is momentary and void; and everything self-defined.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

Everything in the universe including the Atman, exists only for one
instant; and it did not exist before, and will not exist after, that
instant.

Everything is self-defined, is cognised by itself; there can be no
cogniser distinct from the object cognised.

Now, there is a school of Buddhists which maintains that the external
world exists as well as the internal world: that the objective existence
is as real as the subjective. They hold that the subjective existence is
made up of five skandhas or "forms of mundane
[consciousness](errata.htm#16.md)." Their doctrine is stated as follows:

Earth, water, fire, and air are mere aggregates of paramânus or atoms.

<span class="small">They are mere groups of the four kinds of atoms.
They have no attributes of their own distinct from those of the atoms of
which they are made; whereas the Vaiseshikas maintain that they have.
Nor are they,—as the Sankhyas, the Parinamavadins say—different forms
evolved from a previously existing cause, coming into manifestation one
after another, though in substance one and the same with the cause. Such
is the nature of the external world comprising elements of matter and
material objects. As to the inner world:</span>

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

3\. Human and other bodies are mere aggregates of the five skandhas or
bundles of conscious states; and these skandhas are Rûpa, Vijnâna,
Samjnâ, Samskâra, and Vedanâ.

4\. The *Rupas* comprise sense-objects and sense-organs, in so far as
they are represented (in the mind).

<span class="small">It is their subjective representations, *i.e.*. our
ideas of the sense-objects and sense-organs, which go to form the
Rupa-skandha, one of the five skandhas or "forms of consciousness." The
objects themselves as well as the sense-organs belong, no doubt, to the
external world.</span>

The mere cognition of sense-objects and sense-organs is called
*Vijnana-skandha*.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

5–7. The *Samjná-skandha* is represented by the Saugatas (Buddhists) to
consist of five parts, viz., name, quality, act, species and the idea of
a composite whole.

<span class="small">The *name* of the cow is 'cow'; the specific
attributes of a cow abiding in all cows constitutes the *species:*
whiteness, etc., are the [*qualities*](errata.htm#17.md) of the cow; going,
etc., are her *acts;* the horned animal, the four-footed animal, the
tailed animal,—each of these is an idea of a *composite whole*. Thus
five-fold is the Samjna-skandha said to be.</span>

8\. Attachment and the like, as also virtue and sin, are said to
comprise the *Samskára-skandha*, the bundle of tendencies.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pleasure, pain,
and moksha [constitute](errata.htm#18.md) the *Vedanâ-skandha*.

<span class="small">*Moksha* is a continuous stream of pure states of
consciousness, unmixed with alien ideas such as those of sense-objects.
Some read *Moha* for *Moksha*, *Moha* meaning quite the reverse: it is a
continuous stream of conscious states perplexed with ideas of external
objects and the like.</span>

9\. Beyond the five skandhas, there is no other entity such as Atman.
There is no Isvara, no Maker. The universe is self-made.

<span class="small">There is no persisting conscious entity within,
beyond the skandhas made of these fleeting constituents. There is no
Isvara, or Maker, combining the various elements of the universe with
one another, guiding and regulating their orderly evolution. The
universe is self-begotten, self-reliant and self-regulated. No
intelligent operator is necessary.</span>

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

10\. It is born of the fleeting (kshanika) skandhas and paramanus. From
one momentary existence alone comes the next momentary existence.

<span class="small">Isvara cannot create without the materials which He
has to elaborate in the form of a universe. Neither can He create a
universe out of materials which do not possess the potentialities of the
universe inherent in them. Isvara is, moreover, said to be immutable in
Himself, whereas the whole universe is mobile, changing from moment to
moment; so that it is unnecessary and even opposed to experience to
postulate the existence of Isvara, as conceived by the Vedantin.</span>

11\. From the previous cognition itself arises the subsequent cognition.
The cognition that this is the same as that is an illusion, like the
cognition that this flame is the same as that (*i.e.*, the previous)
one.

<span class="small">As in the case of flame, the illusion is caused by a
succession of things of the same sort, each of which exists only for one
moment; so that *pratyabhijna*, the consciousness which refers to</span>

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="small">the continuous existence of one and the same thing,
is a mere illusion.</span>

12\. The existence of the ego amidst non-ego is a mere imagination of
those who are deluded by the idea that it exists and shines,—it being no
object to be sought or avoided. Does âkâsa ever shine?

<span class="small">The Buddhistic metaphysicians regard akasa as a
non-entity, because it is no object which one endeavours to secure or to
avoid. Likewise, since the idea of the ego amidst the non-ego as
*existing* and *shining* leads to no human endeavour to secure or avoid
it, its *existence* and the *light* with which it is said to shine are
non-entities.</span>

#### Refutation of Nihilism.

13\. The Buddhistic doctrinaire thus speaking is silenced (in the sixth
stanza of the Hymn).

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="small">The meaning of the stanza may be explained at
follows:—</span>

If the cause of the universe be void (Sunya), a non-entity, the universe
itself cannot be as we find it.

14\. Who ever says that the pot is a nonentity, or that the cloth is a
non-entity?

The Buddhist says that there was nothing before the universe came into
being,—that the universe was made out of nothing. But in our experience,
whatever effect comes out of a thing as the cause, it is always
conceived to be made up of that cause, and the cause is resorted to as
productive of the effect. Thus a gold ring is always conceived to be
made up of gold, and is resorted to as serving the purposes of gold. If
the universe had been made out of nothing, we would look upon it as
nothing and neglect it altogether as such. The Nihilistic theory,
therefore, ought to be discarded by those who demand proof for things
presented to their belief.

The Nihilist may perhaps say that, though the universe is really a
non-entity, yet, owing to illusion, our conduct in life may go on as if
the universe were real. To this the Vedantin replies as follows:

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

14\. If the universe were a non-entity, it would never have appeared,
any more than a man's horn.

15\. To what would one resort seeking to have a thing? What would one
cast aside who is afflicted with a burden? Who is there to command or
prohibit, when one's own self is a non-entity?

16\. This whole universe, therefore, having no cause for its existence,
may come to an end.

<span class="small">A non-entity cannot even be a subject of illusion
any more than a man's horn.</span>

#### Refutation of the doctrine of the five Skandhas.

16\. Now as to the theory that there exists none who combines and
elaborates the skandhas and paramânus.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

17\. A combination cannot occur without a cause (*i.e.*, the combiner).
A pot, a cloth, and the like are inert.

<span class="small">They are insentient and cannot, therefore, combine
together by [themselves](errata.htm#19.md). Thread, for instance, cannot,
by itself, form a cloth without a weaver handling it. Further, the
theory that the Ego is momentary leads to many absurdities.</span>

"I shall become an Exalted Being," thus thinks the deluded (Buddhist)

18\. For what purpose does the Buddhist observe vows while denying the
existence of Atman?

#### Pratyabhijna is no illusion.

If pratyabhijnâ, the recognition of identity, be an illusion, why should
one eat or do any such thing?

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

19\. It is only in the belief that to-day food will satisfy the craving
as yesterday's food did, that even a child resorts to eating.

<span class="small">This would be impossible if one and the same
individual were not the subject of the two days’ experiences.</span>

#### Atman's continuous Existence.

20\. As affording space, Akâsa has a purpose to serve. So also, as the
doer and the cogniser, Atman has a purpose to serve.

<span class="small">Thus, the contention that a continuous Atman, like
akasa, is a non-entity as serving no purpose, falls to the ground. Akasa
is not a non-entity, not a mere negative state of being unoccupied; it
is, on the other hand, a diffused principle affording space for
creatures to exist and move. So, having a purpose to serve as the doer
and the knower, Atman's continuous existence cannot be denied.</span>

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

21\. Even during sushupti, Atman is endued with being, consciousness,
and bliss, because self-identity is recognise.; in the consciousness "I
slept happy."

<span class="small">The Buddhist cannot consistently regard this
consciousness of self-identity as a mere illusion based on similarity;
for, according to his theory, there is no conscious entity persisting so
long as to perceive a similarity between two things occurring in two
different moments.</span>

22\. The expression "Atman is recognised " is in the reflexive passive
voice. Being self-luminous, Atman knows Himself by Himself.

<span class="small">The expression "Atman is recognised." is in the
reflexive [passive](errata.htm#20.md) voice, and it is equivalent to "Atman
recognises Himself" in the active voice. Thus, the expression does not
mean that Atman is perceived by another and so forms an object of
consciousness like external objects. The use of the given expression
does not, therefore, detract from the self-luminousness of Atman.</span>

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

23\. Deluded as He is by Mâyâ in sushupti, He then appears as inert and
unconscious; He shines as non-luminous and self-luminous.

<span class="small">In so far as He is not manifested in any special
form of cognition, Atman shines as non-luminous. As His inherent
consciousness never fails, He appears as self-luminous.</span>

24\. From the physical body and other upâdhis which are all unconscious
in themselves, He is clearly distinguished as their Lord.

<span class="small">The upadhis are insentient. They are unconscious of
themselves and of their own or others’ functions; whereas Atman, who is
conscious of His own self-identity, illumines all thus: I, who then saw,
now hear, now taste, now speak, now go, and so on. Thus Atman is clearly
distinguishable from other things as the Lord of them all, as one to
whom all else is subservient, subserving His interests and glory as it
were.</span>

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

This verily is the stupefying power of the Mighty Lord's Mâyâ.

25\. Removal of this illusion from the cognisers is spoken of as moksha.

<span class="small">Maya conceals the true nature of Atman. That being
removed, the whole samsara vanishes away. It is this Maya which has
deluded the Buddhists, and they have therefore come to argue against the
existence of Atman.</span>

#### Atman's true nature.

Free from the three states (avasthâs), tainted by no evil passion or
thought;

26\. The One Existence, which is like unto the ishika reed, like unto
the nyagrodha (banyan) seed, like unto the inside stalk of the plantain
trunk stripped off its outer and inner sheaths;

<span class="small">The ishika which is the slender fine stalk of munja
grass, is intended to illustrate the homogeneity of Atman. The particle
of the nyagrodha</span>

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="small">seed serves to illustrate the truth that Atman is a
very subtle principle whence the mighty universe is evolved (*vide*
Chhandogya-Upanishad, 6–12). The plaintain stalk shows that Atman is to
be sought for in the innermost recesses of human nature.</span>

27\. Atman is said to be the Paramesvara Himself who is partless,
changeless, unmanifested, stainless, all-pervading, and free (from all
upâdhis);

28- 29. He from whom all words recede; in whom manas itself dissolves;
in whom all beings and worlds merge into one, as also all principles, as
rivers merge in the ocean. To him who sees this unity, where is grief
and where is delusion?" (*Isâvâsyopanishad*, 7).

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

30\. Though differentiated as designations and the designated, yet by
elimination of the physical body, etc., this one, the Ego, can be the
Undifferentiated.

31\. "Quite non-existent shall the man of knowledge be if he should know
that Brahman is not. If he should know that Brahman is, then they say he
is." (*Taittiriya-Upanishad*, 2–6.)

32\. Thus ends the sixth chapter in brief, in the work called
Mânasollâsa, which expounds the meaning of the Hymn to the Blessed
Dakshinâmûrti.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Atman, the Eternal Light](dast11.md)
