[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dast00)  [Next](dast02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Dakshinamurti Stotra*, translated by Alladi Mahadeva Sastri, \[1920\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> volume comprises the following works
literally translated into English with explanatory comments:

i\. S’rî S’ankarâchârya's *Dakshinamurti-Stotra*, an ode to the Divine
Self, with Sri Suresvaracharya's exposition named Mânasollâsa’
"Brilliant play of thought."

ii\. S’rî Suresvaracharya's *Pranava-Vartika* treating of the
contemplation of the Supreme Atman by means of the Pranava.

iii\. *Dakshinamurti-Upanishad*.

S’ankaracharya's immortal Hymn and the two works of Suresvarâchârya
herein comprised epitomise the whole Vedânta Doctrine as expounded by
the two authors in their commentaries on the Upanishads, and form a good
introduction to a study of the subject. As a terse expression of the
fundamental truths of the Vedânta, the well-known Hymn of S’ankaracharya
forms a suitable text upon which the student may meditate and thereby
construct the whole doctrine for himself. The reader will also be struck
with the catholicity of the teaching, which is not addressed to any
particular class of people nor contains any reference to distinctions of
caste and religious order. While concisely stating the process by which
the oneness of Self and the unreality of all else is established.
Mânasollâsa is more original and telling than any of the later manuals
which state the doctrine as derived from the expositions of the two
eminent leaders of the Advaita-Vedanta school of thought.

Very little need be said regarding the high position which
S’ankaracharya holds among the teachers of

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

the Vedic Religion. Of Suresvaracharya, however, his immediate disciple
and literary collaborator, ordinary students of Vedanta know less than
they ought to, simply because his writings have long remained
inaccessible to all but the very select few who entered the fourth order
of sannyasa and were intellectually qualified to study the highly
erudite exposition of philosophy and metaphysics. Suffice it to say
that, according to all received accounts, the great aim of
S’ankaracharya's missionary peregrinations was to secure the eminent
mimamsaka's allegiance to his own system of Vedanta. The nature of the
work to which this disciple is said to have been detailed by the
Teacher, and the masterly fashion in which he has done it,—the work,
namely, of elucidating systematising, supplementing and even improving
upon the great Master's teachings,—more than justifies the honourable
position which tradition has unanimously accorded to him. He is known as
the *Vartika-kara*, author of elucidative commentary on the teachings of
S’ankaracharya who is known as the *Bhäshyakāra*, author of original
commentaries. "Vartika" is defined as follows:

*Uktànuktaduruktarthavyaktakari tu vartikam*.

"A *vartika* is that which clearly explains what has been said, what has
been left unsaid, and what has been ill said." Five works of the kind
are attributed to Suresvaracharya, all of them having been recently
published in India:

\(1\) *Manasollasa* (Mysore).\*

\(2\) *Pranava-vartika* ( ” ).\*

\(3\) *Naishkarmya-siddhi*, a manual of Advaita doctrine (Bombay
Sanskrit Series).

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

\(4\) An exposition of Sankaracharya's commentary on the
Taittiriya-Upanishad (Poona, A’nandasrama Series).

\(5\) An exposition of Sankaracharya's [commentry](errata.htm#0.md) on the
Brihadaranyaka-Upanishad (Poona, A’nandasrama Series).

Suresvaracharya's exposition of the Vedanta Doctrine is often very
original and is throughout marked with such thoroughness, precision, and
clearness that it forms a very valuable supplement to the teachings of
the Upanishads; and its authority on all knotty points is acknowledged
with due reverence and submission by all the Advaitic writers of later
days.

As an effective aid to a right understanding of the truths taught in the
Vedanta, Sankaracharya's Hymn as well as Sruti inculcates highest
devotion to the Divine Being as the Guru of Gurus, and an equal devotion
to one's own immediate Guru who should be regarded as an incarnation of
that Guru of Gurus. The Dakshinamurti-Upanishad shows in what form Siva,
the Guru of Gurus, should be imaged and devoutly worshipped in the heart
by the neophyte who is about to engage in a contemplation of the truths
taught in the hymn. The style of the Upanishad is in perfect keeping
with the character of the Minor Upanishads described in my introduction
to "the Minor Upanishads, Vol. I."

As Sures’varàcharya's Manasollasa refers to various philosophical
systems of his day, I have thought it necessary to add an introduction
to it treating briefly of the origin, methods, and fundamental tenets of
the several systems referred to, so that the reader may have a
comprehensive view of the whole range of Indian

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

philosophy, at whose summit, towering high above all, stands Vedanta,
the pinnacle of Aryan thought.

<span class="smallcaps">A. Mahadeva Sastri</span>

  MYSORE,  
*24th May 1899*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Second Edition](dast02.md)
