[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/aes014)   
  
[Additions to Esther Index](aes)  
  [Previous](aes013)  [Next](aes015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Additions to Esther Chapter 14

<span id="001">1</span> Queen Esther also, being in fear of death,
resorted unto the Lord:

<span id="002">2</span> And laid away her glorious apparel, and put on
the garments of anguish and mourning: and instead of precious ointments,
she covered her head with ashes and dung, and she humbled her body
greatly, and all the places of her joy she filled with her torn hair.

<span id="003">3</span> And she prayed unto the Lord God of Israel,
saying, O my Lord, thou only art our King: help me, desolate woman,
which have no helper but thee:

<span id="004">4</span> For my danger is in mine hand.

<span id="005">5</span> From my youth up I have heard in the tribe of my
family that thou, O Lord, tookest Israel from among all people, and our
fathers from all their predecessors, for a perpetual inheritance, and
thou hast performed whatsoever thou didst promise them.

<span id="006">6</span> And now we have sinned before thee: therefore
hast thou given us into the hands of our enemies,

<span id="007">7</span> Because we worshipped their gods: O Lord, thou
art righteous.

<span id="008">8</span> Nevertheless it satisfieth them not, that we are
in bitter captivity: but they have stricken hands with their idols,

<span id="009">9</span> That they will abolish the thing that thou with
thy mouth hast ordained, and destroy thine inheritance, and stop the
mouth of them that praise thee, and quench the glory of thy house, and
of thine altar,

<span id="010">10</span> And open the mouths of the heathen to set forth
the praises of the idols, and to magnify a fleshly king for ever.

<span id="011">11</span> O Lord, give not thy sceptre unto them that be
nothing, and let them not laugh at our fall; but turn their device upon
themselves, and make him an example, that hath begun this against us.

<span id="012">12</span> Remember, O Lord, make thyself known in time of
our affliction, and give me boldness, O King of the nations, and Lord of
all power.

<span id="013">13</span> Give me eloquent speech in my mouth before the
lion: turn his heart to hate him that fighteth against us, that there
may be an end of him, and of all that are likeminded to him:

<span id="014">14</span> But deliver us with thine hand, and help me
that am desolate, and which have no other help but thee.

<span id="015">15</span> Thou knowest all things, O Lord; thou knowest
that I hate the glory of the unrighteous, and abhor the bed of the
uncircumcised, and of all the heathen.

<span id="016">16</span> Thou knowest my necessity: for I abhor the sign
of my high estate, which is upon mine head in the days wherein I shew
myself, and that I abhor it as a menstruous rag, and that I wear it not
when I am private by myself.

<span id="017">17</span> And that thine handmaid hath not eaten at
Aman's table, and that I have not greatly esteemed the king's feast, nor
drunk the wine of the drink offerings.

<span id="018">18</span> Neither had thine handmaid any joy since the
day that I was brought hither to this present, but in thee, O Lord God
of Abraham.

<span id="019">19</span> O thou mighty God above all, hear the voice of
the forlorn and deliver us out of the hands of the mischievous, and
deliver me out of my fear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additions to Esther Chapter 15](aes015)
