[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/aes016)   
  
[Additions to Esther Index](aes)  
  [Previous](aes015)  [Next](ma1001) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Additions to Esther Chapter 16

<span id="001">1</span> The great king Artexerxes unto the princes and
governors of an hundred and seven and twenty provinces from India unto
Ethiopia, and unto all our faithful subjects, greeting.

<span id="002">2</span> Many, the more often they are honoured with the
great bounty of their gracious princes, the more proud they are waxen,

<span id="003">3</span> And endeavour to hurt not our subjects only, but
not being able to bear abundance, do take in hand to practise also
against those that do them good:

<span id="004">4</span> And take not only thankfulness away from among
men, but also lifted up with the glorious words of lewd persons, that
were never good, they think to escape the justice of God, that seeth all
things and hateth evil.

<span id="005">5</span> Oftentimes also fair speech of those, that are
put in trust to manage their friends' affairs, hath caused many that are
in authority to be partakers of innocent blood, and hath enwrapped them
in remediless calamities:

<span id="006">6</span> Beguiling with the falsehood and deceit of their
lewd disposition the innocency and goodness of princes.

<span id="007">7</span> Now ye may see this, as we have declared, not so
much by ancient histories, as ye may, if ye search what hath been
wickedly done of late through the pestilent behaviour of them that are
unworthily placed in authority.

<span id="008">8</span> And we must take care for the time to come, that
our kingdom may be quiet and peaceable for all men,

<span id="009">9</span> Both by changing our purposes, and always
judging things that are evident with more equal proceeding.

<span id="010">10</span> For Aman, a Macedonian, the son of Amadatha,
being indeed a stranger from the Persian blood, and far distant from our
goodness, and as a stranger received of us,

<span id="011">11</span> Had so far forth obtained the favour that we
shew toward every nation, as that he was called our father, and was
continually honoured of all the next person unto the king.

<span id="012">12</span> But he, not bearing his great dignity, went
about to deprive us of our kingdom and life:

<span id="013">13</span> Having by manifold and cunning deceits sought
of us the destruction, as well of Mardocheus, who saved our life, and
continually procured our good, as also of blameless Esther, partaker of
our kingdom, with their whole nation.

<span id="014">14</span> For by these means he thought, finding us
destitute of friends to have translated the kingdom of the Persians to
the Macedonians.

<span id="015">15</span> But we find that the Jews, whom this wicked
wretch hath delivered to utter destruction, are no evildoers, but live
by most just laws:

<span id="016">16</span> And that they be children of the most high and
most mighty, living God, who hath ordered the kingdom both unto us and
to our progenitors in the most excellent manner.

<span id="017">17</span> Wherefore ye shall do well not to put in
execution the letters sent unto you by Aman the son of Amadatha.

<span id="018">18</span> For he that was the worker of these things, is
hanged at the gates of Susa with all his family: God, who ruleth all
things, speedily rendering vengeance to him according to his deserts.

<span id="019">19</span> Therefore ye shall publish the copy of this
letter in all places, that the Jews may freely live after their own
laws.

<span id="020">20</span> And ye shall aid them, that even the same day,
being the thirteenth day of the twelfth month Adar, they may be avenged
on them, who in the time of their affliction shall set upon them.

<span id="021">21</span> For Almighty God hath turned to joy unto them
the day, wherein the chosen people should have perished.

<span id="022">22</span> Ye shall therefore among your solemn feasts
keep it an high day with all feasting:

<span id="023">23</span> That both now and hereafter there may be safety
to us and the well affected Persians; but to those which do conspire
against us a memorial of destruction.

<span id="024">24</span> Therefore every city and country whatsoever,
which shall not do according to these things, shall be destroyed without
mercy with fire and sword, and shall be made not only unpassable for
men, but also most hateful to wild beasts and fowls for ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 1](ma1001)
