[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/bar003)  [Sep](../sep/bar003) 
[Vul](../vul/bar003)   
  
[Baruch Index](bar)  
  [Previous](bar002)  [Next](bar004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Baruch Chapter 3

<span id="001">1</span> O Lord Almighty, God of Israel, the soul in
anguish the troubled spirit, crieth unto thee.

<span id="002">2</span> Hear, O Lord, and have mercy; ar thou art
merciful: and have pity upon us, because we have sinned before thee.

<span id="003">3</span> For thou endurest for ever, and we perish
utterly.

<span id="004">4</span> O Lord Almighty, thou God of Israel, hear now
the prayers of the dead Israelites, and of their children, which have
sinned before thee, and not hearkened unto the voice of thee their God:
for the which cause these plagues cleave unto us.

<span id="005">5</span> Remember not the iniquities of our forefathers:
but think upon thy power and thy name now at this time.

<span id="006">6</span> For thou art the Lord our God, and thee, O Lord,
will we praise.

<span id="007">7</span> And for this cause thou hast put thy fear in our
hearts, to the intent that we should call upon thy name, and praise thee
in our captivity: for we have called to mind all the iniquity of our
forefathers, that sinned before thee.

<span id="008">8</span> Behold, we are yet this day in our captivity,
where thou hast scattered us, for a reproach and a curse, and to be
subject to payments, according to all the iniquities of our fathers,
which departed from the Lord our God.

<span id="009">9</span> Hear, Israel, the commandments of life: give ear
to understand wisdom.

<span id="010">10</span> How happeneth it Israel, that thou art in thine
enemies' land, that thou art waxen old in a strange country, that thou
art defiled with the dead,

<span id="011">11</span> That thou art counted with them that go down
into the grave?

<span id="012">12</span> Thou hast forsaken the fountain of wisdom.

<span id="013">13</span> For if thou hadst walked in the way of God,
thou shouldest have dwelled in peace for ever.

<span id="014">14</span> Learn where is wisdom, where is strength, where
is understanding; that thou mayest know also where is length of days,
and life, where is the light of the eyes, and peace.

<span id="015">15</span> Who hath found out her place? or who hath come
into her treasures ?

<span id="016">16</span> Where are the princes of the heathen become,
and such as ruled the beasts upon the earth;

<span id="017">17</span> They that had their pastime with the fowls of
the air, and they that hoarded up silver and gold, wherein men trust,
and made no end of their getting?

<span id="018">18</span> For they that wrought in silver, and were so
careful, and whose works are unsearchable,

<span id="019">19</span> They are vanished and gone down to the grave,
and others are come up in their steads.

<span id="020">20</span> Young men have seen light, and dwelt upon the
earth: but the way of knowledge have they not known,

<span id="021">21</span> Nor understood the paths thereof, nor laid hold
of it: their children were far off from that way.

<span id="022">22</span> It hath not been heard of in Chanaan, neither
hath it been seen in Theman.

<span id="023">23</span> The Agarenes that seek wisdom upon earth, the
merchants of Meran and of Theman, the authors of fables, and searchers
out of understanding; none of these have known the way of wisdom, or
remember her paths.

<span id="024">24</span> O Israel, how great is the house of God! and
how large is the place of his possession!

<span id="025">25</span> Great, and hath none end; high, and
unmeasurable.

<span id="026">26</span> There were the giants famous from the
beginning, that were of so great stature, and so expert in war.

<span id="027">27</span> Those did not the Lord choose, neither gave he
the way of knowledge unto them:

<span id="028">28</span> But they were destroyed, because they had no
wisdom, and perished through their own foolishness.

<span id="029">29</span> Who hath gone up into heaven, and taken her,
and brought her down from the clouds?

<span id="030">30</span> Who hath gone over the sea, and found her, and
will bring her for pure gold?

<span id="031">31</span> No man knoweth her way, nor thinketh of her
path.

<span id="032">32</span> But he that knoweth all things knoweth her, and
hath found her out with his understanding: he that prepared the earth
for evermore hath filled it with fourfooted beasts:

<span id="033">33</span> He that sendeth forth light, and it goeth,
calleth it again, and it obeyeth him with fear.

<span id="034">34</span> The stars shined in their watches, and
rejoiced: when he calleth them, they say, Here we be; and so with
cheerfulness they shewed light unto him that made them.

<span id="035">35</span> This is our God, and there shall none other be
accounted of in comparison of him

<span id="036">36</span> He hath found out all the way of knowledge, and
hath given it unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved.

<span id="037">37</span> Afterward did he shew himself upon earth, and
conversed with men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Baruch Chapter 4](bar004)
