[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/bar001)  [Sep](../sep/bar001) 
[Vul](../vul/bar001)   
  
[Baruch Index](bar)  
  [Previous](sir051)  [Next](bar002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Baruch Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> And these are the words of the book, which
Baruch the son of Nerias, the son of Maasias, the son of Sedecias, the
son of Asadias, the son of Chelcias, wrote in Babylon,

<span id="002">2</span> In the fifth year, and in the seventh day of the
month, what time as the Chaldeans took Jerusalem, and burnt it with
fire.

<span id="003">3</span> And Baruch did read the words of this book in
the hearing of Jechonias the son of Joachim king of Juda, and in the
ears of all the people that came to hear the book,

<span id="004">4</span> And in the hearing of the nobles, and of the
king's sons, and in the hearing of the elders, and of all the people,
from the lowest unto the highest, even of all them that dwelt at Babylon
by the river Sud.

<span id="005">5</span> Whereupon they wept, fasted, and prayed before
the Lord.

<span id="006">6</span> They made also a collection of money according
to every man's power:

<span id="007">7</span> And they sent it to Jerusalem unto Joachim the
high priest, the son of Chelcias, son of Salom, and to the priests, and
to all the people which were found with him at Jerusalem,

<span id="008">8</span> At the same time when he received the vessels of
the house of the Lord, that were carried out of the temple, to return
them into the land of Juda, the tenth day of the month Sivan, namely,
silver vessels, which Sedecias the son of Josias king of Jada had made,

<span id="009">9</span> After that Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had
carried away Jechonias, and the princes, and the captives, and the
mighty men, and the people of the land, from Jerusalem, and brought them
unto Babylon.

<span id="010">10</span> And they said, Behold, we have sent you money
to buy you burnt offerings, and sin offerings, and incense, and prepare
ye manna, and offer upon the altar of the Lord our God;

<span id="011">11</span> And pray for the life of Nabuchodonosor king of
Babylon, and for the life of Balthasar his son, that their days may be
upon earth as the days of heaven:

<span id="012">12</span> And the Lord will give us strength, and lighten
our eyes, and we shall live under the shadow of Nabuchodonosor king of
Babylon, and under the shadow of Balthasar his son, and we shall serve
them many days, and find favour in their sight.

<span id="013">13</span> Pray for us also unto the Lord our God, for we
have sinned against the Lord our God; and unto this day the fury of the
Lord and his wrath is not turned from us.

<span id="014">14</span> And ye shall read this book which we have sent
unto you, to make confession in the house of the Lord, upon the feasts
and solemn days.

<span id="015">15</span> And ye shall say, To the Lord our God belongeth
righteousness, but unto us the confusion of faces, as it is come to pass
this day, unto them of Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,

<span id="016">16</span> And to our kings, and to our princes, and to
our priests, and to our prophets, and to our fathers:

<span id="017">17</span> For we have sinned before the Lord,

<span id="018">18</span> And disobeyed him, and have not hearkened unto
the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in the commandments that he gave
us openly:

<span id="019">19</span> Since the day that the Lord brought our
forefathers out of the land of Egypt, unto this present day, we have
been disobedient unto the Lord our God, and we have been negligent in
not hearing his voice.

<span id="020">20</span> Wherefore the evils cleaved unto us, and the
curse, which the Lord appointed by Moses his servant at the time that he
brought our fathers out of the land of Egypt, to give us a land that
floweth with milk and honey, like as it is to see this day.

<span id="021">21</span> Nevertheless we have not hearkened unto the
voice of the Lord our God, according unto all the words of the prophets,
whom he sent unto us:

<span id="022">22</span> But every man followed the imagination of his
own wicked heart, to serve strange gods, and to do evil in the sight of
the Lord our God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Baruch Chapter 2](bar002)
