[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es1002)  [Sep](../sep/es1002)   
  
[1 Esdras Index](es1)  
  [Previous](es1001)  [Next](es1003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Esdras Chapter 2

<span id="001">1</span> In the first year of Cyrus king of the Persians,
that the word of the Lord might be accomplished, that he had promised by
the mouth of Jeremy;

<span id="002">2</span> The Lord raised up the spirit of Cyrus the king
of the Persians, and he made proclamation through all his kingdom, and
also by writing,

<span id="003">3</span> Saying, Thus saith Cyrus king of the Persians;
The Lord of Israel, the most high Lord, hath made me king of the whole
world,

<span id="004">4</span> And commanded me to build him an house at
Jerusalem in Jewry.

<span id="005">5</span> If therefore there be any of you that are of his
people, let the Lord, even his Lord, be with him, and let him go up to
Jerusalem that is in Judea, and build the house of the Lord of Israel:
for he is the Lord that dwelleth in Jerusalem.

<span id="006">6</span> Whosoever then dwell in the places about, let
them help him, those, I say, that are his neighbours, with gold, and
with silver,

<span id="007">7</span> With gifts, with horses, and with cattle, and
other things, which have been set forth by vow, for the temple of the
Lord at Jerusalem.

<span id="008">8</span> Then the chief of the families of Judea and of
the tribe of Benjamin stood up; the priests also, and the Levites, and
all they whose mind the Lord had moved to go up, and to build an house
for the Lord at Jerusalem,

<span id="009">9</span> And they that dwelt round about them, and helped
them in all things with silver and gold, with horses and cattle, and
with very many free gifts of a great number whose minds were stirred up
thereto.

<span id="010">10</span> King Cyrus also brought forth the holy vessels,
which Nabuchodonosor had carried away from Jerusalem, and had set up in
his temple of idols.

<span id="011">11</span> Now when Cyrus king of the Persians had brought
them forth, he delivered them to Mithridates his treasurer:

<span id="012">12</span> And by him they were delivered to Sanabassar
the governor of Judea.

<span id="013">13</span> And this was the number of them; A thousand
golden cups, and a thousand of silver, censers of silver twenty nine,
vials of gold thirty, and of silver two thousand four hundred and ten,
and a thousand other vessels.

<span id="014">14</span> So all the vessels of gold and of silver, which
were carried away, were five thousand four hundred threescore and nine.

<span id="015">15</span> These were brought back by Sanabassar, together
with them of the captivity, from Babylon to Jerusalem.

<span id="016">16</span> But in the time of Artexerxes king of the
Persians Belemus, and Mithridates, and Tabellius, and Rathumus, and
Beeltethmus, and Semellius the secretary, with others that were in
commission with them, dwelling in Samaria and other places, wrote unto
him against them that dwelt in Judea and Jerusalem these letters
following;

<span id="017">17</span> To king Artexerxes our lord, Thy servants,
Rathumus the storywriter, and Semellius the scribe, and the rest of
their council, and the judges that are in Celosyria and Phenice.

<span id="018">18</span> Be it now known to the lord king, that the Jews
that are up from you to us, being come into Jerusalem, that rebellious
and wicked city, do build the marketplaces, and repair the walls of it
and do lay the foundation of the temple.

<span id="019">19</span> Now if this city and the walls thereof be made
up again, they will not only refuse to give tribute, but also rebel
against kings.

<span id="020">20</span> And forasmuch as the things pertaining to the
temple are now in hand, we think it meet not to neglect such a matter,

<span id="021">21</span> But to speak unto our lord the king, to the
intent that, if it be thy pleasure it may be sought out in the books of
thy fathers:

<span id="022">22</span> And thou shalt find in the chronicles what is
written concerning these things, and shalt understand that that city was
rebellious, troubling both kings and cities:

<span id="023">23</span> And that the Jews were rebellious, and raised
always wars therein; for the which cause even this city was made
desolate.

<span id="024">24</span> Wherefore now we do declare unto thee, O lord
the king, that if this city be built again, and the walls thereof set up
anew, thou shalt from henceforth have no passage into Celosyria and
Phenice.

<span id="025">25</span> Then the king wrote back again to Rathumus the
storywriter, to Beeltethmus, to Semellius the scribe, and to the rest
that were in commission, and dwellers in Samaria and Syria and Phenice,
after this manner;

<span id="026">26</span> I have read the epistle which ye have sent unto
me: therefore I commanded to make diligent search, and it hath been
found that that city was from the beginning practising against kings;

<span id="027">27</span> And the men therein were given to rebellion and
war: and that mighty kings and fierce were in Jerusalem, who reigned and
exacted tributes in Celosyria and Phenice.

<span id="028">28</span> Now therefore I have commanded to hinder those
men from building the city, and heed to be taken that there be no more
done in it;

<span id="029">29</span> And that those wicked workers proceed no
further to the annoyance of kings,

<span id="030">30</span> Then king Artexerxes his letters being read,
Rathumus, and Semellius the scribe, and the rest that were in commission
with them, removing in haste toward Jerusalem with a troop of horsemen
and a multitude of people in battle array, began to hinder the builders;
and the building of the temple in Jerusalem ceased until the second year
of the reign of Darius king of the Persians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Esdras Chapter 3](es1003)
