[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es1001)  [Sep](../sep/es1001)   
  
[1 Esdras Index](es1)  
  [Next](es1002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Esdras Chapter 1

<span id="001">1</span> And Josias held the feast of the passover in
Jerusalem unto his Lord, and offered the passover the fourteenth day of
the first month;

<span id="002">2</span> Having set the priests according to their daily
courses, being arrayed in long garments, in the temple of the Lord.

<span id="003">3</span> And he spake unto the Levites, the holy
ministers of Israel, that they should hallow themselves unto the Lord,
to set the holy ark of the Lord in the house that king Solomon the son
of David had built:

<span id="004">4</span> And said, Ye shall no more bear the ark upon
your shoulders: now therefore serve the Lord your God, and minister unto
his people Israel, and prepare you after your families and kindreds,

<span id="005">5</span> According as David the king of Israel
prescribed, and according to the magnificence of Solomon his son: and
standing in the temple according to the several dignity of the families
of you the Levites, who minister in the presence of your brethren the
children of Israel,

<span id="006">6</span> Offer the passover in order, and make ready the
sacrifices for your brethren, and keep the passover according to the
commandment of the Lord, which was given unto Moses.

<span id="007">7</span> And unto the people that was found there Josias
gave thirty thousand lambs and kids, and three thousand calves: these
things were given of the king's allowance, according as he promised, to
the people, to the priests, and to the Levites.

<span id="008">8</span> And Helkias, Zacharias, and Syelus, the
governors of the temple, gave to the priests for the passover two
thousand and six hundred sheep, and three hundred calves.

<span id="009">9</span> And Jeconias, and Samaias, and Nathanael his
brother, and Assabias, and Ochiel, and Joram, captains over thousands,
gave to the Levites for the passover five thousand sheep, and seven
hundred calves.

<span id="010">10</span> And when these things were done, the priests
and Levites, having the unleavened bread, stood in very comely order
according to the kindreds,

<span id="011">11</span> And according to the several dignities of the
fathers, before the people, to offer to the Lord, as it is written in
the book of Moses: and thus did they in the morning.

<span id="012">12</span> And they roasted the passover with fire, as
appertaineth: as for the sacrifices, they sod them in brass pots and
pans with a good savour,

<span id="013">13</span> And set them before all the people: and
afterward they prepared for themselves, and for the priests their
brethren, the sons of Aaron.

<span id="014">14</span> For the priests offered the fat until night:
and the Levites prepared for themselves, and the priests their brethren,
the sons of Aaron.

<span id="015">15</span> The holy singers also, the sons of Asaph, were
in their order, according to the appointment of David, to wit, Asaph,
Zacharias, and Jeduthun, who was of the king's retinue.

<span id="016">16</span> Moreover the porters were at every gate; it was
not lawful for any to go from his ordinary service: for their brethren
the Levites prepared for them.

<span id="017">17</span> Thus were the things that belonged to the
sacrifices of the Lord accomplished in that day, that they might hold
the passover,

<span id="018">18</span> And offer sacrifices upon the altar of the
Lord, according to the commandment of king Josias.

<span id="019">19</span> So the children of Israel which were present
held the passover at that time, and the feast of sweet bread seven days.

<span id="020">20</span> And such a passover was not kept in Israel
since the time of the prophet Samuel.

<span id="021">21</span> Yea, all the kings of Israel held not such a
passover as Josias, and the priests, and the Levites, and the Jews, held
with all Israel that were found dwelling at Jerusalem.

<span id="022">22</span> In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josias
was this passover kept.

<span id="023">23</span> And the works or Josias were upright before his
Lord with an heart full of godliness.

<span id="024">24</span> As for the things that came to pass in his
time, they were written in former times, concerning those that sinned,
and did wickedly against the Lord above all people and kingdoms, and how
they grieved him exceedingly, so that the words of the Lord rose up
against Israel.

<span id="025">25</span> Now after all these acts of Josias it came to
pass, that Pharaoh the king of Egypt came to raise war at Carchamis upon
Euphrates: and Josias went out against him.

<span id="026">26</span> But the king of Egypt sent to him, saying, What
have I to do with thee, O king of Judea?

<span id="027">27</span> I am not sent out from the Lord God against
thee; for my war is upon Euphrates: and now the Lord is with me, yea,
the Lord is with me hasting me forward: depart from me, and be not
against the Lord.

<span id="028">28</span> Howbeit Josias did not turn back his chariot
from him, but undertook to fight with him, not regarding the words of
the prophet Jeremy spoken by the mouth of the Lord:

<span id="029">29</span> But joined battle with him in the plain of
Magiddo, and the princes came against king Josias.

<span id="030">30</span> Then said the king unto his servants, Carry me
away out of the battle; for I am very weak. And immediately his servants
took him away out of the battle.

<span id="031">31</span> Then gat he up upon his second chariot; and
being brought back to Jerusalem died, and was buried in his father's
sepulchre.

<span id="032">32</span> And in all Jewry they mourned for Josias, yea,
Jeremy the prophet lamented for Josias, and the chief men with the women
made lamentation for him unto this day: and this was given out for an
ordinance to be done continually in all the nation of Israel.

<span id="033">33</span> These things are written in the book of the
stories of the kings of Judah, and every one of the acts that Josias
did, and his glory, and his understanding in the law of the Lord, and
the things that he had done before, and the things now recited, are
reported in the book of the kings of Israel and Judea.

<span id="034">34</span> And the people took Joachaz the son of Josias,
and made him king instead of Josias his father, when he was twenty and
three years old.

<span id="035">35</span> And he reigned in Judea and in Jerusalem three
months: and then the king of Egypt deposed him from reigning in
Jerusalem.

<span id="036">36</span> And he set a tax upon the land of an hundred
talents of silver and one talent of gold.

<span id="037">37</span> The king of Egypt also made king Joacim his
brother king of Judea and Jerusalem.

<span id="038">38</span> And he bound Joacim and the nobles: but Zaraces
his brother he apprehended, and brought him out of Egypt.

<span id="039">39</span> Five and twenty years old was Joacim when he
was made king in the land of Judea and Jerusalem; and he did evil before
the Lord.

<span id="040">40</span> Wherefore against him Nabuchodonosor the king
of Babylon came up, and bound him with a chain of brass, and carried him
into Babylon.

<span id="041">41</span> Nabuchodonosor also took of the holy vessels of
the Lord, and carried them away, and set them in his own temple at
Babylon.

<span id="042">42</span> But those things that are recorded of him, and
of his uncleaness and impiety, are written in the chronicles of the
kings.

<span id="043">43</span> And Joacim his son reigned in his stead: he was
made king being eighteen years old;

<span id="044">44</span> And reigned but three months and ten days in
Jerusalem; and did evil before the Lord.

<span id="045">45</span> So after a year Nabuchodonosor sent and caused
him to be brought into Babylon with the holy vessels of the Lord;

<span id="046">46</span> And made Zedechias king of Judea and Jerusalem,
when he was one and twenty years old; and he reigned eleven years:

<span id="047">47</span> And he did evil also in the sight of the Lord,
and cared not for the words that were spoken unto him by the prophet
Jeremy from the mouth of the Lord.

<span id="048">48</span> And after that king Nabuchodonosor had made him
to swear by the name of the Lord, he forswore himself, and rebelled; and
hardening his neck, his heart, he transgressed the laws of the Lord God
of Israel.

<span id="049">49</span> The governors also of the people and of the
priests did many things against the laws, and passed all the pollutions
of all nations, and defiled the temple of the Lord, which was sanctified
in Jerusalem.

<span id="050">50</span> Nevertheless the God of their fathers sent by
his messenger to call them back, because he spared them and his
tabernacle also.

<span id="051">51</span> But they had his messengers in derision; and,
look, when the Lord spake unto them, they made a sport of his prophets:

<span id="052">52</span> So far forth, that he, being wroth with his
people for their great ungodliness, commanded the kings of the Chaldees
to come up against them;

<span id="053">53</span> Who slew their young men with the sword, yea,
even within the compass of their holy temple, and spared neither young
man nor maid, old man nor child, among them; for he delivered all into
their hands.

<span id="054">54</span> And they took all the holy vessels of the Lord,
both great and small, with the vessels of the ark of God, and the king's
treasures, and carried them away into Babylon.

<span id="055">55</span> As for the house of the Lord, they burnt it,
and brake down the walls of Jerusalem, and set fire upon her towers:

<span id="056">56</span> And as for her glorious things, they never
ceased till they had consumed and brought them all to nought: and the
people that were not slain with the sword he carried unto Babylon:

<span id="057">57</span> Who became servants to him and his children,
till the Persians reigned, to fulfil the word of the Lord spoken by the
mouth of Jeremy:

<span id="058">58</span> Until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths, the
whole time of her desolation shall she rest, until the full term of
seventy years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Esdras Chapter 2](es1002)
