[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2006)  [Sep](../sep/es2006)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2005)  [Next](es2007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 6

<span id="001">1</span> And he said unto me, In the beginning, when the
earth was made, before the borders of the world stood, or ever the winds
blew,

<span id="002">2</span> Before it thundered and lightened, or ever the
foundations of paradise were laid,

<span id="003">3</span> Before the fair flowers were seen, or ever the
moveable powers were established, before the innumerable multitude of
angels were gathered together,

<span id="004">4</span> Or ever the heights of the air were lifted up,
before the measures of the firmament were named, or ever the chimneys in
Sion were hot,

<span id="005">5</span> And ere the present years were sought out, and
or ever the inventions of them that now sin were turned, before they
were sealed that have gathered faith for a treasure:

<span id="006">6</span> Then did I consider these things, and they all
were made through me alone, and through none other: by me also they
shall be ended, and by none other.

<span id="007">7</span> Then answered I and said, What shall be the
parting asunder of the times? or when shall be the end of the first, and
the beginning of it that followeth?

<span id="008">8</span> And he said unto me, From Abraham unto Isaac,
when Jacob and Esau were born of him, Jacob's hand held first the heel
of Esau.

<span id="009">9</span> For Esau is the end of the world, and Jacob is
the beginning of it that followeth.

<span id="010">10</span> The hand of man is betwixt the heel and the
hand: other question, Esdras, ask thou not.

<span id="011">11</span> I answered then and said, O Lord that bearest
rule, if I have found favour in thy sight,

<span id="012">12</span> I beseech thee, shew thy servant the end of thy
tokens, whereof thou shewedst me part the last night.

<span id="013">13</span> So he answered and said unto me, Stand up upon
thy feet, and hear a mighty sounding voice.

<span id="014">14</span> And it shall be as it were a great motion; but
the place where thou standest shall not be moved.

<span id="015">15</span> And therefore when it speaketh be not afraid:
for the word is of the end, and the foundation of the earth is
understood.

<span id="016">16</span> And why? because the speech of these things
trembleth and is moved: for it knoweth that the end of these things must
be changed.

<span id="017">17</span> And it happened, that when I had heard it I
stood up upon my feet, and hearkened, and, behold, there was a voice
that spake, and the sound of it was like the sound of many waters.

<span id="018">18</span> And it said, Behold, the days come, that I will
begin to draw nigh, and to visit them that dwell upon the earth,

<span id="019">19</span> And will begin to make inquisition of them,
what they be that have hurt unjustly with their unrighteousness, and
when the affliction of Sion shall be fulfilled;

<span id="020">20</span> And when the world, that shall begin to vanish
away, shall be finished, then will I shew these tokens: the books shall
be opened before the firmament, and they shall see all together:

<span id="021">21</span> And the children of a year old shall speak with
their voices, the women with child shall bring forth untimely children
of three or four months old, and they shall live, and be raised up.

<span id="022">22</span> And suddenly shall the sown places appear
unsown, the full storehouses shall suddenly be found empty:

<span id="023">23</span> And tha trumpet shall give a sound, which when
every man heareth, they shall be suddenly afraid.

<span id="024">24</span> At that time shall friends fight one against
another like enemies, and the earth shall stand in fear with those that
dwell therein, the springs of the fountains shall stand still, and in
three hours they shall not run.

<span id="025">25</span> Whosoever remaineth from all these that I have
told thee shall escape, and see my salvation, and the end of your world.

<span id="026">26</span> And the men that are received shall see it, who
have not tasted death from their birth: and the heart of the inhabitants
shall be changed, and turned into another meaning.

<span id="027">27</span> For evil shall be put out, and deceit shall be
quenched.

<span id="028">28</span> As for faith, it shall flourish, corruption
shall be overcome, and the truth, which hath been so long without fruit,
shall be declared.

<span id="029">29</span> And when he talked with me, behold, I looked by
little and little upon him before whom I stood.

<span id="030">30</span> And these words said he unto me; I am come to
shew thee the time of the night to come.

<span id="031">31</span> If thou wilt pray yet more, and fast seven days
again, I shall tell thee greater things by day than I have heard.

<span id="032">32</span> For thy voice is heard before the most High:
for the Mighty hath seen thy righteous dealing, he hath seen also thy
chastity, which thou hast had ever since thy youth.

<span id="033">33</span> And therefore hath he sent me to shew thee all
these things, and to say unto thee, Be of good comfort and fear not

<span id="034">34</span> And hasten not with the times that are past, to
think vain things, that thou mayest not hasten from the latter times.

<span id="035">35</span> And it came to pass after this, that I wept
again, and fasted seven days in like manner, that I might fulfil the
three weeks which he told me.

<span id="036">36</span> And in the eighth night was my heart vexed
within me again, and I began to speak before the most High.

<span id="037">37</span> For my spirit was greatly set on fire, and my
soul was in distress.

<span id="038">38</span> And I said, O Lord, thou spakest from the
beginning of the creation, even the first day, and saidst thus; Let
heaven and earth be made; and thy word was a perfect work.

<span id="039">39</span> And then was the spirit, and darkness and
silence were on every side; the sound of man's voice was not yet formed.

<span id="040">40</span> Then commandedst thou a fair light to come
forth of thy treasures, that thy work might appear.

<span id="041">41</span> Upon the second day thou madest the spirit of
the firmament, and commandedst it to part asunder, and to make a
division betwixt the waters, that the one part might go up, and the
other remain beneath.

<span id="042">42</span> Upon the third day thou didst command that the
waters should be gathered in the seventh part of the earth: six parts
hast thou dried up, and kept them, to the intent that of these some
being planted of God and tilled might serve thee.

<span id="043">43</span> For as soon as thy word went forth the work was
made.

<span id="044">44</span> For immediately there was great and innumerable
fruit, and many and divers pleasures for the taste, and flowers of
unchangeable colour, and odours of wonderful smell: and this was done
the third day.

<span id="045">45</span> Upon the fourth day thou commandedst that the
sun should shine, and the moon give her light, and the stars should be
in order:

<span id="046">46</span> And gavest them a charge to do service unto
man, that was to be made.

<span id="047">47</span> Upon the fifth day thou saidst unto the seventh
part, where the waters were gathered that it should bring forth living
creatures, fowls and fishes: and so it came to pass.

<span id="048">48</span> For the dumb water and without life brought
forth living things at the commandment of God, that all people might
praise thy wondrous works.

<span id="049">49</span> Then didst thou ordain two living creatures,
the one thou calledst Enoch, and the other Leviathan;

<span id="050">50</span> And didst separate the one from the other: for
the seventh part, namely, where the water was gathered together, might
not hold them both.

<span id="051">51</span> Unto Enoch thou gavest one part, which was
dried up the third day, that he should dwell in the same part, wherein
are a thousand hills:

<span id="052">52</span> But unto Leviathan thou gavest the seventh
part, namely, the moist; and hast kept him to be devoured of whom thou
wilt, and when.

<span id="053">53</span> Upon the sixth day thou gavest commandment unto
the earth, that before thee it should bring forth beasts, cattle, and
creeping things:

<span id="054">54</span> And after these, Adam also, whom thou madest
lord of all thy creatures: of him come we all, and the people also whom
thou hast chosen.

<span id="055">55</span> All this have I spoken before thee, O Lord,
because thou madest the world for our sakes

<span id="056">56</span> As for the other people, which also come of
Adam, thou hast said that they are nothing, but be like unto spittle:
and hast likened the abundance of them unto a drop that falleth from a
vessel.

<span id="057">57</span> And now, O Lord, behold, these heathen, which
have ever been reputed as nothing, have begun to be lords over us, and
to devour us.

<span id="058">58</span> But we thy people, whom thou hast called thy
firstborn, thy only begotten, and thy fervent lover, are given into
their hands.

<span id="059">59</span> If the world now be made for our sakes, why do
we not possess an inheritance with the world? how long shall this
endure?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 7](es2007)
