[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2007)  [Sep](../sep/es2007)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2006)  [Next](es2008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 7

<span id="001">1</span> And when I had made an end of speaking these
words, there was sent unto me the angel which had been sent unto me the
nights afore:

<span id="002">2</span> And he said unto me, Up, Esdras, and hear the
words that I am come to tell thee.

<span id="003">3</span> And I said, Speak on, my God. Then said he unto
me, The sea is set in a wide place, that it might be deep and great.

<span id="004">4</span> But put the case the entrance were narrow, and
like a river;

<span id="005">5</span> Who then could go into the sea to look upon it,
and to rule it? if he went not through the narrow, how could he come
into the broad?

<span id="006">6</span> There is also another thing; A city is builded,
and set upon a broad field, and is full of all good things:

<span id="007">7</span> The entrance thereof is narrow, and is set in a
dangerous place to fall, like as if there were a fire on the right hand,
and on the left a deep water:

<span id="008">8</span> And one only path between them both, even
between the fire and the water, so small that there could but one man go
there at once.

<span id="009">9</span> If this city now were given unto a man for an
inheritance, if he never shall pass the danger set before it, how shall
he receive this inheritance?

<span id="010">10</span> And I said, It is so, Lord. Then said he unto
me, Even so also is Israel's portion.

<span id="011">11</span> Because for their sakes I made the world: and
when Adam transgressed my statutes, then was decreed that now is done.

<span id="012">12</span> Then were the entrances of this world made
narrow, full of sorrow and travail: they are but few and evil, full of
perils,: and very painful.

<span id="013">13</span> For the entrances of the elder world were wide
and sure, and brought immortal fruit.

<span id="014">14</span> If then they that live labour not to enter
these strait and vain things, they can never receive those that are laid
up for them.

<span id="015">15</span> Now therefore why disquietest thou thyself,
seeing thou art but a corruptible man? and why art thou moved, whereas
thou art but mortal?

<span id="016">16</span> Why hast thou not considered in thy mind this
thing that is to come, rather than that which is present?

<span id="017">17</span> Then answered I and said, O Lord that bearest
rule, thou hast ordained in thy law, that the righteous should inherit
these things, but that the ungodly should perish.

<span id="018">18</span> Nevertheless the righteous shall suffer strait
things, and hope for wide: for they that have done wickedly have
suffered the strait things, and yet shall not see the wide.

<span id="019">19</span> And he said unto me. There is no judge above
God, and none that hath understanding above the Highest.

<span id="020">20</span> For there be many that perish in this life,
because they despise the law of God that is set before them.

<span id="021">21</span> For God hath given strait commandment to such
as came, what they should do to live, even as they came, and what they
should observe to avoid punishment.

<span id="022">22</span> Nevertheless they were not obedient unto him;
but spake against him, and imagined vain things;

<span id="023">23</span> And deceived themselves by their wicked deeds;
and said of the most High, that he is not; and knew not his ways:

<span id="024">24</span> But his law have they despised, and denied his
covenants; in his statutes have they not been faithful, and have not
performed his works.

<span id="025">25</span> And therefore, Esdras, for the empty are empty
things, and for the full are the full things.

<span id="026">26</span> Behold, the time shall come, that these tokens
which I have told thee shall come to pass, and the bride shall appear,
and she coming forth shall be seen, that now is withdrawn from the
earth.

<span id="027">27</span> And whosoever is delivered from the foresaid
evils shall see my wonders.

<span id="028">28</span> For my son Jesus shall be revealed with those
that be with him, and they that remain shall rejoice within four hundred
years.

<span id="029">29</span> After these years shall my son Christ die, and
all men that have life.

<span id="030">30</span> And the world shall be turned into the old
silence seven days, like as in the former judgments: so that no man
shall remain.

<span id="031">31</span> And after seven days the world, that yet
awaketh not, shall be raised up, and that shall die that is corrupt

<span id="032">32</span> And the earth shall restore those that are
asleep in her, and so shall the dust those that dwell in silence, and
the secret places shall deliver those souls that were committed unto
them.

<span id="033">33</span> And the most High shall appear upon the seat of
judgment, and misery shall pass away, and the long suffering shall have
an end:

<span id="034">34</span> But judgment only shall remain, truth shall
stand, and faith shall wax strong:

<span id="035">35</span> And the work shall follow, and the reward shall
be shewed, and the good deeds shall be of force, and wicked deeds shall
bear no rule.

<span id="036">36</span> Then said I, Abraham prayed first for the
Sodomites, and Moses for the fathers that sinned in the wilderness:

<span id="037">37</span> And Jesus after him for Israel in the time of
Achan:

<span id="038">38</span> And Samuel and David for the destruction: and
Solomon for them that should come to the sanctuary:

<span id="039">39</span> And Helias for those that received rain; and
for the dead, that he might live:

<span id="040">40</span> And Ezechias for the people in the time of
Sennacherib: and many for many.

<span id="041">41</span> Even so now, seeing corruption is grown up, and
wickedness increased, and the righteous have prayed for the ungodly:
wherefore shall it not be so now also?

<span id="042">42</span> He answered me, and said, This present life is
not the end where much glory doth abide; therefore have they prayed for
the weak.

<span id="043">43</span> But the day of doom shall be the end of this
time, and the beginning of the immortality for to come, wherein
corruption is past,

<span id="044">44</span> Intemperance is at an end, infidelity is cut
off, righteousness is grown, and truth is sprung up.

<span id="045">45</span> Then shall no man be able to save him that is
destroyed, nor to oppress him that hath gotten the victory.

<span id="046">46</span> I answered then and said, This is my first and
last saying, that it had been better not to have given the earth unto
Adam: or else, when it was given him, to have restrained him from
sinning.

<span id="047">47</span> For what profit is it for men now in this
present time to live in heaviness, and after death to look for
punishment?

<span id="048">48</span> O thou Adam, what hast thou done? for though it
was thou that sinned, thou art not fallen alone, but we all that come of
thee.

<span id="049">49</span> For what profit is it unto us, if there be
promised us an immortal time, whereas we have done the works that bring
death?

<span id="050">50</span> And that there is promised us an everlasting
hope, whereas ourselves being most wicked are made vain?

<span id="051">51</span> And that there are laid up for us dwellings of
health and safety, whereas we have lived wickedly?

<span id="052">52</span> And that the glory of the most High is kept to
defend them which have led a wary life, whereas we have walked in the
most wicked ways of all?

<span id="053">53</span> And that there should be shewed a paradise,
whose fruit endureth for ever, wherein is security and medicine, since
we shall not enter into it?

<span id="054">54</span> (For we have walked in unpleasant places.)

<span id="055">55</span> And that the faces of them which have used
abstinence shall shine above the stars, whereas our faces shall be
blacker than darkness?

<span id="056">56</span> For while we lived and committed iniquity, we
considered not that we should begin to suffer for it after death.

<span id="057">57</span> Then answered he me, and said, This is the
condition of the battle, which man that is born upon the earth shall
fight;

<span id="058">58</span> That, if he be overcome, he shall suffer as
thou hast said: but if he get the victory, he shall receive the thing
that I say.

<span id="059">59</span> For this is the life whereof Moses spake unto
the people while he lived, saying, Choose thee life, that thou mayest
live.

<span id="060">60</span> Nevertheless they believed not him, nor yet the
prophets after him, no nor me which have spoken unto them,

<span id="061">61</span> That there should not be such heaviness in
their destruction, as shall be joy over them that are persuaded to
salvation.

<span id="062">62</span> I answered then, and said, I know, Lord, that
the most High is called merciful, in that he hath mercy upon them which
are not yet come into the world,

<span id="063">63</span> And upon those also that turn to his law;

<span id="064">64</span> And that he is patient, and long suffereth
those that have sinned, as his creatures;

<span id="065">65</span> And that he is bountiful, for he is ready to
give where it needeth;

<span id="066">66</span> And that he is of great mercy, for he
multiplieth more and more mercies to them that are present, and that are
past, and also to them which are to come.

<span id="067">67</span> For if he shall not multiply his mercies, the
world would not continue with them that inherit therein.

<span id="068">68</span> And he pardoneth; for if he did not so of his
goodness, that they which have committed iniquities might be eased of
them, the ten thousandth part of men should not remain living.

<span id="069">69</span> And being judge, if he should not forgive them
that are cured with his word, and put out the multitude of contentions,

<span id="070">70</span> There should be very few left peradventure in
an innumerable multitude.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 8](es2008)
