[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/es2002)  [Sep](../sep/es2002)   
  
[2 Esdras Index](es2)  
  [Previous](es2001)  [Next](es2003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Esdras Chapter 2

<span id="001">1</span> Thus saith the Lord, I brought this people out
of bondage, and I gave them my commandments by menservants the prophets;
whom they would not hear, but despised my counsels.

<span id="002">2</span> The mother that bare them saith unto them, Go
your way, ye children; for I am a widow and forsaken.

<span id="003">3</span> I brought you up with gladness; but with sorrow
and heaviness have I lost you: for ye have sinned before the Lord your
God, and done that thing that is evil before him.

<span id="004">4</span> But what shall I now do unto you? I am a widow
and forsaken: go your way, O my children, and ask mercy of the Lord.

<span id="005">5</span> As for me, O father, I call upon thee for a
witness over the mother of these children, which would not keep my
covenant,

<span id="006">6</span> That thou bring them to confusion, and their
mother to a spoil, that there may be no offspring of them.

<span id="007">7</span> Let them be scattered abroad among the heathen,
let their names be put out of the earth: for they have despised my
covenant.

<span id="008">8</span> Woe be unto thee, Assur, thou that hidest the
unrighteous in thee! O thou wicked people, remember what I did unto
Sodom and Gomorrha;

<span id="009">9</span> Whose land lieth in clods of pitch and heaps of
ashes: even so also will I do unto them that hear me not, saith the
Almighty Lord.

<span id="010">10</span> Thus saith the Lord unto Esdras, Tell my people
that I will give them the kingdom of Jerusalem, which I would have given
unto Israel.

<span id="011">11</span> Their glory also will I take unto me, and give
these the everlasting tabernacles, which I had prepared for them.

<span id="012">12</span> They shall have the tree of life for an
ointment of sweet savour; they shall neither labour, nor be weary.

<span id="013">13</span> Go, and ye shall receive: pray for few days
unto you, that they may be shortened: the kingdom is already prepared
for you: watch.

<span id="014">14</span> Take heaven and earth to witness; for I have
broken the evil in pieces, and created the good: for I live, saith the
Lord.

<span id="015">15</span> Mother, embrace thy children, and bring them up
with gladness, make their feet as fast as a pillar: for I have chosen
thee, saith the Lord.

<span id="016">16</span> And those that be dead will I raise up again
from their places, and bring them out of the graves: for I have known my
name in Israel.

<span id="017">17</span> Fear not, thou mother of the children: for I
have chosen thee, saith the Lord.

<span id="018">18</span> For thy help will I send my servants Esau and
Jeremy, after whose counsel I have sanctified and prepared for thee
twelve trees laden with divers fruits,

<span id="019">19</span> And as many fountains flowing with milk and
honey, and seven mighty mountains, whereupon there grow roses and
lilies, whereby I will fill thy children with joy.

<span id="020">20</span> Do right to the widow, judge for the
fatherless, give to the poor, defend the orphan, clothe the naked,

<span id="021">21</span> Heal the broken and the weak, laugh not a lame
man to scorn, defend the maimed, and let the blind man come into the
sight of my clearness.

<span id="022">22</span> Keep the old and young within thy walls.

<span id="023">23</span> Wheresoever thou findest the dead, take them
and bury them, and I will give thee the first place in my resurrection.

<span id="024">24</span> Abide still, O my people, and take thy rest,
for thy quietness still come.

<span id="025">25</span> Nourish thy children, O thou good nurse;
stablish their feet.

<span id="026">26</span> As for the servants whom I have given thee,
there shall not one of them perish; for I will require them from among
thy number.

<span id="027">27</span> Be not weary: for when the day of trouble and
heaviness cometh, others shall weep and be sorrowful, but thou shalt be
merry and have abundance.

<span id="028">28</span> The heathen shall envy thee, but they shall be
able to do nothing against thee, saith the Lord.

<span id="029">29</span> My hands shall cover thee, so that thy children
shall not see hell.

<span id="030">30</span> Be joyful, O thou mother, with thy children;
for I will deliver thee, saith the Lord.

<span id="031">31</span> Remember thy children that sleep, for I shall
bring them out of the sides of the earth, and shew mercy unto them: for
I am merciful, saith the Lord Almighty.

<span id="032">32</span> Embrace thy children until I come and shew
mercy unto them: for my wells run over, and my grace shall not fail.

<span id="033">33</span> I Esdras received a charge of the Lord upon the
mount Oreb, that I should go unto Israel; but when I came unto them,
they set me at nought, and despised the commandment of the Lord.

<span id="034">34</span> And therefore I say unto you, O ye heathen,
that hear and understand, look for your Shepherd, he shall give you
everlasting rest; for he is nigh at hand, that shall come in the end of
the world.

<span id="035">35</span> Be ready to the reward of the kingdom, for the
everlasting light shall shine upon you for evermore.

<span id="036">36</span> Flee the shadow of this world, receive the
joyfulness of your glory: I testify my Saviour openly.

<span id="037">37</span> O receive the gift that is given you, and be
glad, giving thanks unto him that hath led you to the heavenly kingdom.

<span id="038">38</span> Arise up and stand, behold the number of those
that be sealed in the feast of the Lord;

<span id="039">39</span> Which are departed from the shadow of the
world, and have received glorious garments of the Lord.

<span id="040">40</span> Take thy number, O Sion, and shut up those of
thine that are clothed in white, which have fulfilled the law of the
Lord.

<span id="041">41</span> The number of thy children, whom thou longedst
for, is fulfilled: beseech the power of the Lord, that thy people, which
have been called from the beginning, may be hallowed.

<span id="042">42</span> I Esdras saw upon the mount Sion a great
people, whom I could not number, and they all praised the Lord with
songs.

<span id="043">43</span> And in the midst of them there was a young man
of a high stature, taller than all the rest, and upon every one of their
heads he set crowns, and was more exalted; which I marvelled at greatly.

<span id="044">44</span> So I asked the angel, and said, Sir, what are
these?

<span id="045">45</span> He answered and said unto me, These be they
that have put off the mortal clothing, and put on the immortal, and have
confessed the name of God: now are they crowned, and receive palms.

<span id="046">46</span> Then said I unto the angel, What young person
is it that crowneth them, and giveth them palms in their hands?

<span id="047">47</span> So he answered and said unto me, It is the Son
of God, whom they have confessed in the world. Then began I greatly to
commend them that stood so stiffly for the name of the Lord.

<span id="048">48</span> Then the angel said unto me, Go thy way, and
tell my people what manner of things, and how great wonders of the Lord
thy God, thou hast seen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Esdras Chapter 3](es2003)
