[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt016)  [Sep](../sep/jdt016) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt016)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt)  
  [Previous](jdt015)  [Next](wis001) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 16

<span id="001">1</span> Then Judith began to sing this thanksgiving in
all Israel, and all the people sang after her this song of praise.

<span id="002">2</span> And Judith said, Begin unto my God with
timbrels, sing unto my Lord with cymbals: tune unto him a new psalm:
exalt him, and call upon his name.

<span id="003">3</span> For God breaketh the battles: for among the
camps in the midst of the people he hath delivered me out of the hands
of them that persecuted me.

<span id="004">4</span> Assur came out of the mountains from the north,
he came with ten thousands of his army, the multitude whereof stopped
the torrents, and their horsemen have covered the hills.

<span id="005">5</span> He bragged that he would burn up my borders, and
kill my young men with the sword, and dash the sucking children against
the ground, and make mine infants as a prey, and my virgins as a spoil.

<span id="006">6</span> But the Almighty Lord hath disappointed them by
the hand of a woman.

<span id="007">7</span> For the mighty one did not fall by the young
men, neither did the sons of the Titans smite him, nor high giants set
upon him: but Judith the daughter of Merari weakened him with the beauty
of her countenance.

<span id="008">8</span> For she put off the garment of her widowhood for
the exaltation of those that were oppressed in Israel, and anointed her
face with ointment, and bound her hair in a tire, and took a linen
garment to deceive him.

<span id="009">9</span> Her sandals ravished his eyes, her beauty took
his mind prisoner, and the fauchion passed through his neck.

<span id="010">10</span> The Persians quaked at her boldness, and the
Medes were daunted at her hardiness.

<span id="011">11</span> Then my afflicted shouted for joy, and my weak
ones cried aloud; but they were astonished: these lifted up their
voices, but they were overthrown.

<span id="012">12</span> The sons of the damsels have pierced them
through, and wounded them as fugatives' children: they perished by the
battle of the Lord.

<span id="013">13</span> I will sing unto the Lord a new song: O Lord,
thou art great and glorious, wonderful in strength, and invincible.

<span id="014">14</span> Let all creatures serve thee: for thou spakest,
and they were made, thou didst send forth thy spirit, and it created
them, and there is none that can resist thy voice.

<span id="015">15</span> For the mountains shall be moved from their
foundations with the waters, the rocks shall melt as wax at thy
presence: yet thou art merciful to them that fear thee.

<span id="016">16</span> For all sacrifice is too little for a sweet
savour unto thee, and all the fat is not sufficient for thy burnt
offering: but he that feareth the Lord is great at all times.

<span id="017">17</span> Woe to the nations that rise up against my
kindred! the Lord Almighty will take vengeance of them in the day of
judgment, in putting fire and worms in their flesh; and they shall feel
them, and weep for ever.

<span id="018">18</span> Now as soon as they entered into Jerusalem,
they worshipped the Lord; and as soon as the people were purified, they
offered their burnt offerings, and their free offerings, and their
gifts.

<span id="019">19</span> Judith also dedicated all the stuff of
Holofernes, which the people had given her, and gave the canopy, which
she had taken out of his bedchamber, for a gift unto the Lord.

<span id="020">20</span> So the people continued feasting in Jerusalem
before the sanctuary for the space of three months and Judith remained
with them.

<span id="021">21</span> After this time every one returned to his own
inheritance, and Judith went to Bethulia, and remained in her own
possession, and was in her time honourable in all the country.

<span id="022">22</span> And many desired her, but none knew her all the
days of her life, after that Manasses her husband was dead, and was
gathered to his people.

<span id="023">23</span> But she increased more and more in honour, and
waxed old in her husband's house, being an hundred and five years old,
and made her maid free; so she died in Bethulia: and they buried her in
the cave of her husband Manasses.

<span id="024">24</span> And the house of Israel lamented her seven
days: and before she died, she did distribute her goods to all them that
were nearest of kindred to Manasses her husband, and to them that were
the nearest of her kindred.

<span id="025">25</span> And there was none that made the children of
Israel any more afraid in the days of Judith, nor a long time after her
death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 1](wis001)
