[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/jdt004)  [Sep](../sep/jdt004) 
[Vul](../vul/jdt004)   
  
[Judith Index](jdt)  
  [Previous](jdt003)  [Next](jdt005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Judith Chapter 4

<span id="001">1</span> Now the children of Israel, that dwelt in Judea,
heard all that Holofernes the chief captain of Nabuchodonosor king of
the Assyrians had done to the nations, and after what manner he had
spoiled all their temples, and brought them to nought.

<span id="002">2</span> Therefore they were exceedingly afraid of him,
and were troubled for Jerusalem, and for the temple of the Lord their
God:

<span id="003">3</span> For they were newly returned from the captivity,
and all the people of Judea were lately gathered together: and the
vessels, and the altar, and the house, were sanctified after the
profanation.

<span id="004">4</span> Therefore they sent into all the coasts of
Samaria, and the villages and to Bethoron, and Belmen, and Jericho, and
to Choba, and Esora, and to the valley of Salem:

<span id="005">5</span> And possessed themselves beforehand of all the
tops of the high mountains, and fortified the villages that were in
them, and laid up victuals for the provision of war: for their fields
were of late reaped.

<span id="006">6</span> Also Joacim the high priest, which was in those
days in Jerusalem, wrote to them that dwelt in Bethulia, and
Betomestham, which is over against Esdraelon toward the open country,
near to Dothaim,

<span id="007">7</span> Charging them to keep the passages of the hill
country: for by them there was an entrance into Judea, and it was easy
to stop them that would come up, because the passage was straight, for
two men at the most.

<span id="008">8</span> And the children of Israel did as Joacim the
high priest had commanded them, with the ancients of all the people of
Israel, which dwelt at Jerusalem.

<span id="009">9</span> Then every man of Israel cried to God with great
fervency, and with great vehemency did they humble their souls:

<span id="010">10</span> Both they, and their wives and their children,
and their cattle, and every stranger and hireling, and their servants
bought with money, put sackcloth upon their loins.

<span id="011">11</span> Thus every man and women, and the little
children, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, fell before the temple, and
cast ashes upon their heads, and spread out their sackcloth before the
face of the Lord: also they put sackcloth about the altar,

<span id="012">12</span> And cried to the God of Israel all with one
consent earnestly, that he would not give their children for a prey, and
their wives for a spoil, and the cities of their inheritance to
destruction, and the sanctuary to profanation and reproach, and for the
nations to rejoice at.

<span id="013">13</span> So God heard their prayers, and looked upon
their afflictions: for the people fasted many days in all Judea and
Jerusalem before the sanctuary of the Lord Almighty.

<span id="014">14</span> And Joacim the high priest, and all the priests
that stood before the Lord, and they which ministered unto the Lord, had
their loins girt with sackcloth, and offered the daily burnt offerings,
with the vows and free gifts of the people,

<span id="015">15</span> And had ashes on their mitres, and cried unto
the Lord with all their power, that he would look upon all the house of
Israel graciously.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith Chapter 5](jdt005)
