[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1002)  [Sep](../sep/ma1002) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1002)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1001)  [Next](ma1003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 2

<span id="001">1</span> In those days arose Mattathias the son of John,
the son of Simeon, a priest of the sons of Joarib, from Jerusalem, and
dwelt in Modin.

<span id="002">2</span> And he had five sons, Joannan, called Caddis:

<span id="003">3</span> Simon; called Thassi:

<span id="004">4</span> Judas, who was called Maccabeus:

<span id="005">5</span> Eleazar, called Avaran: and Jonathan, whose
surname was Apphus.

<span id="006">6</span> And when he saw the blasphemies that were
committed in Juda and Jerusalem,

<span id="007">7</span> He said, Woe is me! wherefore was I born to see
this misery of my people, and of the holy city, and to dwell there, when
it was delivered into the hand of the enemy, and the sanctuary into the
hand of strangers?

<span id="008">8</span> Her temple is become as a man without glory.

<span id="009">9</span> Her glorious vessels are carried away into
captivity, her infants are slain in the streets, her young men with the
sword of the enemy.

<span id="010">10</span> What nation hath not had a part in her kingdom
and gotten of her spoils?

<span id="011">11</span> All her ornaments are taken away; of a free
woman she is become a bondslave.

<span id="012">12</span> And, behold, our sanctuary, even our beauty and
our glory, is laid waste, and the Gentiles have profaned it.

<span id="013">13</span> To what end therefore shall we live any longer?

<span id="014">14</span> Then Mattathias and his sons rent their
clothes, and put on sackcloth, and mourned very sore.

<span id="015">15</span> In the mean while the king's officers, such as
compelled the people to revolt, came into the city Modin, to make them
sacrifice.

<span id="016">16</span> And when many of Israel came unto them,
Mattathias also and his sons came together.

<span id="017">17</span> Then answered the king's officers, and said to
Mattathias on this wise, Thou art a ruler, and an honourable and great
man in this city, and strengthened with sons and brethren:

<span id="018">18</span> Now therefore come thou first, and fulfil the
king's commandment, like as all the heathen have done, yea, and the men
of Juda also, and such as remain at Jerusalem: so shalt thou and thy
house be in the number of the king's friends, and thou and thy children
shall be honoured with silver and gold, and many rewards.

<span id="019">19</span> Then Mattathias answered and spake with a loud
voice, Though all the nations that are under the king's dominion obey
him, and fall away every one from the religion of their fathers, and
give consent to his commandments:

<span id="020">20</span> Yet will I and my sons and my brethren walk in
the covenant of our fathers.

<span id="021">21</span> God forbid that we should forsake the law and
the ordinances.

<span id="022">22</span> We will not hearken to the king's words, to go
from our religion, either on the right hand, or the left.

<span id="023">23</span> Now when he had left speaking these words,
there came one of the Jews in the sight of all to sacrifice on the altar
which was at Modin, according to the king's commandment.

<span id="024">24</span> Which thing when Mattathias saw, he was
inflamed with zeal, and his reins trembled, neither could he forbear to
shew his anger according to judgment: wherefore he ran, and slew him
upon the altar.

<span id="025">25</span> Also the king's commissioner, who compelled men
to sacrifice, he killed at that time, and the altar he pulled down.

<span id="026">26</span> Thus dealt he zealously for the law of God like
as Phinees did unto Zambri the son of Salom.

<span id="027">27</span> And Mattathias cried throughout the city with a
loud voice, saying, Whosoever is zealous of the law, and maintaineth the
covenant, let him follow me.

<span id="028">28</span> So he and his sons fled into the mountains, and
left all that ever they had in the city.

<span id="029">29</span> Then many that sought after justice and
judgment went down into the wilderness, to dwell there:

<span id="030">30</span> Both they, and their children, and their wives;
and their cattle; because afflictions increased sore upon them.

<span id="031">31</span> Now when it was told the king's servants, and
the host that was at Jerusalem, in the city of David, that certain men,
who had broken the king's commandment, were gone down into the secret
places in the wilderness,

<span id="032">32</span> They pursued after them a great number, and
having overtaken them, they camped against them, and made war against
them on the sabbath day.

<span id="033">33</span> And they said unto them, Let that which ye have
done hitherto suffice; come forth, and do according to the commandment
of the king, and ye shall live.

<span id="034">34</span> But they said, We will not come forth, neither
will we do the king's commandment, to profane the sabbath day.

<span id="035">35</span> So then they gave them the battle with all
speed.

<span id="036">36</span> Howbeit they answered them not, neither cast
they a stone at them, nor stopped the places where they lay hid;

<span id="037">37</span> But said, Let us die all in our innocency:
heaven and earth will testify for us, that ye put us to death
wrongfully.

<span id="038">38</span> So they rose up against them in battle on the
sabbath, and they slew them, with their wives and children and their
cattle, to the number of a thousand people.

<span id="039">39</span> Now when Mattathias and his friends understood
hereof, they mourned for them right sore.

<span id="040">40</span> And one of them said to another, If we all do
as our brethren have done, and fight not for our lives and laws against
the heathen, they will now quickly root us out of the earth.

<span id="041">41</span> At that time therefore they decreed, saying,
Whosoever shall come to make battle with us on the sabbath day, we will
fight against him; neither will we die all, as our brethren that were
murdered im the secret places.

<span id="042">42</span> Then came there unto him a company of Assideans
who were mighty men of Israel, even all such as were voluntarily devoted
unto the law.

<span id="043">43</span> Also all they that fled for persecution joined
themselves unto them, and were a stay unto them.

<span id="044">44</span> So they joined their forces, and smote sinful
men in their anger, and wicked men in their wrath: but the rest fled to
the heathen for succour.

<span id="045">45</span> Then Mattathias and his friends went round
about, and pulled down the altars:

<span id="046">46</span> And what children soever they found within the
coast of Israel uncircumcised, those they circumcised valiantly.

<span id="047">47</span> They pursued also after the proud men, and the
work prospered in their hand.

<span id="048">48</span> So they recovered the law out of the hand of
the Gentiles, and out of the hand of kings, neither suffered they the
sinner to triumph.

<span id="049">49</span> Now when the time drew near that Mattathias
should die, he said unto his sons, Now hath pride and rebuke gotten
strength, and the time of destruction, and the wrath of indignation:

<span id="050">50</span> Now therefore, my sons, be ye zealous for the
law, and give your lives for the covenant of your fathers.

<span id="051">51</span> Call to remembrance what acts our fathers did
in their time; so shall ye receive great honour and an everlasting name.

<span id="052">52</span> Was not Abraham found faithful in temptation,
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness?

<span id="053">53</span> Joseph in the time of his distress kept the
commandment and was made lord of Egypt.

<span id="054">54</span> Phinees our father in being zealous and fervent
obtained the covenant of an everlasting priesthood.

<span id="055">55</span> Jesus for fulfilling the word was made a judge
in Israel.

<span id="056">56</span> Caleb for bearing witness before the
congregation received the heritage of the land.

<span id="057">57</span> David for being merciful possessed the throne
of an everlasting kingdom.

<span id="058">58</span> Elias for being zealous and fervent for the law
was taken up into heaven.

<span id="059">59</span> Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, by believing were
saved out of the flame.

<span id="060">60</span> Daniel for his innocency was delivered from the
mouth of lions.

<span id="061">61</span> And thus consider ye throughout all ages, that
none that put their trust in him shall be overcome.

<span id="062">62</span> Fear not then the words of a sinful man: for
his glory shall be dung and worms.

<span id="063">63</span> To day he shall be lifted up and to morrow he
shall not be found, because he is returned into his dust, and his
thought is come to nothing.

<span id="064">64</span> Wherefore, ye my sons, be valiant and shew
yourselves men in the behalf of the law; for by it shall ye obtain
glory.

<span id="065">65</span> And behold, I know that your brother Simon is a
man of counsel, give ear unto him alway: he shall be a father unto you.

<span id="066">66</span> As for Judas Maccabeus, he hath been mighty and
strong, even from his youth up: let him be your captain, and fight the
battle of the people.

<span id="067">67</span> Take also unto you all those that observe the
law, and avenge ye the wrong of your people.

<span id="068">68</span> Recompense fully the heathen, and take heed to
the commandments of the law.

<span id="069">69</span> So he blessed them, and was gathered to his
fathers.

<span id="070">70</span> And he died in the hundred forty and sixth
year, and his sons buried him in the sepulchres of his fathers at Modin,
and all Israel made great lamentation for him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 3](ma1003)
