[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1008)  [Sep](../sep/ma1008) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1008)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1007)  [Next](ma1009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 8

<span id="001">1</span> Now Judas had heard of the the Romans, that they
were mighty and valiant men, and such as would lovingly accept all that
joined themselves unto them, and make a league of amity with all that
came unto them;

<span id="002">2</span> And that they were men of great valour. It was
told him also of their wars and noble acts which they had done among the
Galatians, and how they had conquered them, and brought them under
tribute;

<span id="003">3</span> And what they had done in the country of Spain,
for the winning of the mines of the silver and gold which is there;

<span id="004">4</span> And that by their policy and patience they had
conquered all the place, though it were very far from them; and the
kings also that came against them from the uttermost part of the earth,
till they had discomfited them, and given them a great overthrow, so
that the rest did give them tribute every year:

<span id="005">5</span> Beside this, how they had discomfited in battle
Philip, and Perseus, king of the Citims, with others that lifted up
themselves against them, and had overcome them:

<span id="006">6</span> How also Antiochus the great king of Asia, that
came against them in battle, having an hundred and twenty elephants,
with horsemen, and chariots, and a very great army, was discomfited by
them;

<span id="007">7</span> And how they took him alive, and covenanted that
he and such as reigned after him should pay a great tribute, and give
hostages, and that which was agreed upon,

<span id="008">8</span> And the country of India, and Media and Lydia
and of the goodliest countries, which they took of him, and gave to king
Eumenes:

<span id="009">9</span> Moreover how the Grecians had determined to come
and destroy them;

<span id="010">10</span> And that they, having knowledge thereof sent
against them a certain captain, and fighting with them slew many of
them, and carried away captives their wives and their children, and
spoiled them, and took possession of their lands, and pulled down their
strong holds, and brought them to be their servants unto this day:

<span id="011">11</span> It was told him besides, how they destroyed and
brought under their dominion all other kingdoms and isles that at any
time resisted them;

<span id="012">12</span> But with their friends and such as relied upon
them they kept amity: and that they had conquered kingdoms both far and
nigh, insomuch as all that heard of their name were afraid of them:

<span id="013">13</span> Also that, whom they would help to a kingdom,
those reign; and whom again they would, they displace: finally, that
they were greatly exalted:

<span id="014">14</span> Yet for all this none of them wore a crown or
was clothed in purple, to be magnified thereby:

<span id="015">15</span> Moreover how they had made for themselves a
senate house, wherein three hundred and twenty men sat in council daily,
consulting alway for the people, to the end they might be well ordered:

<span id="016">16</span> And that they committed their government to one
man every year, who ruled over all their country, and that all were
obedient to that one, and that there was neither envy nor emmulation
among them.

<span id="017">17</span> In consideration of these things, Judas chose
Eupolemus the son of John, the son of Accos, and Jason the son of
Eleazar, and sent them to Rome, to make a league of amity and
confederacy with them,

<span id="018">18</span> And to intreat them that they would take the
yoke from them; for they saw that the kingdom of the Grecians did
oppress Israel with servitude.

<span id="019">19</span> They went therefore to Rome, which was a very
great journey, and came into the senate, where they spake and said.

<span id="020">20</span> Judas Maccabeus with his brethren, and the
people of the Jews, have sent us unto you, to make a confederacy and
peace with you, and that we might be registered your confederates and
friends.

<span id="021">21</span> So that matter pleased the Romans well.

<span id="022">22</span> And this is the copy of the epistle which the
senate wrote back again in tables of brass, and sent to Jerusalem, that
there they might have by them a memorial of peace and confederacy:

<span id="023">23</span> Good success be to the Romans, and to the
people of the Jews, by sea and by land for ever: the sword also and
enemy be far from them,

<span id="024">24</span> If there come first any war upon the Romans or
any of their confederates throughout all their dominion,

<span id="025">25</span> The people of the Jews shall help them, as the
time shall be appointed, with all their heart:

<span id="026">26</span> Neither shall they give any thing unto them
that make war upon them, or aid them with victuals, weapons, money, or
ships, as it hath seemed good unto the Romans; but they shall keep their
covenants without taking any thing therefore.

<span id="027">27</span> In the same manner also, if war come first upon
the nation of the Jews, the Romans shall help them with all their heart,
according as the time shall be appointed them:

<span id="028">28</span> Neither shall victuals be given to them that
take part against them, or weapons, or money, or ships, as it hath
seemed good to the Romans; but they shall keep their covenants, and that
without deceit.

<span id="029">29</span> According to these articles did the Romans make
a covenant with the people of the Jews.

<span id="030">30</span> Howbeit if hereafter the one party or the other
shall think to meet to add or diminish any thing, they may do it at
their pleasures, and whatsoever they shall add or take away shall be
ratified.

<span id="031">31</span> And as touching the evils that Demetrius doeth
to the Jews, we have written unto him, saying, Wherefore thou made thy
yoke heavy upon our friends and confederates the Jews?

<span id="032">32</span> If therefore they complain any more against
thee, we will do them justice, and fight with thee by sea and by land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 9](ma1009)
