[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma1005)  [Sep](../sep/ma1005) 
[Vul](../vul/ma1005)   
  
[1 Macabees Index](ma1)  
  [Previous](ma1004)  [Next](ma1006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 1 Macabees Chapter 5

<span id="001">1</span> Now when the nations round about heard that the
altar was built and the sanctuary renewed as before, it displeased them
very much.

<span id="002">2</span> Wherefore they thought to destroy the generation
of Jacob that was among them, and thereupon they began to slay and
destroy the people.

<span id="003">3</span> Then Judas fought against the children of Esau
in Idumea at Arabattine, because they besieged Gael: and he gave them a
great overthrow, and abated their courage, and took their spoils.

<span id="004">4</span> Also he remembered the injury of the children of
Bean, who had been a snare and an offence unto the people, in that they
lay in wait for them in the ways.

<span id="005">5</span> He shut them up therefore in the towers, and
encamped against them, and destroyed them utterly, and burned the towers
of that place with fire, and all that were therein.

<span id="006">6</span> Afterward he passed over to the children of
Ammon, where he found a mighty power, and much people, with Timotheus
their captain.

<span id="007">7</span> So he fought many battles with them, till at
length they were discomfited before him; and he smote them.

<span id="008">8</span> And when he had taken Jazar, with the towns
belonging thereto, he returned into Judea.

<span id="009">9</span> Then the heathen that were at Galaad assembled
themselves together against the Israelites that were in their quarters,
to destroy them; but they fled to the fortress of Dathema.

<span id="010">10</span> And sent letters unto Judas and his brethren,
The heathen that are round about us are assembled together against us to
destroy us:

<span id="011">11</span> And they are preparing to come and take the
fortress whereunto we are fled, Timotheus being captain of their host.

<span id="012">12</span> Come now therefore, and deliver us from their
hands, for many of us are slain:

<span id="013">13</span> Yea, all our brethren that were in the places
of Tobie are put to death: their wives and their children also they have
carried away captives, and borne away their stuff; and they have
destroyed there about a thousand men.

<span id="014">14</span> While these letters were yet reading, behold,
there came other messengers from Galilee with their clothes rent, who
reported on this wise,

<span id="015">15</span> And said, They of Ptolemais, and of Tyrus, and
Sidon, and all Galilee of the Gentiles, are assembled together against
us to consume us.

<span id="016">16</span> Now when Judas and the people heard these
words, there assembled a great congregation together, to consult what
they should do for their brethren, that were in trouble, and assaulted
of them.

<span id="017">17</span> Then said Judas unto Simon his brother, Choose
thee out men, and go and deliver thy brethren that are in Galilee, for I
and Jonathan my brother will go into the country of Galaad.

<span id="018">18</span> So he left Joseph the son of Zacharias, and
Azarias, captains of the people, with the remnant of the host in Judea
to keep it.

<span id="019">19</span> Unto whom he gave commandment, saying, Take ye
the charge of this people, and see that ye make not war against the
heathen until the time that we come again.

<span id="020">20</span> Now unto Simon were given three thousand men to
go into Galilee, and unto Judas eight thousand men for the country of
Galaad.

<span id="021">21</span> Then went Simon into Galilee, where he fought
many battles with the heathen, so that the heathen were discomfited by
him.

<span id="022">22</span> And he pursued them unto the gate of Ptolemais;
and there were slain of the heathen about three thousand men, whose
spoils he took.

<span id="023">23</span> And those that were in Galilee, and in
Arbattis, with their wives and their children, and all that they had,
took he away with him, and brought them into Judea with great joy.

<span id="024">24</span> Judas Maccabeus also and his brother Jonathan
went over Jordan, and travelled three days' journey in the wilderness,

<span id="025">25</span> Where they met with the Nabathites, who came
unto them in a peaceable manner, and told them every thing that had
happened to their brethren in the land of Galaad:

<span id="026">26</span> And how that many of them were shut up in
Bosora, and Bosor, and Alema, Casphor, Maked, and Carnaim; all these
cities are strong and great:

<span id="027">27</span> And that they were shut up in the rest of the
cities of the country of Galaad, and that against to morrow they had
appointed to bring their host against the forts, and to take them, and
to destroy them all in one day.

<span id="028">28</span> Hereupon Judas and his host turned suddenly by
the way of the wilderness unto Bosora; and when he had won the city, he
slew all the males with the edge of the sword, and took all their
spoils, and burned the city with fire,

<span id="029">29</span> From whence he removed by night, and went till
he came to the fortress.

<span id="030">30</span> And betimes in the morning they looked up, and,
behold, there was an innumerable people bearing ladders and other
engines of war, to take the fortress: for they assaulted them.

<span id="031">31</span> When Judas therefore saw that the battle was
begun, and that the cry of the city went up to heaven, with trumpets,
and a great sound,

<span id="032">32</span> He said unto his host, Fight this day for your
brethren.

<span id="033">33</span> So he went forth behind them in three
companies, who sounded their trumpets, and cried with prayer.

<span id="034">34</span> Then the host of Timotheus, knowing that it was
Maccabeus, fled from him: wherefore he smote them with a great
slaughter; so that there were killed of them that day about eight
thousand men.

<span id="035">35</span> This done, Judas turned aside to Maspha; and
after he had assaulted it he took and slew all the males therein, and
received the spoils thereof and and burnt it with fire.

<span id="036">36</span> From thence went he, and took Casphon, Maged,
Bosor, and the other cities of the country of Galaad.

<span id="037">37</span> After these things gathered Timotheus another
host and encamped against Raphon beyond the brook.

<span id="038">38</span> So Judas sent men to espy the host, who brought
him word, saying, All the heathen that be round about us are assembled
unto them, even a very great host.

<span id="039">39</span> He hath also hired the Arabians to help them
and they have pitched their tents beyond the brook, ready to come and
fight against thee. Upon this Judas went to meet them.

<span id="040">40</span> Then Timotheus said unto the captains of his
host, When Judas and his host come near the brook, if he pass over first
unto us, we shall not be able to withstand him; for he will mightily
prevail against us:

<span id="041">41</span> But if he be afraid, and camp beyond the river,
we shall go over unto him, and prevail against him.

<span id="042">42</span> Now when Judas came near the brook, he caused
the scribes of the people to remain by the brook: unto whom he gave
commandment, saying, Suffer no man to remain in the camp, but let all
come to the battle.

<span id="043">43</span> So he went first over unto them, and all the
people after him: then all the heathen, being discomfited before him,
cast away their weapons, and fled unto the temple that was at Carnaim.

<span id="044">44</span> But they took the city, and burned the temple
with all that were therein. Thus was Carnaim subdued, neither could they
stand any longer before Judas.

<span id="045">45</span> Then Judas gathered together all the Israelites
that were in the country of Galaad, from the least unto the greatest,
even their wives, and their children, and their stuff, a very great
host, to the end they might come into the land of Judea.

<span id="046">46</span> Now when they came unto Ephron, (this was a
great city in the way as they should go, very well fortified) they could
not turn from it, either on the right hand or the left, but must needs
pass through the midst of it.

<span id="047">47</span> Then they of the city shut them out, and
stopped up the gates with stones.

<span id="048">48</span> Whereupon Judas sent unto them in peaceable
manner, saying, Let us pass through your land to go into our own
country, and none shall do you any hurt; we will only pass through on
foot: howbeit they would not open unto him.

<span id="049">49</span> Wherefore Judas commanded a proclamation to be
made throughout the host, that every man should pitch his tent in the
place where he was.

<span id="050">50</span> So the soldiers pitched, and assaulted the city
all that day and all that night, till at the length the city was
delivered into his hands:

<span id="051">51</span> Who then slew all the males with the edge of
the sword, and rased the city, and took the spoils thereof, and passed
through the city over them that were slain.

<span id="052">52</span> After this went they over Jordan into the great
plain before Bethsan.

<span id="053">53</span> And Judas gathered together those that came
behind, and exhorted the people all the way through, till they came into
the land of Judea.

<span id="054">54</span> So they went up to mount Sion with joy and
gladness, where they offered burnt offerings, because not one of them
were slain until they had returned in peace.

<span id="055">55</span> Now what time as Judas and Jonathan were in the
land of Galaad, and Simon his brother in Galilee before Ptolemais,

<span id="056">56</span> Joseph the son of Zacharias, and Azarias,
captains of the garrisons, heard of the valiant acts and warlike deeds
which they had done.

<span id="057">57</span> Wherefore they said, Let us also get us a name,
and go fight against the heathen that are round about us.

<span id="058">58</span> So when they had given charge unto the garrison
that was with them, they went toward Jamnia.

<span id="059">59</span> Then came Gorgias and his men out of the city
to fight against them.

<span id="060">60</span> And so it was, that Joseph and Azaras were put
to flight, and pursued unto the borders of Judea: and there were slain
that day of the people of Israel about two thousand men.

<span id="061">61</span> Thus was there a great overthrow among the
children of Israel, because they were not obedient unto Judas and his
brethren, but thought to do some valiant act.

<span id="062">62</span> Moreover these men came not of the seed of
those, by whose hand deliverance was given unto Israel.

<span id="063">63</span> Howbeit the man Judas and his brethren were
greatly renowned in the sight of all Israel, and of all the heathen,
wheresoever their name was heard of;

<span id="064">64</span> Insomuch as the the people assembled unto them
with joyful acclamations.

<span id="065">65</span> Afterward went Judas forth with his brethren,
and fought against the children of Esau in the land toward the south,
where he smote Hebron, and the towns thereof, and pulled down the
fortress of it, and burned the towers thereof round about.

<span id="066">66</span> From thence he removed to go into the land of
the Philistines, and passed through Samaria.

<span id="067">67</span> At that time certain priests, desirous to shew
their valour, were slain in battle, for that they went out to fight
unadvisedly.

<span id="068">68</span> So Judas turned to Azotus in the land of the
Philistines, and when he had pulled down their altars, and burned their
carved images with fire, and spoiled their cities, he returned into the
land of Judea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Macabees Chapter 6](ma1006)
