[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2002)  [Sep](../sep/ma2002) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2002)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2001)  [Next](ma2003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 2

<span id="001">1</span> It is also found in the records, that Jeremy the
prophet commanded them that were carried away to take of the fire, as it
hath been signified:

<span id="002">2</span> And how that the prophet, having given them the
law, charged them not to forget the commandments of the Lord, and that
they should not err in their minds, when they see images of silver and
gold, with their ornaments.

<span id="003">3</span> And with other such speeches exhorted he them,
that the law should not depart from their hearts.

<span id="004">4</span> It was also contained in the same writing, that
the prophet, being warned of God, commanded the tabernacle and the ark
to go with him, as he went forth into the mountain, where Moses climbed
up, and saw the heritage of God.

<span id="005">5</span> And when Jeremy came thither, he found an hollow
cave, wherein he laid the tabernacle, and the ark, and the altar of
incense, and so stopped the door.

<span id="006">6</span> And some of those that followed him came to mark
the way, but they could not find it.

<span id="007">7</span> Which when Jeremy perceived, he blamed them,
saying, As for that place, it shall be unknown until the time that God
gather his people again together, and receive them unto mercy.

<span id="008">8</span> Then shall the Lord shew them these things, and
the glory of the Lord shall appear, and the cloud also, as it was shewed
under Moses, and as when Solomon desired that the place might be
honourably sanctified.

<span id="009">9</span> It was also declared, that he being wise offered
the sacrifice of dedication, and of the finishing of the temple.

<span id="010">10</span> And as when Moses prayed unto the Lord, the
fire came down from heaven, and consumed the sacrifices: even so prayed
Solomon also, and the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt
offerings.

<span id="011">11</span> And Moses said, Because the sin offering was
not to be eaten, it was consumed.

<span id="012">12</span> So Solomon kept those eight days.

<span id="013">13</span> The same things also were reported in the
writings and commentaries of Neemias; and how he founding a library
gathered together the acts of the kings, and the prophets, and of David,
and the epistles of the kings concerning the holy gifts.

<span id="014">14</span> In like manner also Judas gathered together all
those things that were lost by reason of the war we had, and they remain
with us,

<span id="015">15</span> Wherefore if ye have need thereof, send some to
fetch them unto you.

<span id="016">16</span> Whereas we then are about to celebrate the
purification, we have written unto you, and ye shall do well, if ye keep
the same days.

<span id="017">17</span> We hope also, that the God, that delivered all
his people, and gave them all an heritage, and the kingdom, and the
priesthood, and the sanctuary,

<span id="018">18</span> As he promised in the law, will shortly have
mercy upon us, and gather us together out of every land under heaven
into the holy place: for he hath delivered us out of great troubles, and
hath purified the place.

<span id="019">19</span> Now as concerning Judas Maccabeus, and his
brethren, and the purification of the great temple, and the dedication
of the altar,

<span id="020">20</span> And the wars against Antiochus Epiphanes, and
Eupator his son,

<span id="021">21</span> And the manifest signs that came from heaven
unto those that behaved themselves manfully to their honour for Judaism:
so that, being but a few, they overcame the whole country, and chased
barbarous multitudes,

<span id="022">22</span> And recovered again the temple renowned all the
world over, and freed the city, and upheld the laws which were going
down, the Lord being gracious unto them with all favour:

<span id="023">23</span> All these things, I say, being declared by
Jason of Cyrene in five books, we will assay to abridge in one volume.

<span id="024">24</span> For considering the infinite number, and the
difficulty which they find that desire to look into the narrations of
the story, for the variety of the matter,

<span id="025">25</span> We have been careful, that they that will read
may have delight, and that they that are desirous to commit to memory
might have ease, and that all into whose hands it comes might have
profit.

<span id="026">26</span> Therefore to us, that have taken upon us this
painful labour of abridging, it was not easy, but a matter of sweat and
watching;

<span id="027">27</span> Even as it is no ease unto him that prepareth a
banquet, and seeketh the benefit of others: yet for the pleasuring of
many we will undertake gladly this great pains;

<span id="028">28</span> Leaving to the author the exact handling of
every particular, and labouring to follow the rules of an abridgement.

<span id="029">29</span> For as the master builder of a new house must
care for the whole building; but he that undertaketh to set it out, and
paint it, must seek out fit things for the adorning thereof: even so I
think it is with us.

<span id="030">30</span> To stand upon every point, and go over things
at large, and to be curious in particulars, belongeth to the first
author of the story:

<span id="031">31</span> But to use brevity, and avoid much labouring of
the work, is to be granted to him that will make an abridgment.

<span id="032">32</span> Here then will we begin the story: only adding
thus much to that which hath been said, that it is a foolish thing to
make a long prologue, and to be short in the story itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 3](ma2003)
