[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2005)  [Sep](../sep/ma2005) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2005)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2004)  [Next](ma2006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 5

<span id="001">1</span> About the same time Antiochus prepared his
second voyage into Egypt:

<span id="002">2</span> And then it happened, that through all the city,
for the space almost of forty days, there were seen horsemen running in
the air, in cloth of gold, and armed with lances, like a band of
soldiers,

<span id="003">3</span> And troops of horsemen in array, encountering
and running one against another, with shaking of shields, and multitude
of pikes, and drawing of swords, and casting of darts, and glittering of
golden ornaments, and harness of all sorts.

<span id="004">4</span> Wherefore every man prayed that that apparition
might turn to good.

<span id="005">5</span> Now when there was gone forth a false rumour, as
though Antiochus had been dead, Jason took at the least a thousand men,
and suddenly made an assault upon the city; and they that were upon the
walls being put back, and the city at length taken, Menelaus fled into
the castle:

<span id="006">6</span> But Jason slew his own citizens without mercy,
not considering that to get the day of them of his own nation would be a
most unhappy day for him; but thinking they had been his enemies, and
not his countrymen, whom he conquered.

<span id="007">7</span> Howbeit for all this he obtained not the
principality, but at the last received shame for the reward of his
treason, and fled again into the country of the Ammonites.

<span id="008">8</span> In the end therefore he had an unhappy return,
being accused before Aretas the king of the Arabians, fleeing from city
to city, pursued of all men, hated as a forsaker of the laws, and being
had in abomination as an open enemy of his country and countrymen, he
was cast out into Egypt.

<span id="009">9</span> Thus he that had driven many out of their
country perished in a strange land, retiring to the Lacedemonians, and
thinking there to find succour by reason of his kindred:

<span id="010">10</span> And he that had cast out many unburied had none
to mourn for him, nor any solemn funerals at all, nor sepulchre with his
fathers.

<span id="011">11</span> Now when this that was done came to the king's
car, he thought that Judea had revolted: whereupon removing out of Egypt
in a furious mind, he took the city by force of arms,

<span id="012">12</span> And commanded his men of war not to spare such
as they met, and to slay such as went up upon the houses.

<span id="013">13</span> Thus there was killing of young and old, making
away of men, women, and children, slaying of virgins and infants.

<span id="014">14</span> And there were destroyed within the space of
three whole days fourscore thousand, whereof forty thousand were slain
in the conflict; and no fewer sold than slain.

<span id="015">15</span> Yet was he not content with this, but presumed
to go into the most holy temple of all the world; Menelaus, that traitor
to the laws, and to his own country, being his guide:

<span id="016">16</span> And taking the holy vessels with polluted
hands, and with profane hands pulling down the things that were
dedicated by other kings to the augmentation and glory and honour of the
place, he gave them away.

<span id="017">17</span> And so haughty was Antiochus in mind, that he
considered not that the Lord was angry for a while for the sins of them
that dwelt in the city, and therefore his eye was not upon the place.

<span id="018">18</span> For had they not been formerly wrapped in many
sins, this man, as soon as he had come, had forthwith been scourged, and
put back from his presumption, as Heliodorus was, whom Seleucus the king
sent to view the treasury.

<span id="019">19</span> Nevertheless God did not choose the people for
the place's sake, but the place far the people's sake.

<span id="020">20</span> And therefore the place itself, that was
partaker with them of the adversity that happened to the nation, did
afterward communicate in the benefits sent from the Lord: and as it was
forsaken in the wrath of the Almighty, so again, the great Lord being
reconciled, it was set up with all glory.

<span id="021">21</span> So when Antiochus had carried out of the temple
a thousand and eight hundred talents, he departed in all haste unto
Antiochia, weening in his pride to make the land navigable, and the sea
passable by foot: such was the haughtiness of his mind.

<span id="022">22</span> And he left governors to vex the nation: at
Jerusalem, Philip, for his country a Phrygian, and for manners more
barbarous than he that set him there;

<span id="023">23</span> And at Garizim, Andronicus; and besides,
Menelaus, who worse than all the rest bare an heavy hand over the
citizens, having a malicious mind against his countrymen the Jews.

<span id="024">24</span> He sent also that detestable ringleader
Apollonius with an army of two and twenty thousand, commanding him to
slay all those that were in their best age, and to sell the women and
the younger sort:

<span id="025">25</span> Who coming to Jerusalem, and pretending peace,
did forbear till the holy day of the sabbath, when taking the Jews
keeping holy day, he commanded his men to arm themselves.

<span id="026">26</span> And so he slew all them that were gone to the
celebrating of the sabbath, and running through the city with weapons
slew great multitudes.

<span id="027">27</span> But Judas Maccabeus with nine others, or
thereabout, withdrew himself into the wilderness, and lived in the
mountains after the manner of beasts, with his company, who fed on herbs
continually, lest they should be partakers of the pollution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 6](ma2006)
