[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2013)  [Sep](../sep/ma2013) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2013)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2012)  [Next](ma2014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 13

<span id="001">1</span> In the hundred forty and ninth year it was told
Judas, that Antiochus Eupator was coming with a great power into Judea,

<span id="002">2</span> And with him Lysias his protector, and ruler of
his affairs, having either of them a Grecian power of footmen, an
hundred and ten thousand, and horsemen five thousand and three hundred,
and elephants two and twenty, and three hundred chariots armed with
hooks.

<span id="003">3</span> Menelaus also joined himself with them, and with
great dissimulation encouraged Antiochus, not for the safeguard of the
country, but because he thought to have been made governor.

<span id="004">4</span> But the King of kings moved Antiochus' mind
against this wicked wretch, and Lysias informed the king that this man
was the cause of all mischief, so that the king commanded to bring him
unto Berea, and to put him to death, as the manner is in that place.

<span id="005">5</span> Now there was in that place a tower of fifty
cubits high, full of ashes, and it had a round instrument which on every
side hanged down into the ashes.

<span id="006">6</span> And whosoever was condemned of sacrilege, or had
committed any other grievous crime, there did all men thrust him unto
death.

<span id="007">7</span> Such a death it happened that wicked man to die,
not having so much as burial in the earth; and that most justly:

<span id="008">8</span> For inasmuch as he had committed many sins about
the altar, whose fire and ashes were holy, he received his death in
ashes.

<span id="009">9</span> Now the king came with a barbarous and haughty
mind to do far worse to the Jews, than had been done in his father's
time.

<span id="010">10</span> Which things when Judas perceived, he commanded
the multitude to call upon the Lord night and day, that if ever at any
other time, he would now also help them, being at the point to be put
from their law, from their country, and from the holy temple:

<span id="011">11</span> And that he would not suffer the people, that
had even now been but a little refreshed, to be in subjection to the
blasphemous nations.

<span id="012">12</span> So when they had all done this together, and
besought the merciful Lord with weeping and fasting, and lying flat upon
the ground three days long, Judas, having exhorted them, commanded they
should be in a readiness.

<span id="013">13</span> And Judas, being apart with the elders,
determined, before the king's host should enter into Judea, and get the
city, to go forth and try the matter in fight by the help of the Lord.

<span id="014">14</span> So when he had committed all to the Creator of
the world, and exhorted his soldiers to fight manfully, even unto death,
for the laws, the temple, the city, the country, and the commonwealth,
he camped by Modin:

<span id="015">15</span> And having given the watchword to them that
were about him, Victory is of God; with the most valiant and choice
young men he went in into the king's tent by night, and slew in the camp
about four thousand men, and the chiefest of the elephants, with all
that were upon him.

<span id="016">16</span> And at last they filled the camp with fear and
tumult, and departed with good success.

<span id="017">17</span> This was done in the break of the day, because
the protection of the Lord did help him.

<span id="018">18</span> Now when the king had taken a taste of the
manliness of the Jews, he went about to take the holds by policy,

<span id="019">19</span> And marched toward Bethsura, which was a strong
hold of the Jews: but he was put to flight, failed, and lost of his men:

<span id="020">20</span> For Judas had conveyed unto them that were in
it such things as were necessary.

<span id="021">21</span> But Rhodocus, who was in the Jews' host,
disclosed the secrets to the enemies; therefore he was sought out, and
when they had gotten him, they put him in prison.

<span id="022">22</span> The king treated with them in Bethsum the
second time, gave his hand, took their's, departed, fought with Judas,
was overcome;

<span id="023">23</span> Heard that Philip, who was left over the
affairs in Antioch, was desperately bent, confounded, intreated the
Jews, submitted himself, and sware to all equal conditions, agreed with
them, and offered sacrifice, honoured the temple, and dealt kindly with
the place,

<span id="024">24</span> And accepted well of Maccabeus, made him
principal governor from Ptolemais unto the Gerrhenians;

<span id="025">25</span> Came to Ptolemais: the people there were
grieved for the covenants; for they stormed, because they would make
their covenants void:

<span id="026">26</span> Lysias went up to the judgment seat, said as
much as could be in defence of the cause, persuaded, pacified, made them
well affected, returned to Antioch. Thus it went touching the king's
coming and departing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 14](ma2014)
