[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/ma2006)  [Sep](../sep/ma2006) 
[Vul](../vul/ma2006)   
  
[2 Macabees Index](ma2)  
  [Previous](ma2005)  [Next](ma2007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: 2 Macabees Chapter 6

<span id="001">1</span> Not long after this the king sent an old man of
Athens to compel the Jews to depart from the laws of their fathers, and
not to live after the laws of God:

<span id="002">2</span> And to pollute also the temple in Jerusalem, and
to call it the temple of Jupiter Olympius; and that in Garizim, of
Jupiter the Defender of strangers, as they did desire that dwelt in the
place.

<span id="003">3</span> The coming in of this mischief was sore and
grievous to the people:

<span id="004">4</span> For the temple was filled with riot and
revelling by the Gentiles, who dallied with harlots, and had to do with
women within the circuit of the holy places, and besides that brought in
things that were not lawful.

<span id="005">5</span> The altar also was filled with profane things,
which the law forbiddeth.

<span id="006">6</span> Neither was it lawful for a man to keep sabbath
days or ancient fasts, or to profess himself at all to be a Jew.

<span id="007">7</span> And in the day of the king's birth every month
they were brought by bitter constraint to eat of the sacrifices; and
when the fast of Bacchus was kept, the Jews were compelled to go in
procession to Bacchus, carrying ivy.

<span id="008">8</span> Moreover there went out a decree to the
neighbour cities of the heathen, by the suggestion of Ptolemee, against
the Jews, that they should observe the same fashions, and be partakers
of their sacrifices:

<span id="009">9</span> And whoso would not conform themselves to the
manners of the Gentiles should be put to death. Then might a man have
seen the present misery.

<span id="010">10</span> For there were two women brought, who had
circumcised their children; whom when they had openly led round about
the city, the babes handing at their breasts, they cast them down
headlong from the wall.

<span id="011">11</span> And others, that had run together into caves
near by, to keep the sabbath day secretly, being discovered by Philip,
were all burnt together, because they made a conscience to help
themselves for the honour of the most sacred day.

<span id="012">12</span> Now I beseech those that read this book, that
they be not discouraged for these calamities, but that they judge those
punishments not to be for destruction, but for a chastening of our
nation.

<span id="013">13</span> For it is a token of his great goodness, when
wicked doers are not suffered any long time, but forthwith punished.

<span id="014">14</span> For not as with other nations, whom the Lord
patiently forbeareth to punish, till they be come to the fulness of
their sins, so dealeth he with us,

<span id="015">15</span> Lest that, being come to the height of sin,
afterwards he should take vengeance of us.

<span id="016">16</span> And therefore he never withdraweth his mercy
from us: and though he punish with adversity, yet doth he never forsake
his people.

<span id="017">17</span> But let this that we at spoken be for a warning
unto us. And now will we come to the declaring of the matter in a few
words.

<span id="018">18</span> Eleazar, one of the principal scribes, an aged
man, and of a well favoured countenance, was constrained to open his
mouth, and to eat swine's flesh.

<span id="019">19</span> But he, choosing rather to die gloriously, than
to live stained with such an abomination, spit it forth, and came of his
own accord to the torment,

<span id="020">20</span> As it behoved them to come, that are resolute
to stand out against such things, as are not lawful for love of life to
be tasted.

<span id="021">21</span> But they that had the charge of that wicked
feast, for the old acquaintance they had with the man, taking him aside,
besought him to bring flesh of his own provision, such as was lawful for
him to use, and make as if he did eat of the flesh taken from the
sacrifice commanded by the king;

<span id="022">22</span> That in so doing he might be delivered from
death, and for the old friendship with them find favour.

<span id="023">23</span> But he began to consider discreetly, and as
became his age, and the excellency of his ancient years, and the honour
of his gray head, whereon was come, and his most honest education from a
child, or rather the holy law made and given by God: therefore he
answered accordingly, and willed them straightways to send him to the
grave.

<span id="024">24</span> For it becometh not our age, said he, in any
wise to dissemble, whereby many young persons might think that Eleazar,
being fourscore years old and ten, were now gone to a strange religion;

<span id="025">25</span> And so they through mine hypocrisy, and desire
to live a little time and a moment longer, should be deceived by me, and
I get a stain to mine old age, and make it abominable.

<span id="026">26</span> For though for the present time I should be
delivered from the punishment of men: yet should I not escape the hand
of the Almighty, neither alive, nor dead.

<span id="027">27</span> Wherefore now, manfully changing this life, I
will shew myself such an one as mine age requireth,

<span id="028">28</span> And leave a notable example to such as be young
to die willingly and courageously for the honourable and holy laws. And
when he had said these words, immediately he went to the torment:

<span id="029">29</span> They that led him changing the good will they
bare him a little before into hatred, because the foresaid speeches
proceeded, as they thought, from a desperate mind.

<span id="030">30</span> But when he was ready to die with stripes, he
groaned, and said, It is manifest unto the Lord, that hath the holy
knowledge, that whereas I might have been delivered from death, I now
endure sore pains in body by being beaten: but in soul am well content
to suffer these things, because I fear him.

<span id="031">31</span> And thus this man died, leaving his death for
an example of a noble courage, and a memorial of virtue, not only unto
young men, but unto all his nation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Macabees Chapter 7](ma2007)
