[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir023)  [Sep](../sep/sir023) 
[Vul](../vul/sir023)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir022)  [Next](sir024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 23

<span id="001">1</span> O Lord, Father and Governor of all my whole
life, leave me not to their counsels, and let me not fall by them.

<span id="002">2</span> Who will set scourges over my thoughts, and the
discipline of wisdom over mine heart? that they spare me not for mine
ignorances, and it pass not by my sins:

<span id="003">3</span> Lest mine ignorances increase, and my sins
abound to my destruction, and I fall before mine adversaries, and mine
enemy rejoice over me, whose hope is far from thy mercy.

<span id="004">4</span> O Lord, Father and God of my life, give me not a
proud look, but turn away from thy servants always a haughty mind.

<span id="005">5</span> Turn away from me vain hopes and concupiscence,
and thou shalt hold him up that is desirous always to serve thee.

<span id="006">6</span> Let not the greediness of the belly nor lust of
the flesh take hold of me; and give not over me thy servant into an
impudent mind.

<span id="007">7</span> Hear, O ye children, the discipline of the
mouth: he that keepeth it shall never be taken in his lips.

<span id="008">8</span> The sinner shall be left in his foolishness:
both the evil speaker and the proud shall fall thereby.

<span id="009">9</span> Accustom not thy mouth to swearing; neither use
thyself to the naming of the Holy One.

<span id="010">10</span> For as a servant that is continually beaten
shall not be without a blue mark: so he that sweareth and nameth God
continually shall not be faultless.

<span id="011">11</span> A man that useth much swearing shall be filled
with iniquity, and the plague shall never depart from his house: if he
shall offend, his sin shall be upon him: and if he acknowledge not his
sin, he maketh a double offence: and if he swear in vain, he shall not
be innocent, but his house shall be full of calamities.

<span id="012">12</span> There is a word that is clothed about with
death: God grant that it be not found in the heritage of Jacob; for all
such things shall be far from the godly, and they shall not wallow in
their sins.

<span id="013">13</span> Use not thy mouth to intemperate swearing, for
therein is the word of sin.

<span id="014">14</span> Remember thy father and thy mother, when thou
sittest among great men. Be not forgetful before them, and so thou by
thy custom become a fool, and wish that thou hadst not been born, and
curse they day of thy nativity.

<span id="015">15</span> The man that is accustomed to opprobrious words
will never be reformed all the days of his life.

<span id="016">16</span> Two sorts of men multiply sin, and the third
will bring wrath: a hot mind is as a burning fire, it will never be
quenched till it be consumed: a fornicator in the body of his flesh will
never cease till he hath kindled a fire.

<span id="017">17</span> All bread is sweet to a whoremonger, he will
not leave off till he die.

<span id="018">18</span> A man that breaketh wedlock, saying thus in his
heart, Who seeth me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover
me, and no body seeth me; what need I to fear? the most High will not
remember my sins:

<span id="019">19</span> Such a man only feareth the eyes of men, and
knoweth not that the eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter
than the sun, beholding all the ways of men, and considering the most
secret parts.

<span id="020">20</span> He knew all things ere ever they were created;
so also after they were perfected he looked upon them all.

<span id="021">21</span> This man shall be punished in the streets of
the city, and where he suspecteth not he shall be taken.

<span id="022">22</span> Thus shall it go also with the wife that
leaveth her husband, and bringeth in an heir by another.

<span id="023">23</span> For first, she hath disobeyed the law of the
most High; and secondly, she hath trespassed against her own husband;
and thirdly, she hath played the whore in adultery, and brought children
by another man.

<span id="024">24</span> She shall be brought out into the congregation,
and inquisition shall be made of her children.

<span id="025">25</span> Her children shall not take root, and her
branches shall bring forth no fruit.

<span id="026">26</span> She shall leave her memory to be cursed, and
her reproach shall not be blotted out.

<span id="027">27</span> And they that remain shall know that there is
nothing better than the fear of the Lord, and that there is nothing
sweeter than to take heed unto the commandments of the Lord.

<span id="028">28</span> It is great glory to follow the Lord, and to be
received of him is long life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 24](sir024)
