[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir012)  [Sep](../sep/sir012) 
[Vul](../vul/sir012)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir011)  [Next](sir013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 12

<span id="001">1</span> When thou wilt do good know to whom thou doest
it; so shalt thou be thanked for thy benefits.

<span id="002">2</span> Do good to the godly man, and thou shalt find a
recompence; and if not from him, yet from the most High.

<span id="003">3</span> There can no good come to him that is always
occupied in evil, nor to him that giveth no alms.

<span id="004">4</span> Give to the godly man, and help not a sinner.

<span id="005">5</span> Do well unto him that is lowly, but give not to
the ungodly: hold back thy bread, and give it not unto him, lest he
overmaster thee thereby: for \[else\] thou shalt receive twice as much
evil for all the good thou shalt have done unto him.

<span id="006">6</span> For the most High hateth sinners, and will repay
vengeance unto the ungodly, and keepeth them against the mighty day of
their punishment.

<span id="007">7</span> Give unto the good, and help not the sinner.

<span id="008">8</span> A friend cannot be known in prosperity: and an
enemy cannot be hidden in adversity.

<span id="009">9</span> In the prosperity of a man enemies will be
grieved: but in his adversity even a friend will depart.

<span id="010">10</span> Never trust thine enemy: for like as iron
rusteth, so is his wickedness.

<span id="011">11</span> Though he humble himself, and go crouching, yet
take good heed and beware of him, and thou shalt be unto him as if thou
hadst wiped a lookingglass, and thou shalt know that his rust hath not
been altogether wiped away.

<span id="012">12</span> Set him not by thee, lest, when he hath
overthrown thee, he stand up in thy place; neither let him sit at thy
right hand, lest he seek to take thy seat, and thou at the last remember
my words, and be pricked therewith.

<span id="013">13</span> Who will pity a charmer that is bitten with a
serpent, or any such as come nigh wild beasts?

<span id="014">14</span> So one that goeth to a sinner, and is defiled
with him in his sins, who will pity?

<span id="015">15</span> For a while he will abide with thee, but if
thou begin to fall, he will not tarry.

<span id="016">16</span> An enemy speaketh sweetly with his lips, but in
his heart he imagineth how to throw thee into a pit: he will weep with
his eyes, but if he find opportunity, he will not be satisfied with
blood.

<span id="017">17</span> If adversity come upon thee, thou shalt find
him there first; and though he pretend to help thee, yet shall he
undermine thee.

<span id="018">18</span> He will shake his head, and clap his hands, and
whisper much, and change his countenance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 13](sir013)
