[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir048)  [Sep](../sep/sir048) 
[Vul](../vul/sir048)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir047)  [Next](sir049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 48

<span id="001">1</span> Then stood up Elias the prophet as fire, and his
word burned like a lamp.

<span id="002">2</span> He brought a sore famine upon them, and by his
zeal he diminished their number.

<span id="003">3</span> By the word of the Lord he shut up the heaven,
and also three times brought down fire.

<span id="004">4</span> O Elias, how wast thou honoured in thy wondrous
deeds! and who may glory like unto thee!

<span id="005">5</span> Who didst raise up a dead man from death, and
his soul from the place of the dead, by the word of the most High:

<span id="006">6</span> Who broughtest kings to destruction, and
honorable men from their bed:

<span id="007">7</span> Who heardest the rebuke of the Lord in Sinai,
and in Horeb the judgment of vengeance:

<span id="008">8</span> Who annointedst kings to take revenge, and
prophets to succeed after him:

<span id="009">9</span> Who was taken up in a whirlwind of fire, and in
a chariot of fiery horses:

<span id="010">10</span> Who wast ordained for reproofs in their times,
to pacify the wrath of the Lord's judgment, before it brake forth into
fury, and to turn the heart of the father unto the son, and to restore
the tribes of Jacob.

<span id="011">11</span> Blessed are they that saw thee, and slept in
love; for we shall surely live.

<span id="012">12</span> Elias it was, who was covered with a whirlwind:
and Eliseus was filled with his spirit: whilst he lived, he was not
moved with the presence of any prince, neither could any bring him into
subjection.

<span id="013">13</span> No word could overcome him; and after his death
his body prophesied.

<span id="014">14</span> He did wonders in his life, and at his death
were his works marvellous.

<span id="015">15</span> For all this the people repented not, neither
departed they from their sins, till they were spoiled and carried out of
their land, and were scattered through all the earth: yet there remained
a small people, and a ruler in the house of David:

<span id="016">16</span> Of whom some did that which was pleasing to
God, and some multiplied sins.

<span id="017">17</span> Ezekias fortified his city, and brought in
water into the midst thereof: he digged the hard rock with iron, and
made wells for waters.

<span id="018">18</span> In his time Sennacherib came up, and sent
Rabsaces, and lifted up his hand against Sion, and boasted proudly.

<span id="019">19</span> Then trembled their hearts and hands, and they
were in pain, as women in travail.

<span id="020">20</span> But they called upon the Lord which is
merciful, and stretched out their hands toward him: and immediately the
Holy One heard them out of heaven, and delivered them by the ministry of
Esay.

<span id="021">21</span> He smote the host of the Assyrians, and his
angel destroyed them.

<span id="022">22</span> For Ezekias had done the thing that pleased the
Lord, and was strong in the ways of David his father, as Esay the
prophet, who was great and faithful in his vision, had commanded him.

<span id="023">23</span> In his time the sun went backward, and he
lengthened the king's life.

<span id="024">24</span> He saw by an excellent spirit what should come
to pass at the last, and he comforted them that mourned in Sion.

<span id="025">25</span> He shewed what should come to pass for ever,
and secret things or ever they came.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 49](sir049)
