[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir046)  [Sep](../sep/sir046) 
[Vul](../vul/sir046)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir045)  [Next](sir047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 46

<span id="001">1</span> Jesus the son a Nave was valiant in the wars,
and was the successor of Moses in prophecies, who according to his name
was made great for the saving of the elect of God, and taking vengeance
of the enemies that rose up against them, that he might set Israel in
their inheritance.

<span id="002">2</span> How great glory gat he, when he did lift up his
hands, and stretched out his sword against the cities!

<span id="003">3</span> Who before him so stood to it? for the Lord
himself brought his enemies unto him.

<span id="004">4</span> Did not the sun go back by his means? and was
not one day as long as two?

<span id="005">5</span> He called upon the most high Lord, when the
enemies pressed upon him on every side; and the great Lord heard him.

<span id="006">6</span> And with hailstones of mighty power he made the
battle to fall violently upon the nations, and in the descent \[of
Beth-horon\] he destroyed them that resisted, that the nations might
know all their strength, because he fought in the sight of the Lord, and
he followed the Mighty One.

<span id="007">7</span> In the time of Moses also he did a work of
mercy, he and Caleb the son of Jephunne, in that they withstood the
congregation, and withheld the people from sin, and appeased the wicked
murmuring.

<span id="008">8</span> And of six hundred thousand people on foot, they
two were preserved to bring them in to the heritage, even unto the land
that floweth with milk and honey.

<span id="009">9</span> The Lord gave strength also unto Caleb, which
remained with him unto his old age: so that he entered upon the high
places of the land, and his seed obtained it for an heritage:

<span id="010">10</span> That all the children of Israel might see that
it is good to follow the Lord.

<span id="011">11</span> And concerning the judges, every one by name,
whose heart went not a whoring, nor departed from the Lord, let their
memory be blessed.

<span id="012">12</span> Let their bones flourish out of their place,
and let the name of them that were honoured be continued upon their
children.

<span id="013">13</span> Samuel, the prophet of the Lord, beloved of his
Lord, established a kingdom, and anointed princes over his people.

<span id="014">14</span> By the law of the Lord he judged the
congregation, and the Lord had respect unto Jacob.

<span id="015">15</span> By his faithfulness he was found a true
prophet, and by his word he was known to be faithful in vision.

<span id="016">16</span> He called upon the mighty Lord, when his
enemies pressed upon him on every side, when he offered the sucking
lamb.

<span id="017">17</span> And the Lord thundered from heaven, and with a
great noise made his voice to be heard.

<span id="018">18</span> And he destroyed the rulers of the Tyrians, and
all the princes cf the Philistines.

<span id="019">19</span> And before his long sleep he made protestations
in the sight of the Lord and his anointed, I have not taken any man's
goods, so much as a shoe: and no man did accuse him.

<span id="020">20</span> And after his death he prophesied, and shewed
the king his end, and lifted up his voice from the earth in prophecy, to
blot out the wickedness of the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 47](sir047)
