[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir030)  [Sep](../sep/sir030) 
[Vul](../vul/sir030)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir029)  [Next](sir031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 30

<span id="001">1</span> He that loveth his son causeth him oft to feel
the rod, that he may have joy of him in the end.

<span id="002">2</span> He that chastiseth his son shall have joy in
him, and shall rejoice of him among his acquaintance.

<span id="003">3</span> He that teacheth his son grieveth the enemy: and
before his friends he shall rejoice of him.

<span id="004">4</span> Though his father die, yet he is as though he
were not dead: for he hath left one behind him that is like himself.

<span id="005">5</span> While he lived, he saw and rejoiced in him: and
when he died, he was not sorrowful.

<span id="006">6</span> He left behind him an avenger against his
enemies, and one that shall requite kindness to his friends.

<span id="007">7</span> He that maketh too much of his son shall bind up
his wounds; and his bowels will be troubled at every cry.

<span id="008">8</span> An horse not broken becometh headstrong: and a
child left to himself will be wilful.

<span id="009">9</span> Cocker thy child, and he shall make thee afraid:
play with him, and he will bring thee to heaviness.

<span id="010">10</span> Laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow with
him, and lest thou gnash thy teeth in the end.

<span id="011">11</span> Give him no liberty in his youth, and wink not
at his follies.

<span id="012">12</span> Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat
him on the sides while he is a child, lest he wax stubborn, and be
disobedient unto thee, and so bring sorrow to thine heart.

<span id="013">13</span> Chastise thy son, and hold him to labour, lest
his lewd behaviour be an offence unto thee.

<span id="014">14</span> Better is the poor, being sound and strong of
constitution, than a rich man that is afflicted in his body.

<span id="015">15</span> Health and good estate of body are above all
gold, and a strong body above infinite wealth.

<span id="016">16</span> There is no riches above a sound body, and no
joy above the joy of the heart.

<span id="017">17</span> Death is better than a bitter life or continual
sickness.

<span id="018">18</span> Delicates poured upon a mouth shut up are as
messes of meat set upon a grave.

<span id="019">19</span> What good doeth the offering unto an idol? for
neither can it eat nor smell: so is he that is persecuted of the Lord.

<span id="020">20</span> He seeth with his eyes and groaneth, as an
eunuch that embraceth a virgin and sigheth.

<span id="021">21</span> Give not over thy mind to heaviness, and
afflict not thyself in thine own counsel.

<span id="022">22</span> The gladness of the heart is the life of man,
and the joyfulness of a man prolongeth his days.

<span id="023">23</span> Love thine own soul, and comfort thy heart,
remove sorrow far from thee: for sorrow hath killed many, and there is
no profit therein.

<span id="024">24</span> Envy and wrath shorten the life, and
carefulness bringeth age before the time.

<span id="025">25</span> A cheerful and good heart will have a care of
his meat and diet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 31](sir031)
