[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir018)  [Sep](../sep/sir018) 
[Vul](../vul/sir018)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir017)  [Next](sir019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 18

<span id="001">1</span> He that liveth for ever Hath created all things
in general.

<span id="002">2</span> The Lord only is righteous, and there is none
other but he,

<span id="003">3</span> Who governeth the world with the palm of his
hand, and all things obey his will: for he is the King of all, by his
power dividing holy things among them from profane.

<span id="004">4</span> To whom hath he given power to declare his
works? and who shall find out his noble acts?

<span id="005">5</span> Who shall number the strength of his majesty?
and who shall also tell out his mercies?

<span id="006">6</span> As for the wondrous works of the Lord, there may
nothing be taken from them, neither may any thing be put unto them,
neither can the ground of them be found out.

<span id="007">7</span> When a man hath done, then he beginneth; and
when he leaveth off, then he shall be doubtful.

<span id="008">8</span> What is man, and whereto serveth he? what is his
good, and what is his evil?

<span id="009">9</span> The number of a man's days at the most are an
hundred years.

<span id="010">10</span> As a drop of water unto the sea, and a
gravelstone in comparison of the sand; so are a thousand years to the
days of eternity.

<span id="011">11</span> Therefore is God patient with them, and poureth
forth his mercy upon them.

<span id="012">12</span> He saw and perceived their end to be evil;
therefore he multiplied his compassion.

<span id="013">13</span> The mercy of man is toward his neighbour; but
the mercy of the Lord is upon all flesh: he reproveth, and nurtureth,
and teacheth and bringeth again, as a shepherd his flock.

<span id="014">14</span> He hath mercy on them that receive discipline,
and that diligently seek after his judgments.

<span id="015">15</span> My son, blemish not thy good deeds, neither use
uncomfortable words when thou givest any thing.

<span id="016">16</span> Shall not the dew asswage the heat? so is a
word better than a gift.

<span id="017">17</span> Lo, is not a word better than a gift? but both
are with a gracious man.

<span id="018">18</span> A fool will upbraid churlishly, and a gift of
the envious consumeth the eyes.

<span id="019">19</span> Learn before thou speak, and use physick or
ever thou be sick.

<span id="020">20</span> Before judgment examine thyself, and in the day
of visitation thou shalt find mercy.

<span id="021">21</span> Humble thyself before thou be sick, and in the
time of sins shew repentance.

<span id="022">22</span> Let nothing hinder thee to pay thy vow in due
time, and defer not until death to be justified.

<span id="023">23</span> Before thou prayest, prepare thyself; and be
not as one that tempteth the Lord.

<span id="024">24</span> Think upon the wrath that shall be at the end,
and the time of vengeance, when he shall turn away his face.

<span id="025">25</span> When thou hast enough, remember the time of
hunger: and when thou art rich, think upon poverty and need.

<span id="026">26</span> From the morning until the evening the time is
changed, and all things are soon done before the Lord.

<span id="027">27</span> A wise man will fear in every thing, and in the
day of sinning he will beware of offence: but a fool will not observe
time.

<span id="028">28</span> Every man of understanding knoweth wisdom, and
will give praise unto him that found her.

<span id="029">29</span> They that were of understanding in sayings
became also wise themselves, and poured forth exquisite parables.

<span id="030">30</span> Go not after thy lusts, but refrain thyself
from thine appetites.

<span id="031">31</span> If thou givest thy soul the desires that please
her, she will make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies that malign
thee.

<span id="032">32</span> Take not pleasure in much good cheer, neither
be tied to the expence thereof.

<span id="033">33</span> Be not made a beggar by banqueting upon
borrowing, when thou hast nothing in thy purse: for thou shalt lie in
wait for thine own life, and be talked on.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 19](sir019)
