[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir006)  [Sep](../sep/sir006) 
[Vul](../vul/sir006)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir005)  [Next](sir007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 6

<span id="001">1</span> Instead of a friend become not an enemy; for
\[thereby\] thou shalt inherit an ill name, shame, and reproach: even so
shall a sinner that hath a double tongue.

<span id="002">2</span> Extol not thyself in the counsel of thine own
heart; that thy soul be not torn in pieces as a bull \[straying alone.\]

<span id="003">3</span> Thou shalt eat up thy leaves, and lose thy
fruit, and leave thyself as a dry tree.

<span id="004">4</span> A wicked soul shall destroy him that hath it,
and shall make him to be laughed to scorn of his enemies.

<span id="005">5</span> Sweet language will multiply friends: and a
fairspeaking tongue will increase kind greetings.

<span id="006">6</span> Be in peace with many: nevertheless have but one
counsellor of a thousand.

<span id="007">7</span> If thou wouldest get a friend, prove him first
and be not hasty to credit him.

<span id="008">8</span> For some man is a friend for his own occasion,
and will not abide in the day of thy trouble.

<span id="009">9</span> And there is a friend, who being turned to
enmity, and strife will discover thy reproach.

<span id="010">10</span> Again, some friend is a companion at the table,
and will not continue in the day of thy affliction.

<span id="011">11</span> But in thy prosperity he will be as thyself,
and will be bold over thy servants.

<span id="012">12</span> If thou be brought low, he will be against
thee, and will hide himself from thy face.

<span id="013">13</span> Separate thyself from thine enemies, and take
heed of thy friends.

<span id="014">14</span> A faithfull friend is a strong defence: and he
that hath found such an one hath found a treasure.

<span id="015">15</span> Nothing doth countervail a faithful friend, and
his excellency is invaluable.

<span id="016">16</span> A faithful friend is the medicine of life; and
they that fear the Lord shall find him.

<span id="017">17</span> Whoso feareth the Lord shall direct his
friendship aright: for as he is, so shall his neighbour be also.

<span id="018">18</span> My son, gather instruction from thy youth up:
so shalt thou find wisdom till thine old age.

<span id="019">19</span> Come unto her as one that ploweth and soweth,
and wait for her good fruits: for thou shalt not toil much in labouring
about her, but thou shalt eat of her fruits right soon.

<span id="020">20</span> She is very unpleasant to the unlearned: he
that is without understanding will not remain with her.

<span id="021">21</span> She will lie upon him as a mighty stone of
trial; and he will cast her from him ere it be long.

<span id="022">22</span> For wisdom is according to her name, and she is
not manifest unto many.

<span id="023">23</span> Give ear, my son, receive my advice, and refuse
not my counsel,

<span id="024">24</span> And put thy feet into her fetters, and thy neck
into her chain.

<span id="025">25</span> Bow down thy shoulder, and bear her, and be not
grieved with her bonds.

<span id="026">26</span> Come unto her with thy whole heart, and keep
her ways with all thy power.

<span id="027">27</span> Search, and seek, and she shall be made known
unto thee: and when thou hast got hold of her, let her not go.

<span id="028">28</span> For at the last thou shalt find her rest, and
that shall be turned to thy joy.

<span id="029">29</span> Then shall her fetters be a strong defence for
thee, and her chains a robe of glory.

<span id="030">30</span> For there is a golden ornament upon her, and
her bands are purple lace.

<span id="031">31</span> Thou shalt put her on as a robe of honour, and
shalt put her about thee as a crown of joy.

<span id="032">32</span> My son, if thou wilt, thou shalt be taught: and
if thou wilt apply thy mind, thou shalt be prudent.

<span id="033">33</span> If thou love to hear, thou shalt receive
understanding: and if thou bow thine ear, thou shalt be wise,

<span id="034">34</span> Stand in the multitude of the elders; and
cleave unto him that is wise.

<span id="035">35</span> Be willing to hear every godly discourse; and
let not the parables of understanding escape thee.

<span id="036">36</span> And if thou seest a man of understanding, get
thee betimes unto him, and let thy foot wear the steps of his door.

<span id="037">37</span> Let thy mind be upon the ordinances of the Lord
and meditate continually in his commandments: he shall establish thine
heart, and give thee wisdom at thine owns desire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 7](sir007)
