[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir027)  [Sep](../sep/sir027) 
[Vul](../vul/sir027)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir026)  [Next](sir028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 27

<span id="001">1</span> Many have sinned for a small matter; and he that
seeketh for abundance will turn his eyes away.

<span id="002">2</span> As a nail sticketh fast between the joinings of
the stones; so doth sin stick close between buying and selling.

<span id="003">3</span> Unless a man hold himself diligently in the fear
of the Lord, his house shall soon be overthrown.

<span id="004">4</span> As when one sifteth with a sieve, the refuse
remaineth; so the filth of man in his talk.

<span id="005">5</span> The furnace proveth the potter's vessels; so the
trial of man is in his reasoning.

<span id="006">6</span> The fruit declareth if the tree have been
dressed; so is the utterance of a conceit in the heart of man.

<span id="007">7</span> Praise no man before thou hearest him speak; for
this is the trial of men.

<span id="008">8</span> If thou followest righteousness, thou shalt
obtain her, and put her on, as a glorious long robe.

<span id="009">9</span> The birds will resort unto their like; so will
truth return unto them that practise in her.

<span id="010">10</span> As the lion lieth in wait for the prey; so sin
for them that work iniquity.

<span id="011">11</span> The discourse of a godly man is always with
wisdom; but a fool changeth as the moon.

<span id="012">12</span> If thou be among the indiscreet, observe the
time; but be continually among men of understanding.

<span id="013">13</span> The discourse of fools is irksome, and their
sport is the wantonness of sin.

<span id="014">14</span> The talk of him that sweareth much maketh the
hair stand upright; and their brawls make one stop his ears.

<span id="015">15</span> The strife of the proud is bloodshedding, and
their revilings are grievous to the ear.

<span id="016">16</span> Whoso discovereth secrets loseth his credit;
and shall never find friend to his mind.

<span id="017">17</span> Love thy friend, and be faithful unto him: but
if thou betrayest his secrets, follow no more after him.

<span id="018">18</span> For as a man hath destroyed his enemy; so hast
thou lost the love of thy neighbor.

<span id="019">19</span> As one that letteth a bird go out of his hand,
so hast thou let thy neighbour go, and shalt not get him again

<span id="020">20</span> Follow after him no more, for he is too far
off; he is as a roe escaped out of the snare.

<span id="021">21</span> As for a wound, it may be bound up; and after
reviling there may be reconcilement: but he that betrayeth secrets is
without hope.

<span id="022">22</span> He that winketh with the eyes worketh evil: and
he that knoweth him will depart from him.

<span id="023">23</span> When thou art present, he will speak sweetly,
and will admire thy words: but at the last he will writhe his mouth, and
slander thy sayings.

<span id="024">24</span> I have hated many things, but nothing like him;
for the Lord will hate him.

<span id="025">25</span> Whoso casteth a stone on high casteth it on his
own head; and a deceitful stroke shall make wounds.

<span id="026">26</span> Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he
that setteth a trap shall be taken therein.

<span id="027">27</span> He that worketh mischief, it shall fall upon
him, and he shall not know whence it cometh.

<span id="028">28</span> Mockery and reproach are from the proud; but
vengeance, as a lion, shall lie in wait for them.

<span id="029">29</span> They that rejoice at the fall of the righteous
shall be taken in the snare; and anguish shall consume them before they
die.

<span id="030">30</span> Malice and wrath, even these are abominations;
and the sinful man shall have them both.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 28](sir028)
