[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir051)  [Sep](../sep/sir051) 
[Vul](../vul/sir051)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir050)  [Next](bar001) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 51

<span id="001">1</span> \[A Prayer of Jesus the son of Sirach.\] I will
thank thee, O Lord and King, and praise thee, O God my Saviour: I do
give praise unto thy name:

<span id="002">2</span> For thou art my defender and helper, and has
preserved my body from destruction, and from the snare of the slanderous
tongue, and from the lips that forge lies, and has been mine helper
against mine adversaries:

<span id="003">3</span> And hast delivered me, according to the
multitude of they mercies and greatness of thy name, from the teeth of
them that were ready to devour me, and out of the hands of such as
sought after my life, and from the manifold afflictions which I had;

<span id="004">4</span> From the choking of fire on every side, and from
the midst of the fire which I kindled not;

<span id="005">5</span> From the depth of the belly of hell, from an
unclean tongue, and from lying words.

<span id="006">6</span> By an accusation to the king from an unrighteous
tongue my soul drew near even unto death, my life was near to the hell
beneath.

<span id="007">7</span> They compassed me on every side, and there was
no man to help me: I looked for the succour of men, but there was none.

<span id="008">8</span> Then thought I upon thy mercy, O Lord, and upon
thy acts of old, how thou deliverest such as wait for thee, and savest
them out of the hands of the enemies.

<span id="009">9</span> Then lifted I up my supplications from the
earth, and prayed for deliverance from death.

<span id="010">10</span> I called upon the Lord, the Father of my Lord,
that he would not leave me in the days of my trouble, and in the time of
the proud, when there was no help.

<span id="011">11</span> I will praise thy name continually, and will
sing praises with thanksgiving; and so my prayer was heard:

<span id="012">12</span> For thou savedst me from destruction, and
deliveredst me from the evil time: therefore will I give thanks, and
praise thee, and bless they name, O Lord.

<span id="013">13</span> When I was yet young, or ever I went abroad, I
desired wisdom openly in my prayer.

<span id="014">14</span> I prayed for her before the temple, and will
seek her out even to the end.

<span id="015">15</span> Even from the flower till the grape was ripe
hath my heart delighted in her: my foot went the right way, from my
youth up sought I after her.

<span id="016">16</span> I bowed down mine ear a little, and received
her, and gat much learning.

<span id="017">17</span> I profited therein, therefore will I ascribe
glory unto him that giveth me wisdom.

<span id="018">18</span> For I purposed to do after her, and earnestly I
followed that which is good; so shall I not be confounded.

<span id="019">19</span> My soul hath wrestled with her, and in my
doings I was exact: I stretched forth my hands to the heaven above, and
bewailed my ignorances of her.

<span id="020">20</span> I directed my soul unto her, and I found her in
pureness: I have had my heart joined with her from the beginning,
therefore shall I not be foresaken.

<span id="021">21</span> My heart was troubled in seeking her: therefore
have I gotten a good possession.

<span id="022">22</span> The Lord hath given me a tongue for my reward,
and I will praise him therewith.

<span id="023">23</span> Draw near unto me, ye unlearned, and dwell in
the house of learning.

<span id="024">24</span> Wherefore are ye slow, and what say ye to these
things, seeing your souls are very thirsty?

<span id="025">25</span> I opened my mouth, and said, Buy her for
yourselves without money.

<span id="026">26</span> Put your neck under the yoke, and let your soul
receive instruction: she is hard at hand to find.

<span id="027">27</span> Behold with your eyes, how that I have but
little labour, and have gotten unto me much rest.

<span id="028">28</span> Get learning with a great sum of money, and get
much gold by her.

<span id="029">29</span> Let your soul rejoice in his mercy, and be not
ashamed of his praise.

<span id="030">30</span> Work your work betimes, and in his time he will
give you your reward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Baruch Chapter 1](bar001)
