[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir047)  [Sep](../sep/sir047) 
[Vul](../vul/sir047)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir046)  [Next](sir048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 47

<span id="001">1</span> And after him rose up Nathan to prophesy in the
time of David.

<span id="002">2</span> As is the fat taken away from the peace
offering, so was David chosen out of the children of Israel.

<span id="003">3</span> He played with lions as with kids, and with
bears as with lambs.

<span id="004">4</span> Slew he not a giant, when he was yet but young?
and did he not take away reproach from the people, when he lifted up his
hand with the stone in the sling, and beat down the boasting of Goliath?

<span id="005">5</span> For he called upon the most high Lord; and he
gave him strength in his right hand to slay that mighty warrior, and set
up the horn of his people.

<span id="006">6</span> So the people honoured him with ten thousands,
and praised him in the blessings of the Lord, in that he gave him a
crown of glory.

<span id="007">7</span> For he destroyed the enemies on every side, and
brought to nought the Philistines his adversaries, and brake their horn
in sunder unto this day.

<span id="008">8</span> In all his works he praised the Holy One most
high with words of glory; with his whole heart he sung songs, and loved
him that made him.

<span id="009">9</span> He set singers also before the altar, that by
their voices they might make sweet melody, and daily sing praises in
their songs.

<span id="010">10</span> He beautified their feasts, and set in order
the solemn times until the end, that they might praise his holy name,
and that the temple might sound from morning.

<span id="011">11</span> The Lord took away his sins, and exalted his
horn for ever: he gave him a covenant of kings, and a throne of glory in
Israel.

<span id="012">12</span> After him rose up a wise son, and for his sake
he dwelt at large.

<span id="013">13</span> Solomon reigned in a peaceable time, and was
honoured; for God made all quiet round about him, that he might build an
house in his name, and prepare his sanctuary for ever.

<span id="014">14</span> How wise wast thou in thy youth and, as a
flood, filled with understanding!

<span id="015">15</span> Thy soul covered the whole earth, and thou
filledst it with dark parables.

<span id="016">16</span> Thy name went far unto the islands; and for thy
peace thou wast beloved.

<span id="017">17</span> The countries marvelled at thee for thy songs,
and proverbs, and parables, and interpretations.

<span id="018">18</span> By the name of the Lord God, which is called
the Lord God of Israel, thou didst gather gold as tin and didst multiply
silver as lead.

<span id="019">19</span> Thou didst bow thy loins unto women, and by thy
body thou wast brought into subjection.

<span id="020">20</span> Thou didst stain thy honour, and pollute thy
seed: so that thou broughtest wrath upon thy children, and wast grieved
for thy folly.

<span id="021">21</span> So the kingdom was divided, and out of Ephraim
ruled a rebellious kingdom.

<span id="022">22</span> But the Lord will never leave off his mercy,
neither shall any of his works perish, neither will he abolish the
posterity of his elect, and the seed of him that loveth him he will not
take away: wherefore he gave a remnant unto Jacob, and out of him a root
unto David.

<span id="023">23</span> Thus rested Solomon with his fathers, and of
his seed he left behind him Roboam, even the foolishness of the people,
and one that had no understanding, who turned away the people through
his counsel. There was also Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who caused Israel
to sin, and shewed Ephraim the way of sin:

<span id="024">24</span> And their sins were multiplied exceedingly,
that they were driven out of the land.

<span id="025">25</span> For they sought out all wickedness, till the
vengeance came upon them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 48](sir048)
