[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/sir009)  [Sep](../sep/sir009) 
[Vul](../vul/sir009)   
  
[Sirach Index](sir)  
  [Previous](sir008)  [Next](sir010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Sirach Chapter 9

<span id="001">1</span> Be not jealous over the wife of thy bosom, and
teach her not an evil lesson against thyself.

<span id="002">2</span> Give not thy soul unto a woman to set her foot
upon thy substance.

<span id="003">3</span> Meet not with an harlot, lest thou fall into her
snares.

<span id="004">4</span> Use not much the company of a woman that is a
singer, lest thou be taken with her attempts.

<span id="005">5</span> Gaze not on a maid, that thou fall not by those
things that are precious in her.

<span id="006">6</span> Give not thy soul unto harlots, that thou lose
not thine inheritance.

<span id="007">7</span> Look not round about thee in the streets of the
city, neither wander thou in the solitary place thereof.

<span id="008">8</span> Turn away thine eye from a beautiful woman, and
look not upon another's beauty; for many have been deceived by the
beauty of a woman; for herewith love is kindled as a fire.

<span id="009">9</span> Sit not at all with another man's wife, nor sit
down with her in thine arms, and spend not thy money with her at the
wine; lest thine heart incline unto her, and so through thy desire thou
fall into destruction.

<span id="010">10</span> Forsake not an old friend; for the new is not
comparable to him: a new friend is as new wine; when it is old, thou
shalt drink it with pleasure.

<span id="011">11</span> Envy not the glory of a sinner: for thou
knowest not what shall be his end.

<span id="012">12</span> Delight not in the thing that the ungodly have
pleasure in; but remember they shall not go unpunished unto their grave.

<span id="013">13</span> Keep thee far from the man that hath power to
kill; so shalt thou not doubt the fear of death: and if thou come unto
him, make no fault, lest he take away thy life presently: remember that
thou goest in the midst of snares, and that thou walkest upon the
battlements of the city.

<span id="014">14</span> As near as thou canst, guess at thy neighbour,
and consult with the wise.

<span id="015">15</span> Let thy talk be with the wise, and all thy
communication in the law of the most High.

<span id="016">16</span> And let just men eat and drink with thee; and
let thy glorying be in the fear of the Lord.

<span id="017">17</span> For the hand of the artificer the work shall be
commended: and the wise ruler of the people for his speech.

<span id="018">18</span> A man of an ill tongue is dangerous in his
city; and he that is rash in his talk shall be hated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sirach Chapter 10](sir010)
