[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/tob005)  [Sep:ToA](../sep/toa005) 
[Sep:ToS](../sep/tos005)  [Vul](../vul/tob005)   
  
[Tobias Index](tob)  
  [Previous](tob004)  [Next](tob006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Tobias Chapter 5

<span id="001">1</span> Tobias then answered and said, Father, I will do
all things which thou hast commanded me:

<span id="002">2</span> But how can I receive the money, seeing I know
him not?

<span id="003">3</span> Then he gave him the handwriting, and said unto
him, Seek thee a man which may go with thee, whiles I yet live, and I
will give him wages: and go and receive the money.

<span id="004">4</span> Therefore when he went to seek a man, he found
Raphael that was an angel.

<span id="005">5</span> But he knew not; and he said unto him, Canst
thou go with me to Rages? and knowest thou those places well?

<span id="006">6</span> To whom the angel said, I will go with thee, and
I know the way well: for I have lodged with our brother Gabael.

<span id="007">7</span> Then Tobias said unto him, Tarry for me, till I
tell my father.

<span id="008">8</span> Then he said unto him, Go and tarry not. So he
went in and said to his father, Behold, I have found one which will go
with me. Then he said, Call him unto me, that I may know of what tribe
he is, and whether he be a trusty man to go with thee.

<span id="009">9</span> So he called him, and he came in, and they
saluted one another.

<span id="010">10</span> Then Tobit said unto him, Brother, shew me of
what tribe and family thou art.

<span id="011">11</span> To whom he said, Dost thou seek for a tribe or
family, or an hired man to go with thy son? Then Tobit said unto him, I
would know, brother, thy kindred and name.

<span id="012">12</span> Then he said, I am Azarias, the son of Ananias
the great, and of thy brethren.

<span id="013">13</span> Then Tobit said, Thou art welcome, brother; be
not now angry with me, because I have enquired to know thy tribe and thy
family; for thou art my brother, of an honest and good stock: for I know
Ananias and Jonathas, sons of that great Samaias, as we went together to
Jerusalem to worship, and offered the firstborn, and the tenths of the
fruits; and they were not seduced with the error of our brethren: my
brother, thou art of a good stock.

<span id="014">14</span> But tell me, what wages shall I give thee? wilt
thou a drachm a day, and things necessary, as to mine own son?

<span id="015">15</span> Yea, moreover, if ye return safe, I will add
something to thy wages.

<span id="016">16</span> So they were well pleased. Then said he to
Tobias, Prepare thyself for the journey, and God send you a good
journey. And when his son had prepared all things far the journey, his
father said, Go thou with this man, and God, which dwelleth in heaven,
prosper your journey, and the angel of God keep you company. So they
went forth both, and the young man's dog with them.

<span id="017">17</span> But Anna his mother wept, and said to Tobit,
Why hast thou sent away our son? is he not the staff of our hand, in
going in and out before us?

<span id="018">18</span> Be not greedy to add money to money: but let it
be as refuse in respect of our child.

<span id="019">19</span> For that which the Lord hath given us to live
with doth suffice us.

<span id="020">20</span> Then said Tobit to her, Take no care, my
sister; he shall return in safety, and thine eyes shall see him.

<span id="021">21</span> For the good angel will keep him company, and
his journey shall be prosperous, and he shall return safe.

<span id="022">22</span> Then she made an end of weeping.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tobias Chapter 6](tob006)
