[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis012)  [Sep](../sep/wis012) 
[Vul](../vul/wis012)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis)  
  [Previous](wis011)  [Next](wis013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 12

<span id="001">1</span> For thine incorruptible Spirit is in all things.

<span id="002">2</span> Therefore chastenest thou them by little and
little that offend, and warnest them by putting them in remembrance
wherein they have offended, that leaving their wickedness they may
believe on thee, O Lord.

<span id="003">3</span> For it was thy will to destroy by the hands of
our fathers both those old inhabitants of thy holy land,

<span id="004">4</span> Whom thou hatedst for doing most odious works of
witchcrafts, and wicked sacrifices;

<span id="005">5</span> And also those merciless murderers of children,
and devourers of man's flesh, and the feasts of blood,

<span id="006">6</span> With their priests out of the midst of their
idolatrous crew, and the parents, that killed with their own hands souls
destitute of help:

<span id="007">7</span> That the land, which thou esteemedst above all
other, might receive a worthy colony of God's children.

<span id="008">8</span> Nevertheless even those thou sparedst as men,
and didst send wasps, forerunners of thine host, to destroy them by
little and little.

<span id="009">9</span> Not that thou wast unable to bring the ungodly
under the hand of the righteous in battle, or to destroy them at once
with cruel beasts, or with one rough word:

<span id="010">10</span> But executing thy judgments upon them by little
and little, thou gavest them place of repentance, not being ignorant
that they were a naughty generation, and that their malice was bred in
them, and that their cogitation would never be changed.

<span id="011">11</span> For it was a cursed seed from the beginning;
neither didst thou for fear of any man give them pardon for those things
wherein they sinned.

<span id="012">12</span> For who shall say, What hast thou done? or who
shall withstand thy judgment? or who shall accuse thee for the nations
that perish, whom thou made? or who shall come to stand against thee, to
be revenged for the unrighteous men?

<span id="013">13</span> For neither is there any God but thou that
careth for all, to whom thou mightest shew that thy judgment is not
unright.

<span id="014">14</span> Neither shall king or tyrant be able to set his
face against thee for any whom thou hast punished.

<span id="015">15</span> Forsomuch then as thou art righteous thyself,
thou orderest all things righteously: thinking it not agreeable with thy
power to condemn him that hath not deserved to be punished.

<span id="016">16</span> For thy power is the beginning of
righteousness, and because thou art the Lord of all, it maketh thee to
be gracious unto all.

<span id="017">17</span> For when men will not believe that thou art of
a full power, thou shewest thy strength, and among them that know it
thou makest their boldness manifest.

<span id="018">18</span> But thou, mastering thy power, judgest with
equity, and orderest us with great favour: for thou mayest use power
when thou wilt.

<span id="019">19</span> But by such works hast thou taught thy people
that the just man should be merciful, and hast made thy children to be
of a good hope that thou givest repentance for sins.

<span id="020">20</span> For if thou didst punish the enemies of thy
children, and the condemned to death, with such deliberation, giving
them time and place, whereby they might be delivered from their malice:

<span id="021">21</span> With how great circumspection didst thou judge
thine own sons, unto whose fathers thou hast sworn, and made covenants
of good promises?

<span id="022">22</span> Therefore, whereas thou dost chasten us, thou
scourgest our enemies a thousand times more, to the intent that, when we
judge, we should carefully think of thy goodness, and when we ourselves
are judged, we should look for mercy.

<span id="023">23</span> Wherefore, whereas men have lived dissolutely
and unrighteously, thou hast tormented them with their own abominations.

<span id="024">24</span> For they went astray very far in the ways of
error, and held them for gods, which even among the beasts of their
enemies were despised, being deceived, as children of no understanding.

<span id="025">25</span> Therefore unto them, as to children without the
use of reason, thou didst send a judgment to mock them.

<span id="026">26</span> But they that would not be reformed by that
correction, wherein he dallied with them, shall feel a judgment worthy
of God.

<span id="027">27</span> For, look, for what things they grudged, when
they were punished, that is, for them whom they thought to be gods;
\[now\] being punished in them, when they saw it, they acknowledged him
to be the true God, whom before they denied to know: and therefore came
extreme damnation upon them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 13](wis013)
