[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis014)  [Sep](../sep/wis014) 
[Vul](../vul/wis014)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis)  
  [Previous](wis013)  [Next](wis015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 14

<span id="001">1</span> Again, one preparing himself to sail, and about
to pass through the raging waves, calleth upon a piece of wood more
rotten than the vessel that carrieth him.

<span id="002">2</span> For verily desire of gain devised that, and the
workman built it by his skill.

<span id="003">3</span> But thy providence, O Father, governeth it: for
thou hast made a way in the sea, and a safe path in the waves;

<span id="004">4</span> Shewing that thou canst save from all danger:
yea, though a man went to sea without art.

<span id="005">5</span> Nevertheless thou wouldest not that the works of
thy wisdom should be idle, and therefore do men commit their lives to a
small piece of wood, and passing the rough sea in a weak vessel are
saved.

<span id="006">6</span> For in the old time also, when the proud giants
perished, the hope of the world governed by thy hand escaped in a weak
vessel, and left to all ages a seed of generation.

<span id="007">7</span> For blessed is the wood whereby righteousness
cometh.

<span id="008">8</span> But that which is made with hands is cursed, as
well it, as he that made it: he, because he made it; and it, because,
being corruptible, it was called god.

<span id="009">9</span> For the ungodly and his ungodliness are both
alike hateful unto God.

<span id="010">10</span> For that which is made shall be punished
together with him that made it.

<span id="011">11</span> Therefore even upon the idols of the Gentiles
shall there be a visitation: because in the creature of God they are
become an abomination, and stumblingblocks to the souls of men, and a
snare to the feet of the unwise.

<span id="012">12</span> For the devising of idols was the beginning of
spiritual fornication, and the invention of them the corruption of life.

<span id="013">13</span> For neither were they from the beginning,
neither shall they be for ever.

<span id="014">14</span> For by the vain glory of men they entered into
the world, and therefore shall they come shortly to an end.

<span id="015">15</span> For a father afflicted with untimely mourning,
when he hath made an image of his child soon taken away, now honoured
him as a god, which was then a dead man, and delivered to those that
were under him ceremonies and sacrifices.

<span id="016">16</span> Thus in process of time an ungodly custom grown
strong was kept as a law, and graven images were worshipped by the
commandments of kings.

<span id="017">17</span> Whom men could not honour in presence, because
they dwelt far off, they took the counterfeit of his visage from far,
and made an express image of a king whom they honoured, to the end that
by this their forwardness they might flatter him that was absent, as if
he were present.

<span id="018">18</span> Also the singular diligence of the artificer
did help to set forward the ignorant to more superstition.

<span id="019">19</span> For he, peradventure willing to please one in
authority, forced all his skill to make the resemblance of the best
fashion.

<span id="020">20</span> And so the multitude, allured by the grace of
the work, took him now for a god, which a little before was but
honoured.

<span id="021">21</span> And this was an occasion to deceive the world:
for men, serving either calamity or tyranny, did ascribe unto stones and
stocks the incommunicable name.

<span id="022">22</span> Moreover this was not enough for them, that
they erred in the knowledge of God; but whereas they lived in the great
war of ignorance, those so great plagues called they peace.

<span id="023">23</span> For whilst they slew their children in
sacrifices, or used secret ceremonies, or made revellings of strange
rites;

<span id="024">24</span> They kept neither lives nor marriages any
longer undefiled: but either one slew another traiterously, or grieved
him by adultery.

<span id="025">25</span> So that there reigned in all men without
exception blood, manslaughter, theft, and dissimulation, corruption,
unfaithfulness, tumults, perjury,

<span id="026">26</span> Disquieting of good men, forgetfulness of good
turns, defiling of souls, changing of kind, disorder in marriages,
adultery, and shameless uncleanness.

<span id="027">27</span> For the worshipping of idols not to be named is
the beginning, the cause, and the end, of all evil.

<span id="028">28</span> For either they are mad when they be merry, or
prophesy lies, or live unjustly, or else lightly forswear themselves.

<span id="029">29</span> For insomuch as their trust is in idols, which
have no life; though they swear falsely, yet they look not to be hurt.

<span id="030">30</span> Howbeit for both causes shall they be justly
punished: both because they thought not well of God, giving heed unto
idols, and also unjustly swore in deceit, despising holiness.

<span id="031">31</span> For it is not the power of them by whom they
swear: but it is the just vengeance of sinners, that punisheth always
the offence of the ungodly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 15](wis015)
