[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis010)  [Sep](../sep/wis010) 
[Vul](../vul/wis010)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis)  
  [Previous](wis009)  [Next](wis011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 10

<span id="001">1</span> She preserved the first formed father of the
world, that was created alone, and brought him out of his fall,

<span id="002">2</span> And gave him power to rule all things.

<span id="003">3</span> But when the unrighteous went away from her in
his anger, he perished also in the fury wherewith he murdered his
brother.

<span id="004">4</span> For whose cause the earth being drowned with the
flood, wisdom again preserved it, and directed the course of the
righteous in a piece of wood of small value.

<span id="005">5</span> Moreover, the nations in their wicked conspiracy
being confounded, she found out the righteous, and preserved him
blameless unto God, and kept him strong against his tender compassion
toward his son.

<span id="006">6</span> When the ungodly perished, she delivered the
righteous man, who fled from the fire which fell down upon the five
cities.

<span id="007">7</span> Of whose wickedness even to this day the waste
land that smoketh is a testimony, and plants bearing fruit that never
come to ripeness: and a standing pillar of salt is a monument of an
unbelieving soul.

<span id="008">8</span> For regarding not wisdom, they gat not only this
hurt, that they knew not the things which were good; but also left
behind them to the world a memorial of their foolishness: so that in the
things wherein they offended they could not so much as be hid.

<span id="009">9</span> Rut wisdom delivered from pain those that
attended upon her.

<span id="010">10</span> When the righteous fled from his brother's
wrath she guided him in right paths, shewed him the kingdom of God, and
gave him knowledge of holy things, made him rich in his travels, and
multiplied the fruit of his labours.

<span id="011">11</span> In the covetousness of such as oppressed him
she stood by him, and made him rich.

<span id="012">12</span> She defended him from his enemies, and kept him
safe from those that lay in wait, and in a sore conflict she gave him
the victory; that he might know that goodness is stronger than all.

<span id="013">13</span> When the righteous was sold, she forsook him
not, but delivered him from sin: she went down with him into the pit,

<span id="014">14</span> And left him not in bonds, till she brought him
the sceptre of the kingdom, and power against those that oppressed him:
as for them that had accused him, she shewed them to be liars, and gave
him perpetual glory.

<span id="015">15</span> She delivered the righteous people and
blameless seed from the nation that oppressed them.

<span id="016">16</span> She entered into the soul of the servant of the
Lord, and withstood dreadful kings in wonders and signs;

<span id="017">17</span> Rendered to the righteous a reward of their
labours, guided them in a marvellous way, and was unto them for a cover
by day, and a light of stars in the night season;

<span id="018">18</span> Brought them through the Red sea, and led them
through much water:

<span id="019">19</span> But she drowned their enemies, and cast them up
out of the bottom of the deep.

<span id="020">20</span> Therefore the righteous spoiled the ungodly,
and praised thy holy name, O Lord, and magnified with one accord thine
hand, that fought for them.

<span id="021">21</span> For wisdom opened the mouth of the dumb, and
made the tongues of them that cannot speak eloquent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 11](wis011)
