[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis003)  [Sep](../sep/wis003) 
[Vul](../vul/wis003)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis)  
  [Previous](wis002)  [Next](wis004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 3

<span id="001">1</span> But the souls of the righteous are in the hand
of God, and there shall no torment touch them.

<span id="002">2</span> In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die:
and their departure is taken for misery,

<span id="003">3</span> And their going from us to be utter destruction:
but they are in peace.

<span id="004">4</span> For though they be punished in the sight of men,
yet is their hope full of immortality.

<span id="005">5</span> And having been a little chastised, they shall
be greatly rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy for
himself.

<span id="006">6</span> As gold in the furnace hath he tried them, and
received them as a burnt offering.

<span id="007">7</span> And in the time of their visitation they shall
shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble.

<span id="008">8</span> They shall judge the nations, and have dominion
over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever.

<span id="009">9</span> They that put their trust in him shall
understand the truth: and such as be faithful in love shall abide with
him: for grace and mercy is to his saints, and he hath care for his
elect.

<span id="010">10</span> But the ungodly shall be punished according to
their own imaginations, which have neglected the righteous, and forsaken
the Lord.

<span id="011">11</span> For whoso despiseth wisdom and nurture, he is
miserable, and their hope is vain, their labours unfruitful, and their
works unprofitable:

<span id="012">12</span> Their wives are foolish, and their children
wicked:

<span id="013">13</span> Their offspring is cursed. Wherefore blessed is
the barren that is undefiled, which hath not known the sinful bed: she
shall have fruit in the visitation of souls.

<span id="014">14</span> And blessed is the eunuch, which with his hands
hath wrought no iniquity, nor imagined wicked things against God: for
unto him shall be given the special gift of faith, and an inheritance in
the temple of the Lord more acceptable to his mind.

<span id="015">15</span> For glorious is the fruit of good labours: and
the root of wisdom shall never fall away.

<span id="016">16</span> As for the children of adulterers, they shall
not come to their perfection, and the seed of an unrighteous bed shall
be rooted out.

<span id="017">17</span> For though they live long, yet shall they be
nothing regarded: and their last age shall be without honour.

<span id="018">18</span> Or, if they die quickly, they have no hope,
neither comfort in the day of trial.

<span id="019">19</span> For horrible is the end of the unrighteous
generation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 4](wis004)
