[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Polyglot](../poly/wis009)  [Sep](../sep/wis009) 
[Vul](../vul/wis009)   
  
[Wisdom Index](wis)  
  [Previous](wis008)  [Next](wis010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocrypha: Wisdom Chapter 9

<span id="001">1</span> O God of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, who hast
made all things with thy word,

<span id="002">2</span> And ordained man through thy wisdom, that he
should have dominion over the creatures which thou hast made,

<span id="003">3</span> And order the world according to equity and
righteousness, and execute judgment with an upright heart:

<span id="004">4</span> Give me wisdom, that sitteth by thy throne; and
reject me not from among thy children:

<span id="005">5</span> For I thy servant and son of thine handmaid am a
feeble person, and of a short time, and too young for the understanding
of judgment and laws.

<span id="006">6</span> For though a man be never so perfect among the
children of men, yet if thy wisdom be not with him, he shall be nothing
regarded.

<span id="007">7</span> Thou hast chosen me to be a king of thy people,
and a judge of thy sons and daughters:

<span id="008">8</span> Thou hast commanded me to build a temple upon
thy holy mount, and an altar in the city wherein thou dwellest, a
resemblance of the holy tabernacle, which thou hast prepared from the
beginning.

<span id="009">9</span> And wisdom was with thee: which knoweth thy
works, and was present when thou madest the world, and knew what was
acceptable in thy sight, and right in thy commandments.

<span id="010">10</span> O send her out of thy holy heavens, and from
the throne of thy glory, that being present she may labour with me, that
I may know what is pleasing unto thee.

<span id="011">11</span> For she knoweth and understandeth all things,
and she shall lead me soberly in my doings, and preserve me in her
power.

<span id="012">12</span> So shall my works be acceptable, and then shall
I judge thy people righteously, and be worthy to sit in my father's
seat.

<span id="013">13</span> For what man is he that can know the counsel of
God? or who can think what the will of the Lord is?

<span id="014">14</span> For the thoughts of mortal men are miserable,
and our devices are but uncertain.

<span id="015">15</span> For the corruptible body presseth down the
soul, and the earthy tabernacle weigheth down the mind that museth upon
many things.

<span id="016">16</span> And hardly do we guess aright at things that
are upon earth, and with labour do we find the things that are before
us: but the things that are in heaven who hath searched out?

<span id="017">17</span> And thy counsel who hath known, except thou
give wisdom, and send thy Holy Spirit from above?

<span id="018">18</span> For so the ways of them which lived on the
earth were reformed, and men were taught the things that are pleasing
unto thee, and were saved through wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wisdom Chapter 10](wis010)
