[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# JINACARITA

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## JOURNAL

<span class="small">OF THE</span>

# PALI TEXT SOCIETY

 

#### \[Volume V\]

###### \[London, Henry Frowde\]

#### \[1905\]

###### {Reduced to HTML by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002, revised August 2002. Corrections to this text, printed on p. 182 of the 1906-1907 issue of JPTS have been incorporated without further note.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

## Jinacarita

<span class="small">EDITED AND TRANSLATED BY DR. W. H. D. ROUSE,
HEADMASTER OF THE PERSE SCHOOL, CAMBRIDGE</span>

 

   NOTE.—This recension is based on the following materials, for all of
which I have to thank the generosity of Mr. Donald Ferguson, late of
Colombo.

   (1) A Singhalese MS., denoted by C<sup><span
class="small">a</span></sup>, containing text and commentary. It
commonly confuses cerebrals with dentals, and generally writes the nasal
with º (anuswāra) before all consonants alike.

   (2) An edition in Singhalese characters (C<sup><span
class="small">t</span></sup>), published in Colombo in 1886, which has
enabled me to correct nearly all the mistakes of the MS.

   (3) A rough transcript in Roman characters, and a draft of
translation, both which I have found useul in doubtful points.

W. H. D. ROUSE.      

   <span class="small">CAMBRIDGE,  
         *May* 16, 1905.</span>

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

## NOTE ON MEDHAŊKARA

   There are at least four Medaŋkaras famous in the literary history of
Ceylon. The first flourished about 1200 A.D., and was the author of the
'Vinyārthasamuccaya' in Siŋhalese. The second was the Āraññaka
Medhaŋkara, who presided over the Council held by Parākrama Bāhu III.
about 1250 A.D. The third was the scholar to whose care Parākrama Bāhu
the IVth entrusted his translation of the Jātaka book into Siŋhalese
'that it might be preserved in the line of the succession of his pupils'
('Mahāvaŋsa,' chap. xl., ver. 86). The fourth was our author, Vanaratana
Medhaŋkara (who was also the author of the 'Payoyasiddhi,' also in
Pali), and who flourished under Bhuvaneka Bāhu the Ist (1277-1288 A.D.)

   Saŋgharāja Medhaŋkara, author of the 'Lokappadīpakasāra (*Journal of
the P.T.S.*, 1882, p. 126; 1896, p. 43), was different from all of the
above, and wrote in Burma ('Gandha Vaŋsa,' p. 67). He is called Nava
Medhaŋkara (*ibid*., p. 64).

   Medhaŋkara is mentioned as the author of the 'Jina Carita' in the
'Saddhama-saŋgaha,' ix., 22 (*Journal of the P.T.S.*, 1890, p. 63), and
in the 'Gandha Vaŋsa,' pp. 62, 72 (*Journal of the P.T.S.*, 1886).

T. W. Rh. D.      

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# JINACARITA

 

NAMO TASSA BHAGAVATO ARAHATO SAMMĀ-SAMBUDDHASSA.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

GLORY TO THE BLESSED, THE HOLY, THE ALL-WISE BUDDHA.

<span id="pp_1">1</span> Worshipping with obeisance of the head, the
supreme lotus on the foot of the Great Being, which provides Nirvāna for
the good as honey for bees,

<span id="pp_2">2</span> the Sun of the Law, dispelling the great
darkness of ignorance in the world, the great light shown forth on the
mountain of the King of the Law,

<span id="pp_3">3</span> the lotus of brightness ever growing in the
lake of the heart of man, and the moon of the Order, emitting the great
shining ray of Precept,

<span id="pp_4">4</span> I will recite in brief the Life of the
Conqueror, a blessing distributed far and wide, desiring ever to keep it
in memory.

<span id="pp_5">5</span> Sweet to those who remember, but hard is the
path of bliss; yet what saying is hard in the gaining of wealth?

<span id="pp_6">6</span> Therefore is this my discourse set out in fair
verse, good, honey-sweet, pure, delightful to the listening ear.

<span id="pp_7">7</span> Listen well, as one drawing water in a pitcher,
and for ever enjoy, O ye righteous, who desire never to wax old or die.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="pp_8">8</span> A hundred thousand æons and four ago, there was
a city the abode of innumerable beings, who always did good deeds,

<span id="pp_9">9</span> provided with all manner of treasures, full of
all manner of people, crowded with gay shops, adorned with arches and
festoons,

<span id="pp_10">10</span> echoing to the ten sounds, like the city of
the King of the gods, called Amara, the Immortal, fair and grand.

<span id="pp_11">11</span> There once was born of a Brahmin stock,
respected through all the world, most merciful, most wise, handsome,
beloved,

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span id="pp_12">12</span> a prince called by name Sumedha, who had
traversed the ocean of the Veda. This nascent Buddha, on the death of
his parents,

<span id="pp_13">13</span> Having beheld the great wealth piled up in
hundreds of chambers by the treasurer,

<span id="pp_14">14</span> piled up the treasures, and cried: 'See, my
father and the rest of my kin have gone to the world of gods without
taking one small coin with them!'

<span id="pp_15">15</span> The Mine of Mercy grew sad at this, and
thought: 'Although I have received all this store of wealth, I too must
go.'

<span id="pp_16">16</span> He sat down in solitude, in his own beautiful
house, examining the blemishes in his body, and thus admonishing
himself:

<span id="pp_17">17</span> 'Painful is the breaking-up of the body,
painful also is its beginning; I am subject to birth, to old age, to
disease.'

<span id="pp_18">18</span> With these and like reflections, having seen
in many ways the blemishes in his body, he sent the drum beating about
the city and sent word to the King.

<span id="pp_19">19</span> At the sound of the drums the beggars flocked
together, as bees to a sweet scent, and for seven days he gratified them
with the flood of the filaments of alms.

<span id="pp_20">20</span> When he saw that although the precious gifts
fell like a shower of snowflakes, the lotus-plantation of treasures was
not exhausted,

<span id="pp_21">21</span> amidst the tears of his kinsfolk, as a royal
elephant flees from a forest blazing with fire, the great hero departed
from his delightful house,

<span id="pp_22">22</span> and came to the mighty Himalaya, perfumed
with scents of yellow sandal, camphor, and aloes,

<span id="pp_23">23</span> adorned with blossoming champak and asoka,
trumpet-flower and tilak, areca-nut and punnāga, ironwood, and other
trees,

<span id="pp_24">24</span> filled with lions, tigers, hyænas, with
elephants, cheetahs, and apes, with horses and other beasts,

<span id="pp_25">25</span> full of the notes of maynahs and sunswans, of
swans, herons, and parrots, of pigeons and cuckoos and vultures,

<span id="pp_26">26</span> haunted by goblins, demons, heavenly
musicians, gods and fairies, beings full of accomplishment and
knowledge,

<span id="pp_27">27</span> shining with great ranges of beautiful
mountains all vermilion and sapphire, mountains of silver and gold,

<span id="pp_28">28</span> brilliant with many a tank, provided with
steps and <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> stages of jewels and gold,
with many a nymph divine dallying there,

<span id="pp_29">29</span> irradiated with the spray from hundreds of
secret cool cascades, delightful nooks full of fays and Nāgas,

<span id="pp_30">30</span> with flocks of dancing peacocks and festoons
of creepers, and garlands of white sand,

<span id="pp_31">31</span> a treasure-mine of gold, jewels, and pearls,
an abode of merit for those who desire it, as bees desire pollen.

<span id="pp_32">32</span> Entered there, the brave one beheld in it the
requisites for the ascetic, produced by Him of the Thousand Eyes, fine
leaf-huts;

<span id="pp_33">33</span> he adopted the ascetic garb, and he abode
there for the space of seven days, stedfast in the Five Transcendent
Faculties and the Eight Precepts.

<span id="pp_34">34</span> In the joy of Attainment thus produced, the
holy ascetic one day, passing through the air, saw some people

<span id="pp_35">35</span> sweeping the road. Descending then from the
air, he asked the people: 'Why do ye sweep the road?'

<span id="pp_36">36</span> 'O Sumedha, knowest thou not? The Tathāgata
Dīpaṅkara has attained to Supreme Might, and has set rolling the Supreme
Wheel of the Law;

<span id="pp_37">37</span> 'he makes the Canon of the Law for the world,
and has reached the fair city Beautiful, and here dwells in Sudassana.

<span id="pp_38">38</span> 'We have invited him with our alms, the ruler
of the world, and his four hundred thousand Brethren pure.

<span id="pp_39">39</span> 'For his coming, O thou of supernatural
might, we sweep the path.' Thus spoke these people, giving joy to his
ear.

<span id="pp_40">40</span> On hearing the word Buddha, the mine of
virtues, highly delighted in mind, could not keep in his usual state,

<span id="pp_41">41</span> and the hero, asking a portion of the road
which the other had begun, was given a rough place and began to make it
smooth.

<span id="pp_42">42</span> Before that spot had been made ready by him,
the one Lord of the world, worshipt by men and immortals alike,
benefactor of the world, the great sage, entered upon the road with the
pious ones.

<span id="pp_43">43</span> Then as he saw there approaching the
Tathāgata, blazing with six-coloured rays, happy in heart, he thought:

<span id="pp_44">44</span> 'What if I make a bridge in the mud, and
prostrate <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> myself before this hero, the
great sage, with his company?

<span id="pp_45">45</span> For a long time it will suffice for my
blessing and happiness.' With this thought, the nascent Conqueror fell
down,

<span id="pp_46">46</span> and raising his lovely lotus-eyes, he looked;
and again, as he lay there, thus the courageous one thought:

<span id="pp_47">47</span> 'Should I wish, I could destroy the endless
turmoil of existence, and become a novice of the Order, and enter the
noble city.

<span id="pp_48">48</span> 'What use in disguise? By the extinction of
sin, I having become a Buddha like this Buddha, supreme in the world,

<span id="pp_49">49</span> will ferry the people in the ship of the Law
across the ocean of existence, and bring them to the City of Nirvāna, my
own happiness being extinguished.'

<span id="pp_50">50</span> Thus thinking, prostrate there in the mud, he
gleamed like a golden plantain stem,

<span id="pp_51">51</span> beholding the beautiful form of the Buddha,
shining with the six-coloured rays, the hero, jubilant with the joys
that arose in him, longed for Buddhahood.

<span id="pp_52">52</span> When he came to the place, and saw the sage
prostrate in the dirt, he who had been the Bridge of the World, seeing
the other made a bridge for him,

<span id="pp_53">53</span> the hero, the Tathāgata Dīpaṅkara, the one
Bridge of the World, the World's one Eye, stood at his head, and spake:

<span id="pp_54">54</span> 'In time to come, this man shall be a supreme
Buddha, Gotama by name,' and revealed his disciples, his native city,
and so forth.

<span id="pp_55">55</span> This said and done, with his Order the pious
one did obeisance to him, moving about him rightwise, and offered to him
eight handfuls of flowers.

<span id="pp_56">56</span> Having done this, the ruler of the world with
his company went to the city named Rammaka, a place beautiful with
monasteries and houses.

<span id="pp_57">57</span> The other, hearing the Conqueror's speech,
arose from the dust, delighted, and reverenced by the hosts of the gods
with offerings of flowers and other things,

<span id="pp_58">58</span> and crossing his legs, sat down on the couch
of flowers, the most austere, the most wise, Sumedha, conqueror of
sense.

<span id="pp_59">59</span> The gods in ten thousand spheres, delighted,
praised the hero seated on the flowery couch.

<span id="pp_60">60</span> As he sat, he pondered on the qualities which
make <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> a Buddha: whether above or below,
at the four cardinal or the four intermediate points.

<span id="pp_61">61</span> Thus meditating, he apprehended all the
elements of the Law, his own image, and first the Perfections of Giving;

<span id="pp_62">62</span> seeking further and further the Perfections
in wisdom, he beheld all the Perfections by his eye of understanding;

<span id="pp_63">63</span> and passing through successive
transmigrations, he endured great suffering, seeking Nirvāna in
tranquillity by fulfilling the Perfections of Giving;

<span id="pp_64">64</span> this chief of givers was like a magic tree,
or a magic wishing-jewel, giving to the world all their desires, food or
what not.

<span id="pp_65">65</span> He tore out his beautiful eyes, like stars in
the sky, and joyfully gave them to those who asked;

<span id="pp_66">66</span> The flesh of his own body and his blood he
gave, as much as the dust of the earth and the water of the sea,

<span id="pp_67">67</span> heads adorned with diadems, great as Mount
Sineru, he gave, shaking the earth, and sons and wives to boot.

<span id="pp_68">68</span> He fulfilled the Precepts, the Separation,
the Wisdom, all the Perfections, he attained the Vessantara existence;
and being born again from that place,

<span id="pp_69">69</span> he came into being in the fair abode of the
gods, the city of Tusita. There he dwelt for a long time, enjoying
infinite happiness.

<span id="pp_70">70</span> The gods in humble obeisance, made this
request of the greatest of men: 'O mighty one, it is time for thee to
become Buddha.'

<span id="pp_71">71</span> He examined time and circumstances, and
recognised that it was the time for Buddhahood, then giving his promise
to the assembly of the gods, to the forest of Nandana,

<span id="pp_72">72</span> he went with the hosts of the gods, and went
to heaven, vanishing from this world amidst their praises, that wise
one; vanishing thence, here,

<span id="pp_73">73-5</span><span id="pp_74"></span><span
id="pp_75"></span> in the picturesque city of Kapila, crowded with great
coursers finely caparisoned, full of gaily-decked shops and wares,
bright with beautiful tall lordly elephants, adorned with myriads of
arches and banners, with spacious halls and watchtowers, with strong
gates, the abode of fair women, laughing to scorn even the city of
Purinda (India); to Suddhodana, lord of men, protector of the helpless,
one of Okkāka's royal stock, <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> the abode
of many pure virtues, or lotus haunted by bees like jewels on Kings'
heads,

<span id="pp_76">76</span> the Most Wise showed in a dream a
gold-coloured elephant like the pure moon, with a trunk like a pure
white silver wreath, a noble festoon of white lotus;

<span id="pp_77">77-8</span><span id="pp_78"></span> he entered the womb
of the King's wife Māyā; lips like bimba-fruit she had, eyes like the
flowering blue lotus, her eyebrows like the rainbow an ever-increasing
delight, her mouth like a beautiful pure full moon, her breasts like a
pair of golden geese, her feet like fair lotus shoots, the colour of her
body shining like the colour of gold; adorned was she with the ornaments
of many a virtue and good custom.

<span id="pp_79">79</span> At the instant of his conception, beings
manifold were born, and thereupon protection was assumed by men and
immortals.

<span id="pp_80">80</span> Like an image of gold seated in the pericarp
of a lovely red lotus, all golden-coloured the chief of men sat
cross-legged in his mother's womb.

<span id="pp_81">81</span> Like a red thread strung through a clear
jewel, the Wise One is seen causing his mother's mind to blossom.

<span id="pp_82">82</span> At the end of ten months, thus spake the
Queen to the King: 'I desire, O King, to go to the home of my family.'

<span id="pp_83">83</span> With the King's consent, she goes to her
family with a large retinue, by a road which seemed to be divine.

<span id="pp_84">84</span> Seeing a grove of sâl-trees adorned with a
multitude of fragrant flowers, echoing with the sound of clusters of
murmuring intoxicated bees, with a flock of bright-eyed birds, which
seemed to invite her, the Lumbini Wood, a spacious place of delight,

<span id="pp_85">85</span> she felt a very great desire for that fair
spot. So with a charming step, like a divine maiden, she approached the
root of a blossoming sâl-tree, and grasped a branch, which of itself
bent low.

<span id="pp_86">86</span> At that moment, the pangs of labour seized
her; then her people ran up and surrounded the lady with screens; this
done, they retired apart. Then

<span id="pp_87">87</span> she stood firm, and clinging to the branch by
her red hand, soft as cotton, with its row of shining red nails, adorned
with fine bracelets and ornaments of gold, brought forth the Wise One;

<span id="pp_88">88</span> who, his body shining with a golden hue, fair
to the eye, incomparable, his beautiful hands and feet fully <span
id="page_39">p. 39</span> extended, came forth from the womb of the
incomparable mother, like a golden goose emerging from a lotus.

<span id="pp_89">89</span> The Brahmas brought a beautiful priceless net
of gold, and approaching, received him, and standing before her, said:
'Rejoice, O Queen! of thee is born a most excellent son.'

<span id="pp_90">90</span> Other men are born with their limbs smeared
in filth; but the excellent lord of men was born pure, like a jewel
lovely and priceless laid in a piece of fine Benares cloth.

<span id="pp_91">91</span> This done, down from the sky came two streams
of water upon the body of the Beloved and on his mother's body, washing
away the pollution to make all auspicious.

<span id="pp_92">92</span> From their hand the delightful gods bringing
a skin rug received the hero on a cushion of fine cloth, from their hand
the best of men received that lion-king among men;

<span id="pp_93">93</span> From their hand, a beautiful and pure moon,
he stood firm upon the earth, his great feet marked with circles, and
gazed with lotus-eyes at the eastern quarter.

<span id="pp_94">94</span> The hundreds of spheres became as one court
yard; men and immortals together worshipping the Wise One with perfumes
and like offerings, and thus they spake:

<span id="pp_95">95</span> 'There is no man like unto thee, O wise one:
how then can there be one superior?' Thus the Lord of the World, seeing
in this quarter not one like himself,

<span id="pp_96">96</span> took seven paces towards the nook, and said:
'I am the chief of the world, choicest and best.'

<span id="pp_97">97</span> At the words of this voice, incomparable and
supreme, all did worship to the King of men—deities, Titans, and
Brahmins, and the great company went to the fair-decorated city called
Kapila.

<span id="pp_98">98</span> At the instant of the birth of this noble
one, the earth, although able to bear the exceeding great burden of
trees, hills, and Mount Meru, and all the water of the ocean, could not
bear the weight of his merits, and did quake;

<span id="pp_99">99</span> dogs sported with deer, crows with owls, in
high delight, great serpents with mighty garula birds, and hosts of cats
with rats,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span id="pp_100">100</span> deer consorted with lions as parents with
children, and ships sped to their goal in all quarters of the world like
the arrow of Sarabhasigasatthā.

<span id="pp_101">101</span> The mighty ocean, and its lines of quiet
waves, became adorned with shining lotus flowers of every hue, and its
waters became quite sweet;

<span id="pp_102">102</span> the heavens were filled with festoons of
full-blossoming lotuses, the birds left their flying in the sky, the
river stood still and flowed not

<span id="pp_103">103</span> by loving union with a sudden breeze, the
earth-bride waxed most lovely, adorned withal by the ornament of many
flowers scattered upon her by the gods;

<span id="pp_104">104</span> great trees were laden with festoons of
blossoming garlands, and the four quarters, like fair women, shone
brightly, clad in sweet-scented filaments;

<span id="pp_105">105</span> The whole heaven was pervaded with sweet
incense most delightfully, gods and Titans, in festal garb, walked about
singing together;

<span id="pp_106">106</span> all spoke kindly, and all the quarters of
the earth were serene: elephants trumpeted, lions roared, the neighing
of horses was heard;

<span id="pp_107">107</span> Flutes, and lutes, and celestial drums made
each its own delightful sound in the sky; the great world with its lofty
mountains was pervaded by a full and lovely light;

<span id="pp_108">108</span> a cool breeze, soft and fragrant, wafted
pleasure to all people, and those who were afflicted by all manner of
pains were set free and at ease;

<span id="pp_109">109</span> the world was made pleasant by the bright
waving of vast plumy fans; water burst forth from the earth and flowed
along; the humpbacked were upright as they walked;

<span id="pp_110">110</span> The blind saw how the lame sported and
danced; the deaf enraptured heard the singing of the dumb;

<span id="pp_111">111</span> the very flames of hell became cool,
straightway, the things born in water rejoiced, and became visible
therein to sight;

<span id="pp_112">112</span> the ghosts, faint with hunger and thirst,
found food, and in the dense darkness of limbo there was light;

<span id="pp_113">113</span> numberless clusters of stars, of suns and
moons, shone bright in the sky, and jewels upon the earth;

<span id="pp_114">114</span> great lotus flowers of all hues burst in
full bloom from the earth one above another;

<span id="pp_115">115</span> ornamented drums, without beat or stroke,
gave forth a sound exceeding sweet on the earth;

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span id="pp_116">116</span> everywhere doors and windows opened of
their own accord, and men bound with fetters and chains were set free;

<span id="pp_117">117</span> then in the Heaven of the Thirty-Three, the
company of the gods made merry in much joy, waving their scarves
unceasingly and crying,

<span id="pp_118">118</span> 'News! in the city of Kapilavatha is born a
son to Suddhodana; he is seated upon the circle of the Bo-tree, and he
will become Buddha.'

<span id="pp_119">119</span> The mighty and most wise ascetic
Kāladevala, the trusted adviser of the wise King Suddhodana,

<span id="pp_120">120</span> after his meal had gone to the dwelling of
the Thirty-Three, and there sat him down for the rest of the day.

<span id="pp_121">121</span> He beheld them there sporting in festive
costume, and asked them the reason of their joy, and they told him.

<span id="pp_122">122</span> The sage, hearing this as it truly was,
enraptured with joy, at once went to the dwelling of Suddhodana,

<span id="pp_123">123</span> and entering, sat down upon a goodly seat,
and said: 'They tell me, O great King, that a son is born to thee,
incomparable, wise:

<span id="pp_124">124</span> 'I wish to see him.' The King caused the
boy to be sent for in his fine array, to salute the sage;

<span id="pp_125">125</span> But child though he was, by the power of
his virtue his fair lotus-feet uprose and placed themselves upon the
ascetic's head.

<span id="pp_126">126</span> In that position of the chief of men, no
one in the three worlds must be worshipt: if the head of the lord of the
three worlds had been placed under the ascetic's feet,

<span id="pp_127">127</span> the ascetic's head would assuredly have
burst asunder. He therefore stood with his hands claspt in supplication
to the wise Ocean of Virtues, because he had not thought fit to destroy
him.

<span id="pp_128">128</span> The lord of men seeing this marvel, done by
his own son the god of gods, gladly adored his soft lotus-feet, marked
with various devices.

<span id="pp_129">129</span> When the King's great sowing festival came
on, the city was adorned like a city of the gods; and all the people in
fair attire gathered at his noble dwelling-place.

<span id="pp_130">130</span> Then the King, at the head of his people,
thus fair adorned, took his son adorned with beauty, and with <span
id="page_42">p. 42</span> a hero's grace went out to the incomparable
sowing festival.

<span id="pp_131">131</span> All the nurses went away to look on at the
festival, leaving the child alone at the foot of a rose-apple tree,
covered by a canopy painted in many colours.

<span id="pp_132">132</span> Seated beneath the canopy, bright with
gold, and shining with golden stars, at the root of the rose-apple-tree,
the wise one took the opportunity and fell into ecstatic meditation.

<span id="pp_133">133</span> The nurses returning, beheld him seated
like an image of gold, and his splendour; and they said to the King,
'Such and such a marvel hae been done by thy son.'

<span id="pp_134">134</span> When he heard this of the lotus-eyed one,
whose mouth is like the bright moon, he said, 'A second time I must
worship him,' and set his head at his son's feet.

<span id="pp_135">135</span> Beside these, other marvels took place also
in the world, shown forth by me in due course in the compass of the
book, reluctant though I am:

<span id="pp_136">136</span> where were quantities of houses, glorious
with all manner of gems, glorious with canopies and couches in plenty,
fair with long flights of stairs and wide storeys, made ready to suit
the three seasons,

<span id="pp_137">137</span> multitudes of fine houses with rows of
pinnacles, one row as it were always defying another, forests of lotus
like rays of sunlight, illuminating the lotus faces of the folk;

<span id="pp_138">138</span> by those walls inset with gems women adorn
their bodies without even the reflexion of a mirror;

<span id="pp_139">139</span> where is seen a circuit painted with
whitewash, fair to the eye like Mount Kelāsa,

<span id="pp_140">140</span> where is always seen a moat covered with
lotus, with a great circuit of sapphire, set with many gems;

<span id="pp_141">141</span> there he dwelt, the one all-seeing, until
he came to maturity enjoying all delights. In going to the park for
sport, upon the high-road

<span id="pp_142">142</span> he saw successively the three states of
existence—old age, disease, and death, and was disgusted; on a fourth
occasion he saw with pleasure in the same place the welcome form of an
ascetic.

<span id="pp_143">143</span> The illustrious one went to the beautiful
grove, lovely as the forest of Nandana, thick with multitudes of
flowering trees, and echoing with the notes of flocks of peacocks and
other birds.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span id="pp_144">144</span> There the royal chief of men, with a hero's
grace, enjoyed the delightful playing, singing, and dancing of fair
women like goddesses.

<span id="pp_145">145</span> Seating himself cross-legged on a fair
seat, he thought that he would cause his person to be adorned.

<span id="pp_146">146</span> The King of the Gods, perceiving his
thought, said to Vissakamma, 'Do thou adorn Siddhattha.'

<span id="pp_147">147</span> At his command, Vissakamma approached, and
wrapt the shining head of the glorious one with ten thousand shawls,

<span id="pp_148">148</span> and his shining body, glorious with its
unequalled marks, he made beautiful with variegated robes and ornaments,
and with the sweet perfume of fragrant blue lotus, sandal, and other
such.

<span id="pp_149">149</span> Adorned by him, himself also adorned, he
sat on a spotless slab of stone, attended by fair women like goddesses,
and shining like the King of the gods.

<span id="pp_150">150</span> A glad message was sent by King Suddhodana:
'A son is born to thee, my son!' Hearing this, the chief of men

<span id="pp_151">151</span> replied, 'To me this day a fetter is born,'
and forthwith amid all the joys of success he returned to the beautiful
city.

<span id="pp_152">152</span> Then Kisāgotamī, in the upper story of the
palace, saw the King shining like the sun, and thus she spake:

<span id="pp_153">153</span> 'Whoever are the parents of this steadfast
one, whosoever is the wife of the noble one, happy are they all, yea,
always happy.'

<span id="pp_154">154</span> When he heard this pleasant speech uttered
by her, gladdened within with joy, he went to his house,

<span id="pp_155">155</span> he loosed from his neck the great necklace,
cool, pure, exquisitely beautiful, and sent it to her;

<span id="pp_156">156</span> then mounting to the terrace, lovely as
Vejayanta, he reclined upon his precious seat like the King of the gods.

<span id="pp_157">157</span> A company of fair women, like goddesses,
attending on him, performed all manner of dances and songs;

<span id="pp_158">158</span> but the wise one, longing for the ascetic
life, free from the fine desires, cared nought even for dances and songs
so lovely as these,

<span id="pp_159">159</span> but after lying there on the couch awhile
to rest, the hero, the mighty King, sat up cross-legged,

<span id="pp_160">160</span> and sitting there, he beheld the changes
that had come over the sleeping girls. Frightened at the thought <span
id="page_44">p. 44</span> of mortal life, he said, 'I will go now!' and
passed through the fair doorway.

<span id="pp_161">161</span> Channa lay with his head on the fair
threshold, for he thought, 'I shall hear my master's call'; and as he
lay there, that most righteous friend and counsellor, giver of joy,
bringer of good,

<span id="pp_162">162</span> the prince called him and said, 'Make ready
the thoroughbred horse Kantaka, and bring him hither.'

<span id="pp_163">163</span> Channa listened to the order given to him,
and went quickly and caparisoned the thoroughbred, and brought him.

<span id="pp_164">164</span> The noble steed, thus made ready by him,
knowing that his master was to leave the world, uttered a neigh:

<span id="pp_165">165</span> that sound filled the whole city, but the
gods one and all kept it from the hearing of any.

<span id="pp_166">166</span> Then the delight of the virtuous thought,
'First I will go and see my own precious son, then I will become a
Buddha.'

<span id="pp_167">167</span> With this thought, he proceeded to his
wife's apartments, and standing upon the threshold, thrust his head
within.

<span id="pp_168">168</span> He beheld his own son, lying like his
mother upon a bed strewn with flowers, with the bed of the King of
heaven;

<span id="pp_169">169</span> seeing which the supreme ruler thought to
himself: 'If I take my son from the Queen's arms,

<span id="pp_170">170</span> 'Yasodharā might awaken from her great
love, and cause delay in my leaving the world.

<span id="pp_171">171</span> 'When I have become a Buddha, I will return
and see my son.' Then the lord of men came down from the upper storey.

<span id="pp_172">172</span> Yasodharā had lovely lotus-like face,
hands, and feet, laughter like the foam, brows like shining wavelets,
eyes like the blue lotus; she was like the moon; all eyes were attracted
to her like so many bees:

<span id="pp_173">173</span> Who that enjoyed possession of her body
would renounce it, save this steadfast one, standing at the summit of
perfection?

<span id="pp_174">174</span> 'I have brought the horse, sire: observe
the time, lord of chariots!' so spake Channa to the glorious ruler of
the earth.

<span id="pp_175">175</span> The lord of the earth heard what Channa had
spoken; <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> down from the palace he came,
and went to Kanthaka.

<span id="pp_176">176</span> To him spoke thus he who delights to do
good to all beings: 'Kanthaka, in this one night convey me over gods and
men.

<span id="pp_177">177</span> 'I will become supreme Buddha, and escape
from the world, from the ocean of existence, the terrors of decay, the
multitude of monstrous growths.'

<span id="pp_178">178</span> With these words he mounted his
thoroughbred steed, white as a conch shell, and caused Channa to grasp
its strong tail.

<span id="pp_179">179</span> When he came to the great gate, he thought:
'If the gate will not open by any means,

<span id="pp_180">180</span> 'with Channa holding fast by his tail, I
will press Kanthaka with my thighs, I will leap over the lofty shining
wall, and begone.' So thought the mighty one.

<span id="pp_181">181</span> Thus the strong one, and Channa, and the
noble steed, each in his own heart thought of the way to get over the
wall.

<span id="pp_182">182</span> But the gods who inhabited the gate,
perceiving his thought, and delighted at his happy going, then set the
gate open.

<span id="pp_183">183</span> Then Death thought, 'I will make this
Siddhattha no Siddhattha'; and approaching, poised in air, he thus
addrest him:.

<span id="pp_184">184</span> 'Go not forth, O most wise! On the seventh
day from now the divine treasure of the Wheel shall surely be made
manifest.'

<span id="pp_185">185</span> But the glorious one, thus addrest by
Death, replied: 'Who art thou?' and Māra declared himself.

<span id="pp_186">186</span> 'Māra, I know that the divine Wheel will be
made manifest. Go thou, and stand not here, for I have no desire for
this kingdom.

<span id="pp_187">187</span> 'I shall become Buddha, sole ruler of the
world, and all the ten thousand systems of the universe I will cause to
resound.'

<span id="pp_188">188</span> When the Great Being had thus uttered his
supreme word, Māra, unable to entrap him, forthwith vanisht away.

<span id="pp_189">189</span> After this speech of the Sinner, Gotama at
dawn renounced the glory of universal dominion, like a drop of spittle,
and there remained.

<span id="pp_190">190</span> Then the gods assembled immediately,
bearing thousands of precious torches, to show reverence to him as he
departed.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span id="pp_191">191</span> Behind him and before and on either side
there went in reverence great serpents and garula birds;

<span id="pp_192">192</span> here great host of gods, showering from the
sky like rain showers of lovely blossoms, coming from the ten thousand
worlds, exult exceedingly over the tender-bodied one;

<span id="pp_193">193</span> on the bright and beautiful road, all
sweet-scented goodly flowers, and aromatic powder, golden flags, where
the noble royal steed as he went, entangled in flowers, could not go at
speed,

<span id="pp_194">194</span> thus he proceeded upon that lovely path of
thirty leagues, amidst all this festivity, for the remainder of the
night.

<span id="pp_195">195</span> Reaching the bank of the river Anoma, he
dismounted from his horse, upon a pure cool expanse of ground,

<span id="pp_196">196</span> and having rested, thus he spoke: 'Go,
Channa, to your own city, and take with you my ornaments and the horse.'

<span id="pp_197">197</span> Standing there, the all-wise one with his
sword exceeding sharp cut off his fragrant hair, and cast it up to the
sky.

<span id="pp_198">198</span> He of the thousand eyes received the
hair-relic as it rose into the sky, in a fair golden casket, bowing his
head in reverence,

<span id="pp_199">199</span> and in the Thirty-Three he set up a
crest-gem shrine, delightful to the eye, made of sapphire, a league in
height.

<span id="pp_200">200</span> The noble Eight Requisites were brought by
Brahma, and cast down as it were from the air, and the goodly pair of
robes:

<span id="pp_201">201</span> taking these, great Brahma made in Brahma's
world a beautiful robe-stupa twelve leagues in height.

<span id="pp_202">202</span> The hero went to the mango-grove named
Anupiya, and there spent seven days, in the bliss of retirement from the
world.

<span id="pp_203">203</span> One day he proceeded along the
thirty-league road as far as Rājagaha, where he went about piously
seeking alms.

<span id="pp_204">204</span> Then the walls and gates, by his radiance,
appeared as if made of gold and set with sapphires.

<span id="pp_205">205</span> The crowds of people, full of excitement,
when they saw him, asked again and again: 'Who is this? Is it Sakka, or
Brahma, Māra or a Serpent?'

<span id="pp_206">206</span> Having entered and obtained food enough for
his <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> living, he went along the high-road,
looking before him no further than a yoke's length;

<span id="pp_207">207</span> and leaving the people there perplext, as
the sea is churned with the churning-stick of Mount Meru, he went to the
Paṇḍava mountain,

<span id="pp_208">208</span> where, seated under its shadow on a lovely
spot, he began to eat the mingled food.

<span id="pp_209">209</span> By contemplation, the wise and mighty one
restrained the snake of his bowels from leaving the anthill of his body.

<span id="pp_210">210</span> After eating, having been many times
offered the kingdom by the great King Bimbisāra, the chief of men
visited him.

<span id="pp_211">211</span> He declined the kingdom; but when the King
prayed, 'When you have become supreme Buddha, declare the Lord to me,'

<span id="pp_212">212</span> he gave his promise to the lord of mankind.
The wise one then retired to the cloister, and there performed exceeding
great marvels and wonders. Then considering a little,

<span id="pp_213">213</span> after partaking of plentiful meat and
drink, and growing stout of body, like a god he came to the foot of the
Ajapāla banyan tree.

<span id="pp_214">214</span> There he sat, the giver of light, facing
the east; and by the colour of his body, that banyan took on the colour
of gold.

<span id="pp_215">215</span> Then a fair woman named Sujātā, her prayer
fulfilled, came to him, bearing upon her head a golden bowl full of rice
and milk, and bowing before him, said:

<span id="pp_216">216</span> 'I present an oblation to the spirit which
dwells in this tree.' Then, seeing this incomparable man,

<span id="pp_217">217</span> and conceiving that he was a god, joyful at
heart, she gave the bowl of food to the noble one, saying, 'As my prayer
was fulfilled, so may thine be, my lord.'

<span id="pp_218">218</span> With these words, the beautiful woman
departed thence. And the sage taking the bowl of food,

<span id="pp_219">219</span> went to the bank of the river Nerañjarā,
and when he had eaten the choice food, cast her fair bowl against the
current.

<span id="pp_220">220</span> The noble being then proceeded to the
incomparable grove, delightful as Sakka's grove of Nandana, adorned with
clusters of full-flowering trees, which, like clusters of bees,
captivated the onlooker's mind and eye.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span id="pp_221">221</span> There he abode for a day's rest; in the
evening hour with the grace of a lion he went to the bo-tree.

<span id="pp_222">222</span> Along the great road, beset with Brahmas,
gods, and Titans, with serpents and roc-birds, went the ruler of man. A
highborn Brahmin, laden with grass, beholding him, gave him a handful of
grass.

<span id="pp_223">223</span> There the skies were flowering with lovely
blue lotus and water lilies, birds thronging like rain-drops, as the
chief of men passed by.

<span id="pp_224">224</span> The skies were full of all manner of sweet
scents, and the odour of sandal wood and fragrant powders, as the chief
of men passed by.

<span id="pp_225">225</span> The skies were full of fair jewelled
sunshades and glorious golden banners as the chief of men passed by.

<span id="pp_226">226</span> The skies were filled with gods also,
sporting and waving thousands of shawls as the chief of men passed by.

<span id="pp_227">227</span> The skies were filled with gods also,
playing upon thousands of divine drums and instruments of musick, as the
chief of men passed by.

<span id="pp_228">228</span> The skies were filled with fair goddesses,
singing all manner of songs, as the chief of men passed by.

<span id="pp_229">229</span> Lovely fays and fairy maidens, lovely
serpents and their mates, kept up their lovely dances and songs.

<span id="pp_230">230</span> Thus, amidst all these festivities, like a
flood, the glorious sole ruler of the three worlds, grass in hand,
approached the bo-tree.

<span id="pp_231">231</span> The chief of men made a circuit rightwise
about the bo-tree, which was like a lofty hill of silver set on a black
coral rock,

<span id="pp_232">232</span> and stood facing the east, the wise one, on
the firm plot of earth where sin was to be destroyed, and scattered the
handfuls of grass.

<span id="pp_233">233</span> Then this seat became fourteen cubits long.
Then, seeing this wonder, the supremely wise one thought:

<span id="pp_234">234</span> 'Let my flesh, blood, and bones, sinews and
skin, indeed be dried up, yet shall I not lose my power.'

<span id="pp_235">235</span> The great hero and chief of men then seated
himself in the invincible seat, and there remained facing the east.

<span id="pp_236">236</span> Then Sakka bronght to the God of gods a
great conch, more than twenty cubits long, and stood there blowing into
it.

<span id="pp_237">237</span> Next the great Brahma Sahampati stood there
in <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> comely wise, upholding a white
sunshade of three leagues in extent, like another full moon.

<span id="pp_238">238</span> Suyāma, chief of gods, with a fair
yak's-tail whisk three leagues long, stood there fanning him gently.

<span id="pp_239">239</span> The god named Pañcasikha stood there
playing upon a lute of vilva wood, capable of many melodies.

<span id="pp_240">240</span> Kāla also, King of Serpents, stood there
singing songs of praise, attended by dancers.

<span id="pp_241">241</span> Two-and-thirty nymphs, with a golden shrine
filled with flowers, stood in attitudes of devotion.

<span id="pp_242">242</span> Whilst Indra and the companies of gods thus
kept festivity, Māra the Sinner thought thus to himself:

<span id="pp_243">243</span> 'This prince desires to escape from my
dominion: well, I will make Siddhattha no Siddhattha.'

<span id="pp_244">244</span> He then created a thousand great and
horrible arms, and with them seized all manner of gleaming weapons; he
mounted upon his magnificent and fierce elephant, a hundred and fifty
leagues high, named Girimekhala.

<span id="pp_245">245</span> He then, attended by an army provided with
all manner of weapons; having many mouths, with flame-coloured hair, and
great round protruding red eyes, their mouths awful, snakes issuing from
their breasts,

<span id="pp_246">246</span> thither he came, roaring with a fearful
sound: 'Seize you Siddhattha, and bind him!' Such was their command. At
the sight, the assembly of gods was scattered, like flecks of cotton
blown by a violent wind.

<span id="pp_247">247</span> Then Death created a harsh sound like deep
thunder, and a wind; but he could not so much as move a corner of the
fair robe of that blessed one.

<span id="pp_248">248</span> Then he caused to descend a horrible and
terrific rain, swift as that which falls at the destruction of an age;
but could not make one drop come near to the incomparable one. Seeing
that wonder, the foul-mouthed one,

<span id="pp_249">249</span> with a great and blazing conflagration of
fire, showered down rocks, ashes and mud, weapons, and fiery coals, and
sand; but all these things,

<span id="pp_250">250</span> by Māra's power precipitated from the sky,
when they came nigh to him of transcendent merit, became like garlands
of flowers. He then created a horrible black darkness, like that

<span id="pp_251">251</span> of limbo; but by the splendour of his
beautiful body, the darkness of delusion was turned into lovely and
<span id="page_50">p. 50</span> glorious light, like the sun in his
radiance. Seeing this, the Evil One,

<span id="pp_252">252</span> his face inflamed with anger, his eyebrows
twitching, his dress in hideous disorder, bearing the disc-weapon,

<span id="pp_253">253</span> exceeding sharp, like a knife, which would
cut through even the noble King Meru like a thick sprout. This he cast
at the mine of virtue, but it could do him no harm; but in a moment, as
it passed through the air, became a canopy over his head.

<span id="pp_254">254</span> Rocky peaks, blazing with fire, thrown by
the host, passing through the air became, as it were, a mass of
garlands.

<span id="pp_255">255</span> Seeing this also, the miserable creature
approached the hero, and said: 'This invincible seat is mine;

<span id="pp_256">256</span> rise up from this seat.' Thus answered the
wise one: 'Who is

<span id="pp_257">257</span> witness, Māra, that the seat is thine by
reason of good deeds done?' The Sinful One replied, 'All these are
witnesses,' stretching out his hand towards the host.

<span id="pp_258">258</span> And the host, with horrid voice, exclaimed:
'I am witness! I am witness!' Having thus caused them to declare that
they were witnesses, he went on:

<span id="pp_259">259</span> 'Who is thy witness, Siddhattha?' Then the
incomparable replied: 'My witnesses, Māra, are not sentient beings.'

<span id="pp_260">260</span> Thrusting out from his brilliant red robe
his right hand, shining like golden lightning,

<span id="pp_261">261</span> he pointed to the earth and said: 'Why
didst thou cry out at the place of perfection, and art now silent?' Then
from the earth

<span id="pp_262">262</span> came forth hundreds of sounds like the
sound of thunder. Clasping his clever and strong elephant close with his
knees,

<span id="pp_263">263</span> on seeing this, he thought, 'Now he will
catch us! now he will catch us!' and like a serpent with broken fangs,
crestfallen and subdued,

<span id="pp_264">264</span> away he fled, with his host, even to the
Cakkavāla Rock, leaving weapons, clothes, ornaments, and everything, all
scattered about.

<span id="pp_265">265</span> Then the company of the gods, seeing Māra's
host in fear and misery fleeing away, exclaimed: 'Behold the defeat of
Māra! Victory to Prince Siddhattha!'

<span id="pp_266">266</span> Rejoicing, they worshipt the hero with
oblations of sweet perfumes and scents, and returning, sang together in
hymns of praise, clad in festal array.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span id="pp_267">267</span> Thus did the mighty hero, sitting upon the
immovable seat, scatter the host of Māra while the sun was still high.

<span id="pp_268">268</span> In the first watch, the supreme one
obtained knowledge of former existences, in the middle watch divine
insight,

<span id="pp_269">269</span> and then in the last watch he went through
the Chain of Causation, until he grasped that knowledge thoroughly.

<span id="pp_270">270</span> At dawn, all the hundred systems of worlds
shouted together. Becoming Buddha all-wise, he of the lotus-eyes, all
wise,

<span id="pp_271">271</span> he uttered this hymn of praise, moved with
joy (sādiso?), 'I have traversed a succession of many births'; and so
forth.

<span id="pp_272">272</span> Then, perceiving the many virtues of that
seat, he said: 'I shall not yet arise from this seat.'

<span id="pp_273">273</span> The Teacher achieved the Attainment in
millions of phases, sitting there for seven days on the unshaken seat.

<span id="pp_274">274-5</span><span id="pp_275"></span> There arose a
doubt in the minds of certain gods, who thought: 'The glorious
Siddhattha must have some other duty to perform, that is why he does not
leave this seat.' Perceiving their thought, and desiring to set their
minds at rest,

<span id="pp_276">276</span> the Ruler uprose like a golden pheasant,
gold-coloured, light-giving, and ascending into the air, he worked a
wonder.

<span id="pp_277">277</span> When by this means he had fully reassured
the minds of the gods, for seven days he stood with unwinking lotus-eyes
venerating the bo-tree and the seat of victory.

<span id="pp_278">278</span> Then, walking up and down in the noble
arcade, bright with gems, like a storehouse of precious things, the pure
one investigated the pure doctrine.

<span id="pp_279">279</span> Then beneath the noble ajapāla-tree he
caused the pure lotus-faces of Māra's women to fade, and beneath the
mucalinda-tree he caused the serpent-King's thoughts to expand like
lotus-blossoms,

<span id="pp_280">280</span> and beneath the rājāyatana-tree, the wise
one, so fair in hue, gave himself up to the uninterrupted enjoyment of
Attainment for nine-and-forty days.

<span id="pp_281">281</span> He then used the water of Anotatta, a
tooth-cleaner of betel-vine, and the goodly myrobolan drug brought by
the King of the gods.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span id="pp_282">282</span> He received from the merchants a cake of
strong honey, presented by the Kings in a leaf.

<span id="pp_283">283</span> At the end of the repast, he went beneath
the ajapāla-tree, and pondered on the profundity of the truth to which
he had attained,

<span id="pp_284">284</span> saying, 'This truth which I have attained
to is profound and calm as the mass of water supporting the earth,' and
so forth.

<span id="pp_285">285</span> 'This profundity of truth has been
comprehended by me, the King of truth, through reasoning and exercise of
memory.

<span id="pp_286">286</span> 'In the endeavour, I gave to a beggar's
petition even my noble head adorned with a crown, which I cut off;

<span id="pp_287">287</span> 'my anointed eyes, which I pluckt out;
blood which I drew from my neck; my beautiful wife;

<span id="pp_288">288</span> 'my children, who are like a lamp to the
family: no gift that I gave not, no observance that I did not fulfil.

<span id="pp_289">289</span> 'Thus in former births, as the Saṅkhapāla,
I sacrificed my very life for fear of some breach of observance.

<span id="pp_290">290</span> 'In the Khantivāda birth and others, no
single perfection but has been attained by me in cutting off what was to
be cut off.

<span id="pp_291">291</span> 'When I scattered the host of Māra the
earth did not quake, nor when I remembered my former existence,

<span id="pp_292">292</span> 'nor in the middle watch, when I obtained
divine insight; but quake it did in the last watch,

<span id="pp_293">293</span> 'when I obtained comprehension of the
causes of existence; and it uttered a loud noise as it were giving
approval.

<span id="pp_294">294</span> 'As a gourd full of rice gruel, as a chatty
full of buttermilk, as a hand smeared over with salve, as a cloth washed
in grease:

<span id="pp_295">295</span> 'so this world is a mine of ignorance,
filled with a mass of sin, polluted, inflamed with lust, miserable with
pain, infatuate with mighty delusion.

<span id="pp_296">296</span> 'What comprehends this doctrine? what use
is there to teach it?' Thus the Lord became despondent about giving the
immortal drink of doctrine to mankind.

<span id="pp_297">297</span> Thereupon Brahma Sahampati uttered a great
cry, saying: 'Alas! the world is perishing, truly the world is lost!'

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span id="pp_298">298</span> Then from the hundreds of world-systems he
assembled throngs of Brahmas and gods, and with them came before the
Teacher.

<span id="pp_299">299</span> He kneeled upon his knee in that place, and
folded his hands upon his head, crying: 'Let the Blessed One declare the
Law.'

<span id="pp_300">300</span> At his request, the conqueror, omniscient,
lotus-lipped, beheld with his divine eye the hundreds of world-systems,

<span id="pp_301">301</span> and then, seeing how few mortals there were
whose lusts were small, he divided them into two parts by the principle
of good and evil:

<span id="pp_302">302</span> rejecting the evil, he assembled the good
by his wisdom, and said: 'Let each person now bring his own vessel of
faith:

<span id="pp_303">303</span> 'I will fill it with this immortal gift of
gospel.' He sent forth upon the company of Brahma rays of words divine.

<span id="pp_304">304</span> Then the bright one rose over the
ajapāla-tree like the sun of wisdom rising in the sky over the eastern
mountain, and shining bright like the light of jewels, emitted bright
rays of wisdom.

<span id="pp_305">305-7</span><span id="pp_306"></span><span
id="pp_307"></span> Then, gladdening Upaka and others, the glorious
ascetic passed along the road eighteen leagues in length, by the
flowering trees, to the incomparable deerpark, filled continually with
the humming of swarms of busy bees, and the murmurs of many a bird,
perfumed with the scent of full-blown lotus; then the Five Brahmins,
seeing the god of gods, the ruler of the three existences, who sees to
the ends of the world, the Blest One, the fair-limbed, the hero, the
sage, the lion-king, devised this evil plot.

<span id="pp_308">308</span> 'Friends, here comes this ascetic,
golden-hued, perfect in shape, after a meal of rich food and drink. Let
us make no kind of salutation to him;

<span id="pp_309">309</span> 'but this honourable personage, born of a
high stock, like a banner upon the earth, is worthy to receive a seat;
therefore let us prepare a seat for him.'

<span id="pp_310">310</span> The Blessed One thus perceiving their
design by his keen wisdom, by the power of his kindness conquered their
arrogance, like a banner blown down by the wind.

<span id="pp_311">311</span> Unable to resist his words, they did all
obeisance to the wise Ruler of the World.

<span id="pp_312">312</span> But the sages, not knowing that this Prince
of Sages <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> was Buddha, addrest him simply
by the name of 'Friend.'

<span id="pp_313">313</span> Then the Ruler of the World, who knows the
world, said unto them, 'Call not the Teacher simply by the name of
Friend;

<span id="pp_314">314</span> 'For, Brethren, the Tathāgata is the Saint,
the Buddha All-knowing.' When the Supreme One had made known to them
that he was Buddha,

<span id="pp_315">315</span> sitting upon the most noble seat which they
had prepared, he adorned those Elders with the ornament of virtue with a
voice like Brahma's voice,

<span id="pp_316">316</span> and, attended by millions of Brahmas, set
the Wheel of the Law in motion, and by the rays of his discourse

<span id="pp_317">317</span> he also dispersed the pall of dark
ignorance in the world, and by his lotus-like wisdom showed forth the
lovely light of truth to those who could be converted;

<span id="pp_318">318</span> thus like a King of great might, the King
of Truth most wise, in the field of victory called the Deer-forest,

<span id="pp_319">319</span> grasping the goodly sword of preaching with
the hand of wisdom, caused continued loss to the kindred of those ripe
for conversion.

<span id="pp_320">320</span> He destroyed sins, he beat the drums of
victory, true religion, the flag of victory, true religion, hard to win;

<span id="pp_321">321</span> he uplifted, he planted the auspicious
pillar of victory, true religion, and became sole King of the world, the
source of bliss;

<span id="pp_322">322</span> he delivered the people from the mighty
bond of transmigration, desiring to lead them to the city of Nirvāna,
longing to do good to the world.

<span id="pp_323">323</span> Reaching the road leading to Uruvela, like
a road divine, fair to behold as a moving mountain of gold,

<span id="pp_324">324</span> he gave to some thirty Bhaddavaggiya
princes the excellent, immortal draught of the Three Paths;

<span id="pp_325">325</span> then, supreme in wisdom, having conferred
the excellent gift of ordination, he sent them forth Brethren for the
world's good, saying, 'Go on your pilgrimage.'

<span id="pp_326">326</span> He proceeded to Uruvela, cutting off the
matted hair of the ascetics without and within. Then, reaching the
highroad, he, pre-eminent, as the moon is attended by stars,

<span id="pp_327">327</span> so attended by these persons, free from
sin, shining with six-coloured rays of light, he shed splendour <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> upon those fair women the points of the
compass, and delighted the eyes of birds.

<span id="pp_328">328</span> Then he remembered the promise given to the
glorious King Bimbisāra, like a banner to a noble royal lineage, abode
of virtues; and desiring to fulfil it,

<span id="pp_329">329</span> at the time of the peacocks' dance he went
to the park called Laṭṭhivana, adorned with plantations of all manner of
trees.

<span id="pp_330">330</span> Bimbisāra, ruler of men, hearing of the
coming of the great sage, adorned with the ornaments of joy and bliss,

<span id="pp_331">331</span> entered that park, attended by his great
councillors, made glorious with his hair the lotus-feet of the Teacher.

<span id="pp_332">332-3</span><span id="pp_333"></span> The other,
sitting, bright with beauty, of excellent beauty, to whom the King of
the gods did sing, worshipt by gods, Titans, and serpent Kings,
glorious, (presented) Bimbisāra with the immortal draught of the true
doctrine. Then to lovely Rājagaha he went, a city like that of the King
of the gods,

<span id="pp_334">334</span> and the mighty man was led by the King to
the King's house. At the end of his repast, shaking the great earth,

<span id="pp_335">335</span> he took the fair road to the lovely
Veluvana Park, beautiful with lordly trees in full bloom,

<span id="pp_336">336</span> and on a plot of earth beautified by being
hidden under a quantity of white sand, filled with gentle waftings of
fragrant flowers, adorned with tanks covered with all kinds of twining
lotus, a wide clear place, a bower of creepers,

<span id="pp_337">337</span> he whom gods and men ought to worship, he
of the lovely lotus-feet and pure lotus-eyes, delightful jasmine teeth,
ocean of precious virtues, protector of the destitute, king of sages,
brilliant with golden rays, his face like a mild moon,

<span id="pp_338">338</span> after performing a multitude of pure
observances, uplifting the brilliant sceptre of tranquillity,
brandishing the excellent sharp arrow of a Buddha's knowledge, he dwelt
at ease in the supreme hermitage.

<span id="pp_339">339</span> Then King Suddhodana, having heard that his
own son had attained to supreme knowledge, and had set rolling the wheel
of the Law for the world's good,

<span id="pp_340">340</span> and near Rājagaha was then dwelling in
lovely Veluvana, desirous to see his son who had become Buddha,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span id="pp_341">341</span> nine times despatcht nine ambassadors to
the great sage with nine thousand men.

<span id="pp_342">342</span> These came and heard the incomparable
preaching of the King of Truth, and obtaining the supreme good, did not
send back so much as a message.

<span id="pp_343">343</span> The King, not seeing a single one of them,
sent for a great minister, the orator Kāludāyi, who ever delighted in
asceticism.

<span id="pp_344">344</span> To him he said: 'Bring me my son, my
precious jewel, by any means, and make a salve for my sore eyes.'

<span id="pp_345">345</span> Then with a thousand soldiers he sent him
also, and he came with his company and heard the Master's beautiful
preaching,

<span id="pp_346">346</span> and entering upon the path to sainthood, he
renounced the world, honouring the mighty man, the omniscient, by laying
his folded hands on his head.

<span id="pp_347">347</span> and <span id="pp_352">352</span> Then he
said: 'Lord, it is time to go to the fine royal city named Kapila,
filled with men of boundless wealth'; and he described the journey. Red
shoots and creepers most beautiful grow in the springtime, trees with
lovely branches and bright green leaves upon them,

<span id="pp_348">348</span> 'with all manner of excellent flowers
bursting into bloom and exhaling sweet odours; there are goodly forests
filled with the voices of hosts of birds and beasts,

<span id="pp_349">349-50</span><span id="pp_350"></span> 'many
delightful lakes of blue water for pleasure, with plenteous flocks of
sweet-voiced Kādamba geese, adorned with fragrant blue lotus, and
water-lilies white and red, bright with trees that grow on the banks,
with festooning filaments and flowers, with white sand spread about pure
as pearls;

<span id="pp_351">351</span> 'spaces of earth bespread with green
grasses, as it were covered with beautiful lapis-lazuli, formed
continually by breezes gentle and cool.'

<span id="pp_353">353</span> The Happy One, on hearing this fine
description, approved of the journey, and said: 'What say you, Udāyi?'
Then Udāyi replied to the Giver of Happiness:

<span id="pp_354">354</span> 'Sir, your father desires to see you,
Suddhodana the noble and glorious King: let the Tathāgata, the supreme
protector who longs to do good to the world, do this favour to his kith
and kin.'

<span id="pp_355">355</span> When he who longs to do good to the world
heard the sweet words of this man, he replied: 'Good, Udāyi; I will do
this favour to my kith and kin.'

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span id="pp_356">356</span> Clad in a cloak of red, the Buddha, like a
moving Mount Meru of gold, like a pure full moon surrounded by stars,

<span id="pp_357">357</span> he moved twenty thousand souls, all peace
at heart like himself, full of bliss, and along his journey of sixty
leagues

<span id="pp_358">358</span> day by day he halted, the conqueror, league
by league, and in two months reached the noble city of his birth.

<span id="pp_359">359</span> The Buddha, with bright and pure
lotus-face, shining like the rays of the new-risen sun, his wide feet
marked with discs, the abode of good doing, sole refuge of the three
worlds, with body supreme and unconquered,

<span id="pp_360">360</span> was worshipt by Suddhodana and other royal
personages with golden vessels filled with wreaths of sweet perfume,
with drums, lutes, and tabors, with goodly canopies, whisks, and fans.

<span id="pp_361">361-3</span><span id="pp_362"></span><span
id="pp_363"></span> Reaching the fair-adorned city, the chief of sages
entered the noble, pre-eminent Nigrodha monastery, provided with
beautiful cloisters, terraces, and bowers of creepers, resplendent with
lakes of wholesome water covered with blossoming lotus, enlivened by the
sporting of flocks of peacocks, the earth one mass of fragrant flowers.

<span id="pp_364">364</span> The Sākiya, with minds full of
stubbornness, thought, 'This Siddhattha is our son, our grandson,'

<span id="pp_365">365</span> and thus they spake to the younger princes
one by one: 'Do you greet Siddhattha; no greeting give we.'

<span id="pp_366">366</span> This said, they sat down, putting the
younger ones forward. Then the one eye of the three worlds, the tranquil
subduer of the untranquil,

<span id="pp_367">367</span> knowing their thought, said: 'My kinsfolk
give me no greeting: very well, I shall make them greet me.' Immediately

<span id="pp_368">368</span> entering upon the transcendent meditation
of supernatural knowledge, and arising from his trance like a golden
goose, the Illuminator

<span id="pp_369">369-70</span><span id="pp_370"></span> rose into the
air; and there the supreme sage performed a glorious unparalleled
miracle, unrivalled by others, like the miracle done beneath the
gaṇḍamba-tree.

<span id="pp_371">371</span> When the King saw this miracle, Suddhodana
the mighty, sole ruler of the Sākiya race, filled with joy <span
id="page_58">p. 58</span> and bliss, he made all his bright hair
beautiful by placing upon it the Teacher's lotus-feet; and all the
Sākiyas did likewise.

<span id="pp_372">372-4</span><span id="pp_373"></span><span
id="pp_374"></span> The wise one, after a shower of rain, showered down
the rain of the Truth, washing away the great ignorance from men's
hearts; then on the following day, with his company, he entered the
excellent city to beg from house to house.

<span id="pp_375">375</span> Wherever he stept, lotus flowers sprang up,
and received his lotus-feet pace by pace.

<span id="pp_376">376</span> and <span id="pp_378">378</span> Then
Yasodharā, standing on a fine terrace of the delightful palace, full of
love, saw from a window gates and pinnacles, houses and watch-towers,
all yellow by the rays from his body, and

<span id="pp_377">377</span> beheld the hero walking for alms in the
street, wise, calm, giving light, enlightener of the world;

<span id="pp_379">379</span> and addressing the noble Rāhula, adorned
and glittering with jewelled rays, said to him: 'That is thy father,'
pointing him out.

<span id="pp_380">380</span> She went to the house of the noble
Suddhodana, attended by many waiting-women, and said, with respectful
greeting;

<span id="pp_381">381</span> 'Sire, thy son, who formerly walked this
city with the grace of a King of gods, now walks from house to house
seeking alms.'

<span id="pp_382">382</span> This said, she went to her own house, her
large eyes filled with abundance of the water of joy.

<span id="pp_383">383</span> Then the King of all other Kings, adorned
like Indra, trembling, went in haste to meet the Conqueror, saying:

<span id="pp_384">384</span> 'O chief of the Sākyas, this is not the
custom of thy family; walk not, walk not; O my son, never before has a
King of our family trudged for alms.'

<span id="pp_385">385</span> When the lord of men had thus said, the
great sage replied, the chaplet of virtues: 'This is thy family, O great
King; mine is the family of the Buddha.'

<span id="pp_386">386</span> Thus he declared the Buddha's family, and
standing in the same spot, declared the gospel,

<span id="pp_387">387</span> uttering this supreme and beautiful verse,
which brought happiness to the hearers: 'One should not neglect the law
. . .,' etc.

<span id="pp_388">388</span> Then the supreme one, after satisfying him
by the gift of the choice flower of doctrine, at his request went on to
his house.

<span id="pp_389">389</span> The Lord of the Earth and twenty thousand
like-minded <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> with him, having satisfied
the chief of men with the well of sweetness,

<span id="pp_390">390</span> greeted him with other royal personages
with rays of crested gems and folded yellow hands, sat down by the
Conqueror.

<span id="pp_391">391</span> Hundreds of fair royal women also, by
permission of the lord of man, sat down there also.

<span id="pp_392">392</span> The Conqueror, the tilaka-spot of the three
worlds, after preaching the sweet doctrine, thought: 'If this day I do
not go to the house of Bimbā

<span id="pp_393">393</span> her heart will break with sorrow.' Thus
thinking, the abode of compassion went with his father to the house,
taking a couple of the chief disciples.

<span id="pp_394">394</span> Entering, the Buddha sat down upon the
Buddha's seat, shining like the sun with the glory of the six-coloured
rays.

<span id="pp_395">395</span> Bimbā approached the Teacher, bright with
rays which shone from her body like vermilion powder, with lips like
bimbā fruit, trembling like a golden creeper.

<span id="pp_396">396</span> The Teacher, by the touch of his foot,
extinguisht the great grief in her heart, as extinguishing a fire on the
hearth by excellent cool water.

<span id="pp_397">397</span> The King told the Teacher the great
excellence of Bimbā, and the chief of sages related the Candakisnara
Birth.

<span id="pp_398">398</span> Then the three festivals of Prince Nanda
having come, marriage, ceremonial sprinkling, and entering on the house,

<span id="pp_399">399</span> the Illuminator ordained him even before
the festivals, having brought him, though unwilling, to the beautiful
monastery;

<span id="pp_400">400</span> and when his own son, Prince Rāhala,
followed him for the sake of an inheritance, shining with princely
splendour,

<span id="pp_401">401</span> and crying in a pleasant voice, 'Grateful
is thy shadow to save,' and 'Give me an inheritance, give me an
inheritance,'

<span id="pp_402">402</span> him also he ordained, and brought him to
the incomparable monastery. Thus the Wise One gave him an inheritance,
by giving him the treasure of pure religion.

<span id="pp_403">403</span> Thence departing, Sagata, the Sun, with the
rays of pure religion, causing men in this place and that to blossom
like the lotus, arrived at Rājagaha. Moreover,

<span id="pp_404">404</span> Sargata dwells in fair Sītavana, having
spacious <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> cloisters adorned with white
sand, and parks of beautiful trees laden with flowers, and multitudes of
lakes shining with blue lotus.

<span id="pp_405">405</span> Then the famous merchant named Sudatta,
taking carts laden with much goods, came from Sāvatthi to beautiful
Rājagaha, to the house of the rich merchant Sahāya.

<span id="pp_406">406</span> This kindly person told him that the Buddha
was born in the world, lord of men; and in the delight and joy of his
heart he thought, 'The night has become light.'

<span id="pp_407">407</span> Departing thence, the darkness being
dispelled on the highroad by the power of the gods, he proceeded to
lovely Sītavana.

<span id="pp_408">408</span> When he beheld the Great Sage, shining like
the full moon, giving out light like a blazing tree, rejoicing the eyes,
he touched with his head the fair colour of the Buddha's foot.

<span id="pp_409">409</span> Then, wise with hearing the doctrine,
profound, abstruse, glorious, pure, he attained the fruit of the First
Path, beautiful a thousand fold.

<span id="pp_410">410</span> Having invited the Supreme Buddha and his
company, ruler of the world, he offered a gift full of happiness,
endowed with colour, scent, and taste.

<span id="pp_411">411</span> He obtained the Teacher's promise to come
to the noble city of Sāvatthi; and departing, on the way,

<span id="pp_412">412</span> league by league, he bestowed great wealth,
and caused to be made goodly monasteries resplendent with paintings.

<span id="pp_413">413</span> Reaching Sāvatthi again, with its hundreds
of palaces, fair with garlanded arches, walls, and gates,

<span id="pp_414">414</span> which seemed even to rival the very city of
the King of gods, full of all prosperity, merry with dancing and song,

<span id="pp_415">415</span> he looked about him on all sides for a site
worthy of a monastery, wherein should dwell the Blessed One, lord of the
earth.

<span id="pp_416">416</span> He espied a spot of ground where was shade,
and water, and all else deairable, a park of Prince Jeta like to
Nandana.

<span id="pp_417">417</span> The glorious one bought this for a crore of
gold pieces, for the Teacher's sake alone. There in that noble place,
charming the minds of men and gods,

<span id="pp_418">418</span> he caused to be made a large and noble
perfumed chamber, painted, like a crown of the earth, fair with all
flowers, beauteous with variegated canopies, <span id="page_61">p.
61</span> its roofs adorned with strings of pearls and all sorts of
jewels, surmounted with peaklike pinnacles, ever alive with rows of
bells, all tinkling.

<span id="pp_419">419-21</span><span id="pp_420"></span><span
id="pp_421"></span> For the Conqueror's children also the merchant had
made a spacious abode, the fair and noble monastery called Jetavana,
furnisht with canopies and beds, adorned with bowers and cloisters, ever
charming the mind and eyes, ornamented with blossoming trees of many a
kind, having tanks filled with most cool and wholesome water, and
covered with sweet-scented water-lilies and lotus, having beautiful wide
terraces supplied with benches, and soft pure white sand.

<span id="pp_422">422</span> Like the wide mountain Kelāsa, protected by
the excellent and beautiful rampart of the Serpent King, helpful to all
believers, this monastery shines, a very magic gem.

<span id="pp_423">423</span> Then Anāthapiṇḍika sent a message to the
chief of sages that he might come. The Teacher, on hearing the
messenger's words,

<span id="pp_424">424</span> with a large company of Brethren, set
forth, and in due time came to Sāvatthi the incomparable.

<span id="pp_425">425</span> A number of handsome princes bearing flags
went before the Teacher, like gods.

<span id="pp_426">426</span> Behind them came lovely young women, like
virgins divine, bearing full pitchers, and in like manner,

<span id="pp_427">427</span> bearing a full bowl, the merchant's wife,
adorned with many ornaments.

<span id="pp_428">428</span> The great merchant himself, with hundreds
of rich merchants, approached the Lord, the great hero, to whom they did
homage in various ways.

<span id="pp_429">429</span> So Sagata the beautiful, chief of sages,
was brought to the golden-coloured city, shining with the delightful
six-coloured rays, and entered the monastery of Jetavana.

<span id="pp_430">430</span> 'I give this monastery to the Supreme
Buddha with the oecumenical order,' said the merchant, as upon the
Teacher's lovely lotus-hands

<span id="pp_431">431</span> he poured from a golden pitcher choice
scented water, and so he presented the beautiful picturesque monastery.

<span id="pp_432">432-3</span><span id="pp_433"></span> Having accepted
the lovely and noble monastery, the King of Kings, the one eye of the
three worlds, the glorious Teacher, the benevolent sage, sitting on the
priceless decorated seat, preached to the merchant called Sudatta, to
that lord (?) the great <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> benefit,
delightful, bringing joy to the three worlds, in the giving of
monasteries, and of gifts to the helpless.

<span id="pp_434">434</span> What man, save the all-wise one, the sole
protector of the three worlds, even though he have thousands of mouths,
is able to declare the great benefit which there is in the giving of
monasteries?

<span id="pp_435">435</span> Thus the far-famed one, having discoursed
to him, gladdening at the same time the hearts of all men, spent his
days going here and there, beating the great drum of the Law with an
exceeding sweet sound.

<span id="pp_436">436</span> I shall now recite the list of places
frequented by he who gives happiness to the three worlds, the
all-compassionate, supreme in the worlds, worshipt by gods, Titans,
great Serpents, demons, and other creatures.

<span id="pp_437">437</span> In the first season, the noble Conqueror,
like a sun, causing believers to unfold like lotus flowers under the
shining rays of religion, dwelt in the Deer Park in Benares City.

<span id="pp_438">438</span> In the second, third, and fourth season the
Protector dwelt in most lovely Veluvana, in the fair, noble city called
Rājagaha, with its rows of streets containing many a precious shop.

<span id="pp_439">439</span> In the fifth season the Lion Sakyamuni made
his abode in the great wood near the lovely city, well-known under the
name of Vesāli, brilliant with the jewelled aigrettes of kings.

<span id="pp_440">440</span> In the sixth season, the Buddha, store of
infinite virtues, dwelt on the great mountain of Manikala, illuminating
it with delicate golden light, his lovely eyes like blue lotus flowers
bursting into bloom.

<span id="pp_441">441</span> In the seventh season, the incomparable
sage, living an auspicious life, made his abode in the cool and spacious
rocky seat of the King of the gods, preaching to the gods his doctrine,
sweet, profound, and difficult to comprehend.

<span id="pp_442">442</span> In the eighth season, the supreme Conqueror
of Māra, the abode of good conduct, whose feet were as the full-blown
lotus, made his abode in the delightful wood of Bhesakalā, on the
mountain named Hill Su"msumāra.

<span id="pp_443">443</span> In the ninth season, the royal Conqueror of
garula birds, the tilaka-mark of the three worlds, having <span
id="page_63">p. 63</span> destroyed many a heresy, and the pride of
heretics and serpents, made his abode in the Kosambī silk-cotton wood,
most beautiful and fair to see.

<span id="pp_444">444</span> In the tenth season, the noble sage, to
pacify the bitter quarrel of the priests by means of the noble elephant,
made his abode in goodly Pāraleyya, the spacious pine-grove filled with
flowers.

<span id="pp_445">445</span> In the eleventh season, the chief of sages,
the infinitely wise, whose pure teeth captivated the eyes, who leads
people to freedom from decay and death with the ambrosia of the gospel,
made his abode in the noble Brahmin village called Nāla.

<span id="pp_446">446</span> In the twelfth season, Sākyamuni the
all-wise made his abode in a monastery, delightful with fragrant flowers
and fruits, under a noble nimb-tree near the Brahmin village of Verañja.

<span id="pp_447">447</span> In the thirteenth season, the wise Teacher
of the three worlds, whose mouth was like a lotus full-blown, the goodly
sun shining for the right conduct of the people of this world, the abode
of mercy, made his abode on the beautiful Cābiya Mountain.

<span id="pp_448">448</span> In the fourteenth season, the steadfast and
majestic sage, devoted to the good of all beings, the lord of the
gospel, whose hands and feet were like beautiful bandhūka flowers, made
his abode in fair and lovely Jetavana.

<span id="pp_449">449</span> In the fifteenth year, the sage, the
lion-King, having destroyed lust in the kindred of those fit for
salvation, like an elephant in a forest, made his abode in the
picturesque jewelled cave of the great Nigrodha monastery on Mount
Kapilavatha.

<span id="pp_450">450</span> In the sixteenth season, the leader of
multitudes in the paths of bliss, having reduced a most cruel goblin to
a state of submission, made his abode in the exceeding fair city called
Alāvaka.

<span id="pp_451">451</span> In the seventeenth season, the great sage,
the incomparable, whose fame is spread abroad throughout all the three
worlds, made his abode in noble Rājagaha, fair to the eye, with its
walls, gates, towers, and arches.

<span id="pp_452">452</span> In the eighteenth season, Aŋgīrasa, having
destroyed the dirt of horrible lust in the world with the sweet,
wholesome medicine of religion, made his abode on the great Mount
Cāliya.

<span id="pp_453">453</span> In the nineteenth season, he made his abode
there again, the excellent King of the Law, the sweet speaker, lord of
the world, having with the sword <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> of the
Law destroyed ignorance, the great foe of the kinsfolk of those fit for
salvation.

<span id="pp_454">454</span> In the twentieth season, the chief of
sages, the abode of purity, the tree of fortune, the magic jewel, the
noble and auspicious vessel, good for the right conduct of all people,
abode in noble and beauteous Rājagaha.

<span id="pp_455">455-6</span><span id="pp_456"></span> Thus the Blessed
One, blood-kin to all the world, revered by the three worlds, pleased
with the world's prosperity, full of good fortune, the sage all-wise,
having from the time he became Buddha made no fixed abode, but making
pilgrimage, his body shining with six-coloured rays, for the rest of the
time, five-and-twenty years, made his abode in Sāvatthi and Jetavana,
noble and beautiful, incomparably fair, and adorned like an abode of the
gods.

<span id="pp_457">457</span> Thus this sage abode for forty-and-five
years, in his immeasurable compassion quenching like a cloud, with
waters most sweet, the lust which arose in men's minds like a body of
fire in a forest. May he bring bliss to the world!

<span id="pp_458">458</span> May that fair maiden Wisdom, in the house
of my mind, increase day by day, delighting all men.

<span id="pp_459">459</span> By the merit of my compiling this
meritorious Life of the Conqueror, may I attain to the Tusitā heaven,

<span id="pp_460">460</span> hearing the discourse of Metteyya, ruler of
the world, enjoying with him great bliss for a long time.

<span id="pp_461">461</span> When the Great Being is born, as Buddha in
the lovely city, the banner of the earth, may I be born of the royal
stock, obtaining the threefold fortune,

<span id="pp_462">462</span> and give to that noble sage large,
precious, and goodly robes, alms-food, a dwelling-place, and medicine.

<span id="pp_463">463</span> Becoming an ascetic in the religion, may I
be possest of supernatural power, a great being, glorifying that
incomparable one, keeping well in mind the three Pitakas.

<span id="pp_464">464</span> May he predict, 'This man will become
Buddha,' and may I in the future again and again give to the Buddhas
alms which bring happiness.

<span id="pp_465">465</span> As I go through my transmigrations, may I,
like a tree of fortune, give excellent, sweet, and noble water, and all
that could be wished;

<span id="pp_466">466</span> giving my flesh, blood, and eyes, with a
calm mind, fulfilling all the Perfections and Virtues, all
self-abnegation and wisdom;

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span id="pp_467">467</span> attaining to the highest perfection, may I
become Buddha incomparable, and having preached sweet doctrine, bringing
happiness to man,

<span id="pp_468">468</span> and freed all the world and the gods from
the great bond of transmigration, may I reach the noble city of peace
and bliss.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="pp_469">469-72</span><span id="pp_470"></span><span
id="pp_471"></span><span id="pp_472"></span> By King Vijayabāhu, of
Bhupāla's royal line, the ornament of Ceylon, done in his own name.
(?)  
The book was compiled by an Elder, wise, the abode of compassion, named
Medhaŋkara, well-behaved, living in in a fair and goodly cell, goodly
with cisterns, walls, and gates. May it always be pored over by the
good! Here there are 473 stanzas, and according to the text 555.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)
