[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# NÂGÂRJUNA'S "FRIENDLY EPISTLE"

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## JOURNAL

<span class="small">OF THE</span>

# PALI TEXT SOCIETY

 

#### \[Volume II\]

###### \[London, Henry Frowde\]

#### \[1886\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

###### {Circumflexes represent macrons in this transcription. The text of this work consists of three layers; Nâgârjuna's letter, the traditional commentary (edited by the translator), and the translator's commentary, all of which are undifferentiated in the original. I have set the translator's commentary in a smaller font in this edition.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

Bçes pai phrin yig.  
("Friendly Epistle.")

<span class="small">TRANSLATED BY</span>  
HEINRICH WENZEL, PH.D.  
<span class="small">(PRIVAT-DOCENT AT LEIPZIG UNIVERSITY.)</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PREFACE.

   THE following is a translation of the Tibetan version of
*Nâgârjuna*'s letter to King *Udayana*,<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> first mentioned by Max Müller in the
Journal for 1883, p. 72 ff., where a translation of the first eight
verses from the Chinese is given. As might have been concluded at once
from the note, quoted there, of *I-tsi"n*, one of the translators of our
letter into Chinese (see about him M.M.'s "Renaissance of Sanscrit
Literature"), viz., that it was learnt by heart as an introduction to
religious instruction, we find that its 123 verses contain, in fact, a
short exposition of the principal doctrines. Most of the dogmatical
terms used or mentioned here are to be found likewise in the
*Dharmasa.mgraha* (published in Anecdota Ononiensia, Aryan Series V.,
Oxford, 1885), which also is brought into connection with *Nâgârjuna*.
Chiefly we may mention: Verse 4--the *Anusm.rtayas* = Dharmas. 54; v.
5--the ten *Virtues*, Dh. 67; v. 8--the six Pâramitâs, Dh. 17; v.
29--the eight *Lokadharma's*, Dh. 61; v. 40--the *Brahmavihâra's*, Dh.
16; v. 41--the four *Dhyâna's*, Dh. 72; v. 45--the five *Indriya's* or
*Bala's*, Dh. 47, 48; v. 49, 50--the five *Skandha's*, Dh. 22; v. 52,
53,

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. To be found in the great collection of the Tanjur, vol. 94 of the
Sutra-division, ff. 279-286.\]

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> 105--the three *Çiksha's*, Dh. 140; v. 63,
64--the eight *Aksha.na's*, Dh. 134; v. 77-88--the eight (hot) hells,
Dh. 121; v. 89-103--the other *states of rebirth*, Dh. 57; v. 106--the
*Bodhya.nga's*, Dh. 49; v.108--the Avyâk.rtavastûni, Dh. 137; v.
109-111--the *Pratîtyasamutpâda*, Dh. 42; v. 113--the *Eightfold Path*,
Dh. 50; v. 114--the *Four Truths*, Dh. 21.<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> In the same volume of the Tanjur (ff.
321-364) we find a commentary on our letter, composed by one
*Blo-gros-chen-po = Mahâmati*, from which I give only the more
interesting parts. Besides this, I have pointed out some striking
coincidences with other Buddhist and Sanscrit works, principally the
*Dhammapada* and its Tibetan compeer, the *Udânavarga*; the
*Hdsa"n-blun*, "Der Weise und der Thor," ed. by I. J. Schmidt, where
some tales of the *Divyâvadâna* appear in a shorter form; and that large
storehouse of Indian wisdom, Böhtlingk's "Indische Sprüche." Other
quotations are rare. For the Tibetan translations of the theological
terms I have usually substituted their Sanscrit originals as far as they
were known to me, and as far as they were not to be found in the
Dharmasa.mgraha in the same order. Perhaps it may not be superfluous to
remark here that a *transliteration* of Sanscrit words (in Tibetan
characters) only occurs in the following places: v. 20, *am-ra* (*sic*);
v. 23, *kim-pa*; v. 43, *ga"ngâ*; in the commentary on v. 80,
*çal-ma-li*, and the translator's name at the end.

   Regarding the author of our letter, *Nâgârjuna* (*Klu-sgrub*), it is
known that he was the renowned founder of the *Mahâyâna*, *i.e.*, the
later philosophical development of Buddhism, especially the school of
the *Mâdhyamika's*. As the typical representative of the whole of later
Buddhism, he soon became the subject of many legends, that are

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. From the circumstance that our author leaves unmentioned certain
categories that one wight expect--as, for instance, his enumerating only
six *Pâramitâ's*--I do not think that we can conclude his not knowing
them, and, consequently, his priority to their introduction, for, as the
Commentator more than once rewarks, he writes for the use of a laywan
(*khyim-pa = g.rhastha*), on whom these higher duties were not
binding.\]

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span> to be found for the most part in
Târâ.natha's history, and Wassiljew's "Buddhismus." But "of the
historical Nâgârjuna we know very little" (Kern). Generally, as a
contemporary of Kanishka, he is put in the first or the second century
A.D.--on the authority of the Râjatara"ngi.ni, and of Târâ.natha.
Anyhow, he cannot have lived much later, since the first Chinese
translation of this letter is dated 431, and others of his works (at
least of those that are ascribed to him) were translated as far back as
402 (s. Bunyiu Nanjio, Catalogue Col. 370 fi.). Târâ.natha, indeed,
makes him live 521 or 579 years, and contemporary, not only with
*Kâlidâsa* and *Vararuci*, but even with the rise of *Islâm*. For it
seems quite certain that he understands this latter by the *Mleccha*
faith mentioned by him on this occasion (German translation, p. 79 ff.),
though Wassiljew (p. 50 note) seems inclined todoubt it.<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> *Mohammed* has become *Mâmathar*, who
before had been a Sautrântika of the name of *Kumârasena*;<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> the cry *bismillah* ("in the name of
God")--a demon *Biçlimli* (as Schiefner has remarked), and the
"Mleccha-Rshi's" are called *Paikhampa* (evidently the Persian
*paighamber*, the usual translation of *rasûl*, " prophet "). Islâm,
too, is aptly described as the religion of injury, persecution
(*hthse-va*, Schiefner: Besinträchtigung)--the feature of the new
doctrine that must strike most the charitable Buddhist.<sup><span
class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> With this account compare the note, p.
304 f., of Schiefner's translation, where, from some other Tibetan work,
the name of the founder of Islâm is given as *Madhumati*, who had been
born in the land (!) of *Makha* ( = *Mekka*), in the town of *Bâgadâdi*
( = *Baghdâd*; this shows us the way on which the news reached the
informants of Târâ.natha).

   King *Udayana*, to whom the letter is addressed, is called

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. It is a mistake of the German translator of Wassiljew's book, when
he makes him speak of a "Tibetan translation *of it*," *i.e*., of
Târâ.natha's work, as if there had been an original in Sanscrit.

2\. Is it the same as *Kumâralâbha*, occurring shortly before? and
perhaps a hit at the celebrated Kumârila?

3\. The killing of animals also is comprised in the Tibetan term.\]

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> in the Tibetan of the subscription (which
evidently cannot be ascribed to the author), *Bde-spyod*. In
Târâ.natha's history, where his name on the whole occurs eight times, he
is generally (six times) called *Bde-byed* (viz., 57, 12. 58, 8. 59, 18.
60, 7. 67, 1), once (2, 10) *Bde-spyod*, and once (56, 17)
transliterated *Utrayana*. Another king Udayana likewise is called
*Bde-byed* (v. 14 of the letter, cf. Schiefner, *Mahâkâtjâjana*, etc.,
p. 35 ff.). *Bde-spyod* would be in Sanscrit = S*ukhacârin* (cf.
*Dharmacârin* Lalitav., 249, 9 = *Chos-spyod*, Rgya 179, 22 and
Schiefner's note, translation of Târ. p. 2); *Bde-byed* = Sukhakara,
both of which might be taken as an explanation of the meaning of
Udayana. At any rate we cannot, as Schiefner does (Târ. transl. p. 72,
note 2), simply declare *Bde-byed* to be an error. It seems to me rather
that the older translation of the name of Udayana, king of *Kauçâmbi*,
who was born at the same time with Buddha, and later on converted by him
(the one mentioned in v. 14), was *Hchar-byed* ("He who makes rise"),
since he was so-called "because he shone like the image of the rising
sun" (Lebensb. 235 and Rockhill, Life, p. 16, f. Note; also, Kon-tsegs
v. 25 in Feer, Ann. Mus. Guim. ii. 217, and Mdo. xvi. 15, ibid., p.
262). But king Udayana ( = Sadvâhana) of Vârâ.nasî, friend of Nâgârjuna,
was, it seems, properly called in Tibetan, *Bde-spyod* (which, indeed,
also might express the meaning of *Sadvâhana*), and the two names, or
the two explanations of the one name, were afterwards mixed up, as well
as the persons themselves (v., for instance, Kern, Germ. transl., ii. p.
200 note). The king of Kauçâmbi is mentioned sometimes in "Der Weise und
der Thor" (60, 13. 64, 6. 69, 2. 229,6), as *Utrayana* (*Uttrayana*).
Ssanang Ssetzen, in his history of the Eastern Mongolians (14, 10. ed.
Schmidt), correctly has *Udayana* (cf. Schmidt's Note, p. 313). But the
confusion is not at an end here. Chandra Dâs, in the Journal As. Soc.
Beng. <span class="small">LI</span>., p. 119--I do not know on what
authority--retranslates the Tibetan name *De-chye* (i.e., *Bde-byed*,
according to his modern pronunciation) of Nâgârjuna's friend by
*Camkara*. And, in fact, we find this translation of <span
id="page_5">p. 5</span> Ça.mkara, again in Târ. 3, 9 (as the name of a
Brahmin), whereas shortly before (3, 6) it is, as another man's name,
translated by *Dge-byed*. Likewise we have the compositions with
Ça.mkara = Bde-Byed: *Ça.mkarapati = Bde-byed-bdag-po* (51, 13. 16)
*Ça.mkara-nanda = Bde-byed-dga-va* (144, 8). Finally we find one
*Udâyana = Hchar-po*, a Purohita of King Çuddhodana (Latitav. ch. ix.
beg.), who is mentioned also in the Lebensb. 235, though with short *a*
(what was here in the Tibetan text?). Compare also Eitel, Handbook s.v.
Sadvaha, Udâyana and Vatsa.

   The letter appears in Tibetan in verses of 4 × 9 syllables, so that
we may conclude the Sanscrit original to have been in Indravajra (as,
e.g., Lalit. 30 = Rgya 38, 20 ff.). Only the last two verses (the
Epilogue) count 4 × 11 syllables. The Tibetan verses generally consist
of four lines of an odd number of syllables from 7 onward. Four × 7
corresponds to the Sanscrit Çloka, and is, of course, the most used (I
found it, however, reproducing the Sanscrit Âryâ in Lalit. 221 = Rgya
164). Sometimes two longer lines correspond to one Sanscrit verse, as
for the Âryâ in Lalit. 245, 17 ff., we find (Rgya 177, 13 ff.) 2 × 17
syll., changing afterwards to 4 × 9. Even single lines of 41 syll. are
found (Rgya 186, 9 ff.) to correspond to one Sanscrit verse (Lalit. 260,
10 ff.), the Tibetans here, apparently, mistaking the whole of four
verses for one verse of four lines. There is not, or has not been found
out, any prosody, properly so called, in Tibetan (cf. Foucaux, grammar,
213 ff.); at most we might observe a tendency to put heavier syllables
in the first part of a foot, thus giving the verse a trochaical
movement.

   Fin!tlly, I may remark that the two translators of this letter aIso
took part in the translation and revision of the first four voll. of the
*Hdul-va* (*Vinaya*), s. Feer, l. c. p. 182, and the Ratnânanta Sûtra,
ib. p. 233, in the ninth century, A.D.

   Especial thanks are due to Dr. Rost, through whose kindness I was
enabled to make use of the London copy of the Tanjur.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

 

### Nâgârjuna's "Friendly Epistle."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

In Sanscrit: *Suhridlekha* (*sic*); in Tibetan: *Bçes-pai-phrin-yig*
("Friendly epistle").

Praise to Manjuçrî kumârabhûta!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   <span id="pp_1">1</span>. O thou of virtuous character, worthy of
happiness, hear these noble verses which I have composed shortly, that
(I thereby) might gather the merits, proceeding from the proclamation of
the Sugata's words.

   *Comm*. "Shortly," he says, in order that you may not be afraid of
his making many words.

   <span id="pp_2">2</span>. As an image of the Sugata, even if only
made of wood, is honoured by the wise, as is right, do thou also not
despise my speech, even if humble, considering that it is the exposition
of the Good Law (*saddharma*).

   <span id="pp_3">3</span>. Though thou didst hear in thy mind (before
this) a little of the instruction in the great Muni's law, is (appears)
not also a whitewashed wall whiter still in the light of the moon?

   <span id="pp_4">4</span>. Remember the six Memorable Things that have
been ordained by the Jina, viz., the Buddha, the Law, the Community,
Charity, Morality and the Gods, according to to the measure of their
virtues.

   <span class="small">(The six *Anusm.rtaya's* s. Dharmas. 54.)</span>

   *Comm*. "According to the measure of their virtues," Buddha, for
instance, you must remember as Bhagavat, Tathâgata, Arhat, the truly
accomplished Buddha, the Possessor of wisdom and the *principles*,
Sugata, the Knower of the worlds, the *steersman* for the conversion of
man, the Highest one, the Teacher of gods and men (cf. Divyâvadâna, ch
xv. beg., etc.) "The victorious conqueror" <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>
(*Bcom-ldan-hdas = Bhagavat*) he is called, because he has conquered
lust (*râga*) and the other (evil passions); because he has penetrated
to the heart of wisdom (*bodhisâra*); because he conquered Mâra who put
hindrances in his way; because he obtained every fortune (*bhaga*), as
riches and so forth. *Tathâgata* (*De-bzhin-gçegs-pa*) he is called,
because he understands the things as they are (*gam* in the sense of: to
perceive, understand, as in *gati*, etc.; likewise Maheçvara comm. on
Amarakosha: tathâ satya.m gatam jñâta.m yasya); and because his words
will remain so, as he did pronounce them, without being changed (cf.
*âgama* the sacred tradition). "The Conqueror of foes" (*dgra-bcom-pa* =
*Arhat*) he is called because he conquers (*hanti*) the (common) foe
(*ari*), viz., the misery of sin; because he has conquered (*i.e.*
destroyed) the spokes of the transmigration-wheel; also because he
deserves (*arhati*) to be honoured by property (*i.e.* sacrifices) and
respect.<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> . . . "Knower of the
worlds:" "World" it is called, because it is (from time to time)
destroyed (*Hjig-rten*, "Receptacle of the perishable" or "R. of
destruction" = *loka* from luñc; like the grammatical term *luk*?). This
world is of two kinds: the world of the living, and the world of the
lifeless (Dharmas. 89). The world of the living he knows according to
the conditions of the twelvefold chain of causation ([v. 109
ff.](#pp_109)); of the world of the lifeless: Earth, mountains, etc., he
knows origin, conditions, place, etc. . . . "Teacher of gods and men"
(is said), because these two are the highest (degrees of animate beings)
or because they are vessels of the Noble Path ([v. 113](#pp_113)). . . .
*Buddha* (*Sa"ns-rgyas*, "Wide awake") he is called, because he has a
wide (comprehensive) mind, and therefore is like an opened (*rgyas*)
lotus, and because he, waked from the sleep of ignorance, is like a man
waked from sleep. . . . Similarly the remaining five articles are
expounded by the comm., who then goes on: Because these six Memorable
Things clear up the mind, and become the ground of great merit,

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Both these explanations of Arahat, the latter fanciful besides the
right one, we also find in Eitel, Handbook, p. 12 f.\]

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> he has expounded them first, that by the
belief in them the mind might become virtuous."

   <span id="pp_5">5</span>. Steadily observing the tenfold way of
virtuous action in body, speech, and thoughts (and also) turning away
from spirituous liquors, you will feel a sincere joy in this (your)
virtuous life.

   *Comm*. gives the ten virtuous actions in this manner: You must give
up killing, stealing, impurity, lying, slander, harsh language,
frivolous talk, covetousness, malice, and must adhere to the right
doctrine (cf. Dharmas. 56; also "Der Weise und der Thor," p. 13, 9 ff.,
transl. p. 15 f.). Of these, three concern the body; four, speech; and
three, the thoughts. Cf. M. Müller's Note to his translation of the
Dhammapada (Sacred Books X.) [v. 96](../../bud/sbe10/sbe1009.htm#pp_96);
also in Böhtlingk's Ind. Spr., the verse beginning kâyena kurute and
1559 f.; Udânav. vii. 1 ff.) "Though the drinking of intoxicating
liquors (*cha"n*) is a grave fault, it is not (to be reckoned) as a sin,
and therefore is treated separately. There are three kinds of *cha"n*:
from sugar-cane, from rice-meal, and from honey" (cf. [v. 33](#pp_33)).

   <span id="pp_6">6</span>. Knowing that riches are unstable and void
(prop. "heartless"--*asâra*), give (of them) according to the moral
precepts, to Bhikshu's, Brahmins, the poor and (your) friends, for there
is no better friend than giving (liberality).

   *Comm*. "heartless," because it is insatiable.

   <span id="pp_7">7</span>. Exhibit morality (*çila*) faultless and
sublime, unmixed and spotless, for morality is the supporting ground of
all eminence, as the earth is of the moving and immovable.

   <span id="pp_8">8</span>. Exercise the imponderable Transcendental
virtues of charity, morality, patience, energy, meditation, and likewise
wisdom, in order that, having reached the farther shore of the sea of
existence, you may become a Jina-prince. (The six Pâramitâs s. Dharmas.
17.)

   <span id="pp_9">9</span>. Those families where father and mother are
honoured are blessed by (lit. endowed with) Brahma and the teachers;
they (*i.e.* the children in their turn) will be honoured and finally
reach heaven.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

   <span class="small">Prof. Windisch draws my attention to a similar
passage, Itivuttaka.m Sutt. 106.</span>

   <span id="pp_10">10</span>. Renouncing murder (*hthse*, s. preface),
theft, lewdness, lying, wine, eating at improper times, pleasure in high
seats, singing, dancing, and (certain) kinds of wreaths.

   <span id="pp_11">11</span>. If any one, man or woman, possesses these
eight parts of an Arhat's morality, and wishes it in confession, he (or
she) is born again among the *Kâmâvacaradeva's*.

   <span class="small">On the eight Çîla's s. Childers s.v. and
Uposatha. The Kâmâvacaras s. Dharmas. 127.</span>

   *Comm*. Incense and wreaths are prohibited, if they only serve for
pleasure (*cha-vai-don-du*), but not if they are used in the interests
of the law (religious service), or for medicinal purposes.

   <span id="pp_12">12</span>. View as enemies: avarice (*mâtsaryam*),
deceit (*çâ.thyam*), duplicity (*mâyâ*), lust (?), indolence
(*kausîdyam*), pride (*mâna*), greed (*râga*), hatred (*dvesha*), and
pride (*mada*) concerning family, figure (*i.e.* beauty), glory, youth,
or power.

   <span class="small">These different faults and sins s. Dharmas. 67,
69, 139, also 30, and Dhammasa"ngani 1113-34, 1229.</span>

   <span id="pp_13">13</span>. The Muni has taught that carefulness is
the abode of immortality (*am.rta--i.e.*, according to Comm.,
*Nirvâ.na*); carelessness (*pramâda*) the abode of death; therefore be
always reverentially careful, in order to increase (thy understanding
of) the law of virtue.

   <span id="pp_14">14</span>. Who, having formerly been careless,
afterwards becomes careful, is beautiful like the moon freed from
clouds, as (were) *Nanda, A"ngulimâla, Kshemadarçin, Udayana*.

   <span class="small">On *Nanda* (*Dga-vo*), s. Kern, "Buddhismus," I.
133; 153 ff.; *A"ngulimâla* (*Sor-phre"n can*), ibid. 219; also "Der
Weise und der Thor," ch. 36; *Ajâtaçatru* (i.e., *Kshema-darçin =
Mthon-ldan*, supply *dge-va*, s. Schiefner, Târ. transl. p. 2, note 1
and Wassiljew's transl. preface, p. iv.), s. ibid. p. 226 ff. *Udayana*
(*Bde-byed*; Comm.: *Bde-lda*n) was according to Comm., "nobleman
(*kulaputra*), who, after <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> having
committed adultery and murdered his mother, was converted by the
Tathâgata and released from hell. On his name, s. preface and cf. also
Lebensb. p. 269. (Cf. Dhmpd. 172 = Udânav. xvi. 5.)</span>

   <span id="pp_15">15</span>. Since nothing is so difficult of
attainment as patience, open no door for anger, the Buddha has
pronounced that he who renounces anger shall attain the degree of an
*Anâgâmin*.

   *Comm*. says that it is more difficult to find a patient man, than (a
hermit) who feeds on wind, water, roots, and (raw) fruits, and dresses
himself in hairs, leaves, bark, and rags, but that by bodily penance
alone (*lus-gdu"ns-pa tsam-gyis*) not even a happy rebirth (*i.e.*, as
man or god, s. Dharmas. 57) is to be obtained, much less (final)
salvation. Anger (*krodha*) is the becoming wild and displeased if
anything disagreeable is done to us by men or other beings
(*amanushya*); patience (*kshânti*) is freedom from anger, and if anger
should rise (in us), quieting it at once. (Cf. Böhtlingk, Sprüche,
5045.)

   <span id="pp_16">16</span>. "This one scolded me," "this one blamed
me," (or) "beat me," if so (saying) you bear hatred (to any one),
quarrel arises, but when (you) renounce hatred (you) will sleep quietly.
(Cf. Udânav. xiv. 9 f. = Dhammap. 3 f.)

   <span id="pp_17">17</span>. Know that the thoughts are painted, as it
were, on earth, water, and stone; among these may (for thee) the sinful
ones always be like the first (*i.e.*, perishable), the virtuous ones
like the last (*i.e.*, constant).

   <span class="small">Second part of verse not quite sure.</span>

   <span id="pp_18">18</span>. The Jina has declared that men have three
kinds of speech: the agreeable, the true, and the untrue one, which are
(respectively) like ambrosia, like a flower, like an unclean (thing); of
these avoid the last. (Cf. Böhtlingk, Spr. 9732. Udânav. viii. 14;
Subhântasutta 4.)

   <span id="pp_19">19</span>. There are four kinds of persons
(*pudgala*): those that go from light to light, those that go from
darkness to darkness, those that go from light to darkness, and those
that go from darkness to light; of these do thou the first!

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

   <span class="small">By light is meant a happy rebirth (as god or man
of high position); by darkness--an unhappy one (as an inhabitant of
hell, animal, Preta, or man of low position): thus comm. (Cf. Mahâvastu,
27, 28, and [v. 15](#pp_15) of this letter.)</span>

   <span id="pp_20">20</span>. Understand that men are like Âmra-fruits,
some that are unripe look as if they were ripe, some ripe ones look
unripe, some unripe ones look (also) unripe, and some ripe ones look
(also) ripe.

   <span id="pp_21">21</span>. Do not look after another's wife; but if
you see her, regard her, according to (her) age, like (your) mother,
daughter, or sister; if you love (her?) then think purely even on the
unclean (things).

   *Comm*. points to [v. 25](#pp_25). (Cf. Divyâvadâna, 115, 5 f.)

   <span id="pp_22">22</span>. Guard the fickle mind like (your) fame,
like a son, like a treasure, like (your) life; and be afflicted or
sensual pleasure like (or: as) on a poisonous (*gdug-pa*, sc. snake),
poison (*dug*), a knife, and fire.

   *Comm*. The objects of the senses are hurtful (malicious) like a
*snake*, because they do us and others harm; they kill like *poison*,
because they destroy the virtuous works; they hurt like a *sword*,
because they lead to the bad rebirths (cf. [v. 19](#pp_19)); they burn
like *fire*, because they produce remorse.

   <span id="pp_23">23</span>. Because the desires beget destruction,
the prince of the Jina's has likened them to the *Kimpa*-fruit; renounce
them, for by their iron fetters the world is bound in the jail of the
orb (of transmigration).

   *Comm*. The *Kimpa*-fruit has a good (sweet?) shell, but the kernel
is bad. (*Kimpâka*, probably, was in the Sanscrit text; cf. Böhtl., Spr.
5255, and Pet. Wört. s.v.)

   <span id="pp_24">24</span>. Of him who has conquered the unstable,
ever moving objects of the six senses, and him who has overcome the mass
of his enemies in battle, the wise praise the first as the greater hero.

   *Comm*. says that even animals may conquer their enemies, but not
their senses. (Cf. Dhmp. 103 = Udânav. xxiii. 3.) The six objects s.
Dharmas. 33.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

   <span id="pp_25">25</span>. The body of a young woman (viewed) from
the one (right) point of view, is of evil flavour, (having) nine deep
openings, like a vessel of everything unclean, difficult to fill, only
covered with skin;<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> even (her)
ornaments view from (this) one side.

   <span id="pp_26">26</span>. As a leprous (man), infested by worms,
even if he, to mitigate (his pain), keeps near the fire, will not find
any rest, so know it to be also with those who are affected by desires.
(Cf. [v. 22](#pp_22). Böhtl., Spr. 3272.)

   <span id="pp_27">27</span>. In order to attain the highest aim
(*paramârtha*), take these things to heart and meditate thereon; there
is no other law (*dharma*) having virtues like this.

   <span id="pp_28">28</span>. Although a man possess rank ("family"),
beauty ("figure"), and erudition (*thos-pa, i.e., çrutam*), but be
devoid of wisdom (*prajñâ*) and good behaviour (*vinaya*), he will not
be honoured; but who possess these two virtues, even if he be devoid of
other virtues, will be esteemed.

   <span id="pp_29">29</span>. Thou, who knowest the world, be
equanimous against the eight worldly conditions: gain and loss,
happiness and suffering, fame and dishonour, blame and praise, for they
are not (fit) objects for your thoughts. (S. Dharmas. 61.)

   <span id="pp_30">30</span>. Do not commit sin for (in the interest
of) a Brahmin, a Bhikshu, a god, (thy) parents, (thy) wife, or subjects,
for no one will take part in the requital (*vipâka*) for your sins (in)
hell. (Cf. Dhmpd. 105 = Udânav. xxviii. 11.)

   <span id="pp_31">31</span>. Though some who have committed sinful
actions are not cut as with a knife (*i.e.* instantly punished), in the
hour of their death, the fruits of what sinful actions there are (*i.e.*
they have committed) will appear.

   *Comm*. Therefore some people die with a clear countenance
(*bzhin-mda"ns*), but others with a bad (disfigured) one. (Cf. Udânav.
ix. 17.)

   <span id="pp_32">32</span>. Faith (*çraddhâ*), morality (*çîla*),
liberality (*dâna*), religious lmowledge (*thos = çruti*), shame
(*hrî*), carefulness (*apatrapâ*), and wisdom (*prajñâ*), the Muni has
pronounced to be the seven possessions; other possessions regard as
common and useless.

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Böhtlingk points out to me the likeness in Spr. 807.\]

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

   *Comm*. Morality is eightfold: the duties (*sdom-pa*) of a *Bhikshu*
and a *Bhikshu.nî*, a *Dge-slob*, a *Çranma.na* (*dge-sbyo.n*) and a
*Çrama.nâ*, a *Çrama.nera* and a woman of that degree, and an *Upâsaka*
(*bsñen-gnas*). "Shame" is the aversion to faults regarding one's-self,
"carefulness" the same regarding others. (Cf. [v. 12](#pp_12). Udânav.
x. 1 ff.)

   <span id="pp_33">33</span>. Betting, looking out for crowds (as for
some festival, etc.), indolence (*kausîdyam*), the company of bad men,
(drinking) wine, and strolling about at night, these sins, equally known
as the prevarications (*"nan-so"n = durgati?*), avoid.

   *Comm*. . . . "Wine" (*cha"n*) either is fabricated (*bcos-pa*) or
only gathered (*sbyar-va*) *i.e.* pressed out of flowers (cf. *madhu* in
the Pet. Wört., chiefly R. 5,60,9, quoted there, to which Böhtlingk
calls my attention), etc. (Cf. [v. 5](#pp_5).)

   <span id="pp_34">34</span>. The teacher of gods and men has
pronounced that of all possessions contentedness is the best by far;
therefore be always content, for if (you) are content, you will be rich,
even if not possessing any (external: Comm.) goods.

   *Comm*. remarks, that contentedness is the fruit (*i.e.* end and aim)
of all possession; if a poor man, therefore, be content, he has already
obtained the purpose of wealth. A man is (to be called) "content," if he
does not pine for the past, does not long for the future, and is not too
much addicted to the present (fortunes). (Cf. Böhtl., Spr., anto nâsti
and ko vâ daridro.)

   <span id="pp_35">35</span>. O noble one! men who have few wishes have
no pains (cares) like the rich; from each head of the many-headed Nâga
princes arise separate cares.

   <span id="pp_36">36</span>. A woman that associating with (your)
natural enemy, is like (*i.e.* to be likened to) an avenging goddess;
one that, despising the lord of the house, is like *Târâ*; and one that,
stealing though a little, is like a thief, these thou do not take as
wives.

   <span id="pp_37">37</span>. But one that is gentle as a sister,
winning as a friend, careful of your well-being as a mother, obedient as
a servant, her (you must) honour as the guardian god(dees) of the
family.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

   *Comm*. "As the god of the family," because she shields the family
from damage. (Cf. Manu ix. 26; A"nguttara Nik., Sattakanipâta, quoted by
Oldenberg, p. 191 note.)

   <span id="pp_38">38</span>. As you know that food is (to be regarded)
as medicine, do not use it, from lust or hatred, to become stout (and
strong), proud or handsome, but only to keep your body (together).

   <span id="pp_39">39</span>. Having repeated the essence of the rule
during the whole day and the first and last watch of the night, sleep in
the interval between them, (but) with consciousness, that even the time
of sleep may not be without fruit. (Cf. Dhmpd. 157 = Udânav. v. 16.)

   <span id="pp_40">40</span>. Always perfectly meditate on (turn your
thoughts to) kindness, pity, joy, and indifference; then, if you do not
obtain a higher (degree), you (certainly) will obtain the happiness of
Brahman's world.

   <span class="small">The four *Brahmavihâra's* 5. Dharmas. 16; cf.
Dhammasa"ngani, 262; *Brahman's* world, Dharm. 128.</span>

   *Comm*: *Maitrî* (*byams-pa*) means the giving of happiness to the
animate beings; *Karu.nâ* (*sñi"n-rje*), the shielding them from pain;
*muditâ* (*dga-va*), not robbing them of happiness; upekshâ
(*bta"n-sñoms*), equanimity and impartiality.

   <span id="pp_41">41</span>. By the four *Dhyâna's* of (*i.e.* that
consist in) completely abandoning desire (*kâma*), reflection
(*vicâra*), joy (*prîti*), and happiness and pain (*sukha, du.hkha*) you
will obtain as fruit the lot of a Brahman, an *Abhâsvara*, a
*Çubhak.rtsna*, or (one of the) great kings.

   <span class="small">S. the four *Dhyâna's* Dharm. 72, chiefly
Childers 169, Dhammasa"ngani, 83-88; the mentioned classes of gods,
128.</span>

   <span id="pp_42">42</span>. Fivefold are the actions, virtuous and
sinful, that arise from perseverance, longing, absence of an adversary,
and from the ground of the highest excellence, of these (or: therefore?)
strife for virtue.

   <span id="pp_43">43</span>. As by an ounce of salt a little water is
spoiled, but the river Gangâ is not (spoiled), though it rolls corpses,
thus know that it is the same with a little sin on an extensive root of
virtue.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

   *Comm*. Thererore be not too much afraid if, upon great virtuous
actions, you have committed a little sin. (cf. Dhmpd. 173. Udânav. xvi.
96.)

   <span id="pp_44">44</span>. Understand that the five depravities of
(groundless) joy and sorrow, malevolence, sloth (*styânam*) and sleep
(at the wrong time), desire and doubt (*vicikîtsâ*) are the thieves that
steal the treasure of virtue. (Five other "depravities," s. Dharm. xci.)

   <span id="pp_45">45</span>. Faith, energy, recollection, meditation,
and wisdom are the five best things (*dharma*); strife after these, for
they are truly the highest "forces" and "qualities." (S. Dharm. 47, 48;
Dhammasa"ngani, 74 ff. 95 ff.)

   <span id="pp_46">46</span>. Thinking again and again: as I cannot
avoid the pain of illness, age, and death, so I also will not go beyond
(*i.e.*, lose the fruits of) the works done by myself, be not proud of
this help.

   <span id="pp_47">47</span>. But if you indeed long for heaven and
liberation, then entertain the true faith (*samyagd.rshti*); all men who
have a wrong faith (*mithyâd.rshti*), even if their conduct is good,
will (only) find a bad requital (*vipâka*).

   <span id="pp_48">48</span>. Know that a man who takes no joy in
perfection (*samyaktva*) is unstable (*anitya*), soulless (*anâtman*),
and unclean; and that, through want of attention (*sm.rtyupasthâna*),
(he falls into) the misery of the four wrong views.

   *Comm*.: *Mi-rtag-pa* (*anitya*), who only lasts for a moment;
*bdag-med-pa* (*anâtman*), who is bare of the interior *purusha*
(*na"n-gi byed-pai skyes-bu*). . . . The "four wrong views," if one
thinks (1) that pain (*duhkha*) is joy (*sukha*); (2) that the unstable
is stable; (3) that the unreal is real; (4) that the unclean is clean.
(Cf. Dharm. 55 and 97, and chiefly Kern, I. 474.)

   <span id="pp_49">49</span>. If you say: I am not the form, you
thereby will understand: I am not endowed with form, I do not dwell in
form, the form does not dwell in me; and, in like manner, you will
understand the voidness of the other four aggregates. (The Aggregates,
s. Dharmas. 22; Dhammasa"ngani, 1083, cf. 59 ff.)

   <span id="pp_50">50</span>. The aggregates do not arise from desire
(*? hdod-rgyal*), <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> not from time, not
from nature (*prak.rti*), not from themselves (*svabhâvât*), nor from
the Lord (*îçvara*), nor yet are they without cause; know that they
arise from ignorance (*avidyâ*) and desire (*t.rsh.nâ*).

   *Comm*. Explains *hdod-rgyal* by *gnam-babs* (?). "Time" the
followers of (the doctrine of) Time (*dus su smra-va-rnams*, cf.
*kâlakâra.nika* in Aufr. Cat. Oxon. 216 b. 7 f.) declare to be the cause
of all growth and decay with the following words: "Time ripens what has
come to existence, Time destroys the creatures, Time wakes the sleeping
(*sic*!), to escape Time is difficult" (it is the verse, Böhtl., Spr.
1688). "Nature," the *Sâ"nkhya's* (*gra"ns-can-rnams*) declare to be the
original cause of all things, consisting of *Sattva* (*sñi"n-stobs*),
*Rajas* (*rdul*), and *Tamas* (*mun*. cf. Sarvadarçana-sa.mgraha,
transl. p. 227, Manu. xii. 24 ff). The "Lord" is the fine and
inconceivably soft, all-knowing, and all-doing object of meditation
(*dhyâna*), for the wise meditators practised in Yoga, whose (the
Lord's) body consists of sun, moon, water, fire, wind, the regions (of
the sky), and ether, on whom those who long for the joy of (inner)
quietude constantly meditate.<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>
Then follows a lengthy explanation why the Aggregates do not arise from
these different causes. But, "like seed, covered with dung and watered,
buds up, so, covered with ignorance and watered by desire, existence
(*bhava*) arises." (Cf. [v. 110 f.](#pp_110))

   <span id="pp_51">51</span>. Know that attachment to religious
ceremonies (*çîlavrataparâmarça*), wrong views (*mithyad.rsh.ti*), and
doubt, (*vicikitsâ*) are the three fetters (*sa.myojana*, s. Childers
s.v. Oldenberg, Buddha, 435, 451 f., Eng. transl. p. 430, 448)
obstructing the entrance to the city of salvation. (Cf. Dharm. 68;
Dhammasa"nga.ni, 1002.)

   <span class="small">This verse seems spurious, as the commentary is
wanting.</span>

   <span id="pp_52">52</span>. As (your) salvation only regards (and
depends on) (your)self, there is no use in taking any one else as
companion, but, observing the holy doctrine (*çrutam*), morality

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Cf. Vedântasâtra 43 (Böhtl., "Chrestomathie," p. 259; Jacob,
"Manual of Hindu Pantheism," p. 48).\]

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span> (*çîla*), and contemplation (*dhyâna*),
apply yourself to the fourfold truth. (Cf. [v. 30](#pp_30).)

   <span id="pp_53">53</span>. Steadily instruct yourself (more and
more) in the highest morality, the highest wisdom, and the highest
thought, for the hundred and fifty-one rules (of the *Prâtimoksha*,
Comm.) are combined perfectly in these three. (The three *Çikshâ's* s.
Dharm. 140. cf. Udânav. vi. ll.)

   <span id="pp_54">54</span>. O Lord, the Sugata has taught that the
remembrance concerning (the care to be taken of) the body is the only
way that must be trod; therefore keep to it with firm endeavour, for
when remembrance (carefulness) is wanting, all things (*dharma*) must
decay.

   *Comm*. quotes the following words of Buddha: Bhikshus, for the
living beings there is, in order to do right, to overcome pain and
inconvenience, to understand the true law, and to obtain Nirvâna (only)
one way that must be trod, viz., Remembrance concerning the body.
(Apparently the *kâyânudarçam.rtyupasthânam*, Dharm. 44, is meant, which
there has not been accurately translated.) All these things (*dharma,
i.e.*, fruits, as enumerated) decay (come to naught), etc. Cf.
Oldenberg, p. 311 (transl. 305) ff.

   <span id="pp_55">55</span>. Life, though being more unstable than a
bubble driven by the wind, has as many troubles as one exhales and
inhales, or awakes from sleep, and this is astonishing much.

   <span id="pp_56">56</span>. Know that the body, which at the end (of
life) either is consumed, or dries up, or putrefies, or (finally)
becomes unclean and substanceless, and (thus) is completely destroyed
and dissolved, is by its nature unstable.

   *Comm*. The body is "consumed" if it is burned; it "dries up" if
buried in the ground, by the action of wind and sun (!); it "putrefies"
if, thrown into water, it is carried on by this; it becomes "unclean" if
animals devour it. (A sentence of the Bhagavat himself is quoted, where
he details these different modes of disposing of the dead.)

   <span id="pp_57">57</span>. Since even the earth, the Meru, and the
ocean, having burned for seven days, will become bodies of flame <span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> and be consumed, without leaving an atom, how
should it be otherwise with man, (who is so) very weak?

   <span id="pp_58">58</span>. Because thus (as demonstrated) all this
is unstable (*anitya*), without substance (*anâtma*), without help
(*açarana* or *ni.hç*.), without protector (*anâtha*), and without abode
(*asthâna*), thou, O Lord of men, must become discontented with this
worthless (*asâra*) Kadalî-tree of the orb (of transmigration). (About
*Kadalî* s. Pet. Wört.)

   <span id="pp_59">59</span>. As it is more difficult to rise from (the
existence as) animal to the dignity of man, than it is for the tortoise
to find the hole of the yoke that is in one (and the same) sea, exercise
the good law (*saddharma*) with your power as man, and make appear its
fruits.

   *Comm*. In a certain sea of the world a blind tortoise dwells which
rises to the surface (every) hundred years. In the same sea there is a
yoke (*gña-çi"n*) with a hole (*bu-ga*) in it, that by the easterly wind
is driven west. This is the time when the tortoise's neck may enter the
hole of the yoke.

   <span id="pp_60">60</span>. He who, born as a man, commits sin, is
more foolish than he who fills vomit in golden vessels, adorned with
jewels.

   *Comm*. Because the human dignity is more difficult of attainment
than a golden vessel.

   <span id="pp_61">61</span>. The life in a land of (common) agreement,
the support of a holy man, my good counsel, and good works formerly done
(*i.e.* their fruits), those four great wheels are in thy possession.

   *Comm*. "Land of agreement," where every one's mind is like the
other's and agrees (with it). "A holy man" is a Virtuous friend
(*kalyâ.namitra*) (Cf. Childers s.v.; Dhammasa"ngani, 1328.) "Wheels,"
that move the carriage of the sublime path. Since then you are possessed
of the four, endeavour to generate in you the subl. path.

   <span id="pp_62">62</span>. Because the Muni has explained that he
who leans on a Virtuous friend, will be able to lead to the end a pious
life, therefore lean on a holy man, for, leaning on the Jina, you
certainly will find complete rest.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

   *Comm*. quotes a speech of the Buddha to Ânanda, wherein he says that
the support of a Virtuous friend is the half of a holy life--*brahman*
(*thsa"ns-pa*) is explained here by *Nirvâ.na*, and *brahmacarya*
(*thsa"ns-par spyod-pa*) as the way thereto.

   <span id="pp_63">63</span>. (Adopting) wrong views, being born among
the brutes, among the Pretas, or in hell, (at the time when) the law of
the Jina is not (observed), in a foreign country among barbarians, being
dumb and stupid (dumb and deaf?),

   <span id="pp_64">64</span>. Or being born anywhere among the
Longlived gods, these are the eight unfavourable moments; if you, freed
from these, get a (favourable) moment, then exert yourself to avert (any
future unfavourable) birth.

   <span class="small">The *Aksha.na's* s. Dharm. 134, where Trigl. 66
(34) is forgotten. The "birth as Preta" is the same as
*Yamalokopapatti*; for "if the law of the Jina is not," the Dharm. has
*cittatpâdavirâgitatâ*; "dumb and stupid" (*glen-zhi"n lkugs-pa*,
explained by Comm. as: one who makes signs with the hand) =
Indriyavikalatâ. The "Longlived gods are the *Asa.mjña's* and the
*Arûpa's*" (Dharm. 128 f.). "These eight are called *Aksha.na*, because
therein you will not find rest. (Ksha.na) for the performance of
virtue."</span>

   <span id="pp_65">65</span>. O Noble one, grieved at this orb (of
transmigration) which is the ground (origin) of the stings of passion,
of death, illness, age, and many other pains, only hear a part of those
evils.

   *Comm*. The evils of the orb are sevenfold: Uncertainty ([v.
66](#pp_66)), Insatiability ([67](#pp_67)), Waste of bodies
([68](#pp_68)), Continuous Conception ([68](#pp_68)), Continual Change
between high and low position ([69 ff.](#pp_69)), Want of a companion
([75](#pp_75)), and the six states of birth ([77 ff.](#pp_77)).

   <span id="pp_66">66</span>. Since there is a (constant) change
between (the conditions of) father and son, mother and wife, friend and
foe, (it is clear that) within the orb there is no certainty whatever.

   <span id="pp_67">67</span>. If every one has drunk more milk than
(water is contained in) the four seas, even then the common people <span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> (*p.rthagjana*) who are caught in the orb,
will demand to drink more.

   <span id="pp_68">68</span>. The heap of any one's bones (from his
successive births) exceeds in quantity mount Meru; and if a man were to
count his (successive) mothers by grains (of soil) not larger than
juniper-berries, the earth would not suffice (to form them).

   <span class="small">About the mountain of bones s. "Der Weise und der
Thor," 95, 17. 100, 2 ff. = transl. p. 118. 123.</span>

   <span id="pp_69">69</span>. Even he who has been honoured in the
world of Indra falls, through the force of his works (*karma*), again to
the earth; even after having risen to world-sovereignty
(*cakravartitvam*), he, in the course of transmigration, will become a
slave.

   <span class="small">To the first part of this verse cf. "Der Weise,
&c.," ch. 45, chiefly 300, 3 = transl. p. 375, and Divyâvadâna ch.
17.</span>

   <span id="pp_70">70</span>. After having enjoyed for a long time the
happiness of touching the breasts and waists of the heaven-maids
(*i.e.*, Apsaras, cf. *svargastrî*), one must endure in hell the
intolerable pains of grinding, cutting, and lacerating.

   *Comm*. The pain of grinding is to be endured in the hell
*Sa.mghâta*, cutting in *Kâlasûtra*, and lacerating in *Tâpana* and
*Pratâpana*. (S. [v. 77, 78](#pp_77).)

   <span id="pp_71">71</span>. After having dwelt for a long time on the
summit of Meru, enjoying the pleasure of a ground that sinks and rises
to the touch of the foot (*i.e.*, is elastic), afterwards the
intolerable pain of walking on (in) hot ashes and mud is entailed on
you.

   *Comm*. "A long time," thousand years of the gods. The "hot ashes"
reach to the knees, and when you set down your foot skin, flesh, and
blood are destroyed, and, on raising it, grow again. The "mud" is a
morass of excrements, where beasts called: "Worm with the pointed bill"
live, whose body is all white, the head black. These (beasts) pierce the
skin of those animate beings (who are driven there by their fortune).

   <span id="pp_72">72</span>. After walking and playing, in company of
the <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> heaven-maids, in a pleasant and
delightful grove, again you must undergo, in a wood where the leaves are
like swords, the cutting of feet, hands, ears, and nose. (Cf. Manu, xii.
75.)

   <span id="pp_73">73</span>. After having entered (*i.e.*, bathed in)
*Mandâkinî* (*hdal-gyis hbab-pa*, "softly flowing," s. Amarakoça, Tib.
transl.) which is gay with beautiful Apsarasas and (round which grow)
golden lotuses you must again enter the intolerably salt water of the
hell-river *Vaitara.ni* (*rab-med*, "fordless," Amarak.).

   <span id="pp_74">74</span>. After having obtained the very great
happiness of desire (*i.e.*, of the senses) in the world of gods (viz.,
the *Kâmâvacara's*), and the unsensuous happiness of Brahmahood, you
must, becoming fuel in the fire of (the hell) Avîci, suffer
uninterrupted pains.

   <span id="pp_75">75</span>. After having become like sun and moon,
and having illuminated with the light of your body the ends of the
world, again you will come into the utter darkness, where you will not
even see your arm, if you stretch it out.

   *Comm*. The "utter darkness" is in the intermediate space of the
worlds (*Lokântarika*). (Cf. the Comm. on [v. 50](#pp_50) about
*Îçvara*.)

   <span id="pp_76">76</span>. Since then you must die in this manner
(in uncertainty as to your fate), take the lamp of the three merits to
give you light, for alone you must enter this endless darkness, which is
untouched by sun and moon.

   *Comm*. The three kinds of merits (meritorious actions) are: those of
body, speech, and thought ([v. 5](#pp_5)), or else: those arising from
liberality, morality, and meditation (*i.e.*, the three *Çikshâ's*, [v.
53](#pp_53)).

   <span id="pp_77">77</span>. Those living beings that have committed
sinful actions, will have to endure continuous pain in the hells
*Sa.mjîva*, *Kâlasûtra*, *Mahâtâpana*, *Sa.mghâta Raurava*, *Avîci*, and
so forth.

   *Comm*. By "and so forth," he understands the remaining (of the eight
hot hells), the cold hells, and the *Ñi-tse* (s. Jäschke, who has
*ñi-thse*). . . . In (the hell) *Sa.mjîva* the living beings, being
seized by different cutting instruments that have sprung from their
(evil) works, all their principal <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> and
minor (*pratya"nga*) members are cut off, and, becoming insensible, they
roll on the ground. Then there issues a voice from the sky: Become ye
sound again (*khyed-rnams ya"n sos-par gyur-cig*), therefore this hell
is called *Ya"n-sos*. In *Kâlasûtra* the living beings are put, by the
tormentors (*skyes-bu gnod-pa bye-pad*), that are there, between
mountains of different form, and, a black string (*thig-nag*) having
been drawn, they are cut and split like wood, therefore this hell is
called *Thig-nag*. In Sa.mghâta the l.b.,<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> having been assembled (*bsdus*)
together, are pushed by the tormentors that are there, between mountains
of different shape, and when these mountains are pressed together then
the blood of those pressed flows like a river. Likewise they are put in
a large iron press (*btsir-spyad*), where from above a large stone
descends, pressing the iron ground (*sa-gzhi*), tormenting, oppressing,
destroying (*hjolns-par byed*), everywhere, therefore this hell is
called *Bsdus-hjoms* (or º *gzhom*). In *Raurava*, the l.b., seeking a
dwelling (*i.e.*, some kind of refuge), are put into an iron house. From
those that have entered there a fire springs up, and, becoming one
(immense) flame, burns them (so vehemently) that they cry (*hbod*) in
roaring lamentation; therefore this hell is called *"Nu-hbod* ("Wailing
Cry"). In *Mahâurava*, which surpasses the last in cruelty, the l.b.,
seeking for a dwelling, are put into a house (not larger than a) box
(and treated as before); therefore this hell is called *"Nu-hbod
chen-po* ("The Great Wailing Cry"). In *Tâpana*, the l.b. are put--into
(iron) pans, heated to a high degree, and roasted. Pierced by the fire
as by spears, they give forth ashes, and from all their pores and
apertures fire issues. Again they are laid down on the heated ground,
and struck with very hot iron hammers. Therefore this hell is called
"*Thsa-va*" ("The hot one"). In *Pratâpana* there is this difference,
that they are stung by those (flames like) spear-points, of which two
make ashes come forth from the back and front, one from the head. Also
their bodies are bound with red-hot iron

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Living beings.\]

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span> bands. Again they are thrown, head
foremost, into boiling salt-water contained in heated iron cauldrons,
and wherever they go (*i.e.*, swim), their skin, flesh, and blood are
destroyed, and nothing is left but a bony skeleton. When they emerge,
their skin, flesh, and blood grow again. Therefore this hell is called
*Rab-tu-thsa-va* ("The very hot one"). In *Avîci*, the fire burns from
the four sides, from above and below, and meeting (in the middle)
attacks skin, flesh, fibres, and the inmost marrow of the bones of the
l.b., and dwells there, as if the essence (*sâra*) of fire had become
attached to the body. Only by the doleful wailing cries you can tell
which is the living being, which the fire, for (altogether) it looks
like one mass of fire. And because there is for the l.b. no interval
(*bar-mthsams*; to *vîci* also is given the meaning of *avakâça*, thus
Childers: leisure) of fire and pain, therefore this hell is called
*Mthsams-med* ("Continuous"); the same explanation in Chinese v.
Eitel.--The usual Tibetan translation of *Avîci*; as also in our verse,
is *Mnar-med* ("Painless"), and this would seem to be an euphemism
opposed to the explanation found in Maheçvara's comm. on Amarak. (*na
vidyate vîcih sukha.m yatra*). (Cf. Dharm. 121.)

   <span id="pp_78">78</span>. Some are pressed like sesamum (seeds),
others are ground to dust (so minute) like fine flour, some are split by
saws, and others are cut by ugly knives with sharp edges.

   *Comm*. In *Sa.mghâta* they are pressed in the hot iron press (s.
above), and also pounded, by the keepers of this hell, in iron sieves as
mortars, with their sharp bills (snouts) as pestles. In *Kâlasûtra* they
are split by the Lords of the Dead (*Yama's*), who, unconcerned about
any man, *i.e.*, his woes, briskly begin their work (*mi-ci-la ma
rag-par chas-pa brod-brod-ltar hdug-pa*), as wet wood is split by
carpenters, with heated strong-toothed saws, and axes heated in the
fire.

   <span id="pp_79">79</span>. In like manner others are made to drink
the hot fluid of melted bronze, and some are fixed on iron stakes,
red-hot and pointed.

   *Comm*. On the bank of the river Vaitara.nî (s.v. [73](#pp_73)) they
<span id="page_24">p. 24</span> have opened their mouth with hot
pincers, and made to drink metal that, by a violent fire, has lost its
consistency, and may be drawn out (*sra-va-las thal-te nal-nal-po ñid-du
gyur-pa*). The stakes are to be found in *Tâpana*.

   <span id="pp_80">80</span>. Some, lacerated by furious dogs with iron
fangs, raise their hands to the sky (wailing, Comm.); others are seized
by hawks with sharp iron bills, and ugly claws.

   *Comm*. The dogs are in the wood with sword-leaves ([v. 72](#pp_72)),
the hawks in the *Çalmali*-wood (cf. Pet. Wört. s.v.).

   <span id="pp_81">81</span>. Some bitten by different kinds of worms
and beetles, and ten thousand flesh-flies and blackflies, whose touch
produces great ugly wounds, roll (unconscious on the ground), and utter
loud lamentation.

   *Comm*. The "worms" grow out of the body, the "beetles" come from
without; they are difIerent in colour and form; by the "black flies" is
meant the black fly-abscess (? *sbra"n-ma lhi"n-nag*).

   <span id="pp_82">82</span>. Some are burned without interruption in
heaps of glowing embers, and even their mouths are filled (therewith);
some are cooked in great cauldrons made of (!) iron, like the gourd (?
*cu"n-pe"n*) of the fruit *Spiu-thsugs* (?).

   *Comm*. says that the former takes place in *Tâpana*, the latter in
*Mahâtâpana*. (Cf. Manu, xii. 76.)

   <span id="pp_83">83</span>. The sinner who, hearing of the endless
pain of hell that is not interrupted for so long as one can retain his
breath, becomes not afraid (and repents, Comm.), he has the character of
a diamond (*i.e.*, is truly impassible, since the pains of hell will
begin immediately after his death, Comm.).

   <span id="pp_84">84</span>. But those who, seeing a picture of hell,
hearing (of hell), remembering (it), reading (about it), or making
images (of it), generate fear (of it), they certainly will experience
immense rewards (*vipâka*).

   <span class="small">(S. Divyâv, p. 300 ff. on a picture of the hells
(and the rest of the world) and its purpose. Such a picture is to be
found, for instance, in Georgi, Alphab. Tibet.)</span>

   *Comm*. "Remember," *viz*., the pains they endured their former
births in hell.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

   <span id="pp_85">85</span>. As among all blisses the bliss of the
cessation of desire (*i.e.*, complete liberation, Comm.) is the highest,
thus among all pains the pain of the hell Avîci is the most
unsupportable.

   <span id="pp_86">86</span>. The pain of him who, in this (world), is,
during an (entire) day vehemently stung with three hundred spears,
cannot be compared even to the smallest pain of hell.

   <span id="pp_87">87</span>. This intolerable pain of hell does not
end, even if you have endured it for a hundred *ko.ti's* of years; as
long as the (fruits of) your sins are not exhausted, so long you will
not get rid of your life (in hell).

   <span id="pp_88">88</span>. Therefore exert yourself with energy that
there may not by any means be as much as an atom of the seed of this
sin-fruit, (produced) by evil action, speech, or thought.

   <span id="pp_89">89</span>. Also in the condition of *brute* (you
will suffer) killing, binding, striking, and various other pains; and
(the brutes), having abandoned pacifying virtue (?), will eat up one
another without pity.

   *Comm*. explains *zhi*(*-var*) *hgyur*(*-va*), what I translate
"pacifying," by: *"nes-par hbyed-pai cha-da"n mthun-pa*, the same words
that explain "contemplation" [v. 52](#pp_52), and "highest wisdom" [v.
53](#pp_53) (one of the three Çikshâs), and says that *Nirvâ.na* is
attained thereby, and that by want of this virtue the brutes are so
stupid (as to devour each other).

   <span id="pp_90">90</span>. Some (brutes) are killed on account of
(their) pearls, wool, bones, blood, flesh or hide; others forced into
the service (of man) by kicks or blows of hand, whip or iron hook.

   *Comm*. For his "bones" (tusks) the elephant, for instance, is
killed; for it's "flesh," game, etc.; for its hide, the leopard, etc.
With "kicks" the horse is driven; with the "hand" the buffalo; with a
"whip" the ass; with an "iron hook," the elephant.

   <span id="pp_91">91</span>. Among the *Preta's* also you must endure
the uninterrupted (because never quenched, Comm.) pain born from the
stings of desire, and the quite intolerable (pain) arising from hunger
and thirst, heat and frost, weariness and fear.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

   *Comm*. Their "weariness" comes from their continually running after
food (and never reaching it); "fear," from seeing the beings (tormenters
armed) with swords, pestles, and leashes.

   <span id="pp_92">92</span>. Some, having a mouth small as the eye of
a needle, and a belly large as a mountain, are tortured by hunger, as
they are not able to eat however little of the nasty excrements put
before them. (Cf. Pañcagati, transl. Feer, Mus. Guim, v. 521.)

   <span id="pp_98">98</span>. Some, having nothing left but skin and
bones, are dried up like the naked top of a *Tâla*-tree; other, during
the night, have a flaming mouth, and devour as food hot sand that falls
into it.

   *Comm*. remarks that the "dry" Preta's are called *Asura's*.
"Scorching sand" in Manu, xii. 76.

   <span id="pp_94">94</span>. But some common people, not finding
matter (pus), excrements, blood, or other impurities strike each other
in the face, when goitres will arise on their necks, on whose ripe
matter they feed.

   *Comm*. "Common people" (Mob), because they have no merits (*i.e.*,
even less than their companions).

   <span id="pp_95">95</span>. For the Preta's, in summer the moon
herself is hot, in winter the sun himself is cold; the trees (in their
region) are fruitless, and the rivers dry up, as soon as they look upon
them.

   *Comm*. By their want of merit the boughs of the trees are burned as
by fire, and lose fruits and leaves. The pleasant and cool rivers dry up
(as if) burned by the poison of their eyes (*mig gdug-pai dug-gis
bsregs-pa*). Some of them are filled (instead of food) with fire and
live coal, some are thrust into rivers of matter, filled with different
kinds of worms; some are filled with excrements and urine. (Cf. Feer,
"Études Bouddhiques," 299.)

   <span id="pp_96">96</span>. Without interruption this pain continues
for those who have not abandoned sinful actions and have not reined in
their body, some (of them) will not die (in this place of torment) in
five thousand, some in ten thousand years.

   <span id="pp_97">97</span>. The reason why beings must endure these
different <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> torments as Pretas in one run
(*i.e.*, without interruption), the Buddha has declared to be their
avarice and mean niggardliness. (s. Feer, ll. p. 303 f.)

   <span id="pp_98">98</span>. In *Heaven* also, though the pleasure to
be enjoyed is great, the pain of dying is greater: thus thinking, noble
(souls) do not wish for the perishable (joys of) heaven. (Cf. [v. 69
ff.](#pp_69))

   <span id="pp_99">99</span>. The colour of the body becoming ugly,
want of pleasure in (their) couches, decaying of flower-wreaths,
appearance of dirt on (their) cloths, dust, that had not been before,
arising from (their) body,

   <span id="pp_100">100</span>. These are the five prognostics
announcing death in heaven, that appear to the gods who dwell in the
land of gods, similar to the signs that announce death to the men on
earth. (Cf. Divyâv. ch. xiv. beg. Prof. Windisch points out to me the
similar passage in Ittivuttakam, Sutt. 83.)

   <span id="pp_101">101</span>. Those (now) who die off from the worlds
of gods, if they have not any rest of (fruit of) virtue left, thence
must irrevocably take their dwelling, according to their merit, among
the Brutes, the Pretas, or in Hell.

   <span class="small">As god you cannot gain any merit ([v.
64](#pp_64)). But the *Sarvâstivâdin's* taught the reverse, s. Rockhill,
"Life of the Buddha," p. 191, better than Was. 247; cf. Feer, ll. p. 276
ff.</span>

   <span id="pp_102">102</span>. Among the *Asura's* also, who, from
their (spiteful) nature, hate (envy?) the splendour of the gods, there
is much mental pain; and, though they have an intellect, from the
inherent darkness of their state (*gati*) they are not able to see the
truth.

   *Comm*. They have an intellect (sufficient) to know the difference
between virtue and vice, but, unable to stick to virtue in this state,
they fall back to vice. "Darkness:" because, in the state of Asura, you
are obliged to think continuously on vice, but in the state as god,
thoughts and (power of) execution incline to virtue, there is a great
difference between the states of god and Asura or any other (lower). On
the pains in the state of *man* he does <span id="page_28">p. 28</span>
not enlarge here, because he alluded to this before in the words: O
Noble one, etc. ([v. 65](#pp_65)), and because this (state) has been,
before this, blamed (*i.e.*, described as undesirable) by different men
(*s"nar ya"n mi rnam-pa du-mas smad-pai phyir*).

   <span id="pp_103">103</span>. Since the orb is thus (constituted),
that the birth as god, man, infernal being, brute, or Preta is
(likewise) bad, understand (then) than birth (itself) is a receptacle of
much harm.

   <span id="pp_104">104</span>. If a fire were to seize your head or
your dress, you would extinguish and subdue it (by all means), even thus
endeavour to annihilate desire, for there is no other higher necessity
(duty) than this.

   <span id="pp_105">105</span>. By morality, knowledge, and
contemplation, attain the spotless dignity of the quieting and the
subduing Nirvâ.na, not subject to age, death, or decay, devoid of earth,
water, fire, wind, sun, and moon.

   *Comm*. *Nirvâ.na* is twofold: with, and without, a rest of the
Skandha's; the first "quiets" all pain, the second "subdues" the senses.
(Cf. Childers 267 b. Oldenberg, Buddha, p. 432 (transl. p. 427) ff.; the
three Çikshâs, s.v. [53](#pp_53), also Udânav. vi. 11.)

   <span id="pp_106">106</span>. Recollection, investigation, energy,
joy, calm, contemplation, equanimity, these seven members of knowledge
are the rallying-points of the virtues whereby one reaches Nirvâ.na.
(The seven *bodhya"nga's* v. Dharm. 49; cf. Dhammasa"nga.ni 1355.)

   <span id="pp_107">107</span>. Where there is no wisdom (*prajñâ*),
there is also no contemplation (*dhyâna*); where there is no
contemplation, there is also no wisdom; but know that for him who
possesses these two, the sea of existence is like a grove (?
*gnag-rjes*, perhaps *nags*).

   *Comm*. Remarks on *gnag-rjes*: "because it (the sea of ex.) is
easily traversed by him," so we might correct, perhaps, *gnag-rdsis*,
and translate: "the sea of ex. is for him as for a *lord of cattle*
(shepherd; who has the means to ride)," sc. is a meadow. (Cf. Udânav.
xxxii. 28.)

   <span id="pp_108">108</span>. On the fourteen Undeclared worlds,
which the <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> Friend of the sun has
explained, you must not (even) think, for by this (*i.e.*, in so doing)
you cannot keep your mind quiet.

   *Comm*. Enumerates the fourteen *Avyâk.rtavastûni* (in the text was
*loka*, s. Dharm. 137), and continues: These categories (*vastu*) are
called undeclared, because they must not be declared, if anybody asks;
they are questions to be put aside (*sthâpanîya*).

   <span id="pp_109">109</span>. The Muni has declared that from
Ignorance always springs the Conformations (in the text: *las*, "work"),
thence Consciousness, thence Name and Form, thence the Six Organs of
sense, thence Contact,

   <span id="pp_110">110</span>. From Contact springs Sensation, from
the ground of Sensation Thirst will arise, from Thirst the Clinging (to
existence) will be born, thence Being, and from Being comes Birth,

   <span id="pp_111">111</span>. And if Birth is (put) there arise
Misery, Illness, Age, the pangs of desire, Death, Fear, and many other
evils; but if Birth is stopped, all these are stopped (at the same
time).

   *Comm*. First gives the list of the *Nidâna's*, as it is to be found
in Dharm. 42, and also in Pâli s. Dhammasa"nga.ni 1336 (including the
appendix *çoka<sup><span class="small">0</span></sup>*). Then follows a
lengthy exposition of the single items, and the series as a whole (two
leaves), wherefrom only the most important part is given here.
"Ignorance" is the not-knowing the truth, and not acknowledging the
highest aim (*paramârtha*). In an ignorant fool arise, in consequence of
(his) not knowing virtue, vice; and in consequence of his not knowing
the constant (*ânejja*, *âneñja* s. Childers), the *Conformations*.
These are divided into (conform.) of body, speech, mind; here (in our
verse) they are meant by Action (*las* = *karman*), because this also is
divided in the same three parts (cf. Child. 454 b. Oldenberg 247
(transl. 241) ff.). By forming (lit. conforming) thoughts on the roots
of these actions, *Consciousness* arises. This is sixfold (*i.e.*, the
conception of the six senses, [v. 24](#pp_24); s. Was. p. 237 N). . . .
*Name and Form* is the condition of the (embryo) <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> conceived in the womb as *Kalalam*, etc. (s. Was. p. 236),
which not yet has any sensation, etc., and (on the other side) the
(child) come out, that has assumed a body (*rgyur byas-pa*). The embryo
in its four states is "Name," because it leads to existence (*bhava*),
and falls into the senses (? *yul-la hgro-va*): the emerged and embodied
(human being) is "Form," because the (feeling) produced by cold, etc.,
arises (in it; ? *gra"n-va la sogs-pa hgyur-va bskyed-pai phyir*). (Cf.
Child. 258 a; Oldenberg, p. 232 (transl. 227) ff.). . . . "Thirst" is
the wish not to lose agreeable sensations, to get rid of unagreeable
ones, and not to keep nor to lose those which are neither agreeable nor
disagreeable (s. Dharm. 27); again it ("thirst") is, in the Sûtra,
declared to be three-fold, according to its direction to the reign of
pleasure, of form, or of the formless (s. Child. s.v. *ta.nhâ*). The
"Clinging" is the violent desire (*hdun-pai hdod-chags*) of lust
(*kâma*), etc. (s. Child. s.v. *upâdâna.m* and cf. [v. 51](#pp_51);
Oldenberg, p. 239 N. 1). . . . When the seed of Conformations is well
watered with (the water of) Thirst and Clinging, the fruit of Being is
produced (cf. [v. 50](#pp_50)). It is threefold like Thirst: (the Being)
of pleasure, etc. (s. Child. s.v. *bhava*). But here chiefly the past
existence is understood. When any one is born at the end of (this)
existence, he is subject, one after the other, to (the states) "Name and
Form" to "Sensation." . . . The whole series is divided into three
parts: "Ignorance" and "Conformations" are (*i.e.*, refer to) the past
birth; "Consciousness" to "Being," the present; "Birth" and "Age and
Death," the future (one). . . .

   <span id="pp_112">112</span>. This concatenation of causes is made
clear (to us) by the Jina's word, and deep (in meaning); who perfectly
understands this, he perfectly understands the teaching of the Buddha.

   <span id="pp_113">113</span>. Right views, living, energy,
recollection, meditation, speech, action, thoughts these eight parts of
the way practise in order to reach quiet. (S. Dharmas. 50.
Dhammasa"nga.ni 297 ff. and 89 ff.).

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

   <span id="pp_114">114</span>. Birth is Suffering, Thirst is the great
cause from which all this springs, the prevention of this (thirst) is
liberation, the path to attain this is that (above described) Noble
eightfold path. (S. Dharm. 21).

   <span id="pp_115">115</span>. Therefore always exert yourself in
order to understand the four truths, for even laymen (*g.rhastha*) who
live in kingly estate will, by understanding (these truths), ford over
the sea of sin (*kleça*).

   <span id="pp_116">116</span>. Those that fulfil the law do not drop
from the sky, nor do they rise, like a ripe crop, from the bosom of the
earth, but, when you have abandoned (the state of) layman, dependent on
former sin,

   <span id="pp_117">117</span>. Then it is not necessary to tell you in
many (words) that you need not fear, as there is a useful counsel of
this meaning: Subdue your mind, for Bhagavat has declared that the mind
is the root of (all our) conditions (*dharma*).

   *Comm*. says the meaning is that, if your mind is all pure, you will
be quite happy, but if troubled, quite unhappy (Cf. Dhampd. 1; Udânav;
xxxi.23 f.--M.M.'s translation is, as appears, justified by our comm.).

   <span id="pp_118">118</span>. To satisfy all these counsels (I have)
given to thee in these words (*i.e.*, in this letter) would be difficult
even for a Bhikshu (who has given up domestic life; how much more for a
layman, *g.rhastha*, Comm.); therefore keep to the virtue thou art able
to fulfil, and make (the best) use of your lifetime.

   <span id="pp_119">119</span>. When, always rejoicing at every virtue
of every one, thou performest thyself the three kinds of good actions
(*viz*., in thought, word, deed), then perfectly consecrated to attain
Buddhaship, thou wilt, through this accumulation of merit,

   <span id="pp_120">120</span>. Having become, during innumerable
births, *Yog*a-lord of all the worlds of gods and men, (as) the noble
*Avalokiteçvara*, taking care of miserable mankind,

   <span id="pp_121">121</span>. Freeing (them) after (their) birth,
from illness, age, lust, and envy, become, in the Buddha-field, like the
Bhagavat *Amitâbha*, lord of the world, with immeasurable lifetime.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

   <span class="small">*Amitâbha* is also sometimes called
*Amitâyu*.</span>

   <span id="pp_122">122</span>. Having spread in the land of gods, in
the sky (*Antariksha*, Comm.), and on earth the great spotless fame
arising from Wisdom, Morality, and Liberality, and having perfectly
quieted, (as) man on earth, and (as) God in heaven, the pleasure in the
enjoyment of beautiful maidens,

   <span id="pp_123">123</span>. And having obtained the power of a
*Jina*, that quiets fear, birth and death of all the living beings
afflicted with pain, thou wilt obtain the dignity (of *Nirvâ.na* without
a rest, Comm.), that surpasses the world, blotting out even the name
(thereof), without fear and hunger, and not subject to death.

   The friendly epistle, sent by the Master (*âcârya*), the Noble
*Nâgârjuna* (*Klu-sgrub*) to his friend King Udayana (*Bde-spyod*) is
finished.

   Translated, corrected, and put in order by the Indian Pa.n.dit
(*mkhan-po*) *Sarvajñadeva*, and the great translator Bande
*Dpal-rtsegs*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index)
