[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc39007)  [Next](cc39009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** And I, brethren, when I came to you,
came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom, declaring unto you the
testimony of God.

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et ego, quum venissem ad vos, fratres,
veni non in excellentia sermonis vel sapientiae, annuntians vobis
testimonium Dei.

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span>**2.** For I determined not to know any thing
among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Non enim eximium duxi, (*vel*, *duxi
pro scientia*,) scire quicquam inter vos,  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) nisi Iesum Christum, et hunc
crucifixum.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span><span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span>**1.** *And I, when I came* Paul having begun
to speak of his own method of teaching, had straightway fallen into a
discussion as to the nature of gospel preaching generally. Now again he
returns to speak of himself, to show that nothing in him was despised
but what belonged to the nature of the gospel itself, and did in a
manner adhere to it. He allows therefore that he had not had any of the
aids of human eloquence or wisdom to qualify him for producing any
effect, but while he acknowledges himself to be destitute of such
resources, he hints at the inference to be drawn from this — that the
power of God shone the more illustriously in his ministry, from its
standing in no need of such helps. This latter idea, however, he will be
found bringing forward shortly afterwards. For the present he simply
grants that he has nothing of human wisdom, and in the meantime reserves
to himself this much — that he *published the testimony of God* Some
interpreters, indeed, explain the *testimony of God* in a passive sense;
but as for myself, I have no doubt that another interpretation is more
in *accordance* with the Apostle’s design, so that *the testimony of
God* is that which has come forth from God — the doctrine of the gospel,
of which he is the author and witness. He now distinguishes between
*speech* and *wisdom* (<span id="ix.i-p9.1"></span>λόγον ἀπὸ τὢς
σοφίας.) Hence what I noticed before  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) is here confirmed — that hitherto he
has not been speaking of mere empty prattling, but has included the
entire training of human learning.

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span><span id="ix.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span>**2.** *For I did not reckon it desirable.*
As <span id="ix.i-p12.1"></span>κρίνειν, in Greek, has often the same
meaning as <span id="ix.i-p12.2"></span>εκλεγειν, that is to choose out
anything as precious,  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md) there is,
I think, no person of sound judgment but will allow that the rendering
that I have given is a probable one, provided only the construction
admits of it. At the same time, if we render it thus — “No kind of
knowledge did I hold in esteem,” there will be nothing harsh in this
rendering. If you understand something to be supplied, the sentence will
run smoothly enough in this way — “Nothing did I value myself upon, as
worth my knowing, or on the ground of knowledge.” At the same time I do
not altogether reject a different interpretation — viewing Paul as
declaring that he esteemed nothing as knowledge, or as entitled to be
called knowledge, except Christ alone. Thus the Greek preposition <span
id="ix.i-p13.5"></span>ανδ, would, as often happens, require to be
supplied. But whether the former interpretation is not disapproved of,
or whether this latter pleases better, the substance of the passage
amounts to this: “As to my wanting the ornaments of speech, and wanting,
too, the more elegant refinements of discourse, the reason of this was,
that I did not aspire at them, nay rather, I despised them, because
there was one thing only that my heart was set upon — that I might
preach Christ with simplicity.”

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span>In adding the word *crucified,* he does not
mean that he preached nothing respecting Christ except the cross; but
that, with all the abasement of the cross, he nevertheless preached
Christ. It is as though he had said: “The ignominy of the cross will not
prevent me from looking up to him  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md) from whom salvation comes, or *make*
me ashamed to regard all my wisdom as comprehended in him — in him, I
say, whom proud men despise and reject on account of the reproach of the
cross.” Hence the statement must be explained in this way: “No kind of
knowledge was in my view of so much importance as to lead me to desire
anything but Christ, *crucified though he was*.” This little clause is
added by way of enlargement (<span id="ix.i-p15.2"></span>αὔξησιν,) with
the view of galling so much the more those arrogant masters, by whom
Christ was next to despised, as they were eager to gain applause by
being renowned for a higher kind of wisdom. Here we have a beautiful
passage, from which we learn what it is that faithful ministers ought to
teach, what it is that we must, during our whole life, be learning, and
in comparison with which everything else must be “counted as dung.”
(<span id="ix.i-p15.3"></span>[Php
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="ix.i-p15.3"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
2:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**3.** And I was with you in weakness, and in
fear, and in much trembling.

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Et ego in infirmirate,  <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) et in timore, et in tremore multo fui
apud vos:

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>**4.** And my speech and my preaching *was*
not with enticing words of man’s wisdom, but in demonstration of the
Spirit and of power:

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>**4.** Et sermo meus, et praedicatio mea, non
in persuasoriis humanae sapientiae sermonibus, sed in demonstratione
Spiritus et potentiae:

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>**5.** That your faith should not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span>**5.** Ut fides vestra non sit in sapientia
hominum, sed in potentia Dei.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span><span id="ix.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span>**3.** *And I was with you in weakness* He
explains at greater length what he had previously touched upon — that he
had nothing shining or excellent in him in the eyes of men, to raise him
to distinction. He concedes, however, to his adversaries what they
desired in such a way as to make those very things which, in their
opinion, tended to detract from the credit of his ministry, redound to
its highest commendation. If he appeared less worthy of esteem from his
being so mean and abject according to the flesh, he shows that the power
of God shone out the more conspicuously in this, that he could effect so
much, while sustained by no human helps. He has in his eye not merely
those foolish boasters  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) who
aimed at mere show, with the view of obtaining for themselves a name,
but the Corinthians, too, who gazed with astonishment on their empty
shows. Accordingly a recital of this kind was fitted to have great
weight with them. They were aware that Paul had brought nothing with him
in respect of the flesh that was fitted to help him forward, or that
might enable him to insinuate himself into the favor of men, and yet
they had seen the amazing success which the Lord had vouchsafed to his
preaching. Nay more, they had in a manner beheld with their own eyes the
Spirit of God present in his doctrine. When, therefore, despising his
simplicity, they were tickled with a desire for a kind of wisdom, I know
not of what sort, more puffed up and more polished, and were captivated
with outward appearance, nay, even with adventitious ornament, rather
than with the living efficacy of the Spirit, did they not sufficiently
discover their ambitious spirit? It is with good reason, therefore, that
Paul puts them in mind of his *first entering in among them*, (<span
id="ix.ii-p12.2"></span>[1Th 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001.md)<span
id="ix.ii-p12.2"></span>,) that they may not draw back from that divine
efficacy, which they once knew by experience.

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span>The term *weakness* he employs here, and in
several instances afterwards, (<span id="ix.ii-p13.1"></span>[2Co
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#030.md)<span id="ix.ii-p13.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.ii-p13.2"></span>[2 Cor.
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#005.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)<span id="ix.ii-p13.2"></span>,.md) as
including everything that can detract from a person’s favor and dignity
in the opinion of others. *Fear and trembling* are the effects of that
*weakness* There are, however, two ways in which these two terms may be
explained by us. Either we may understand him to mean, that when he
pondered the magnitude of the office that he sustained, it was
tremblingly, and not without great anxiety, that he occupied himself in
it; or that, being encompassed with many dangers, he was in constant
alarm and incessant anxiety. Either meaning suits the context
sufficiently well. The second, however, is, in my opinion, the more
simple. Such a spirit of modesty, indeed, becomes the servants of the
Lord, that, conscious of their own weakness, and looking, on the other
hand, at once to the difficulty and the excellence of so arduous an
office, they should enter on the discharge of it with reverence and
*fear* For those that intrude themselves confidently, and in a spirit
much elated, or who discharge the ministry of the word with an easy
mind, as though they were fully equal to the task, are ignorant at once
of themselves and of the task.  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md)

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>As, however, Paul here connects *fear* with
*weakness*, and as the term *weakness* denotes everything that was
fitted to render him contemptible, it follows necessarily that this
*fear* must relate to dangers and difficulties. It is certain, however,
that this *fear* was of such a nature as did not prevent Paul from
engaging in the Lord’s work, as facts bear witness. The Lord’s servants
are neither so senseless as not to *perceive* impending dangers, nor so
devoid of feeling as not to be moved by them. Nay more, it is necessary
for them to be seriously afraid on two accounts chiefly — *first*, that,
abased in their own eyes, they may learn wholly to lean and rest upon
God alone, and *secondly*, that they may be trained to a thorough
renunciation of self. Paul, therefore, was not devoid of the influence
of *fear*, but that *fear* he controlled in such a manner as to go
forward, notwithstanding, with intrepidity through the midst of dangers,
so as to encounter with undaunted firmness and fortitude all the
assaults of Satan and of the world; and, in fine, so as to struggle
through every impediment.

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span><span id="ix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span>**4.** *And my preaching was not in the
persuasive words.* By the *persuasive words of man’s wisdom* he means
that exquisite oratory which aims and strives rather by artifice than by
truth, and also an appearance of refinement, that allures the minds of
men. It is not without good reason, too, that he ascribes persuasiveness
(<span id="ix.ii-p17.3"></span>τό πιθάνον)  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md) to human wisdom. For the word of the
Lord constrains us by its majesty, as if by a violent impulse, to yield
obedience to it. Human wisdom, on the other hand, has her allurements,
by which she insinuates herself  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md)
and her blandishments, as it were, by which she may conciliate for
herself the affections of her hearers. With this he contrasts the
*demonstration of the Spirit and of power*, which most interpreters
consider as restricted to miracles; but I take it in a more general
sense, as meaning the hand of God powerfully exercised in every way
through the instrumentality of the Apostle. *Spirit and power* he seems
to have made use of by hypallage,  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) (<span id="ix.ii-p20.1"></span>καθ ᾿
ὑπαλλαγὴν,) to denote *spiritual power*, or at least with the view of
showing by signs and effects in what manner the presence of the Spirit
had shown itself in his ministry. He appropriately, too, makes use of
the term <span id="ix.ii-p20.2"></span>ἀποδείξεως, (*demonstration*;)
for such is our dullness in contemplating the works of God, that when he
makes use of inferior instruments, they serve as so many veils to hide
from us his influence, so that we do not clearly perceive it. On the
other hand, as in the furtherance given to Paul’s ministry, there was no
aid furnished from the flesh or the world, and as the hand of God was as
it were made bare, (<span id="ix.ii-p20.3"></span>[Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010)<span id="ix.ii-p20.3"></span>,.md)
his influence was assuredly the more apparent.

<span id="ix.ii-p21"></span><span id="ix.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p22"></span>**5.** *That your faith should not be in the
wisdom of men. To be* is used here as meaning *to consist* His meaning,
then, is, that the Corinthians derived this advantage from his having
preached Christ among them without dependence on human wisdom, and
relying solely on the Spirit’s influence, that their faith was founded
not on men but on God. If the Apostle’s preaching had rested exclusively
on the power of eloquence, it might have been overthrown by superior
eloquence, and besides, no one would pronounce that to be solid truth
which rests on mere elegance of speech. It may indeed be *helped by it*,
but it ought not *to rest upon it* On the other hand, *that* must have
been most powerful which could stand of itself without any foreign aid.
Hence it forms a choice commendation of Paul’s preaching, that heavenly
influence shone forth in it so clearly, that it surmounted so many
hindrances, while deriving no assistance from the world. It follows,
therefore, that they must not allow themselves to be moved away from his
doctrine, which they acknowledge to rest on the authority of God. Paul,
however, speaks here of the faith of the Corinthians in such a way as to
bring forward this, as a general statement. Let it then be known by us
that it is the property of faith to rest upon *God* alone, without
depending on *men*; for it requires to have so much certainty to go
upon, that it will not fail, even when assailed by all the machinations
of hell, but will perseveringly endure and sustain every assault. This
cannot be accomplished unless we are fully persuaded that God has spoken
to us, and that what we have believed is no mere contrivance of men.
While faith ought properly to be founded on the word of God alone, there
is at the same time no impropriety in adding this second prop, — that
believers recognize the word which they hear as having come forth from
God, from the effect of its influence.

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006.md)<span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>**6.** Howbeit we speak wisdom among them
that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes
of this world, that come to naught:

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>**6.** Porro sapientiam loquimur inter
perfectos: sapientiam quidem non saeculi hujus, neque principum saeculi
hujus, qui abolentur:

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span>**7.** But we speak the wisdom of God in a
mystery, *even* the hidden *wisdom*, which God ordained before the world
unto our glory:

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span>**7.** Sed loquimur sapientiam Dei in
mysterio, quae est recondita: quam praefinivit Deus ante saecula in
gloriam nostram,

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span>**8.** Which none of the princes of this
world knew: for had they known *it*, they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory.

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>**8.** Quam nemo principum saeculi hujus
cognovit: si emro cognovissent, nequaquam Dominum gloriae
crucifixissent.

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span>**9.** But as it is written, Eye hath not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God hath prepared for them that love him.

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span>**9.** Sed quemadmodum Scriptum est (<span
id="ix.iii-p9.1"></span>[Isa 64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004.md)<span
id="ix.iii-p9.1"></span>.) “Quae oculus non vidit, nec auris audivit,
nec in cor hominis ascenderunt, quae praeparavit Deus iis, qui ipsum
diligunt.”

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span><span id="ix.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span>**6.** *We speak wisdom* Lest he should
appear to despise wisdom, as *unlearned and ignorant men* (<span
id="ix.iii-p12.1"></span>[Ac 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013.md)<span
id="ix.iii-p12.1"></span>) condemn learning with a sort of barbarian
ferocity, he adds, that he is not devoid of *that* wisdom, which was
worthy of the name, but was esteemed as such by none but competent
judges. By those that were *perfect*, he means not those that had
attained a wisdom that was full and complete, but those who possess a
sound and unbiased judgment. For <span id="ix.iii-p12.2"></span>תם,
which is always rendered in the Septuagint by <span
id="ix.iii-p12.3"></span>τελειος means *complete*  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) *He* twits, however, in passing, those
that had no relish for his preaching, and gives them to understand that
it was owing to their own fault: “If my doctrine is disrelished by any
of you, those persons give sufficient evidence from that very token,
that they possess a depraved and vitiated understanding, inasmuch as it
will invariably be acknowledged to be the highest wisdom among men of
sound intellect and correct judgment.” While Paul’s preaching was open
to the view of all, it was, nevertheless, not always estimated according
to its value, and this is the reason why he appeals to sound and
unbiased judges,  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md) who would
declare that doctrine, which the world accounted insipid, to be true
wisdom. Meanwhile, by the words *we speak*, he intimates that he set
before them an elegant specimen of admirable wisdom, lest any one should
allege that he boasted of a thing unknown.

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span>*Yet not the wisdom of this world* He again
repeats by way of anticipation what he had already conceded — that the
gospel was not human wisdom, lest any one should object that there were
few supporters of that doctrine; nay more, that it was contemned by all
that were most distinguished for intellect. Hence he acknowledges of his
own accord what might be brought forward by way of objection, but in
such a way as not at all to give up his point.

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span>*The princes of this world* By the *princes
of this world* he means those that have distinction in the world through
means of any endowment, for sometimes there are persons, who, though
they are by no means distinguished by acuteness of intellect, are
nevertheless held in admiration from the dignity of the station which
they hold. That, however, we may not be alarmed by these imposing
appearances, the Apostle adds, that they *come to nought*, or perish.
For it were unbefitting, that a thing that is eternal should depend upon
the authority of those who are frail, and fading, and cannot give
perpetuity even to themselves: “When the kingdom of God is revealed, let
the wisdom of this world retire, and what is transient give place to
what is eternal; for the princes of this world have their distinction,
but it is of such a nature as is in one moment extinguished. What is
this in comparison with the heavenly and incorruptible kingdom of God?”

<span id="ix.iii-p17"></span><span id="ix.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p18"></span>**7.** *The wisdom of God in a mystery* He
assigns the reason why the doctrine of the gospel is not held in high
esteem by the *princes of this world* — because it is involved in
mysteries, and is consequently *hidden* For the gospel so far transcends
the perspicacity of human intellect, that to whatever height those who
are accounted men of superior intellect may raise their view, they never
can reach its elevated height, while in the meantime they despise its
meanness, as if it were prostrate at their feet. The consequence is,
that the more proudly they contemn it, they are the farther from
acquaintance with it — nay more, they are removed to so great a distance
as to be prevented from even seeing it.

<span id="ix.iii-p19"></span>*Which God hath ordained.* Paul having said
that the gospel was a *hidden* thing, there was a danger lest believers
should, on hearing this, be appalled by the difficulty, and retire in
despair. Accordingly he meets this danger, and declares that it had
notwithstanding been appointed to us, that we might enjoy it. Lest any
one, I say, should reckon that he has nothing to do with the *hidden
wisdom*, or should imagine it to be unlawful to direct his eyes towards
it, as not being within the reach of human capacity, he teaches that it
has been communicated to us in accordance with the eternal counsel of
God. At the same time he has something still farther in view, for by an
implied comparison he extols that grace which has been opened up by
Christ’s advent, and distinguishes us above our fathers, who lived under
the law. On this point I have spoken more at large in the end of the
last chapter of the Romans. *First* of all then he argues from what God
had *ordained*, for if God has appointed nothing in vain, it follows,
that we will be no losers by listening to the gospel which he has
appointed for us, for he accommodates himself to our capacity in
addressing us. In accordance with this Isaiah (<span
id="ix.iii-p19.2"></span>[Isa
45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019)<span id="ix.iii-p19.2"></span>.md)
says —

<span id="ix.iii-p20"></span>“I have not spoken in a lurking place, or
in a dark corner.  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md)  
I have not in vain said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me.”

<span id="ix.iii-p22"></span>*Secondly*, with the view of rendering the
gospel attractive, and alluring us to a desire of acquaintance with it,
he draws an argument still farther from the design that God had in view
in giving it to us — “*for our glory*.” In this expression, too, he
seems to draw a comparison between us and the fathers, our heavenly
Father not having vouchsafed to them that honor which he reserved for
the advent of his Son.  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md)

<span id="ix.iii-p24"></span><span id="ix.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p25"></span>**8.** *None of the princes of this world
knew* If you supply the words *by their own discernment*, the statement
would not be more applicable to them than to the generality of mankind,
and the very lowest of the people; for what are the attainments of all
of us as to this matter, from the greatest to the least? Only we may
perhaps say, that *princes*, rather than others, are charged with
blindness and ignorance — for this reason, that they alone appear in the
view of the word clear-sighted and wise. At the same time I should
prefer to understand the expression in a more simple way, agreeably to
the common usage of Scripture, which is wont to speak in terms of
universality of those things that, happen <span
id="ix.iii-p25.1"></span>επι το πολυ, that is *commonly*, and also to
make a negative statement in terms of universality, as to those things
that happen only <span id="ix.iii-p25.2"></span>ἐπι ἔλαττον, that is
*very seldom* In this sense there were nothing inconsistent with this
statement, though there were found a few men of distinction, and
elevated above others in point of dignity, who were at the same time
endowed with the pure knowledge of God.

<span id="ix.iii-p26"></span>*For had they known* The wisdom of God
shone forth clearly *in Christ*, and yet *there* the *princes* did not
perceive it; for those who took the lead in the crucifixion of Christ
were on the one hand the chief men of the Jews, high in credit for
holiness and wisdom; and on the other hand Pilate and the Roman empire.
In this we have a most distinct proof of the utter blindness of all that
are wise only according to the flesh. This argument of the Apostle,
however, might appear to be weak. “What! do we not every day see persons
who, with deliberate malice, fight against the truth of God, as to which
they are not ignorant; nay, even if a rebellion so manifest were not to
be seen by us with our eyes, what else is the sin against the Holy Ghost
than a willful obstinacy against God, when a man knowingly and willingly
does not merely oppose his word, but even fights against it. It is on
this account, too, that Christ declares that the Pharisees, and others
of that description, *knew him*, (<span id="ix.iii-p26.1"></span>[Joh
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028)<span id="ix.iii-p26.1"></span>,.md)
while he deprives them of all pretext of ignorance, and accuses them of
impious cruelty in persecuting him, the faithful servant of the Father,
for no other reason but that they hated the truth.”

<span id="ix.iii-p27"></span>I answer that there are two kinds of
ignorance. The *one* arises from inconsiderate zeal, not expressly
rejecting what is good, but from having an impression that it is evil.
No one, it is true, sins in ignorance in such a way as not to be
chargeable meanwhile in the sight of God with an evil conscience, there
being always a mixture of hypocrisy, or pride, or contempt; but at the
same time judgment, and all intelligence in the mind of man, are
sometimes so effectually choked, that nothing but bare ignorance is to
be seen by others, or even by the individual himself. Such was Paul
before he was enlightened; for the reason why he hated Christ and was
hostile to his doctrine was, that he was through ignorance hurried away
with a preposterous zeal for the law.  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) Yet he was not devoid of hypocrisy,
nor exempt from pride, so as to be free from blame in the sight of God,
but those vices were so completely covered over with ignorance and
blindness as not to be perceived or felt even by himself.

<span id="ix.iii-p29"></span>The *other* kind of ignorance has more of
the appearance of insanity and derangement, than of mere ignorance; for
those that of their own accord rise up against God, are like persons in
a frenzy, who, seeing, see not. (<span id="ix.iii-p29.1"></span>[Mt
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span id="ix.iii-p29.1"></span>..md)
It must be looked upon, indeed, as a settled point, that infidelity is
always blind; but the difference lies here, that in some cases malice is
covered over with blindness to such a degree that the individual,
through a kind of stupidity, is without any perception of his own
wickedness. This is the case with those who, with a good intention, as
they speak, or in other words, a foolish imagination, impose upon
themselves. In some cases malice has the ascendancy in such a manner,
that in spite of the checks of conscience, the individual rushes forward
into wickedness of this sort with a kind of madness.  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) Hence it is not to be wondered, if
Paul declares that *the princes of this world would not have crucified
Christ, had they known* the wisdom of God. For the Pharisees and Scribes
did not know Christ’s doctrine to be true, so as not to be bewildered in
their mind, and wander on in their own darkness.

<span id="ix.iii-p31"></span><span id="ix.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p32"></span>**9.** *As it is written, “What eye hath
not seen.”* All are agreed that this passage is taken from <span
id="ix.iii-p32.1"></span>[Isa
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.iii-p32.1"></span>,
and as the meaning is at first view plain and easy, interpreters do not
give themselves much trouble in expounding it. On looking, however, more
narrowly into it, two very great difficulties present themselves. The
*first* is, that the words that are here quoted by Paul do not
correspond with the words of the Prophet. The *second* is, that it seems
as though Paul had perverted the Prophet’s declaration to a purpose
quite foreign to his design.

<span id="ix.iii-p33"></span>First then as to the words; and as they may
be taken in different senses, they are explained variously by
interpreters. Some render the passage thus: “From the beginning of the
world men have not heard, nor perceived with their ears, and eye hath
not seen any god beside Thee, who doth act in such a manner towards him
that waiteth for him.” Others understand the discourse as addressed to
God, in this manner: “Eye hath not seen, nor hath ear heard, O God,
besides thee, the things which thou dost for those that wait for thee.”
Literally, however, the Prophet’s meaning is: “From the beginning of the
world men have not heard, nor have they perceived with the ears, hath
not seen a god, (or O God,) besides thee, will do (or will prepare) for
him that waiteth for him.” If we understand <span
id="ix.iii-p33.1"></span>אלהים (God) to be in the accusative, the
relative *who* must be supplied. This exposition, too, appears, at first
view, to suit better with the Prophet’s context in respect of the verb
that follows being used in the third person;  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) but it is farther removed from Paul’s
meaning, on which we ought to place more dependence than on any other
consideration. For where shall we find a surer or more faithful
interpreter than the Spirit of God of this authoritative declaration,
which He himself dictated to Isaiah — in the exposition which He has
furnished by the mouth of Paul. With the view of obviating, however, the
calumnies of the wicked, I observe that the Hebrew idiom admits of our
understanding the Prophets true meaning to be this: “O God, neither hath
eye seen, nor hath ear heard: but thou alone knowest the things which
thou art wont to do to those that wait for thee.” The sudden change of
person forms no objection, as we know that it is so common in the
writings of the Prophets, that it needs not be any hindrance in our way.
If any one, however, prefers the former interpretation, he will have no
occasion for charging either us or the Apostle with departing from the
simple meaning of the words, for we supply less than they do, as they
are under the necessity of adding a mark of comparison to the verb,
rendering it thus: “*who* doth act *in such a manner*.”

<span id="ix.iii-p35"></span>As to what follows respecting the
*entering* of these things *into the heart of man*, though the
expression is not made use of by the Prophet, it does not differ
materially from the clause *besides thee* For in ascribing this
knowledge to God alone, he excludes from it not merely the bodily senses
of men, but also the entire faculty of the understanding. While,
therefore, the Prophet makes mention only of sight and hearing, he
includes at the same time by implication all the faculties of the soul.
And without doubt these are the two instruments by which we attain the
knowledge of those things that find their way into the understanding. In
using the expression *them that love him*, he has followed the Greek
interpreters, who have translated it in this way from having been misled
by the resemblance between one letter and another;  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) but as that did not affect the point
in hand, he did not choose to depart from the common reading, as we
frequently have occasion to observe how closely he follows the received
version. Though the words, therefore, are not the same, there is no real
difference of meaning.

<span id="ix.iii-p37"></span>I come now to the subject-matter. The
Prophet in that passage, when mentioning how signally God had on all
occasions befriended his people in their *emergencies*, exclaims, that
his acts of kindness to the pious surpass the comprehension of human
intellect. “But what has this to do,” some one will say, “with spiritual
doctrine, and the promises of eternal life, as to which Paul is here
arguing?” There are three ways in which this question may be answered.
There were no inconsistency in affirming that the Prophet, having made
mention of earthly blessings, was in consequence of this led on to make
a general statement, and even to extol that spiritual blessedness which
is laid up in heaven for believers. I prefer, however, to understand him
simply as referring to those gifts of God’s grace that are daily
conferred upon believers. In these it becomes us always to observe their
source, and not to confine our views to their present aspect. Now their
source is that unmerited goodness of God, by which he has adopted us
into the number of his sons. He, therefore, who would estimate these
things aright, will not contemplate them in their naked aspect, but will
clothe them with God’s fatherly love, as with a robe, and will thus be
led forward from temporal favors to eternal life. It might also be
maintained that the argument is from the less to the greater; for if
man’s intellect is not competent to measure God’s earthly gifts, how
much less will it reach the height of heaven? (<span
id="ix.iii-p37.1"></span>[Joh
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii-p37.1"></span>..md)
I have, however, already intimated which interpretation I prefer.

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
2:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**10.** But God hath revealed *them* unto us
by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things
of God.

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>**10.** Nobis autem Deus revelavit per
Spiritum suum: Spiritus enim omnia scrutatur, etiam profunditates Dei.

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span>**11.** For what man knoweth the things of a
man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God
knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span>**11.** Quis enim hominum novit, quae ad eum
pertinent, nisi spiritus hominis, qui est in ipso? Ita et quae Dei sunt,
nemo novit, nisi Spiritus Dei.

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span>**12.** Now we have received, not the spirit
of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the
things that are freely given to us of God.

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span>**12.** Nos autem non spiritum mundi
accepimus, seal Spiritum qui est ex Deo: ut sciamus quae a Christo
donata sunt nobis:

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span>**13.** Which things also we speak, not in
the words which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost
teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span>**13.** Quae et loquimur, non in eruditis
humanae sapientiae sermonibus, sed Spiritus sancti, spiritualibus
spiritualia coaptantes.

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span><span id="ix.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p12"></span>**10.** *But God hath revealed them to us.*
Having shut up all mankind in blindness, and having taken away from the
human intellect the power of attaining to a knowledge of God by its own
resources, he now shows in what way believers are exempted from this
blindness, — by the Lord’s honoring them with a special illumination of
the Spirit. Hence the greater the bluntness of the human intellect for
understanding the mysteries of God, and the greater the uncertainty
under which it labors, so much the surer is our faith, which rests for
its support on the revelation of God’s Spirit. In this, too, we
recognize the unbounded goodness of God, who makes our defect contribute
to our advantage.

<span id="ix.iv-p13"></span>*For the Spirit searcheth all things* This
is added for the consolation of the pious, that they may rest more
securely in the revelation which they have from the Spirit of God, as
though he had said. “Let it suffice us to have the Spirit of God as a
witness, for there is nothing in God that is too profound for him to
reach.” For such is the import here of the word *searcheth* By the *deep
things* you must understand — not secret judgments, which we are
forbidden to *search into*, but the entire doctrine of salvation, which
would have been to no purpose set before us in the Scriptures, were it
not that God elevates our minds to it by his Spirit.

<span id="ix.iv-p14"></span><span id="ix.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p15"></span>**11.** *For what man knoweth?* Two
different things he intends to teach here: *first*, that the doctrine of
the Gospel cannot be understood otherwise than by the testimony of the
Holy Spirit; and *secondly*, that those who have a testimony of this
nature from the Holy Spirit, have an assurance as firm and solid, as if
they felt with their hands what they believe, for the Spirit is a
faithful and indubitable witness. This he proves by a similitude drawn
from our own *spirit*: for every one is conscious of his own thoughts,
and on the other hand what lies hid in any man’s heart, is unknown to
another. In the same way what is the counsel of God, and what his will,
is hid from all mankind, for “who hath been his counselor?” (<span
id="ix.iv-p15.1"></span>[Ro 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034.md)<span
id="ix.iv-p15.1"></span>.) It is, therefore, a secret recess,
inaccessible to mankind; but, if the Spirit of God himself introduces us
into it, or in other words, makes us acquainted with those things that
are otherwise hid from our view, there will then be no more ground for
hesitation, for nothing that is in God escapes the notice of the Spirit
of God.

<span id="ix.iv-p16"></span>This similitude, however, may seem to be not
altogether very appropriate, for as the tongue bears an impress of the
mind, mankind communicate their dispositions to each other, so that they
become acquainted with each other’s thoughts. Why then may we not
understand from the word of God what is his will? For while mankind by
pretenses and falsehoods in many cases conceal their thoughts rather
than discover them, this cannot happen with God, whose word is undoubted
truth, and his genuine and lively image. We must, however, carefully
observe how far Paul designed to extend this comparison. A man’s
innermost thought, of which others are ignorant, is perceived by himself
alone: if he afterwards makes it known to others, this does not hinder
but that his spirit alone knows what is in him. For it may happen that
he does not persuade: it may even happen that he does not properly
express his own meaning; but even if he attains both objects, this
statement is not at variance with the other — that his own spirit alone
has the true knowledge of it. There is this difference, however, between
God’s thoughts and those of men, that men mutually understand each
other; but the word of God is a kind of *hidden wisdom*, the loftiness
of which is not reached by the weakness of the human *intellect*. Thus
the light shineth in darkness, (<span id="ix.iv-p16.1"></span>[Joh
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span id="ix.iv-p16.1"></span>,.md)
aye and until the Spirit opens the eyes of the blind.

<span id="ix.iv-p17"></span>*The spirit of a man* Observe, that the
*spirit of a man* is taken here for the soul, in which the intellectual
faculty, as it is called, resides. For Paul would have expressed himself
inaccurately if he had ascribed this knowledge to man’s intellect, or in
other words, the faculty itself, and not to the soul, which is endued
with the power of understanding.

<span id="ix.iv-p18"></span><span id="ix.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p19"></span>**12.** *Now we have received, not the
spirit of the world* He heightens by contrast the certainty of which he
had made mention. “The Spirit of revelation,” says he, “which we have
received, is not of the world, so as to be merely creeping upon the
ground, so as to be subject to vanity, or be in suspense, or vary or
fluctuate, or hold us in doubt and perplexity. On the contrary, it is
from God, and hence it is above all heavens, of solid and unvarying
truth, and placed above all risk of doubt.”

<span id="ix.iv-p20"></span>It is a passage that is most abundantly
clear, for refuting that diabolical doctrine of the Sophists as to a
constant hesitancy on the part of believers. For they require all
believers to be in doubt, whether they are in the grace of God or not,
and allow of no assurance of salvation, but what hangs on moral or
probable conjecture. In this, however, they overthrow faith in two
respects: for *first* they would have us be in doubt, whether we are in
a state of grace, and then afterwards they suggest a *second* occasion
of doubt — as to final perseverance.  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md) Here, however, the Apostle declares in
general terms, that the *elect* have the Spirit given them, by whose
testimony they are assured that they have been adopted to the hope of
eternal salvation. Undoubtedly, if they would maintain their doctrine,
they must of necessity either take away the Spirit of God from the
elect, or make even the Spirit himself subject to uncertainty. Both of
these things are openly at variance with Paul’s doctrine. Hence we may
know the nature of faith to be this, that conscience has from the Holy
Spirit a sure testimony of the good-will of God towards it, so that,
resting upon this, it does not hesitate to invoke God as a Father. Thus
Paul lifts up our faith above the world, that it may look down with
lofty disdain upon all the pride of the flesh; for otherwise it will be
always timid and wavering, because we see how boldly human ingenuity
exalts itself, the haughtiness of which requires to be trodden under
foot by the sons of God through means of an opposing haughtiness of
heroical magnanimity.  <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md)

<span id="ix.iv-p23"></span>*That we may know the things that are given
us by Christ.* The word *know* is made use of to express more fully the
assurance of confidence. Let us observe, however, that it is not
acquired in a natural way, and is not attained by the mental capacity,
but depends entirely on the revelation of the Spirit. The things that he
makes mention of as *given by Christ* are the blessings that we obtain
through his death and resurrection — that being reconciled to God, and
having obtained remission of sins, we know that we have been adopted to
the hope of eternal life, and that, being sanctified by the Spirit of
regeneration, we are made new creatures, that we may live to God. In
<span id="ix.iv-p23.1"></span>[Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018.md)<span id="ix.iv-p23.1"></span>, he
says what amounts to the same thing —

<span id="ix.iv-p24"></span>“That ye may know what is the hope of your
calling.”

<span id="ix.iv-p25"></span><span id="ix.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p26"></span>**13.** *Which things also we speak, not in
the learned words, etc*. He speaks of himself, for he is still employed
in commending his ministry. Now it is a high commendation that he
pronounces upon his preaching, when he says of it that it contains a
secret revelation of the most important matters — the doctrine of the
Holy Spirit, the sum of our salvation, and the inestimable treasures of
Christ, that the Corinthians may know how highly it ought to be prized.
In the meantime he returns to the concession that he had made before —
that his preaching had not been adorned with any glitter of words, and
had no luster of elegance, but was contented with the simple doctrine of
the Holy Spirit. By *the learned words of human wisdom*  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md) he means those that savor of human
learning, and are polished according to the rules of the rhetoricians,
or blown up with philosophical loftiness, with a view to excite the
admiration of the hearers. *The words taught by the Spirit,* on the
other hand, are such as are adapted to a pure and simple style,
corresponding to the dignity of the Spirit, rather than to an empty
ostentation. For in order that eloquence may not be wanting, we must
always take care that the wisdom of God be not polluted with any
borrowed and profane luster. Paul’s manner of teaching was of such a
kind, that the power of the Spirit shone forth in it single and
unattired, without any foreign aid.

<span id="ix.iv-p28"></span>*Spiritual things with spiritual* <span
id="ix.iv-p28.1"></span>Συγκρινεσθαι is used here, I have no doubt, in
the sense of *adapt* This is sometimes the meaning of the word,  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) (as Budaeus shows by a quotation from
Aristotle,)and hence <span id="ix.iv-p29.2"></span>συγκριμα is used to
mean what is knit together or glued together, and certainly it suits
much better with Paul’s context than *compare* or *liken*, as others
have rendered it. He says then that he *adapts spiritual things to
spiritual*, in accommodating the words to the subject;  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md) that is, he tempers that heavenly
wisdom of the Spirit with a simple style of speech, and of such a nature
as carries in its front the native energy of the Spirit. In the meantime
he reproves others, who, by an affected elegance of expression and show
of refinement, endeavor to obtain the applause of men, as persons who
are either devoid of solid truth, or, by unbecoming ornaments, corrupt
the spiritual doctrine of God.

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span><span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>**14.** But the natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither
can he know *them*, because they are spiritually discerned.

<span id="ix.v-p3"></span>**14.** Animalis autem homo non comprehendit
quae sunt Spiritus Dei. Sunt enim illi stultitia; nec potest
intelligere, quia spiritualiter diiudicantur.

<span id="ix.v-p4"></span>**15.** But he that is spiritual judgeth all
things, yet himself is judged of no man.

<span id="ix.v-p5"></span>**15.** Spiritualis autem diiudicat omnia,
ipsc vero a neminc (vel, nullo) diiudicatur.

<span id="ix.v-p6"></span>**16.** For who hath known the mind of the
Lord, that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ.

<span id="ix.v-p7"></span>**16.** Quis enim cognovit mentem Domini, qui
adjuvet ipsum? nos autem mentem Christi habemus.

<span id="ix.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.v-p9"></span><span id="ix.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p10"></span>**14.** *But the animal man.*  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) By the *animal man* he does not mean
(as is commonly thought) the man that is given up to gross lusts, or, as
they say, to his own sensuality, but any man that is endowed with
nothing more than the faculties  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md)
of nature.  <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md) This appears from
the corresponding term, for he draws a comparison between the *animal*
man and the *spiritual* As *the latter* denotes the man whose
understanding is regulated by the illumination of the Spirit of God,
there can be no doubt that *the former* denotes the man that is left in
a purely natural condition, as they speak. For the soul  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md) belongs to nature, but the Spirit is
of supernatural communication.

<span id="ix.v-p15"></span>He returns to what he had previously touched
upon, for his object is to remove a stumblingblock which might stand in
the way of the weak — that there were so many that despised the gospel.
He shows that we ought to make no account of a contempt of such a nature
as proceeds from ignorance, and that it ought, consequently, to be no
hindrance in the way of our going forward in the race of faith, unless
perhaps we choose to shut our eyes upon the brightness of the sun,
because it is not seen by the blind. It would, however, argue great
ingratitude in any individual, when God bestows upon him a special
favor, to reject it, on the ground of its not being common to all,
whereas, on the contrary, its very rareness ought to enhance its value.
 <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md)

<span id="ix.v-p17"></span>*For they are foolishness to him, neither can
he know them*. “The doctrine of the gospel,” says he, “is insipid  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md) in the view of all that are wise
merely in the view of man. But whence comes this? It is from their own
blindness. In what respect, then, does this detract from the majesty of
the gospel?” In short, while ignorant persons depreciate the gospel,
because they measure its value by the estimation in which it is held by
men, Paul derives an argument from this for extolling more highly its
dignity. For he teaches that the reason why it is contemned is that it
is unknown, and that the reason why it is unknown is that it is too
profound and sublime to be apprehended by the understanding of man. What
a superior wisdom  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) this is,
which so far transcends all human understanding, that man cannot have so
much as a taste of it!  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) While,
however, Paul here tacitly imputes it to the pride of the flesh, that
mankind dare to condemn as foolish what they do not comprehend, he at
the same time shows how great is the weakness or rather bluntness of the
human understanding, when he declares it to be incapable of spiritual
apprehension. For he teaches, that it is not owing simply to the
obstinacy of the human will, but to the impotency, also, of the
understanding, that man does not attain to the *things of the Spirit*.
Had he said that men are not *willing* to be wise, *that* indeed would
have been true, but he states farther that they are not *able*. Hence we
infer, that faith is not in one’s own power, but is divinely conferred.

<span id="ix.v-p21"></span>*Because they are spiritually discerned* That
is, the Spirit of God, from whom the doctrine of the gospel comes, is
its only true interpreter, to open it up to us. Hence in judging of it,
men’s minds must of necessity be in blindness until they are enlightened
by the Spirit of God.  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md) Hence
infer, that all mankind are by nature destitute of the Spirit of God:
otherwise the argument would be inconclusive. It is from the Spirit of
God, it is true, that we have that feeble spark of reason which we all
enjoy; but at present we are speaking of that special discovery of
heavenly wisdom which God vouchsafes to his sons alone. Hence the more
insufferable the ignorance of those who imagine that the gospel is
offered to mankind in common in such a way that all indiscriminately are
free  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md) to embrace salvation by
faith.

<span id="ix.v-p24"></span><span id="ix.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p25"></span>**15.** *But the spiritual man judgeth all
things.* Having stripped of all authority man’s carnal judgment, he now
teaches, that *the spiritual* alone are fit judges as to this matter,
inasmuch as God is known only by his Spirit, and it is his peculiar
province to distinguish between his own things and those of others, to
approve of what is his own, and to make void all things else. The
meaning, then, is this: “Away with all the discernment of the flesh as
to this matter! It is *the spiritual man* alone that has such a firm and
solid acquaintance with the mysteries of God, as to distinguish without
fail between truth and falsehood — between the doctrine of God and the
contrivances of man, so as not to fall into mistake.  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) *He*, on the other hand, *is judged by
no man*, because the assurance of faith is not subject to men, as though
they could make it totter at their nod,  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) it being superior even to angels
themselves.” Observe, that this prerogative is not ascribed to the man
as an individual, but to the word of God, which *the spiritual* follow
in judging, and which is truly dictated to them by God with true
discernment. Where *that* is afforded, a man’s persuasion  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) is placed beyond the range of human
judgment. Observe, farther, the word rendered *judged*: by which the
Apostle intimates, that we are not merely enlightened by the Lord to
perceive the truth, but are also endowed with a spirit of
discrimination, so as not to hang in doubt between truth and falsehood,
but are able to determine what we ought to shun and what to follow.

<span id="ix.v-p29"></span>But here it may be asked, who is *the
spiritual man*, and where we may find one that is endowed with so much
light as to be prepared to *judge of all things*, feeling as we do, that
we are at all times encompassed with much ignorance, and are in danger
of erring: nay more, even those who come nearest to perfection from time
to time fall and bruise themselves. The answer is easy: Paul does not
extend this faculty to everything, so as to represent all that are
renewed by the Spirit of God as exempt from every kind of error, but
simply designs to teach, that the wisdom of the flesh is of no avail for
judging of the doctrine of piety, and that this right of judgment and
authority belong exclusively to the Spirit of God. In so far, therefore,
as any one is regenerated, and according to the measure of grace
conferred upon him, does he judge with accuracy and certainty, and no
farther.

<span id="ix.v-p30"></span>*He himself is judged by no man*. I have
already explained on what ground he says that *the spiritual man* is not
subject to the judgment of any man — because the truth of faith, which
depends on God alone, and is grounded on his word, does not stand or
fall according to the pleasure of men.  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) What he says afterwards, that

<span id="ix.v-p32"></span>the spirit of one Prophet is subject to the
other Prophets,  
(<span id="ix.v-p32.2"></span>[1Co
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#032)<span id="ix.v-p32.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="ix.v-p33"></span>is not at all inconsistent with this
statement. For what is the design of that subjection, but that each of
the Prophets listens to the others, and does not despise or reject their
revelations, in order that what is discovered to be the truth of God,
 <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) may at length remain firm, and
be received by all? Here, however, he places the science of faith, which
has been received from God,  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md)
above the height of heaven and earth, in order that it may not be
estimated by the judgment of men. At the same time, <span
id="ix.v-p35.2"></span>ὕπ ᾿ οὐδενός may be taken in the neuter gender as
meaning — by *nothing*, understanding it as referring to a thing, and
not to a man. In this way the contrast will be more complete,  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) as intimating that *the spiritual
man*, in so far as he is endowed with the Spirit of God, *judgeth all
things*, but *is judged by nothing*, because he is not subject to any
human wisdom or reason. In this way, too, Paul would exempt the
consciences of the pious from all decrees, laws, and censures of men.

<span id="ix.v-p37"></span><span id="ix.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p38"></span>**16.** *For who hath known*? It is probable
that Paul had an eye to what we read in the 40th chapter of Isaiah. The
Prophet there asks,

<span id="ix.v-p39"></span>Who hath been God’s counselor? Who hath
weighed his Spirit,  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md) (<span
id="ix.v-p40.1"></span>[Isa 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013.md)<span
id="ix.v-p40.1"></span>,)

<span id="ix.v-p41"></span>or hath aided him both in the creation of the
world and in his other works? and, in fine, who hath comprehended the
reason of his works? Now, in like manner Paul, by this interrogation,
designs to teach, that his secret counsel which is contained in the
gospel is far removed from the understanding of men. This then is a
confirmation of the preceding statement.

<span id="ix.v-p42"></span>*But we have the mind of Christ.* It is
uncertain whether he speaks of believers universally, or of ministers
exclusively. Either of these meanings will suit sufficiently well with
the context, though I prefer to view it as referring more particularly
to himself and other faithful ministers.  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) He says, then, that the servants of
the Lord are taught by the paramount authority of the Spirit, what is
farthest removed from the judgment of the flesh, that they may speak
fearlessly as from the mouth of the Lord, — which gift flows out
afterwards by degrees to the whole Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc39008.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="ix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p6.1"></span>Car je n’ay
point eu en estime de scauoir aucune chose *ou* rien deli-ber\~ de
sqauoir entre vous:” — “I had nothing in esteem as knowledge; *or*, I
determined to know nothing among you.”

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc39008.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="ix.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span> Calvin refers to what he had said when
commenting on an expression which occurs in <span
id="ix.i-p10.1"></span>[1Co 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017.md)<span
id="ix.i-p10.1"></span> — *not* *with wisdom of words*.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc39008.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="ix.i-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span> Xenophon uses <span
id="ix.i-p13.1"></span>κρινω in the sense of *choosing out*, or
*preferring*: in Mem. 4. 4, sec. 16, <span id="ix.i-p13.2"></span>ουχ
ὁπως τους αυτους χορους κρινωσιν οἱ πολιται — not that the citizens
should prefer the dances.” See also Menander, prefer the same line 245,
edit. Cleric. In the New Testament we find <span
id="ix.i-p13.3"></span>κρινω used in the sense of *esteeming*, in <span
id="ix.i-p13.4"></span>[Ro 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005.md)<span
id="ix.i-p13.4"></span>. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc39008.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="ix.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p15.1"></span>Ne fera point
que ie n’aye en reuerence et admiration;” — “Will not prevent me from
holding in reverence and admiration.”

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc39008.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p4.1"></span>En infirmite
ou foiblesse;” — “In weakness or feebleness.”

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc39008.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span> “Thrasones.” The appellation is borrowed
from Thraso, a foolish captain in Terence (Eun. 3:1.) — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc39008.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p14.1"></span>Ne
cognoissent ni eux ni la chose qu’ils ont entre mains;” — “They know not
either themselves or the thing that they have in hand.”

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc39008.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p18"></span> This passage has largely exercised the
ingenuity of critics, from the circumstance that the adjective <span
id="ix.ii-p18.1"></span>πειθοῖς, occurring nowhere else in the New
Testament, or in any of the writings of classical authors, it is
supposed that there has been some corruption of the reading. Some
suppose it to be a contraction or corruption of <span
id="ix.ii-p18.2"></span>πείθανοις or <span
id="ix.ii-p18.3"></span>πίθαςοις, and Chrysostom, in one or two
instances, when quoting the passage, uses the adjective <span
id="ix.ii-p18.4"></span>πίθανοις, while in other cases he has <span
id="ix.ii-p18.5"></span>πειθοῖς It is perhaps in allusion to those
instances in which Chrysostom makes use of the adjective <span
id="ix.ii-p18.6"></span>πίθαςοις, that Calvin employs the phrase <span
id="ix.ii-p18.7"></span>το πίθανον (persuasiveness.) Semler, after
adducing various authorities, suggests the following reading: — <span
id="ix.ii-p18.8"></span>ἐν πειθοῖ σοφαις taking <span
id="ix.ii-p18.9"></span>πειθοῖ; as the dative of <span
id="ix.ii-p18.10"></span>ἡ πειθω, (persuasion.) Bloomfield considers
<span id="ix.ii-p18.11"></span>πειθοῖ, to be a highly probable reading,
but prefers to retain <span id="ix.ii-p18.12"></span>πειθοῖς. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc39008.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p18.13"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p19.1"></span>Secrettement
et doucement;” — “Secretly and softly.”

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc39008.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p20"></span> A figure of speech by which words change
their cases with each other. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc39008.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span> “Thus we read, (<span
id="ix.iii-p13.1"></span>[Ge
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)<span id="ix.iii-p13.1"></span>,.md)
that Jacob was <span id="ix.iii-p13.2"></span>איש תם, “a *perfect* man,”
i.e. without any manifest blemish. See also <span
id="ix.iii-p13.3"></span>[Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.iii-p13.3"></span>. The
corresponding word <span id="ix.iii-p13.4"></span>תמים, is frequently
applied to the sacrificial victims, to denote their being *without
blemish* <span id="ix.iii-p13.5"></span>[Ex
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.iii-p13.5"></span>;
<span id="ix.iii-p13.6"></span>[Le
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.iii-p13.6"></span>. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc39008.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p13.7"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p14.1"></span>Il ne s’en
rapporte pas a vn chacvn, mais requiert des luges entiers;” — “He does
not submit the case to every one, but appeals to competent judges.”

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc39008.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p21"></span> “In allusion, it is generally thought, to
*the* deep and dark caverns from which the heathen oracles gave forth
their responses. Such was the cave (antrum) of the Cumean Sibyl,
described by Virgil, AEn. 6:42-44, and also the cavern in the temple of
Apollo at Delphi, described by Strabo (lib. 9.) “<span
id="ix.iii-p21.1"></span>φασι δ <span id="ix.iii-p21.2"></span>᾿ ειναι
το μαντειον αντρον κοιλον μετα βαθους, ου μαλα ευροστομον;” — “They say
that the oracle is a hollow cavern of considerable depth, but not at all
wide in the opening.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc39008.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p23"></span> Locke, in accordance with Calvin’s view,
understands Paul as if he had said: “Why do you make divisions, by
glorying, as you do, in your distinct teachers? The glory that God has
ordained us (Christian teachers and professors) to, is to be expounders,
preachers, and believers of those revealed truths and purposes of God,
which, though contained in the sacred Scriptures of the Old Testament,
were not understood in former ages.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc39008.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p28.1"></span>Vne zele
de la loy desordonne et real regle;” — “An inordinate and ill regulated
zeal for the law.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc39008.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p30"></span> The distinction drawn by Calvin is
illustrated by a statement of Solomon in <span
id="ix.iii-p30.1"></span>[Pr
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#027.md)<span id="ix.iii-p30.1"></span>.
“The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more when he
bringeth it *with a wicked mind*.” <span id="ix.iii-p30.2"></span>בזמה —
“with a wicked design.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc39008.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p34"></span> “<span id="ix.iii-p34.1"></span>Assauoir,
Fera, or Preparera;” — “Namely — He will do, or *He* will prepare.”

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc39008.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p36"></span> The word made use of by Isaiah is <span
id="ix.iii-p36.1"></span>מחכה, which is a part of the verb <span
id="ix.iii-p36.2"></span>חכה, to *wait for*, and Calvin’s meaning most
probably is, that the “Greek interpreters had (from the resemblance
between <span id="ix.iii-p36.3"></span>ב and <span
id="ix.iii-p36.4"></span>כ) been led into the mistake of supposing it to
be a part of the verb <span id="ix.iii-p36.5"></span>חבב, to *love*,
while the corresponding part of the latter *verb* — <span
id="ix.iii-p36.6"></span>מחובב, manifestly differs very widely from the
word made use of by the Prophet. There appears, how ever, to have been
an oversight, in this instance, on the part of Calvin, as the word in
the Septuagint version is *not* the word made use of by the *Apostle* —
<span id="ix.iii-p36.7"></span>ἀγαπῶσιν, “them that love” (him,) but
(corresponding to the word made use of bythe *Prophet* <span
id="ix.iii-p36.8"></span>ὑπομένουσιν, “them that wait for” (him.) It is
not a little *singular*, that Clemens Romanus (Ep. ad Cor. Sect. 34.)
quotes the words of Isaiah precisely as Paul quotes them, with the
exception of the last clause, which he gives as follows: <span
id="ix.iii-p36.9"></span>ὅσα ἡτοιμασε τοις ὑπομένουσιν αὐτὸν — “which he
hath prepared for them that *wait for* him.” Some have supposed the
citation to have *been* taken from one or other of the two Apocryphal
books, entitled, “The Ascension of Esaiah,” and “The Apocalyps of
Elias,” in both of which this passage was found, but, as is justly
observed by *Horne* in his *Introduction* (volume 2,) “it is so near to
the Hebrew here both in sense and words, that we cannot suppose it to be
taken from any other source, nor in this case would the Apostle have
introduced it with the formula of quotation — as *it is written*.” In
accordance with Calvln’s remark, that “though the words are not the
same, there is no real difference of meaning,” it is well observed by
*Poole* in his *Annotations*, that “waiting *for*” God is “the certain
product and effect of *love to him*.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc39008.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p21"></span> The reader will find this subject treated
of at greater length in the *Institutes*, volume 2, p. 143. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc39008.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p22.1"></span>Fondee en
vne magnanimite heroique;” — “Founded upon a heroical magnanimity.”

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc39008.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p27"></span> “A similar rendering is given in some of
the old English versions of the Scriptures. Thus, Wiclif’s version,
(1380,) it is rendered “not in wise wordis of mannes wisdom:” in
Tyndale’s version (1534) — “not in the connynge wordes of mannes
wysdome: and in Rhemls version (1582) — “not in learned wordes of humane
wisedom.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc39008.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="ix.iv-p29.1"></span>Es bons
autheurs;” — “In good authors.”

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc39008.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p30"></span> Beza’s view is substantially the same —
“<span id="ix.iv-p30.1"></span>Verba rei accommodantes, ut, sicut
spiritualia sunt quae docemus, neque sinceritas doctrinae caelestis
ullis humanis commentis est depravata, ita spirituale sit nostrum illius
docendae ghenus: — “Accommodating the words to the subject, so that as
the things at we teach are spiritual, and the purity of heavenly
doctrine is not corrupted by human contrivances, our mode of teaching it
may in like manner be spiritual.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc39008.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="ix.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p11.1"></span>Or *l*’*homme
naturel*. A le traduire du Grec mot a mot, il y auroit l’homme animal;”
— “*But the natural man*. Rendering the Greek literally it means the
animal man.”

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc39008.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="ix.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p12.1"></span>Les facultes
et graces;” — “The faculties and gifts.”

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc39008.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="ix.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p13"></span> Beza’s definition of the term is much
similar — “<span id="ix.v-p13.1"></span>Homo non alia quam naturali
animi luce praeditus;” — “A man that is not endowed with anything more
than the natural light of the mind.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc39008.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="ix.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p14.1"></span>Anima“ “the
soul” corresponds to the Greek term <span id="ix.v-p14.2"></span>ψυχη,
and the Hebrew term <span id="ix.v-p14.3"></span>נפש, while <span
id="ix.v-p14.4"></span>*spiritus* (spirit) corresponds to <span
id="ix.v-p14.5"></span>πνευμα and <span id="ix.v-p14.6"></span>רוח; but
Calvin employs the epithet <span id="ix.v-p14.7"></span>*animalis*
(*animal*) *as* a derivative from <span id="ix.v-p14.8"></span>*anima*,
(*the soul*,) and as designating the man whose *soul* is in a purely
natural state — without supernatural illumination — in other words, the
man of mere *mind*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc39008.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="ix.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p16.1"></span>D’autant qu’il
est fait a peu de gens, d’autant doit-il estre trouue plus excellent;” —
“The fewer it is conferred upon, it ought to be accounted so much the
more valuable.”

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc39008.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="ix.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p18"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p18.1"></span>Et n’auoir
point de goust;” — “And has no relish.”

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc39008.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="ix.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p19.1"></span>O quelle
sagesse!“ — “O what wisdom!”

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc39008.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="ix.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p20.1"></span>Vn petit
goust;” — “A slight taste.”

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc39008.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="ix.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p22"></span> “The reader will find the Apostle’s
statement respecting the “natural man” commented upon at some length in
the *Institutes*, volume 1. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc39008.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="ix.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p23"></span> Calvin obviously does not mean to deny that
“all indiscriminately” are *invited* and *warranted* to “embrace
salvation by faith.” He says in the *Harmony*, volume 3, “For since by
his word he \[God\] *calls all men indiscriminately to* salvation, and
since the end of preaching is, that all should betake themselves to his
guardianship and protection, it may justly be said that he *wills* to
gather all to himself.” His meaning is, that the will requires to be set
*free* by the Spirit of God. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc39008.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="ix.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p26"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p26.1"></span>En cest
endroit“ — “In this matter.”

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc39008.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="ix.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p27.1"></span>Pour estre ou
n’estre point selon qu’il leur plaira;” — “So as to be or not to be,
according as it shall please them.”

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc39008.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="ix.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p28.1"></span>Et foy;” —
“And faith.”

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc39008.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="ix.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p31"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p31.1"></span>N’est point
suiete au plaisir des hommes, pour estre ou n’estre point, selon qu’ils
voudront;” — “It is not subject to the pleasure of men, so as to be, or
not to be, according as they shall choose.”

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc39008.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="ix.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p34"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p34.1"></span>La pure verite
du Seigneur;” — “The pure truth of the Lord.”

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc39008.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="ix.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p35"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p35.1"></span>Mais yci il
establit et conferme la science de roy, laquelle les eleus recoyuent de
Dieu;” — “But here he establishes and confirms the science of faith,
which the elect have received from God.”

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc39008.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="ix.v-p35.3"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p36"></span> “<span id="ix.v-p36.1"></span>Et expresse;”
— “And exact.”

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc39008.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="ix.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p40"></span> The expression made use of by Isaiah is, Who
hath *directed* the Spirit of the Lord? Our author, quoting from memory,
seems to have had in his eye an expression that occurs in a preceding
part of the same passage, “and *weighed* the mountains in scales.” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc39008.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="ix.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p43"></span> Calvin, when alluding to this passage, as he
evidently does in his Commentary on <span id="ix.v-p43.1"></span>[Ro
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034.md)<span id="ix.v-p43.1"></span>,
views the expression, We *have the mind of Christ*, as applicable to
believers universally — “<span id="ix.v-p43.2"></span>Nam et Paulus ipso
alibi, postquam testatus erat onmia Dei mysteria ingenii nostri captum
longe excedere, mox tamen subjicit, fideles tenere mentem Domini: quia
non spiritum hujus mundi acceperint, sed a Deo sibi datum, per quem de
incomprehensibili alioqui ejus bonitate edocentur;” — “For even Paul
himself, in another place, after testifying that all the mysteries of
God far exceed the capacity of our understanding, does nevertheless
immediately add, that believers are in possession of the Lord’s mind,
because they have received not the spirit of this world, but that which
has been given them by God, whereby they are instructed as to his
otherwise incomprehensible goodness.” — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc39009.md)
