[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc39018)  [Next](cc39020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001.md)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** Though I speak with the tongues of men
and of angels, and have not charity, I am become *as* sounding brass, or
a tinkling cymbal.

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et adhuc excellentiorem viam vobis
demonstro. Si linguis hominum loquar et Angelorum, caritatem autem non
habeam, factus sum tympanum sonans, aut cymbalum tinniens.

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2.** And though I have *the gift of*
prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I
have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity,
I am nothing.

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et si habeam prophetiam, et noverim
mysteria omnia omnemque scientiam, et si habeam omnem fidem, adeo ut
montes loco dimoveam, caritatem autem non habeam, nihil sum.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**3.** And though I bestow all my goods to
feed *the poor,* and though I give my body to be burned, and have not
charity, it profiteth me nothing.

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et si insumam in alimoniam omnes
facultates meas, et si tradam corpus meum ut comburar, caritatem autem
non habeam, nihil mihi prodest.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span><span id="xx.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>The division of the Chapter being so absurd,
I could not refrain from changing it, especially as I could not
conveniently interpret it otherwise. For what purpose did it serve to
connect with what goes before a detached sentence, which agrees so well
with what comes after — nay more, is thereby rendered complete? It is
likely, that it happened through a mistake on the part of the
transcribers. However it may be as to this, after having commanded that
regard should be had chiefly to edification, he now declares that he
will show them something of greater importance — that everything be
regulated according to the rule of *love.* This, then, is *the most
excellent way,* when *love* is the regulating principle of all our
actions. And, in the outset, he proceeds upon this — that all
excellencies  <span id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773.md) are of no value
without *love;* for nothing is so excellent or estimable as not to be
vitiated in the sight of God, if *love*  <span
id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774.md) is wanting. Nor does he teach anything
here but what he does elsewhere, when he *declares,* that it is the *end
of the law,* and the *bond of perfection,* (<span
id="xx.i-p12.5"></span>[1Ti 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005.md)<span
id="xx.i-p12.5"></span>,) and also when he makes the holiness of the
godly consist entirely in this, (<span id="xx.i-p12.6"></span>[Col
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014)<span id="xx.i-p12.6"></span>,.md) —
for what else does God require from us in the second Table of the Law?
It is not then to be wondered, if all our deeds are estimated by this
test — their appearing to proceed from love. It is also not to be
wondered, if gifts, otherwise ex*cellent,* come to have their true value
only when they are made subservient to *love.*

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>1. *If should speak with the tongues of men.*
He begins with eloquence, which is, it is true, an admirable gift,
considered in itself, but, when apart from *love,* does not recommend a
man in the estimation of God. When he speaks of the *tongue of angels,*
he uses a hyperbolical expression to denote what is singular, or
distinguished. At the same time, I explain it rather as referring to the
diversity of languages, which the Corinthians held in much esteem,
measuring everything by ambition — not by fruit.  <span
id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775.md) “Make yourself master,” says he, “of
all the languages, not of men merely, but even of Angels. You have, in
that case, no reason to think, that you are of higher estimation in the
sight of God than a mere cymbal, if you have not *love.”*

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span><span id="xx.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span>**2.** *And if I should have the gift of
prophecy.* He brings down to nothing the dignity of even this endowment,
 <span id="fr_776"></span>[777](#fn_776.md) which, nevertheless, he had
preferred to all others. *To know all mysteries,* might seem to be added
to the term *prophecy,* by way of explanation, but as the term
*knowledge* is immediately added, of which he had previously made
mention by itself, (<span id="xx.i-p17.2"></span>[1Co
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008)<span id="xx.i-p17.2"></span>,.md) it
will deserve your consideration, whether the *knowledge of mysteries*
may not be used here to mean *wisdom.* As for myself, while I would not
venture to affirm that it is so, I am much inclined to that opinion.

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>That *faith,* of which he speaks, is special,
as is evident from the clause that is immediately added — so *that I
remove mountains* Hence the Sophists accomplish nothing, when they
pervert this passage for the purpose of detracting from the excellence
of faith. As, therefore, the term *faith* is *(*<span
id="xx.i-p18.1"></span>πολύσημον*) used in a variety of senses,* it is
the part of the prudent reader to observe in what signification it is
taken. Paul, however, as I have already stated, is his own interpreter,
by restricting *faith,* here, to miracles. It is what Chrysostom calls
the *“faith* of miracles,” and what we term a “special faith,” because
it does not apprehend a whole Christ, but simply his power in working
miracles; and hence it may sometimes exist in a man without the Spirit
of sanctification, as it did in Judas.  <span
id="fr_777"></span>[778](#fn_777.md)

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span><span id="xx.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>**3.** *And if I should expend all my
possessions.*  <span id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778.md) This, it is true,
is worthy of the highest praise, if considered in itself; but as
liberality in many cases proceeds from ambition — not from true
generosity, or even the man that is liberal is destitute of the other
departments of love, (for even liberality, that is inwardly felt, is
only one department of *love,)* it may happen that a work, otherwise so
commendable, has, indeed, a fair show in the sight of men, and is
applauded by them, and yet is regarded as nothing in the sight of God.

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span>*And if I should give up my body.* He speaks,
undoubtedly, of martyrdom, which is an act that is the most lovely and
excellent of all; for what is more admirable than that invincible
fortitude of mind, which makes a man not hesitate to pour out his life
for the testimony of the gospel? Yet even this, too, God regards as
nothing, if the mind is destitute of *love.* The kind of punishment that
he makes mention of was not then so common among Christians; for we read
that tyrants, at that time, set themselves to destroy the Church, rather
by swords than by flames,  <span id="fr_779"></span>[780](#fn_779.md)
except that Nero, in his rage, had recourse, also, to burning. The
Spirit appears, however, to have predicted here, by Paul’s mouth, the
persecutions that were coming. But this is a digression. The main truth
in the passage is this — that as *love* is the only rule of our actions,
and the only means of regulating the right use of the gifts of God,
nothing, in the absence of it, is approved of by God, however
magnificent it may be in the estimation of men. For where it is wanting,
the beauty of all virtues is mere tinsel — is empty sound — is not worth
a straw — nay more, is offensive and disgusting. As for the inference
which Papists draw from this — that *love* is therefore of more avail
for our justification than faith, we shall refute it afterwards. At
present, we must proceed to notice what follows,

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
13:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004.md)<span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Charity suffereth long, *and* is kind;
charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Caritaspatiens est, benigne agit,
caritas non aemulatur, caritas non agit insolenter, non inflatur:

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span>**5.** Doth not behave itself unseemly,
seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil;

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**5.** Non agit indecenter, non quaerit sua
ipsius, non provocatur, non cogitat malum:

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span>**6.** Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but
rejoiceth in the truth;

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span>**6.** Non gaudet obiniustitiam, con gaudet
autem veritati.

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span>**7.** Beareth all things, believeth all
things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span>**7.** Omnia fert, omnia credit, omnia
sperat, omnia sustinet.

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span>**8.** Charity never faileth: but whether
*there be* prophecies, they shall fail; whether *there be* tongues, they
shall cease; whether *there be* knowledge, it shall vanish away.

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span>**8.** Caritas nunquam excidit: sive
prophetiae abolebuntur, sive linguae cessabunt, sive scientia
destruetur.

<span id="xx.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xx.ii-p13"></span><span id="xx.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p14"></span>**4.** *Love is patient.* He now commends
*love* from its effects or fruits, though at the same time these
eulogiums are not intended merely for its commendation, but to make the
Corinthians understand what are its offices, and what is its nature. The
object, however, mainly in view, is to show how *necessary* it is for
preserving the unity of the Church. I have also no doubt that he
designed indirectly to reprove the Corinthians, by setting before them a
contrast, in which they might recognize, by way of contraries, their own
vices.

<span id="xx.ii-p15"></span>The *first* commendation of love is this —
that, by patient endurance of many things, it promotes peace and harmony
in the Church. Near akin to this is the *second* excellence — gentleness
and lenity, for such is the meaning of the verb <span
id="xx.ii-p15.1"></span>χρηστεύεσθαι  <span
id="fr_780"></span>[781](#fn_780.md) *A third* excellence is — that it
counteracts *emulation,* the seed of all contentions. Under *emulation*
he comprehends envy, which is a vice near akin to it, or rather, he
means that emulation, which is connected with envy, and frequently
springs from it. Hence where envy reigns — where every one is desirous
to be the first, or appear so, love *there* has no place.

<span id="xx.ii-p17"></span>What I have rendered — *does not act
insolently* — is in the Greek <span id="xx.ii-p17.1"></span>χρηστεύεσθαι
Erasmus has rendered it, *is not froward.*  <span
id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781.md) It is certain that the word has
different significations; but, as it is sometimes taken to *mean* —
*being fierce, or insolent, through presumption,* this meaning seemed to
be more suitable to the passage before us.  <span
id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782.md) Paul, therefore, ascribes to *love*
moderation, and declares that it is a bridle to restrain men, that they
may not break forth into ferocity, but may live together in a peaceable
and orderly manner. He adds, farther, that it has nothing of the nature
of pride.  <span id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783.md) That man, then, who
is governed by *love, is not puffed up* with pride, so as to despise
others and feel satisfied with himself.  <span
id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784.md)

<span id="xx.ii-p22"></span><span id="xx.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p23"></span>**5.** *Doth not behave itself unseemly*
Erasmus renders it *“Is not disdainful;”* but as he quotes no author in
support of this interpretation, I have preferred to retain its proper
and usual signification. I explain it, however, in this way — that
*love* does not exult in a foolish ostentation, or does not bluster, but
observes moderation and propriety. And in this manner, he again reproves
the Corinthians indirectly, because they shamefully set at naught all
propriety by an unseemly haughtiness.  <span
id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785.md)

<span id="xx.ii-p25"></span>*Seeketh not its own.* From this we may
infer, how very far we are from having *love* implanted in us by nature;
for we are naturally prone to have love and care for ourselves, and aim
at our own advantage. Nay, to speak more correctly, we rush headlong
into it.  <span id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786.md) For so perverse an
inclination the remedy  <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787.md) is
*love,* which leads us to leave off caring for ourselves, and feel
concerned for our neighbors, so as to love them and be concerned for
their welfare. Farther, *to seek one’s own things,*  <span
id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788.md) is to be devoted to self, and to be
wholly taken up with concern for one’s own advantage. This definition
solves the question, whether it is lawful for a Christian to be
concerned for his own advantage? for Paul does not here reprove every
kind of care or concern for ourselves, but the excess of it, which
proceeds from an immoderate and blind attachment to ourselves. Now the
excess lies in this — if we think of ourselves so as to neglect others,
or if the desire of our own advantage calls us off from that concern,
which God commands us to have as to our neighbors.  <span
id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789.md) He adds, that *love* is also a bridle
to repress quarrels, and this follows from the first two statements. For
where there is gentleness and forbearance, persons in that case do not,
on a sudden, become angry, and are not easily stirred up to disputes and
contests.  <span id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790.md)

<span id="xx.ii-p31"></span><span id="xx.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p32"></span>**7.** *Beareth all things,* etc. By all
these statements he intimates, that love is neither impatient nor
spiteful. For to *bear* and *endure all things* is the part of
forbearance to *believe* and *hope all things* is the part of candor and
kindness. As we are naturally too much devoted to self, this vice
renders us morose and peevish. The effect is, that every one wishes that
others should carry him upon their shoulders, but refuses for his part
to assist others. The remedy for this disease is *love,* which makes us
subject to our brethren, and teaches us to apply our shoulders to *their
burdens.* (<span id="xx.ii-p32.1"></span>[Ga
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002)<span id="xx.ii-p32.1"></span>..md)
Farther, as we are naturally *spiteful,* we are, consequently,
suspicious too, and take almost everything amiss. *Love,* on the other
hand, calls us back to *kindness,* so that we think favorably and
candidly of our neighbors.

<span id="xx.ii-p33"></span>*When* he says *all things,* you must
understand him as referring to the things that *ought to be endured,*
and in such a manner as is befitting. For we are not to bear with vices,
so as to give our sanction to them by flattery, or, by winking at them,
encourage them through our supineness. Farther, this *endurance* does
not exclude *corrections* and just punishments. The case is the same as
to kindness in judging of things.

<span id="xx.ii-p34"></span>Love *believeth all things* — *not* that the
Christian knowingly and willingly allows himself to be imposed upon —
not that he divests himself of prudence and judgment, that he may be the
more easily taken advantage of — not that he unlearns the way of
distinguishing black from white. What then? He requires here, as I have
already said, *simplicity* and *kindness* in judging of things; and he
declares that these  <span id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791.md) are the
invariable accompaniments of *love.* The consequence will be, that a
Christian man will reckon it better to be imposed upon by his own
kindness and easy temper, than to wrong his brother by an unfriendly
suspicion.

<span id="xx.ii-p36"></span><span id="xx.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p37"></span>**8.** *Love never faileth* Here we have
another excellence of *love* — *that* it endures for ever. There is good
reason why we should eagerly desire an excellence that will never come
to an end. Hence *love* must be preferred before temporary and
perishable gifts. *Prophesyings have an end, tongues fail, knowledge
ceases* Hence *love* is more excellent than they on this ground — that,
while they fail, it survives.

<span id="xx.ii-p38"></span>Papists pervert this passage, for the
purpose of establishing the doctrine which they have contrived, without
any authority from Scripture — that the souls of the deceased pray to
God on our behalf. For they reason in this manner: “Prayer is a
perpetual *office* of love — love endures in the souls of departed
saints — therefore they pray for *us.”* For my part, although I should
not wish to contend too keenly on this point, yet, in order that they
may not think that they have gained much by having this conceded to
them, I reply to their objection in a few words.

<span id="xx.ii-p39"></span>In the *first* place, though love *endures
for ever,* it does not *necessarily* follow that it is (as the
expression is) in constant exercise. For what is there to hinder our
maintaining that the saints, being now in the enjoyment of calm repose,
do not exercise *love* in present offices?  <span
id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792.md) What absurdity, I pray you, would
there be in this? In the *second* place, were I to maintain, that it is
*not* a perpetual office of *love to* intercede for the brethren, how
would they prove the contrary? That a person may intercede for another,
it is necessary that he be acquainted with his necessity. If we may
conjecture as to the state of the dead, it is a more probable
supposition, that departed saints are ignorant of what is doing here,
than that they are aware of our necessities. Papists, it is true,
imagine, that they see the whole world in the reflection of light which
they enjoy in the vision of God; but it is a profane and altogether
heathenish contrivance, which has more of the savor of Egyptian
theology,  <span id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793.md) than it has of
accordance with Christian philosophy. What, then, if I should maintain
that the saints, being ignorant of our condition, are not concerned in
reference to us? With what argument will Papists press me, so as to
constrain me to hold their opinion? What if I should affirm, that they
are so occupied and swallowed up, as it were, in the vision of God, that
they think of nothing besides? How will they prove that this is not
agreeable to reason? What if I should reply, that the perpetuity of
*love,* here mentioned by the Apostle, will be after the last day, and
has nothing to do with the time that is intermediate? What if I should
say that the office of mutual intercession has been enjoined only upon
the living, and those that are sojourning in this world, and
consequently does not at all extend to the departed?

<span id="xx.ii-p42"></span>But I have already said more than enough;
for the very point for which they contend I leave undetermined, that I
may not raise any contention upon a matter that does not call for it. It
was, however, of importance to notice, in passing, how little support is
given them from this passage, in which they think they have so strong a
bulwark. Let us reckon it enough, that it has no support from any
declaration of scripture, and that, consequently, it is maintained by
them rashly and inconsiderately.  <span
id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794.md)

<span id="xx.ii-p44"></span>*Whether knowledge, it will be destroyed.*
We have already seen the meaning of these words; but from this arises a
question of no small importances whether those who in this world excel
either in learning, or in other gifts, will be on a level with idiots in
the kingdom of God? In the *first* place, I should wish to admonish
 <span id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795.md) pious readers, not to harass
themselves more than is meet in the investigation of these things. Let
them rather seek the way by which the kingdom of God is arrived at, than
curiously inquire, what is to be our condition there; for the Lord
himself has, by his silence, called us back from such curiosity. I now
return to the question. So far as I can conjecture, and am able even to
gather in part from this passage — inasmuch as learning, knowledge of
languages, and similar gifts are subservient to the necessity of this
life, I do not think that there will be any of them then remaining. The
learned, however, will sustain no loss from the want of them, inasmuch
as they will receive the fruit of them, which is greatly to be
preferred.  <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796.md)

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span><span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
13:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009.md)<span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>-

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>**9.** For we know in part, and we prophesy
in part.

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span>**9.** Ex parte enim cognoscimus, et ex
parte prophetamus:

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span>**10.** But when that which is perfect is
come, then that which is in part shall be done away.

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span>**10.** At ubi venerit quod perfectum est,
tunc, quod ex parte est, abolebitur.

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span>**11.** When I was a child, I spake as a
child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became
a man, I put away childish things.

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span>**11.** Quum essem puer, ut puer loquebar,
ut puer sentiebam, ut puer cogitabam: at postquam factus sum vir,
abolevi puerilia.

<span id="xx.iii-p8"></span>**12.** For now we see through a glass,
darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know
even as also I am known.

<span id="xx.iii-p9"></span>**12.** Cernimus enim nunc per speculum in
aenigmate: tunc autem facie ad faciem: nunc cognosco ex parte: tune vero
cognoscam, quem admodum et cognitus sum.

<span id="xx.iii-p10"></span>**13.** And now abideth faith, hope,
charity, these three; but the greatest of these *is* charity.

<span id="xx.iii-p11"></span>**13.** Nunc autem manet fides, spes,
caritas, tria haec: sed maxima ex his est caritas.

<span id="xx.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xx.iii-p13"></span><span id="xx.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p14"></span>He now proves that *prophecy,* and other
gifts of that nature, are done away,  <span
id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797.md) because they are conferred upon us to
help our infirmity. Now our imperfection will one day have an end. Hence
the use, even of those gifts, will, at the same time, be discontinued,
for it were absurd that they should remain and be of no use. They will,
therefore, perish. This subject he pursues to the end of the chapter.

<span id="xx.iii-p16"></span>**9.** *We know in part* This passage is
misinterpreted by most persons, as if it meant that our knowledge, and
in like manner our prophecy, is not yet perfect, but that we are daily
making progress in them. Paul’s meaning, however, is — that it is owing
to our imperfection that we at present have knowledge and prophecy.
Hence the phrase *in part* means — “Because we are not yet perfect.”
Knowledge and prophecy, therefore, have place among us so long as that
imperfection cleaves to us, to which they are helps. It is true, indeed,
that we ought to make progress during our whole life, and that
everything that we have is merely begun. Let us observe, however, what
Paul designs to prove — that the gifts in question are but temporary.
Now he proves this from the circumstance, that the advantage of them is
only for a time — so long as we aim at the mark by making progress every
day.

<span id="xx.iii-p17"></span><span id="xx.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p18"></span>**10.** *When that which is perfect is
come* “When the goal has been reached, then the helps in the race will
be done away.” He retains, however, the form of expression that he had
already made use of, when he contrasts *perfection* with what is *in
part* “Perfection,” says he, “when it will arrive, will put an end to
everything that aids imperfection.” But when will that perfection come?
It begins, indeed, at death, for then we put off, along with the body,
many infirmities; but it will not be completely manifested until the day
of judgment, as we shall hear presently. Hence we infer, that the whole
of this discussion is ignorantly applied to the time that is
intermediate.

<span id="xx.iii-p19"></span><span id="xx.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p20"></span>**11.** *When I was a child* He illustrates
what he had said, by a similitude. For there are many things that are
suitable to children, which are afterwards done away on arriving at
maturity. For example, education is necessary for childhood; it does not
comport with mature age.  <span id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798.md) So
long as we live in this world, we require, in some sense, education. We
are far from having attained, as yet, the perfection of wisdom. That
perfection, therefore, which will be in a manner a maturity of spiritual
age, will put an end to education and its accompaniments. In his Epistle
to the Ephesians, (<span id="xx.iii-p21.2"></span>[Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span id="xx.iii-p21.2"></span>,.md)
he exhorts us to be no *longer children;* but he has there another
consideration in view, of which we shall speak when we come to that
passage.

<span id="xx.iii-p22"></span><span id="xx.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p23"></span>**12.** *We now see through a glass* Here
we have the application of the similitude. “The measure of knowledge,
that we now have, is suitable to imperfection and childhood, as it were;
for we do not as yet see clearly the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom,
and we do not as yet enjoy a distinct view of them.” To express this, he
makes use of another similitude — that *we now see only as in a glass,*
and therefore but obscurely. This obscurity he expresses by the term
*enigma*  <span id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799.md)

<span id="xx.iii-p25"></span>In the first place, there can be no doubt
that it is the ministry of the word, and the means that are required for
the exercise of it, that he compares to a *looking-glass* For God, who
is otherwise invisible, has appointed these means for discovering
himself to us. At the same time, this may also be viewed as extending to
the entire structure of the world, in which the glory of God shines
forth to our view, in accordance with what is stated in <span
id="xx.iii-p25.1"></span>[Ro 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016.md)<span
id="xx.iii-p25.1"></span>; and <span id="xx.iii-p25.2"></span>[2Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018.md)<span id="xx.iii-p25.2"></span>.
In <span id="xx.iii-p25.3"></span>[Ro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020.md)<span id="xx.iii-p25.3"></span>
the Apostle speaks of the creatures as *mirrors,*  <span
id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800.md) in which God’s invisible majesty is to
be seen; but as he treats here particularly of spiritual gifts, which
are subservient to the ministry of the Church, and are its
accompaniments, we shall not wander away from our present subject.

<span id="xx.iii-p27"></span>The ministry of the word, I say, is like a
*looking-glass* For the angels have no need of preaching, or other
inferior helps, nor of sacraments, for they enjoy a vision of God of
another kind;  <span id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801.md) and God does not
give them a view of his face merely in a mirror, but openly manifests
himself as present with them. We, who have not as yet reached that great
height, behold the image of God as it is presented before us in the
word, in the sacraments, and, in fine, in the whole of the service of
the Church. This vision Paul here speaks of as partaking of obscurity —
not as though it were doubtful or delusive, but because it is not so
distinct as that which will be at last afforded on the final day. He
teaches the same thing in other words, in the *second* Epistle — (<span
id="xx.iii-p28.2"></span>[2Co 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007.md)<span
id="xx.iii-p28.2"></span>) — that,

<span id="xx.iii-p29"></span>so long as we dwell in the body we are
absent from the Lord;  
for we walk by faith, not by sight.

<span id="xx.iii-p30"></span>Our faith, therefore, at present beholds
God as absent. How so? Because it sees not his face, but rests satisfied
with the image in the *mirror;* but when we shall have left the world,
and gone to him, it will behold him as near and before its eyes.

<span id="xx.iii-p31"></span>Hence we must understand it in this manner
— that the knowledge of God, which we now have from his word, is indeed
certain and true, and has nothing in it that is confused, or perplexed,
or dark, but is spoken of as comparatively *obscure,* because it comes
far short of that clear manifestation to which we look forward; for then
*we shall see face to face*  <span id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802.md)
Thus this passage is not at all at variance with other passages, which
speak of the clearness, at one time, of the law, at another time, of the
entire Scripture, but more especially of the gospel. For we have in the
word (in so far as is expedient for us) a naked and open revelation of
God, and it has nothing intricate in it, to hold us in suspense, as
wicked persons imagine;  <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803.md) but how
small a proportion does this bear to *that* vision, which we have in our
eye! Hence it is only in a comparative sense, that it is termed
*obscure.*

<span id="xx.iii-p34"></span>The adverb *then* denotes the last day,
rather than the time that is immediately subsequent to death. At the
same time, although full vision will be deferred until the day of
Christ, a nearer view of God will begin to be enjoyed immediately after
death, when our souls, set free from the body, will have no more need of
the outward ministry, or other inferior helps. Paul, however, as I
noticed a little ago, does not enter into any close discussion as to the
state of the dead, because the knowledge of that is not particularly
serviceable to piety.

<span id="xx.iii-p35"></span>*Now I know in part* That is, the measure
of our present knowledge is *imperfect,* as John says in his Epistle,
(<span id="xx.iii-p35.1"></span>[1 John
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="xx.iii-p35.1"></span>,.md)
that

<span id="xx.iii-p36"></span>we know, indeed, that we are the sons of
God,  
but that it doth not yet appear, until we shall see God as he is.

<span id="xx.iii-p37"></span>*Then* we shall see God — not in his image,
but in himself, so that there will be, in a manner, a mutual view.

<span id="xx.iii-p38"></span><span id="xx.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p39"></span>**13.** *But now remaineth faith, hope,
love.* This is a conclusion from what goes before — that love is more
excellent than other gifts; but in place of the enumeration of gifts
that he had previously made, he now puts *faith* and *hope* along with
*love,* as all those gifts are comprehended under this summary. For what
is the object of the entire ministry, but that we may be instructed as
to these things?  <span id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804.md) Hence the term
*faith* has a larger acceptation here, than in previous instances; for
it is as though he had said — “There are, it is true, many and various
gifts, but they all point to this object, and have an eye to it.”

<span id="xx.iii-p41"></span>To *remain,* then, conveys the idea, that,
as in the reckoning up of an account, when everything has been deducted,
this is the sum that *remains* For faith does not *remain* after death,
inasmuch as the Apostle elsewhere contrasts it with *sight,* (<span
id="xx.iii-p41.1"></span>[2Co 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007.md)<span
id="xx.iii-p41.1"></span>,) and declares that it remains only so long as
we are *absent from the Lord* We are now in possession of what is meant
by *faith* in this passage — that knowledge of God and of the divine
will, which we obtain by the ministry of the Church; or, if you prefer
it, faith universal, and taken in its proper acceptation. *Hope* is
nothing else than perseverance in *faith* For when we have once believed
the word of God, it remains that we persevere until the accomplishment
of these things. Hence, as *faith* is the mother of *hope,* so it is
kept up by it, so as not to give way.

<span id="xx.iii-p42"></span>*The greatest of these is love.* It is so,
if we estimate its excellence by the effects which he has previously
enumerated; and farther, if we take into view its perpetuity. For every
one derives advantage from his own *faith* and *hope,* but *love*
extends its benefits to others. *Faith* and *hope* belong to a state of
imperfection: *love* will remain even in a state of perfection. For if
we single out the particular effects *of faith,* and compare them,
*faith* will be found to be in many respects superior. Nay, even *love*
itself, according to the testimony of the same Apostle, (<span
id="xx.iii-p42.1"></span>[1Th 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003.md)<span
id="xx.iii-p42.1"></span>,) is an effect of *faith* Now the effect is,
undoubtedly, inferior to its cause.

<span id="xx.iii-p43"></span>Besides, there is bestowed upon *faith* a
signal commendation, which does not apply to *love,* when John declares
that it is *our victory, which overcometh the world.* (<span
id="xx.iii-p43.1"></span>[1Jo 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004.md)<span
id="xx.iii-p43.1"></span>.) In fine, it is by faith that we are born
against that we become the sons of God — that we obtain eternal life,
and that *Christ dwells in* us. (<span id="xx.iii-p43.2"></span>[Eph
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="xx.iii-p43.2"></span>..md)
Innumerable other things I pass over; but these few are sufficient to
prove what I have in view — that faith is, in many of its effects,
superior to love. Hence it is evident, that it is declared here to be
superior — not in every respect, but inasmuch as it will be perpetual,
and holds at present the first place in the preservation of the Church.

<span id="xx.iii-p44"></span>It is, however, surprising how much
pleasure Papists take in thundering forth these words. *“If faith*
justifies,” say they, *“then* much more does *love,* which is declared
to be *greater.”* A solution of this objection is already furnished from
what I have stated, but let us grant that *love* is in every respect
superior; what sort of reasoning is that — that because it is greater,
therefore it is of more avail for justifying men! Then a king will plow
the ground better than a husbandman, and he will make a shoe better than
a shoemaker, because he is more noble than either! Then a man will run
faster than a horse, and will carry a heavier burden than an elephant,
because he is superior in dignity! Then angels will give light to the
earth better than the sun and moon, because they are more excellent! If
the power of justifying depended on the dignity or merit of faith they
might perhaps be listened to; but we do not teach that faith justifies,
on the ground of its having more worthiness, or occupying a higher
station of honor, but because it receives the righteousness which is
freely offered in the gospel. Greatness or dignity has nothing to do
with this. Hence this passage gives Papists no more help, than if the
Apostle had given the preference to *faith* above everything else.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_773"></span>[774](cc39019.htm#fr_773.md) <span
id="xx.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span> "<span id="xx.i-p11.1"></span>Quelles
qu’elles soyent;” — “Whatever they are.”

<span id="fn_774"></span>[775](cc39019.htm#fr_774.md) <span
id="xx.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span> *Penn*, in his *Annotations*, gives the
following account of the term *charity*, as made use of in our English
translation — “If the Latin version had not rendered <span
id="xx.i-p12.1"></span>αγαπη, in this place, by ‘<span
id="xx.i-p12.2"></span>*charitas*,’ instead of ‘<span
id="xx.i-p12.3"></span>*amor* — *love*,’ we should not have found the
word ‘*charity*’ in our English version. But Wiclif, who only knew the
Latin Scripture, adopted from it that word, and rendered, ‘and I have
not *charite*.’ When the knowledge of the Greek was acquired by our
learned Reformers, the first revisers of Wiclif were sensible of the
unsuitableness of this translation, and rendered this clause — ‘and yet
had no *love*,’ as it is printed in the ‘*Newe Testament in Englishe and
Latin*, *of* 1548;’ and they rendered <span id="xx.i-p12.4"></span>αγαπη
— ‘*love*,’ throughout this chapter. Our last revisers abandoned this
sound correction of their immediate predecessors, and brought back the
Latinising ‘charity’ of Wiclif, who was only excusable for employing
that word, because he translated from a Latin text, in ignorance of its
Greek original.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_775"></span>[776](cc39019.htm#fr_775.md) <span
id="xx.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p14.1"></span>Par le fruit
qui s’en pouuoit ensuyure;” — “By the fruit that might result from it.”

<span id="fn_776"></span>[777](cc39019.htm#fr_776.md) <span
id="xx.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p17.1"></span>La dignite
mesme de la prophetie;” — “The dignity even of prophecy.”

<span id="fn_777"></span>[778](cc39019.htm#fr_777.md) <span
id="xx.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span> The reader will observe, that this is, in
substance, what has been stated by Calvin previously, when commenting on
<span id="xx.i-p19.2"></span>[1 Corinthians
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010.md)<span id="xx.i-p19.2"></span>. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[779](cc39019.htm#fr_778.md) <span
id="xx.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span> "<span id="xx.i-p22.1"></span>Et si ie
distribue tous mes biens;” — “And if I should distribute all my goods.”

<span id="fn_779"></span>[780](cc39019.htm#fr_779.md) <span
id="xx.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p24.1"></span>Les tyrans
faisoyent plustot traneher la teste aux Chrestiens et vsoyent plustot du
glaiue que du feu pour destruire l’Egiise;” — “Tyrants practiced rather
the beheading of Christians, and made use of the sword, rather than of
fire, for the destruction of the Church.”

<span id="fn_780"></span>[781](cc39019.htm#fr_780.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p16"></span> The distinction between the. *first* and
*second* of the commendations here bestowed upon *love* is stated by
*Bloomfield* as follows: <span id="xx.ii-p16.1"></span>Μακροθυμεῖ,
“denotes *lenity*, as opposed to passion and revenge: and <span
id="xx.ii-p16.2"></span>χρηστεύεται, *gentleness*, as opposed to
severity and misanthropy.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_781"></span>[782](cc39019.htm#fr_781.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p18"></span> This rendering is followed in two of the
old English translations, viz. Tyndale (1534) and Cranmer (1539.) “Love
doth not frowardly.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[783](cc39019.htm#fr_782.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p19"></span> Interpreters are by no means agreed as to
the precise import of the original term <span
id="xx.ii-p19.1"></span>περπερεύεται. Most ancient and many modern
commentators explain it as meaning — “to act precipitately and rashly” —
and in accordance with this, is the rendering given by our Translators
in the *Margin* — *is not rash* No *single* expression, however, appears
to bring out more satisfactorily the import of the original word than
that which our Translators have inserted in the *text* — *vaunteth not*
itself. *Beausobre* makes use of *two* epithets. “<span
id="xx.ii-p19.2"></span>N’est point *vaine* et *insolerite*;” — “Is not
*vain* and *insolent*.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_783"></span>[784](cc39019.htm#fr_783.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p20.1"></span>I1 dit
consequemment que charite *ne* *s’enfle point*;” — “He says
consequently, that love *is not puffed up*.”

<span id="fn_784"></span>[785](cc39019.htm#fr_784.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p21"></span> *Bloomfield* considers the distinction
between this clause and the preceding one to be this, that the former
“refers to *pride as shown in words*, and the latter to “the *carriage*
and *bearing*, to denote pride and haughtiness on account of certain
external advantages. A similar view is taken by *Barnes*, who considers
the *former* clause as referring to “the *expression* of the feelings of
pride, vanity,” etc.; and the *latter*, to “the feeling itself.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[786](cc39019.htm#fr_785.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p24"></span> The proper meaning of the verb <span
id="xx.ii-p24.1"></span>ασχήμονειν, is to *offend against decorum* See
Eurip. Hec 407. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_786"></span>[787](cc39019.htm#fr_786.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p26.1"></span>Nons sommes
transportez-la, et nous-nous y iettons sans moderation aucune;” — “We
are hurried into it, and rush into it without any restraint.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[788](cc39019.htm#fr_787.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p27"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p27.1"></span>Le remede
unique,” — “The only remedy.”

<span id="fn_788"></span>[789](cc39019.htm#fr_788.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p28.1"></span>Car il y a
ainsi a le traduire mot a mot;” — “For that is the literal meaning.”

<span id="fn_789"></span>[790](cc39019.htm#fr_789.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p29"></span> *Granville Penn* translates the clause as
follows: “Seeketh not *what is not its own*,” — in accordance with the
reading of the Vat. MS. <span id="xx.ii-p29.1"></span>Οὐ <span
id="xx.ii-p29.2"></span>ζητεῖ τὰ μὴ εαυτὢς (*Seeketh not the things that
are not its own*.) He supposes the <span id="xx.ii-p29.3"></span>μὢ
(*not*) to have “lapsed, or been erroneously rejected from all the later
copies.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_790"></span>[791](cc39019.htm#fr_790.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p30"></span> The last clause of the verse, which is in
our translation, *thinketh no evil*, is rendered by Bishop Pearce,
“*meditateth* *no mischief*” — a sense in which the expression (p.424)
<span id="xx.ii-p30.1"></span>λογιζεσθαι κακον occurs in the Septuagint,
in <span id="xx.ii-p30.2"></span>[Ps
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004.md)<span id="xx.ii-p30.2"></span>,
and <span id="xx.ii-p30.3"></span>[Ps
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#007.md)<span id="xx.ii-p30.3"></span>. It
is beautifully rendered by *Bloomfield*, “does not enter it into a
note-book, for future revenge. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_791"></span>[792](cc39019.htm#fr_791.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p35"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p35.1"></span>Ceux deux
vertus;” — “These two virtues.”

<span id="fn_792"></span>[793](cc39019.htm#fr_792.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p40.1"></span>En secourant
et aidant presentement a ceux qui sont en ce monde;” — “In presently
succouring and aiding those that are in this world.”

<span id="fn_793"></span>[794](cc39019.htm#fr_793.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p41"></span> “See *Institutes*, volume 1. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[795](cc39019.htm#fr_794.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p43"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p43.1"></span>C’est folie
et presomption grande a eux de l’affermer;” — “It is great folly and
presumption in them to affirm it.”

<span id="fn_795"></span>[796](cc39019.htm#fr_795.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p45"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p45.1"></span>En premier
lieu, i’admoneste et prie;” — “In the first place, I admonish and
beseech.”

<span id="fn_796"></span>[797](cc39019.htm#fr_796.md) <span
id="xx.ii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p46"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p46.1"></span>Qui est plus
excellent sans comparaison;” — “Which is, beyond comparison, more
excellent.”

<span id="fn_797"></span>[798](cc39019.htm#fr_797.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p15"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p15.1"></span>Seront un
iour abolis;” — “Will one day be done away.”

<span id="fn_798"></span>[799](cc39019.htm#fr_798.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p21"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p21.1"></span>Elle ne
conuient point a ceux qui sont en aage de discretion;” — “It does not
become those who are at the age of discretion?’

<span id="fn_799"></span>[800](cc39019.htm#fr_799.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p24"></span> The original term <span
id="xx.iii-p24.1"></span>αἴνιγμα, (*enigma*,) properly means, a *dark
saying* It is employed by classical writers in this sense. See Pind. Fr.
165. Aeseh. <span id="xx.iii-p24.2"></span>Pr. 610<span
id="xx.iii-p24.2"></span>. The Apostle is generally supposed to have had
in his eye <span id="xx.iii-p24.3"></span>[Nu
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008.md)<span id="xx.iii-p24.3"></span>,
which is rendered in the Septuagint as follows: <span
id="xx.iii-p24.4"></span>Στόμα κατὰ στόμα λαλήσω αὐτῶ ἐν ἔιδει, καὶ οὐ
δι ᾿ αἰνίγματων; — “I will speak to him mouth to mouth in a vision, and
not by *dark sayings*.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_800"></span>[801](cc39019.htm#fr_800.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p25.4"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p26"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p26.1"></span>Et
l’Apostre, en l’onzieme aux Heb., d. 13, nomme les creatures, miroirs;”
— “And the Apostle, in <span id="xx.iii-p26.2"></span>[Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md)<span id="xx.iii-p26.2"></span>,
speaks of the creatures as mirrors.” There is obviously a mistake here
in the quotation. Most probably Calvin had in his eye <span
id="xx.iii-p26.3"></span>[Heb
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003.md)<span id="xx.iii-p26.3"></span>,
as a passage similar *in* *substance* to <span
id="xx.iii-p26.4"></span>[Ro 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020.md)<span
id="xx.iii-p26.4"></span>, quoted by him in his Latin Commentary. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[802](cc39019.htm#fr_801.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p28"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p28.1"></span>Ils ont vn
autre iouissance de la presence de Dieu;” — “They have another enjoyment
of the presence of God.”

<span id="fn_802"></span>[803](cc39019.htm#fr_802.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p32"></span> “The blessed God’s manifestation of
himself,” say’s Mr. Howe, “is emphatically expressed in <span
id="xx.iii-p32.1"></span>[1Co
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span id="xx.iii-p32.1"></span> —
of *seeing face to face*, which signifies on *his* part, gracious
vouchsafement, — his offering his blessed face to view, — that he hides
it not, nor turns it away, as here sometimes he doth, in just
displeasure. And his face means, even his most conspicuous glory, such
as, in this state of mortality, it would be mortal to us to behold; for
‘no man,’ not so divine a man as Moses himself, ‘could see his face and
live.’ And it signifies, on *their* part who are thus made perfect,
their applying and turning their face towards his, viz., that they see
not casually, or by fortuitous glances, but eye to eye, by direct and
most voluntary intuition; which, therefore, on their part, implies moral
perfection, the will directing and commanding the eye, and upon
inexpressible relishes of joy and pleasure, forbidding its diversion,
holds it steady and intent.” Howe’s Works, (Lond. 1834,) p. 1016. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[804](cc39019.htm#fr_803.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p33"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p33.1"></span>Comme
imaginent les moqueurs et gens profanes;” — “As scoffers and profane
persons imagine.”

<span id="fn_804"></span>[805](cc39019.htm#fr_804.md) <span
id="xx.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p40"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p40.1"></span>En ces
trois choses;” — “In these three things.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](cc39020.md)
