[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc39013)  [Next](cc39015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
8:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now as touching things offered unto
idols, we know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but
charity edifieth.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** De iis porro quae idolis immolantur,
scimus, quod omnes scientiam habemus: scientia inflat, caritas autem
aedificat.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2.** And if any man think that he knoweth
any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Si quis autem videtur sibi aliquid
scire, nondum quicquam scit,qualiter scire oportet.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3.** But if any man love God, the same is
known of him.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3.** At si quis diligit Deum, hie cognitus
est ab illo.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**4.** As concerning therefore the eating of
those things that are offered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an
idol *is* nothing in the world, and that *there is* none other God but
one.

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**4.** De esu ergo eorum quae idolis
immolantur, novimus, quod idolum nihil est in mundo, et quod non est
alius Deus nisi unus.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>**5.** For though there be that are called
gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods many, and lords
many,)

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Nam etsi sunt qui vocentur dii, sire
in coelo sive super terram, quemadmodum sunt dii multi et domini multi:

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>**6.** But to us *there is but* one God, the
Father, of whom *are* all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom *are* all things, and we by him.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Nobis tamen unus Deus Pater, ex quo
omnia, et nos in ipso: et unus Dominus Iesus Christus, per quem omnia,
et nos per ipsum.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>**7.** Howbeit *there is* not in every man
that knowledge: for some with conscience of the idol unto this hour eat
*it* as a thing offered unto an idol; and their conscience being weak is
defiled.

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>**7.** At non est in omnibus scientia: quidam
autem cum idoli conscientia nunc quoque tanquam idolo immolatum edunt,
et conscientia eorum, infirma quum sit, polluitur.

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span><span id="xv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>He now passes on to another question, which
he had merely touched upon in the sixth chapter, without fully
discussing. For when he had spoken of the avarice of the Corinthians,
and had drawn that discussion to a close with this statement — *Neither
covetous, nor extortioners, nor fornicators, etc., shall inherit the
kingdom of God*, he passed on to speak of the liberty of Christians —
*All things are lawful for me*. He had taken occasion from this to speak
of *fornication*, and from that, of *marriage* Now, therefore, he at
length follows out what he had touched upon as to things intermediate —
how we ought to restrain our liberty in intermediate things. By
intermediate things, I mean those that are neither good nor bad in
themselves, but indifferent, which God has put in our power, but in the
use of which we ought to observe moderation, that there may be a
difference between liberty and licentiousness. In the outset, he selects
one instance, distinguished above all the others, as to which the
Corinthians grievously offended — their having been present on occasion
of the sacred banquets, which were held by idolaters in honor of their
gods, and eating indiscriminately of the meats that were offered to
them. As this gave much occasion of offense, the Apostle teaches them
that they rashly perverted the liberty granted them by the Lord.

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span>**1.** *Concerning things offered unto
idols.* He begins with a concession, in which he voluntarily grants and
allows to them everything that they were prepared to demand or object.
“I see what your pretext is: you make Christian liberty your pretext.
You hold out that *you have knowledge*, and that there is not one of you
that is so ignorant as not to know that *there is but one God.* I grant
all this to be true, but of what avail is that knowledge which is
ruinous to the brethren?” Thus, then, he grants them what they demand,
but it is in such a way as to show that their excuses are empty and of
no avail.

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span>*Knowledge puffeth up* He shows, from the
effects, how frivolous a thing it is to boast of *knowledge*, when
*love* is wanting. “Of what avail is *knowledge*, that is of such a kind
as *puffs us up* and elates us, while it is the part of *love* to
*edify*?” This passage, which otherwise is somewhat obscure, in
consequence of its brevity, may easily be understood in this way —
“Whatever is devoid of *love* is of no account in the sight of God; nay
more, it is displeasing to him, and much more so what is openly at
variance with *love* Now that, *knowledge* of which you boast, O ye
Corinthians, is altogether opposed to *love*, for it *puffs up* men with
pride, and leads to contempt of the brethren, while *love* is concerned
for the welfare of brethren, and exhorts us to *edify* them. Accursed,
then, be that *knowledge* which makes men proud, and is not regulated by
a desire of *edifying*.”

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span>Paul, however, did not mean, that this is to
be reckoned as a fault attributable to *learning* — that those who are
learned are often self-complacent, and have admiration of themselves,
accompanied with contempt of others. Nor did he understand this to be
the natural tendency of learning — to produce arrogance, but simply
meant to show what effect *knowledge* has in an individual, that has not
the fear of God, and love of the brethren; for the wicked abuse all the
gifts of God, so as to exalt themselves. Thus riches, honors, dignities,
nobility, beauty, and other things of that nature, *puff up*; because
men, elated through a mistaken confidence in these things, very
frequently become insolent.  <span id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) Nor
is it always so; for we see that many who are rich and beautiful, and
abounding in honors, and distinguished for dignity and nobility, are,
nevertheless, of a modest disposition, and not at all tainted with
pride. And even when it does happen to be so, it is, nevertheless, not
proper that we should put the blame upon what we know to be gifts of
God; for in the *first* place that were unfair and unreasonable; and
farther, by putting the blame upon things that are not blameworthy, we
would exempt the persons themselves from blame, who alone are in fault.
My meaning is this — “If riches *naturally tend* to make men proud, then
a rich man, if proud, is free from blame, for the evil arises from
riches.”

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span>We must, therefore, lay it down as a settled
principle, that knowledge is good in itself; but as piety is its only
foundation,  <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) it becomes empty
and useless in wicked men: as love is its true seasoning, where *that*
is wanting it is tasteless. And truly, where there is not that thorough
knowledge of God which humbles us, and teaches us to do good to the
brethren, it is not so much *knowledge*, as an empty notion of it, even
in those that are reckoned the most learned. At the same time, knowledge
is not by any means to be blamed for this, any more than a sword, if it
falls into the hands of a madman. Let this be considered as said  <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) with a view to certain fanatics, who
furiously declaim against all the liberal arts and sciences, as if their
only use were to *puff* men *up*, and were not of the greatest advantage
as helps in common life.  <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) Now
those very persons, who defame them in this style, are ready to burst
with pride, to such an extent as to verify the old proverb — “Nothing is
so arrogant as ignorance.”

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span><span id="xv.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span>**2.** *And if any man thinketh* That man
*thinketh that he knoweth something*, who is delighted with the opinion
that he entertains of his own knowledge, and despises others, as if he
were far above them. For Paul does not here condemn knowledge, but that
ambition and haughtiness which ungodly men contract in consequence of
it. Otherwise he does not exhort us to be sceptical, so as to be always
hesitating and hanging in doubt, and he does not approve of a false and
counterfeit modesty, as if it were a good thing to think that we are
ignorant of what we do know. That man, therefore, who *thinketh that he
knoweth something*, or, in other words, who is insolent from an empty
notion of his own knowledge, so that he prefers himself before others,
and is self-conceited, *he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know* For
the beginning of all true knowledge is acquaintance with God, which
produces in us humility and submission; nay more, it prostrates us
entirely instead of elating us. But where pride is, *there* is ignorance
of God  <span id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) — a beautiful passage!
Would to God that all knew it aright, so as properly to understand the
rule of right knowledge!

<span id="xv.i-p30"></span><span id="xv.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p31"></span>**3.** *But if any man loves God* Here we
have the conclusion, in which he shows what is especially commendable in
Christians, and even renders knowledge, and all other endowments worthy
of commendation, if we *love God*; for if it is so, we will also love
our neighbors in him. By this means all our actions will be properly
regulated, and consequently approved by God. He shows, therefore, from
consequences, that no learning is commendable that is not dipped in the
*love of God*; because that alone secures, that whatever endowments we
have are approved by him, as it is said in the second Epistle —

<span id="xv.i-p32"></span>If any man be in Christ he is a new
creature.  
(<span id="xv.i-p32.2"></span>[2Co
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="xv.i-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.i-p33"></span>By this he intimates, that without the Spirit
of regeneration, all things else, whatever they may have of show, are of
no value. To be *known by God* means to be held in any estimation, or to
be reckoned among his sons. Thus he erases all proud persons from the
*book of life*, (<span id="xv.i-p33.1"></span>[Php
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)<span id="xv.i-p33.1"></span>,) and
from the roll of the pious.

<span id="xv.i-p34"></span><span id="xv.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p35"></span>**4.** *Concerning, therefore, the eating of
those things* He now returns to the statement with which he had set out,
and speaks more plainly in reference to the pretext made use of by the
Corinthians. For as the whole of the evil took its rise from this root —
that they were pleased with themselves, and despised others, he
condemns, in general, that contemptuous knowledge which is not seasoned
with love. Now, however, he explains particularly, what is the kind of
knowledge on which they valued themselves — that *an idol* is an empty
figment of the human brain, and must therefore be reckoned as *nothing*;
and accordingly, that the consecration, that is gone through in name of
the idol, is a foolish imagination, and of no importance, and that a
Christian man, therefore, is not polluted, who, without reverence for
the idol, eats of things offered to idols. This is the sum of the
excuse, and it is not set aside by Paul as false, (for it contains
excellent doctrine,) but because they abused it, in opposition to *love*

<span id="xv.i-p36"></span>As to the words, Erasmus reads thus — “An
idol has no existence.” I prefer the rendering of the old translation —
An idol is nothing. For the argument is this — that an idol is nothing,
inasmuch as there is but one God; for it follows admirably — “If there
is no other God besides our God, then an idol is an empty dream, and
mere vanity.” When he says — and there is none other God but one, I
understand the conjunction and as meaning because. For the reason why an
idol is nothing is, that it must be estimated according to the thing
that it represents. Now it is appointed for the purpose of representing
God: nay more, for the purpose of representing false gods, inasmuch as
there is but one God, who is invisible and incomprehensible. The reason,
too, must be carefully observed — An idol is nothing because there is no
God but one; for he is the invisible God, and cannot be represented by a
visible sign, so as to be worshipped through means of it. Whether,
therefore, idols are erected to represent the true God, or false gods,
it is in all cases a perverse contrivance. Hence Habakkuk calls idols
teachers of lies, (<span id="xv.i-p36.1"></span>[Hab
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018)<span id="xv.i-p36.1"></span>,)
because they deal falsely in pretending to give a figure or image of
God, and deceive men under a false title. Hence <span
id="xv.i-p36.2"></span>οὐδεν (nothing) refers not to essence, but to
quality — for an idol is made of some substance — either silver, or
wood, or stone; but as God does not choose to be represented in this
way, it is vanity and nothing as to meaning and use.

<span id="xv.i-p37"></span><span id="xv.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p38"></span>**5.** *For though there be that are called*
“They have,” says he, “the name, but the reality is wanting.” He uses
the word *called* here, to mean — *renowned in the estimation of men* He
has also made use of a general division, when he says in *heaven or on
earth* The gods that are made mention of as being *in heaven*, are the
heavenly hosts, as the Scripture terms the sun, moon, and the other
stars. How very far they are, however, from being entitled to divine
honors, Moses shows from this, that they were created for our use. The
sun is our servant; the moon is our handmaid. How absurd, therefore, it
is to render to them divine honors! By the gods that are on *earth*, are
properly meant, in my opinion, men and women for whom religious worship
has been appointed.  <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) For, as
Pliny observes, those who had deserved well of mankind had their memory
consecrated by religion, so as to be worshipped as deities — Jupiter,
Mars, Saturn, Mercury, and Apollo, who were mortal men, but were, after
death, exalted to the rank of deities; and, more recently, Hercules,
Romulus, and at length the Caesars — as if it were in the power of
mankind to make deities at their pleasure, while they cannot give to
themselves either life or immortality. There are also other gods that
are terrestrial, taken either from cattle or from brute creatures, as,
for example, among the Egyptians, the ox, the serpent, the cat, the
onion, the garlic; and, among the Romans, the boundary-stone,  <span
id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) and the stone Vesta. They are gods,
then, only in name; but Paul says that he does not stop to notice
deifications of this sort.  <span id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464)

<span id="xv.i-p42"></span><span id="xv.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p43"></span>**6.** *But to us there is but one God, the
Father* Though Paul says these things by anticipation, he repeats the
excuse made by the Corinthians, in such a way as at the same time to
convey instruction. For, from what is more especially peculiar to God,
he proves that there is but one God: “Whatever has its origin from what
is foreign to itself, is not eternal, and, consequently, is not God. All
things have their origin from one Being: he alone, therefore, is God.”
Again — “*He* is assuredly God who gives existence to all, and from whom
all things flow, as from the supreme source; but there is only *One*,
from whom all things flow, and hence *there is but one God*.” When he
adds — and *we in him*, (<span id="xv.i-p43.1"></span>εἰς αὐτόν,) he
means, that we subsist in God, as it was by him that we were once
created. For this clause might, indeed, seem to have another
signification — that as we have our beginning from him, so we ought to
devote our life to him as its end; and it is used in this sense in <span
id="xv.i-p43.2"></span>[Ro 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="xv.i-p43.2"></span>. Here, however, it is taken for <span
id="xv.i-p43.3"></span>ἐν αὐτῷ, which is commonly made use of by the
Apostles. His meaning, therefore, is, that as we were once created by
God, so it is by his power that we are preserved in our present
condition. That this is its meaning, is evident from what he affirms
respecting Christ immediately afterwards — that we are *by him* For he
designed to ascribe the same operation to the Father and to the Son,
adding, however, the distinction which was suitable to the Persons. He
says, then, that we subsist *in* the Father, and that it is *by* the
Son, because the Father is indeed the foundation of all existence; but,
as it is by the Son that we are united to him, so he communicates to us
through him the reality of existence.

<span id="xv.i-p44"></span>*One Lord* These things are affirmed
respecting Christ relatively, that is, in relationship to the Father.
For all things that are God’s are assuredly applicable to Christ, when
no mention is made of persons; but as the person of the Father is here
brought into comparison with the person of the Son, it is with good
reason that the Apostle distinguishes what is peculiar to them.

<span id="xv.i-p45"></span>Now the Son of God, after having been
manifested in the flesh, received from the Father dominion and power
over all things, that he might reign alone in heaven and on earth, and
that the Father might exercise his authority through his hands. For this
reason our Lord is spoken of as one.  <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) But in respect of dominion being
ascribed to him alone, this is not to be taken as meaning that worldly
distinctions  <span id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) are abolished. For
Paul speaks here of spiritual dominion, while the governments of the
world are political; as when he said a little before — *there are many
that are called lords* — (<span id="xv.i-p47.2"></span>[1Co
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005)<span id="xv.i-p47.2"></span>) — he
meant that, not of kings, or of others who excel in rank and dignity,
but of idols or demons, to whom foolish men ascribe superiority and
rule. While, therefore, our religion acknowledges but one Lord, this is
no hindrance in the way of civil governments having many lords, to whom
honor and respect are due in that *one Lord*

<span id="xv.i-p48"></span><span id="xv.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p49"></span>**7.** *But there is not in all that
knowledge.* He refutes, in a single word, all that he had previously
brought forward in their name, showing that it is not enough that they
know that what, they do is right, if they have not at the same time a
regard to their brethren. When he said above — *We know that we all have
knowledge*, (<span id="xv.i-p49.2"></span>[1Co
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p49.2"></span>,) he
referred to those whom he reproved for abusing their liberty. Now, on
the other hand, he calls them to consider, that there are many weak and
ignorant persons associated with them, to whom they ought to accommodate
themselves. “You have, it is true, a correct judgment in the sight of
God, and if you were alone in the world, it would be as lawful for you
to eat of things offered to idols, as of any other kinds of food. But
consider your brethren, to whom you are debtors. You have knowledge;
they are ignorant,. Your actions ought to be regulated not merely
according to your knowledge, but also according to their ignorance.”
This reply is particularly deserving of notice; for there is nothing to
which we are more prone  <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) than
this, that every one follows his own advantage, to the neglect of that
of others. Hence we feel prepared to rest in our own judgment, and do
not consider, that the propriety of those works that we do in the sight
of men depends not merely on our own conscience, but also on that of our
brethren.

<span id="xv.i-p51"></span>*Some with conscience of the idol* This is
their ignorance, that they were still under the influence of some
superstitious notion, as if there were some virtue in the idol, or some
virtue in a wicked and idolatrous consecration. Paul, however, does not
speak of idolaters, who were entire strangers to pure religion, but of
ignorant persons who had not been sufficiently instructed, to understand
that *an idol is nothing*, and therefore that the consecration, which
was gone through in name of the idol, is of no importance. Their idea,
therefore, was this: “As an idol is something, the consecration which is
gone through in its name is not altogether vain, and hence those meats
are not pure, that have been once dedicated to idols.” Hence they
thought, that, if they ate of them, they contracted some degree of
pollution, and were, in a manner, partakers with the idol. This is the
kind of *offense* that Paul reproves in the Corinthians — when we induce
weak brethren, by our example, to venture upon anything against their
conscience.

<span id="xv.i-p52"></span>*And their conscience* God would have us try
or attempt nothing but what we know for certain is agreeable to him.
Whatever, therefore, is done with a doubting conscience, is, in
consequence of doubts of that kind, faulty in the sight of God. And this
is what he says, (<span id="xv.i-p52.1"></span>[Ro
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span id="xv.i-p52.1"></span>,)
*Whatsoever is not of faith is sin* Hence the truth of the common
saying, that “those build for hell, who build against their conscience.”
For as the excellence of actions depends on the fear of God and
integrity of conscience, so, on the other hand, there is no action, that
is so good in appearance, as not to be polluted by a corrupt affection
of the mind. For the man, who ventures upon anything in opposition to
conscience, does thereby discover some contempt of God; for it is a
token that we fear God, when we have respect to his will in all things.
Hence you are not without contempt of God, if you so much as move a
finger while uncertain, whether it may not be displeasing to him. As to
*meats*, there is another thing to be considered, for they are not
*sanctified* to us otherwise than *by the word* (<span
id="xv.i-p52.2"></span>[1Ti 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span
id="xv.i-p52.2"></span>.) If that word is wanting, there remains nothing
but pollution — not that the creatures of God are polluted, but because
man’s use of them is impure. In fine, as men’s hearts are purified by
faith, so without faith there is nothing that is pure in the sight of
God.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
8:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**8.** But meat commendeth us not to God: for
neither, if we eat, are we the better; neither, if we eat not, are we
the worse.

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span>**8.** Atqui esca nos non commendat Deo:
neque si comedamus, abundamus, neque si non comedamus, deficimur aliquo.

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span>**9.** But take heed lest by any means this
liberty of yours become a stumblingblock to them that are weak.

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span>**9.** Sed videte, ne quo modo facultas haec
vestra offendiculo sit infirmis.

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span>**10.** For if any man see thee which hast
knowledge sit at meat in the idol’s temple, shall not the conscience of
him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to
idols;

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span>**10.** Si quis enim videat to, utcunque
scientiam habeas, in epulo simulacrorum accumbentem; nonne conscientia
eius, quum tamen infirmus sit, aedificabitur ad edendum quae sunt idolis
immolata?

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>**11.** And through thy knowledge shall the
weak brother perish, for whom Christ died?

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span>**11.** Et peribit frater, qui infirmus est,
in tua scientia, propter quem Christus mortuus est?

<span id="xv.ii-p10"></span>**12.** But when ye sin so against the
brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.

<span id="xv.ii-p11"></span>**12.** Sic autem peccantes in fratres, et
vuluerantes conscientiam illorum infirmam, in Christum peccatis.

<span id="xv.ii-p12"></span>**13.** Wherefore, if meat make my brother
to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my
brother to offend.

<span id="xv.ii-p13"></span>**13.** Quapropter si esca offendit fratrem
meum, nequaquam vescar carnibus in aeternum, ne fratri meo sim
offendiculo.

<span id="xv.ii-p14"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p15"></span><span id="xv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p16"></span>**8.** *Meat recommendeth us not to God*
This was, or may have been, another pretext made use of by the
Corinthians — that the worship of God does not consist in meats, as Paul
himself teaches in his Epistle to the Romans, (<span
id="xv.ii-p16.1"></span>[Ro 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)<span
id="xv.ii-p16.1"></span>,) that *the kingdom of God is not meat or
drink* Paul answers: “We must at the same time take care that our
liberty does not do injury to our neighbors.” In this he tacitly
acknowledges, that in the sight of God it matters not what kinds of food
we partake of, because he allows us the free use of them, so far as
conscience is concerned; but that this liberty, as to the external use
of it, is made subject to love. The argument of the Corinthians,
therefore, was defective, inasmuch as they inferred the whole from a
part, for in the use of them a regard to the claims of love is included.
It is, therefore, certain, that *meat recommendeth us not to God;* and
Paul acknowledges this, but he states this exception, that love is
recommended to us by God, which it were criminal to overlook.

<span id="xv.ii-p17"></span>*Neither if we eat, are we the better.* He
does not speak of improvement as to the stomach; for the man who has
dined has a better filled stomach than the man who goes fasting; but he
means, that we have neither more nor less of righteousness from eating
or from abstaining. Besides, he does not speak of every kind of
abstinence, or of every kind of eating. For excess and luxury are in
themselves displeasing to God, while sobriety and moderation are
well-pleasing to him. But let it be understood by us, that *the kingdom
of God*, which is spiritual, does not consist in these outward
observances, and therefore, that things indifferent are in themselves of
no importance in the sight of God. While he brings this forward in the
person of others by <span id="xv.ii-p17.1"></span>*anthypophora*,  <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) he at the same time admits that it is
true, for it is taken from his own doctrine, which we touched upon a
little ago.

<span id="xv.ii-p19"></span><span id="xv.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p20"></span>**9.** *Take heed that your liberty* He
leaves their liberty untouched, but moderates the use of it thus far —
that it may not give occasion of stumbling to the weak. And he expressly
desires that regard be had to the weak, that is, to those who are not,
yet thoroughly confirmed in the doctrine of piety, for as they are wont
to be regarded with contempt, it is the will and command of the Lord,
that regard should be had to them. In the meantime, he hints that strong
giants, who may be desirous tyrannically to subject our liberty to their
humor, may safely be let alone,  <span id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469)
because we need not fear giving offense to those who are not drawn into
sin through infirmity, but eagerly catch at something to find fault
with. What he means by *an occasion, of stumbling* we shall see
herelong.

<span id="xv.ii-p22"></span><span id="xv.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p23"></span>**10.** *If any one see thee.* From this it
appears more clearly, how much liberty the Corinthians allowed
themselves; for when the wicked made a kind of sacred banquet for their
idols, they did not hesitate  <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) to
go to it, to eat of the sacrifice along with them. Paul now shows what
evil resulted from this. In the *first* clause, instead of the words
*who hast knowledge*, I have rendered the expression thus — though *thou
shouldest have*; and in the *second* clause, in the expression *who is
weak*, I have introduced the word *notwithstanding*. This I found it
necessary to do for the clearing up of Paul’s meaning. For he makes a
concession, as if he had said: “Be it so, that thou hast knowledge; he
who seeth thee, though he is not endowed with knowledge, is
*notwithstanding* confirmed by thine example to venture upon the same
thing, while he would never have taken such a step if he had not had one
to take the lead. Now when he has one to imitate, he thinks that he has
a sufficient excuse in the circumstance that he is imitating another,
while in the meantime he is acting from an evil conscience.” For
*weakness* here means ignorance, or scruple of conscience. I am aware,
at the same time, in what way others explain it; for they understand
*the occasion of stumbling* to be this — when ignorant persons, induced
by example, imagine that in this way they perform some kind of religious
service to God, but this idea is quite foreign to Paul’s meaning. For he
reproves them, as I have said,  <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471)
because they emboldened the ignorant to hurry on, contrary to
conscience, to attempt what they did not think it lawful for them to do.
To be *built up* means here — to be *confirmed*  <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) Now that is a ruinous kind of
*building*, that is not founded on sound doctrine.

<span id="xv.ii-p27"></span><span id="xv.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p28"></span>**11.** *And thy brother perish* Mark how
serious an evil it is, that mankind commonly think so little of — that
of venturing upon anything with a doubtful or opposing conscience. For
the object to which our whole life ought to be directed, is the will of
the Lord. This, therefore, is the one thing that vitiates all our
actions, when we disregard it.  <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473)
This we do, not merely by an outward action, but even by a thought of
the mind, when we allow ourselves in anything in opposition to
conscience, even though the thing be not evil in itself. Let us bear in
mind, therefore, that whenever we take a step in opposition to
conscience, we are on the high road to ruin.

<span id="xv.ii-p30"></span>I read, however, the sentence
interrogatively, thus: *Shall he perish through thy knowledge*? as
though he had said: “Is it reasonable that thy knowledge should give
occasion of ruin to thy brother? Is it for this reason that thou knowest
what is right, that thou mayest cause another’s ruin!” He makes use of
the term *brother*, in order to expose their pride as unfeeling, in this
way: “It is true that the person whom you despise is *weak*, but still
he is your *brother*, for God has adopted him. You act a cruel part,
therefore, in having no concern for your brother.” There is, however,
still greater force in what follows — that even those that are ignorant
or weak have been *redeemed with the blood of Christ*; for nothing were
more unseemly than this, that while Christ did not hesitate to die, in
order that the weak might not perish, we, on the other hand, reckon as
nothing the salvation of those who have been redeemed with so great a
price. A memorable saying, by which we are taught how precious the
salvation of our brethren ought to be in our esteem, and not merely that
of all, but of each individual in particular, inasmuch as the blood of
Christ was poured out for each individual!

<span id="xv.ii-p31"></span><span id="xv.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p32"></span>**12.** *When ye sin so against the
brethren*, etc. For if the soul of every one that is weak is the price
of Christ’s blood, that man who, for the sake of a very small portion of
meat, hurries back again to death the brother who has been redeemed by
Christ, shows how contemptible the blood of Christ is in his view. Hence
contempt of this kind is an open insult to Christ. In what way a weak
conscience may be wounded has been already explained — when it is *built
up* in what is evil (<span id="xv.ii-p32.1"></span>[1Co
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#010)<span id="xv.ii-p32.1"></span>) so
as daringly and rashly to rush on farther than the individual thinks to
be lawful for him.

<span id="xv.ii-p33"></span><span id="xv.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p34"></span>**13.** *Wherefore if meat make my brother
to offend* With the view of reproving more severely their disdainful
liberty, he declares, that we ought not merely to refrain from a single
banquet rather than injure a *brother*, but ought to give up the eating
of meats during our whole life. Nor does he merely prescribe what ought
to be done, but declares that he would himself act in this way. The
expression, it is true, is hyperbolical, as it is scarcely possible that
one should refrain from eating flesh during his whole life, if he remain
in common life;  <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) but his meaning
is, that he would rather make no use of his liberty in any instance,
than be an *occasion of offense* to the weak. For participation is in no
case lawful, unless it be regulated by the rule of love. Would that this
were duly pondered by those who make everything subservient to their own
advantage, so that they cannot endure to give up so much as a
hair’s-breadth of their own right for the sake of their brethren; and
that they would attend not merely to what Paul teaches, but also to what
he marks out by his own example! How greatly superior he is to us! When
*he*, then, makes no hesitation in subjecting himself thus far to his
brethren, which of us would not submit to the same condition?

<span id="xv.ii-p36"></span>But, however difficult it is to act up to
this doctrine, so far as the meaning is concerned, is easy, were it not
that some have corrupted it by foolish glosses, and others by wicked
calumnies. Both classes err as to the meaning of the word *offend* For
they understand the word *offend* to mean, *incurring the hatred or
displeasure of men*, or what is nearly the same thing, *doing what
displeases them, or is not altogether agreeable to them* But it appears
very manifestly from the context, that it means simply to hinder a
brother by bad example (as an obstacle thrown in his way) from the right
course, or to give him occasion of falling. Paul, therefore, is not here
treating of the retaining of the favor of men, but of the assisting of
the weak, so as to prevent their falling, and prudently directing them,
that they may not turn aside from the right path. But (as I have said)
the former class are *foolish*, while the latter are also *wicked* and
impudent.

<span id="xv.ii-p37"></span>Those are *foolish*, who allow Christians
scarcely any use of things indifferent, lest they should *offend*
superstitious persons. “Paul,” say they, “prohibits here everything that
may give occasion of *offense* Now to eat flesh on Friday will not fail
to give *offense*, and hence we must abstain from it, not merely when
there are some weak persons present, but in every case without
exception, for it is possible that they may come to know of it.” Not to
speak of their misinterpretation of the word rendered *occasion of
offense*, they fall into a grievous blunder in not considering that Paul
here inveighs against those who impudently abuse their knowledge in the
presence of the weak, whom they take no pains to instruct.

<span id="xv.ii-p38"></span>Hence there will be no occasion for reproof,
if instruction has been previously given. Farther, Paul does not command
us to calculate, whether there may be an occasion of offense in what we
do, except when the danger is present to our view.

<span id="xv.ii-p39"></span>I come now to the other class. These are
pretended followers of Nicodemus,  <span
id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) who under this pretext conform
themselves to the wicked by participating in their idolatry, and not
contented with justifying what they do amiss, are desirous also to bind
others to the same necessity. Nothing could be said with greater
plainness to condemn their perverse dissimulation than what Paul here
teaches — that all who by their example allure the weak to idolatry,
commit a grievous outrage against God as well as men. Yet they eagerly
shield themselves from this by endeavoring to show that superstitions
ought to be cherished in the hearts of the ignorant, and that we ought
to lead the way before them to idolatry, lest a free condemnation of
idolatry should *offend* them. Hence I will not do them the honor of
dwelling upon a refutation of their impudence. I simply admonish my
readers to compare Paul’s times with ours, and judge from this whether
it is allowable to be present at mass, and other abominations, giving so
much *occasion of offense* to the weak

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_457"></span>[458](cc39014.htm#fr_457) <span
id="xv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p22.1"></span>Et
intraittables;” — “And insufferable.”

<span id="fn_458"></span>[459](cc39014.htm#fr_458) <span
id="xv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p24.1"></span>La crainte de
Dieu est le seul et vray fondement d’icelle;” — “The fear of God is its
only true foundation.”

<span id="fn_459"></span>[460](cc39014.htm#fr_459) <span
id="xv.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p25.1"></span>J’ai bien
voulu dire ceci;” — “I have felt prepared to say this.”

<span id="fn_460"></span>[461](cc39014.htm#fr_460) <span
id="xv.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p26.1"></span>Moyens et
instrumens tres-vtiles, tant a la cognoissance de Dieu, qu’a la conduite
de la vie commune;” — “Most useful means and instruments, both for the
knowledge of God, and for the conduct of common life.”

<span id="fn_461"></span>[462](cc39014.htm#fr_461) <span
id="xv.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p29"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p29.1"></span>La regne
ignorance et faute de cognoissance de Dieu;” — “There ignorance reigns,
and deficiency in acquaintance with God.”

<span id="fn_462"></span>[463](cc39014.htm#fr_462) <span
id="xv.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p39"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p39.1"></span>Ausquels on a
attribue diuinite, et en leur honneur dresse quelque senrice diuin;” —
“To whom they have ascribed divinity, and have appointed some divine
service in honor of them.”

<span id="fn_463"></span>[464](cc39014.htm#fr_463) <span
id="xv.i-p39.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p40"></span> The allusion is to Terminus, the god of
boundaries, of whom mention is made by Livy (1. 10, and 5. 54.) — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[465](cc39014.htm#fr_464) <span
id="xv.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p41"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p41.1"></span>Telles
consecrations faites a l’appetit des hommes;” — “Such consecrations made
according to the humor of men.”

<span id="fn_465"></span>[466](cc39014.htm#fr_465) <span
id="xv.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p46"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p46.1"></span>Pour ceste
raison quand il est parle de nostre Seigneur, il est dit que nous n’en
auons qu’vn, assauoir Christ;” — “For this reason, when mention is made
of our Lord, it is declared that we have only one, namely, Christ.”

<span id="fn_466"></span>[467](cc39014.htm#fr_466) <span
id="xv.i-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p47"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p47.1"></span>Les degrez,
estats, et gouuernemens du monde;” — “Ranks, conditions, and governments
of the world.”

<span id="fn_467"></span>[468](cc39014.htm#fr_467) <span
id="xv.i-p49.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p50"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p50.1"></span>Il n’y a rien
plus commun et ordinaire que ce vice;” — “There is nothing that is more
common and ordinary than this fault.”

<span id="fn_468"></span>[469](cc39014.htm#fr_468) <span
id="xv.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p18.2"></span>Par une
maniere d’anticipation;” — “By way of anticipation.” <span
id="xv.ii-p18.3"></span>*Anthrypophora* is a figure of speech which
derives its name from the Greek term <span
id="xv.ii-p18.4"></span>ἀνθυποφορά, a *reply to an objection* It is used
in this sense by Dionysius Halicarnassensis. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_469"></span>[470](cc39014.htm#fr_469) <span
id="xv.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p21"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p21.1"></span>Nous ne nous
en devons point soucier, mais les laisser la;” — “We should not concern
ourselves as to them, but leave them there.”

<span id="fn_470"></span>[471](cc39014.htm#fr_470) <span
id="xv.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p24.1"></span>Les
Corinthiens n’auoyent point de honte;” — “The Corinthians were not
ashamed.”

<span id="fn_471"></span>[472](cc39014.htm#fr_471) <span
id="xv.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p25"></span> See commentary on <span
id="xv.ii-p25.2"></span>[1 Corinthians
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#007)<span id="xv.ii-p25.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[473](cc39014.htm#fr_472) <span
id="xv.ii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p26"></span> The original word <span
id="xv.ii-p26.1"></span>οἰκοδομηθήσεται, *shall be built up*, is used
here, in the opinion of some learned critics, to mean *encouraged* or
*emboldened*, and a parallel passage is pointed to in <span
id="xv.ii-p26.2"></span>[Mal 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#015)<span
id="xv.ii-p26.2"></span>, where the Hebrew word <span
id="xv.ii-p26.3"></span>כבכי is rendered in the Septuagint <span
id="xv.ii-p26.4"></span>ἀνοικοδομοῦνται or *emboldened* It deserves
notice, however, that the Apostle had in the commencement of the chapter
spoken of love as *edifying*, while *knowledge puffeth up*, and it is
not improbable that he made use of the same word here *ironically*, as
we would say — “Will not this be *edifying* the wrong way?” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_473"></span>[474](cc39014.htm#fr_473) <span
id="xv.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p29.1"></span>Quand nous
entreprenons quelque chose center ceste saincte volonte;” — “When we
attempt anything in opposition to that holy will.”

<span id="fn_474"></span>[475](cc39014.htm#fr_474) <span
id="xv.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p35"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p35.1"></span>S’il
demelure en la conuersation et communication auec les autres?” — “If he
remains in converse and fellowship with others.”

<span id="fn_475"></span>[476](cc39014.htm#fr_475) <span
id="xv.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p40"></span> Our author speaks of the same class of
persons when commenting on <span id="xv.ii-p40.1"></span>[John
7:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#050)<span id="xv.ii-p40.1"></span>.
See Calvin’s *Commentary on John*, vol. 1, p. 317. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc39015)
