[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc39012)  [Next](cc39014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
7:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001.md)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now concerning the things whereof ye
wrote unto me: *It is* good for a man not to touch a woman.

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Porro, de quibus scripsistis mihi,
bonum est viro mulierem non tangere.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>**2.** Nevertheless, *to avoid* fornication,
let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own
husband.

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Propter fornicationes autem
unusquisque uxorem suam habeat, et unaquaeque proprium maritum.

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span><span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>As he had spoken of fornication, he now
appropriately proceeds to speak of marriage which is the remedy for
avoiding fornication. Now it appears, that, notwithstanding the greatly
scattered state of the Corinthian Church, they still retained some
respect for Paul, inasmuch as they consulted him on doubtful points.
What their questions had been is uncertain, except in so far as we may
gather them from his reply. This, however, is perfectly well known, that
immediately after the first rise of the Church, there crept into it,
through Satan’s artifice, a superstition of such a kind, that a large
proportion of them, through a foolish admiration of celibacy,  <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366.md) despised the sacred connection of
marriage; nay more, many regarded it with abhorrence, as a profane
thing. This contagion had perhaps spread itself among the Corinthians
also; or at least there were idly-disposed spirits, who, by immoderately
extolling celibacy, endeavored to alienate the minds of the pious from
marriage. At the same time, as the Apostle treats of many other
subjects, he intimates that he had been consulted on a variety of
points. What is chiefly of importance is, that we listen to his doctrine
as to each of them.

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>1. *It is good for a man*. The answer
consists of two parts. In the *first*, he teaches that it were *good*
for every one to abstain from connection with a woman, provided it was
in his power to do so. In the *second*, he subjoins a correction to this
effect, that as many cannot do this, in consequence of the weakness of
their flesh, these persons must not neglect the remedy which they have
in their power, as appointed for them by the Lord. Now we must observe
what he means by the word good, when he declares that it is good to
abstain from marriage, that we may not conclude, on the other hand, that
the marriage connection is therefore evil — a mistake which Jerome has
fallen into, not so much from ignorance, in my opinion, as from the heat
of controversy. For though that great man was endowed with distinguished
excellences, he labored, at the same time, under one serious defect,
that when disputing he allowed himself to be hurried away into great
extravagancies, so that he did not keep within the bounds of truth. The
inference then which he draws is this “It is *good not to touch a
woman*: it is therefore *wrong* to do so.”  <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367.md) Paul, however, does not make use of
the word *good* here in such a signification as to be opposed to what is
evil or vicious, but simply points out what is expedient on account of
there being so many troubles, vexations, and anxieties that are incident
to married persons. Besides, we must always keep in view the limitation
which he subjoins. Nothing farther, therefore, can be elicited from
Paul’s words than this — that it is indeed expedient and profitable for
a man not to be bound to a wife, provided he can do otherwise. Let us
explain this by a comparison. Should any one speak in this way: “It were
*good* for a man not to eat, or to drink, or to sleep” — he would not
thereby condemn eating, or drinking, or sleeping, as things that were
wrong — but as the time that is devoted to these things is just so
 <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368.md) much taken from the soul, his
meaning would be, that we would be happier if we could be free from
these hindrances, and devote ourselves wholly  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369.md) to meditation on heavenly things.
Hence, as there are in married life many impediments which keep a man
entangled, it were on that account *good* not to be connected in
marriage.

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>But here another question presents itself,
for these words of Paul have some appearance of inconsistency with the
words of the Lord, in <span id="xiv.i-p14.1"></span>[Ge
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018.md)<span id="xiv.i-p14.1"></span>,
where he declares, that *it is not good for a man* to be without a wife.
What the Lord there pronounces to be *evil* Paul here declares to be
*good* I answer, that in so far as a wife is *a help* to her husband, so
as to make his life happy, that is in accordance with God’s institution;
for in the beginning God appointed it so, that the man without the woman
was, as it were, but half a man, and felt himself destitute of special
and necessary assistance, and the wife is, as it were, the completing of
the man. Sin afterwards came in to corrupt that institution of God; for
in place of so great a blessing there has been substituted a grievous
punishment, so that marriage is the source and occasion of many
miseries. Hence, whatever evil or inconvenience there is in marriage,
that arises from the corruption of the divine institution. Now, although
there are in the meantime some remains still existing of the original
blessing, so that a single life is often much more unhappy than the
married life; yet, as married persons are involved in many
inconveniences, it is with good reason that Paul teaches that it would
be *good for a man* to abstain. In this way, there is no concealment of
the troubles that are attendant upon marriage; and yet, in the meantime,
there is no countenance given to those profane jests which are commonly
in vogue with a view to bring it into discredit, such as the following:
that a wife is a necessary evil, and that a wife is one of the greatest
evils. For such sayings as these have come from Satan’s workshop, and
have a direct tendency to brand with disgrace God’s holy institution;
and farther, to lead men to regard marriage with abhorrence, as though
it were a deadly evil and pest.

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span>The sum is this, that we must remember to
distinguish between the pure ordinance of God and the punishment of sin,
which came in subsequently. According to this distinction, it was in the
beginning *good for a man*, without any exception, to be joined to a
wife, and even yet, it is *good* in such a way, that there is in the
meantime a mixture of bitter and sweet, in consequence of the curse of
God. To those, however, who have not the gift of continency, it is a
necessary and salutary remedy in accordance with what follows.

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span><span id="xiv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>**2.** *But to avoid fornication* He now
commands, that those who are liable to the vice of incontinency should
have recourse to the remedy. For though it may seem that the statement
is universal, it ought, nevertheless, to be restricted to those who feel
themselves urged by necessity. As to this, every one must judge for
himself. Whatever difficulty, therefore, is perceived to be in marriage,
let all that cannot resist the promptings of their flesh, know that this
commandment has been enjoined upon them by the Lord. But it is asked —
“Is this the only reason for entering into matrimony, that we may cure
incontinency?” I answer, that this is not Paul’s meaning; for as for
those that have the gift of abstinence from marriage, he leaves *them*
at liberty,  <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370.md) while he commands
others to provide against their infirmity by marrying. The sum is this —
that the question is not as to the reasons for which marriage has been
instituted, but as to the persons for whom it is necessary. For if we
look to the first institution, it could not be a remedy for a disease
which had as yet no existence, but was appointed for begetting
offspring; but after the fall, this second purpose was added.

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span>This passage is also opposed to (<span
id="xiv.i-p19.1"></span>τολυγαμία) *polygamy* For the Apostle desires
that *every woman have her own husband*, intimating that the obligation
is mutual. The man, therefore, who has once pledged his fidelity to a
woman as his wife, must not separate from her, as is manifestly done in
case of a second connection.

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
7:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003.md)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Let the husband render unto the wife
due benevolence: and like also the wife unto the husband.

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Uxori vir debitam benevolentiam
vicissim praetet, similiter et uxor marito.

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span>**4.** The wife hath not power of her own
body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power of
his own body, but the wife.

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Mulier corporis sui potestatem non
habet, sed maritus: similiter et maritus corporis sui potestatem non
habet, sed uxor.

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span>**5.** Defraud ye not one the other, except
*it be* with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting
and prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your
incontinency.

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>**5.** Ne fraudetis alter alterum, nisi ex
mutuo consensu ad tempus, ut vacetis ieiunio et orationi: et rursum in
unum redite, ne tentet vos Satanas propter incontinentiam vestram.

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span>**3.** *The husband to the wife.* He now
prescribes the rules to be observed in the marriage connection, or he
teaches what is the duty of husband and wife. And in the first place he
lays down a general doctrine as to mutual benevolence — that the husband
love his wife, and the wife her husband; for as to the interpretation
which others give to the expression *due benevolence* — duty of marriage
— I do not know how far it is suitable. The reason that inclines them to
this view is, that it is immediately added, *The husband has not power
of his own body*, etc.; but it will suit better to regard that as an
inference drawn from the preceding statement. Husband and wife,
therefore, are bound to mutual benevolence: hence it follows, that they
have, neither the one nor the other, *the power of their own body.* But
it may be asked, why the Apostle here puts them upon a level, instead of
requiring from the wife obedience and subjection. I answer, that it was
not his intention to treat of all their duties, but simply of the mutual
obligation as to the marriage bed. In other things, therefore, husband
and wife differ, both as to duty and as to authority in this respect the
condition of both is alike — as to the maintaining of conjugal fidelity.
For this reason, also, polygamy (<span
id="xiv.ii-p10.1"></span>τολυγαμία) is again condemned; for if this is
an invariable condition of marriage, that the husband surrenders *the
power of his own body,* and gives it up to his wife, how could he
afterwards connect himself with another, as if he were free?

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span>**5.** *Defraud ye not one the other*
Profane persons might think that Paul does not act with sufficient
modesty in discoursing in this manner as to the intercourse of a husband
with his wife; or at least that it was unbecoming the dignity of an
Apostle. If, however, we consider the reasons that influenced him, we
shall find that he was under the necessity of speaking of these things.
In the first place, he knew how much influence a false appearance of
sanctity has in beguiling devout minds, as we ourselves know by
experience. For Satan dazzles us with an appearance of what is right,
that we may be led to imagine that we are polluted by intercourse with
our wives, and leaving off our calling, may think of pursuing another
kind of life. Farther, he knew how prone every one is to self-love, and
devoted to his own gratification. From this it comes, that a husband,
having had his desire gratified, treats his wife not merely with
neglect, but even with disdain; and there are few that do not sometimes
feel this disdain of their wives creep in upon them. It is for these
reasons that he treats so carefully of the mutual obligations of the
married life. “If at any time it comes into the minds of married persons
to desire an unmarried life, as though it were holier, or if they are
tempted by irregular desires,  <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371.md)
let them bear in mind that they are bound by a mutual connection.” The
husband is but the one half of his body, and so is it, also, as to the
wife. Hence they have not liberty of choice, but must on the contrary
restrain themselves with such thoughts as these: “Because the one needed
help from the other, the Lord has connected us together, that we may
assist each other.” Let each then be helpful to each other’s necessity,
and neither of them act as if at his or her own disposal.

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span>*Unless by mutual consent* He requires
*mutual consent,* in the first place, because the question is not as to
the continency of one merely, but of two; and besides, he immediately
adds two other exceptions. The *first* is, that it be done only *for a
time,* as perpetual continency is not in their power, lest if they
should venture to make an attempt beyond their power, they might fall
before Satan’s stratagems. The *second* is, that they do not abstain
from conjugal intercourse, on the ground of that abstinence being in
itself a good and holy work, or as if it were the worship of God,  <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372.md) but that they may be at leisure for
better employments. Now though Paul had taken such pains in guarding
this, yet Satan prevailed so far as to drive  <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373.md) many to unlawful divorce, from a
corrupt desire for an unmarried life. The husband, leaving his wife,
fled to the desert, that he might please God better by living as a monk.
The wife, against her husband’s will, put on the veil — the badge of
celibacy. Meanwhile they did not consider that by violating their
marriage engagement they broke the Lord’s covenant, and by loosing the
marriage tie, they cast off the Lord’s yoke.

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span>This vice, it is true, was corrected in
some measure by the ancient canons; for they prohibited a husband from
leaving his wife against her will, on pretense of continency; and in
like manner a wife from refusing to her husband the use of her body. In
this, however, they erred — that they permitted both together to live in
perpetual celibacy, as if it were lawful for men to decree anything that
is contrary to the Spirit of God. Paul expressly commands, that married
persons do not *defraud each other, except for a time* The bishops give
permission to leave off the use of marriage for ever. Who does not see
the manifest contrariety? Let no one, therefore, be surprised, that we
make free to dissent on this point from the ancients, who, it is
evident, deviated from the clear statements of the word of God.

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span>*That ye may have leisure for fasting and
prayer.* We must take notice, that Paul does not speak here of every
kind of *fasting*, or every kind of prayer. That sobriety and
temperance, which ought to be habitual on the part of Christians, is a
kind of *fasting. Prayer*, too, ought to be not merely daily, but even
continual. He speaks, however, of that kind of *fasting* which is a
solemn expression of penitence, with the view of deprecating God’s
anger, or by which believers prepare themselves for *prayer*, when they
are undertaking some important business. In like manner, the kind of
*prayer* that he speaks of is such as requires a more intense affection
of the mind.  <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374.md) For it sometimes
happens, that. we require (leaving off everything else) to *fast* and
*pray*; as when any calamity is impending, if it appears to be a
visitation of God’s wrath; or when we are involved in any difficult
matter, or when we have something of great importance to do, as, for
example, the ordaining of pastors.  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375.md) Now it is with propriety that the
Apostle connects these two things, because *fasting* is a preparation
for *prayer*, as Christ also connects them, when he says,

<span id="xiv.ii-p21"></span>This kind of devils goeth not out but by
fasting and prayer. (<span id="xiv.ii-p21.1"></span>[Mt
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021)<span id="xiv.ii-p21.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.ii-p22"></span>When, therefore, Paul says, *that ye may be
at leisure*, the meaning is, that having freed ourselves from all
impediments, we may apply ourselves to this one thing. Now if any one
objects, that the use of the marriage bed is an evil thing, inasmuch as
it hinders *prayer*, the answer is easy — that it is not on that account
worse than meat and drink, by which *fasting* is hindered. But it is the
part of believers to consider wisely *when* it is time to eat and drink,
and *when* to fast. It is also the part of the same wisdom to have
intercourse with their wives when it is seasonable, and to refrain from
that intercourse when they are called to be engaged otherwise.

<span id="xiv.ii-p23"></span>*And come together again, that Satan tempt
you not* Here he brings forward the reason, from ignorance of which the
ancients have fallen into error, in rashly and inconsiderately approving
of a vow of perpetual continency. For they reasoned in this manner: “If
it is good for married persons sometimes to impose upon themselves *for
a time* a voluntary continency with *mutual consent*, then, if they
impose this upon themselves for ever, it will be so much the better.”
But then, they did not consider how much danger was involved in this,
for we give Satan an occasion for oppressing us, when we attempt
anything beyond the measure of our weakness.  <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376.md) “But we must resist Satan.”  <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377.md) What if arms and shield be wanting?
“They must be sought from the Lord,” say they. But in vain shall we
beseech the Lord to assist us in a rash attempt. We must, therefore,
carefully observe the clause — *for your incontinency*: for we are
exposed to Satan’s temptations in consequence of the infirmity of our
flesh. If we wish to shut them out, and keep them back, it becomes us to
oppose them by the remedy, with which the Lord has furnished us. Those,
therefore, act a rash part, who give up the use of the marriage bed. It
is as if they had made an agreement with God as to perpetual strength.
 <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378.md)

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 7:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#006.md)<span
id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**6.** But I speak this by permission,
*and* not of commandment.

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span>**6.** Hoc autem dico secundum veniam, non
secundum praeceptum.

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span>**7.** For I would that all men were even
as I myself. But every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this
manner, and another after that.

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span>**7.** Optarim enim, omnes homines esse
sicut me: sed unusquisque proprium donum habet ex Deo, alius sic, alius
autem sic.

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span>**8.** I say therefore to the unmarried and
widows, It is good for them if they abide even as I.

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span>**8.** Dico autem inconiugatis et viduis:
bonum ipsis est, si maneant ut ego.

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span>**9.** But if they cannot contain, let them
marry: for it is better to marry than to burn.

<span id="xiv.iii-p9"></span>**9.** Si autem non continent, matrimonium
contrahant: melius enim est matrimonium contrahere quam uri.

<span id="xiv.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p11"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p12"></span>**6.** *By permission* That they might
not, by taking their stand upon a precept of the kind that he had
prescribed, loosen unduly the restraints of lust,  <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379.md) he adds a limitation — that he had
written these things on account of their infirmity — that they may bear
in mind that marriage is a remedy for unchastity, lest they should
inordinately abuse the advantage of it, so as to gratify their desire by
every means; nay more, without measure or modesty. He has it also in
view to meet the cavils of the wicked, that no one might have it in his
power to object in this way: “What! are you afraid that husbands and
wives will not of their own accord be sufficiently inclined to carnal
delight that you prompt them to it?” For even the Papists, those little
saints,  <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380.md) are offended with this
doctrine, and would gladly have a contest with Paul, on the ground of
his keeping married persons in mutual cohabitation, and not allowing
them to turn aside to a life of celibacy. He assigns, then, a reason for
his doctrine, and declares, that he had not recommended connubial
intercourse to married persons with the view of alluring them to
delight, or as though he took pleasure in commanding it, but had
considered what was required by the infirmity of those that he is
addressing.

<span id="xiv.iii-p15"></span>Foolish zealots  <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381.md) for celibacy make a wrong use of both
clauses of this verse; for as Paul says that he speaks *by permission*,
they infer from this, that there is therefore something wrong in
conjugal intercourse, for where there is need of pardon,  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382.md) there must be sin. Farther, from his
saying that he speaks *not by commandment*, they infer, that it is,
therefore, a holier thing to leave off the use of marriage and turn to
celibacy. To *the former*, I answer, that as there is, I acknowledge, an
inordinate excess in all human affections, I do not deny that there is
as to this matter an irregularity, (<span
id="xiv.iii-p17.2"></span>ἀταξία,)  <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383.md) which, I allow, is vicious.  <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384.md) Nay more, this affection, I allow, is
beyond others violent, and next to brutish. But, on the other hand, I
also maintain, that whatever there is of vice or baseness, is so covered
over by the honorableness of marriage, that it ceases to be a vice, or
at least is not reckoned a fault by God, as Augustine elegantly
discourses in his book “On the advantage of Marriage,” and frequently in
other places. You may then take it briefly thus:  <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385.md) conjugal intercourse is a thing that
is pure, honorable and holy, because it is a pure institution of God:
the immoderate desire with which persons burn is a fault arising from
the corruption of nature; but in the case of believers marriage is a
veil, by which that fault is covered over, so that it no longer appears
in the sight of God. To the *second* I answer: as the term *commandment*
is properly applied to those things which relate to the duties of
righteousness, and things in themselves pleasing to God, Paul on this
account says that he does not speak *by commandment* He has, however,
sufficiently shown previously, that the remedy, which he had enjoined,
must necessarily be made use of.

<span id="xiv.iii-p21"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p22"></span>**7.** *For I should wish, that all.* This
is connected with the exposition of the foregoing statement; for he does
not fail to intimate, what is the more convenient way, but he wishes
every one to consider what has been given him.  <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386.md) Why, then, has he, a little before,
spoken *not by way of commandment*? It is for this reason, that he does
not willingly constrain them to marry, but rather desires that they may
be free from that necessity. As this, however, is not free to all, he
has respect to infirmity. If this passage had been duly weighed, that
perverse superstition connected with the desire of celibacy, which is
the root and cause of great evils, would never have gained a footing in
the world. Paul here expressly declares, that every one has not a free
choice in this matter, because virginity is a special gift, that is not
conferred upon all indiscriminately. Nor does he teach any other
doctrine than what Christ himself does, when he says, that

<span id="xiv.iii-p24"></span>all men are not capable of receiving this
saying.  
(<span id="xiv.iii-p24.2"></span>[Mt
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011.md)<span
id="xiv.iii-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.iii-p25"></span>Paul, therefore, is here an interpreter of
our Lord’s words, when he says that this power has not been given to all
— that of living without marriage.

<span id="xiv.iii-p26"></span>What, in the meantime, has been done?
Every one, without having any regard to his *power*, has, according to
his *liking*, vowed perpetual continency. Nor has the error as to this
matter been confined to the common people and illiterate persons; for
even the most eminent doctors, devoting themselves unreservedly to the
commendation of virginity, and forgetting human infirmity, have
overlooked this admonition of Paul — nay rather, of Christ himself.
Jerome, blinded by a zeal, I know not of what sort, does not simply
fall, but rushes headlong, into false views. Virginity, I acknowledge,
is an excellent gift; but keep it in view, that it is a *gift*. Learn,
besides, from the mouth of Christ and of Paul, that it is not common to
all, but is given only to a few. Guard, accordingly, against rashly
devoting what is not in your own power, and what you will not obtain as
a gift, if forgetful of your calling you aspire beyond your limits.

<span id="xiv.iii-p27"></span>At the same time the ancients erred even
in their estimate of virginity, for they extol it as if it were the most
excellent of all virtues, and wish it to be regarded as the worship of
God.  <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387.md) Even in this there is a
dangerous error; and now follows another — that, after celibacy had
begun to be so much esteemed, many, vying with each other, rashly vowed
perpetual continency, while scarcely the hundredth part of them were
endowed with the power and gift. Hence, too, *a third* sprung up — that
the ministers of the Church were forbidden to enter into marriage, as a
kind of life unbecoming the holiness of their order.  <span
id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388.md) As for those who, despising marriage,
rashly vowed perpetual continency, God punished their presumption,
first, by the secret flames of lust;  <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389.md) and then afterwards, by horrible acts
of filthiness. The ministers of the Churches being prohibited from
lawful marriage, the consequence of this tyranny was, that the Church
was robbed of very many good and faithful ministers; for pious and
prudent men would not ensnare themselves in this way. At length, after a
long course of time, lusts, which had been previously kept under, gave
forth their abominable odor. It was reckoned a small matter for those,
in whom it would have been a capital crime to have a wife, to maintain
with impunity concubines, that is, prostitutes; but no house was safe
from the impurities of the priests. Even that was reckoned a small
matter; for there sprung up monstrous enormities, which it were better
to bury in eternal oblivion than to make mention of them by way of
example.  <span id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390.md)

<span id="xiv.iii-p32"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p33"></span>**8.** *I say, then, to the unmarried.*
This depends on what goes before, and is a sort of inference from it. He
had said that the gifts of God are variously distributed — that
continency is not in the power of all, and that those who have it not
ought to have recourse to the remedy. He now directs his discourse to
*virgins*, to all that are *unmarried*, and to *widows*, and he allows
that an unmarried life ought to be desired by them, provided they have
the power; but that regard must always be had by each individual to the
power that he possesses. The sum is this, that an unmarried life has
many advantages, and that these are not to be despised, provided every
one measures himself according to his own size and measure.  <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391.md) Hence, though virginity should be
extolled even to the third heavens, this, at the same time, always
remains true — that it does not suit all, but only those who have a
special *gift* from God. For as to the objection that is brought forward
by Papists — that in baptism, also, we promise to God purity of life,
which it is not in our power to perform, the answer is easy — that in
that we promise nothing but what God requires from all his people, but
that continency is a special gift, which God has withheld from many.
Hence those who make a vow of continency, act precisely as if any
unlearned and illiterate person were to set himself off as a prophet, or
teacher, or interpreter of languages.

<span id="xiv.iii-p35"></span>We must also notice carefully the word
*continue*; for it is possible for a person to live chastely in a state
of celibacy for a time, but there must be in this matter no
determination made for tomorrow. Isaac was unmarried until he was thirty
years of age, and passed in chastity those years in which the heats of
irregular desire are most violent; yet afterwards he is called to enter
into the married life. In Jacob we have a still more remarkable
instance. Hence the Apostle would wish those who are at present
practicing chastity, to continue in it and persevere; but as they have
no security for the continuance of the gift, he exhorts all to consider
carefully what has been *given* them. This passage, however, shows that
the Apostle was at that time unmarried; for as to the inference drawn by
Erasmus, that he was married, because he makes mention of himself in
connection with married persons, it is frivolous and silly; for we
might, on the same principle, infer that he was a widower,  <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392.md) because he speaks of himself in
connection with widows.  <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393.md) Now the
words intimate, that at that time he was unmarried; for I do not give
any countenance to the conjecture, that he had put away his wife
somewhere, and had of his own accord abandoned the use of the marriage
bed. For where, in that case, had been the injunction,  <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394.md) *Come together again without delay*?
(<span id="xiv.iii-p38.2"></span>[1Co
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span id="xiv.iii-p38.2"></span>..md)
It would certainly be an absurdity to say, that he did not obey his own
precepts, and did not observe the law which he imposed upon others. It
is, however, a singular token of modesty, that, while he is himself
endowed with the gift of *continency*, he does not require others to
bind themselves to his rule, but allows them that remedy for infirmity
which he dispenses with. Let us, then, imitate his example, so that if
we excel in any particular gift, we do not rigorously insist upon it on
the part of others, who have not as yet reached that height.

<span id="xiv.iii-p39"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p40"></span>**9.** *But if they cannot contain* While
he advises to abstain from marriage, he always speaks conditionally —
*if it can be done, if there is ability*; but where the infirmity of the
flesh does not allow of that liberty, he expressly enjoins marriage as a
thing that is not in the least doubtful. For this is said *by way of
commandment*, that no one may look upon it as mere advice. Nor is it
merely fornicators that he restrains, but those also who are defiled in
the sight of God by inward lust; and assuredly he that *cannot contain*
tempts God, if he neglects the remedy of marriage. This matter requires
— not advice, but strict prohibition.

<span id="xiv.iii-p41"></span>*For it is better* There is not strictly a
comparison here, inasmuch as lawful *marriage is honorable in all
things*, (<span id="xiv.iii-p41.1"></span>[Heb
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span id="xiv.iii-p41.1"></span>,.md)
but, on the other hand, *to burn* is a thing that is exceedingly wrong.
The Apostle, however, has made use of a customary form of expression,
though not strictly accurate, as we commonly say: “It is better to
renounce this world that we may, along with Christ, enjoy the
inheritance of the heavenly kingdom, than to perish miserably in carnal
delights.” I mention this, because Jerome constructs upon this passage a
childish sophism  <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395.md) — that
marriage is good, inasmuch as it is not so great an evil as *to burn* I
would say, if it were a matter of sport, that he foolishly amuses
himself, but in a matter so weighty and serious, it is an impious scoff,
unworthy of a man of judgment. Let it then be understood, that marriage
is a good and salutary remedy, because *to burn* is a most base
abomination in the sight of God. We must, however, define what is meant
by *burning*; for many are stung with fleshly desires, who,
nevertheless, do not require forthwith to have recourse to marriage. And
to retain Paul’s metaphor, it is one thing *to burn* and another to feel
heat. Hence what Paul here calls *burning*, is not a mere slight
feeling, but a boiling with lust, so that you cannot resist. As,
however, some flatter themselves in vain, by imagining that they are
entirely free from blame, if they do not yield assent to impure desire,
observe that there are three successive steps of temptation. For in some
cases the assaults of impure desire have so much power that the will is
overcome: *that* is the worst kind of *burning*, when the heart is
inflamed with lust. In some instances, while we are stung with the darts
of the flesh, it is in such a manner that we make a stout resistance,
and do not allow ourselves to be divested of the true love of chastity,
but on the contrary, abhor all base and filthy affections.

<span id="xiv.iii-p43"></span>Hence all must be admonished, but
especially the young, that whenever they are assailed by their fleshly
inclinations, they should place the fear of God in opposition to a
temptation of this sort, cut off all inlets to unchaste thoughts,
entreat the Lord to give them strength to resist, and set themselves
with all their might to extinguish the flames of lust. If they succeed
in this struggle, let them render thanks unto the Lord, for where shall
we find the man who does not experience some molestation from his flesh?
but if we bridle its violence, before it has acquired the mastery, it is
well. For we do not *burn*, though we should feel a disagreeable heat —
not that there is nothing wrong in that feeling of heat, but
acknowledging before the Lord, with humility and sighing,  <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396.md) our weakness, we are meanwhile,
nevertheless, of good courage. To sum up all, so long as we come off
victorious in the conflict, through the Lord’s grace, and Satan’s darts
do not make their way within, but are valiantly repelled by us, let us
not become weary of the conflict.

<span id="xiv.iii-p45"></span>There is an intermediate kind of
temptation  <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397.md) — when a man does
not indeed admit impure desire with the full assent of his mind, but at
the same time is inflamed with a blind impetuosity, and is harassed in
such a manner that he cannot with peace of conscience call upon God. A
temptation, then, of such a kind as hinders one from calling upon God in
purity, and disturbs peace of conscience, is *burning*, such as cannot
be extinguished except by marriage. We now see, that in deliberating as
to this, one must not merely consider whether he can preserve his body
free from pollution: the mind also must be looked to, as we shall see in
a little.

<span id="xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
7:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#010.md)<span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p2"></span>**10.** And unto the married I command,
*yet* not I, but the Lord, Let not the wife depart from *her* husband:

<span id="xiv.iv-p3"></span>**10.** Coniugibus denuntio, non ego, sed
Dominus: Uxor a marito ne discedat.

<span id="xiv.iv-p4"></span>**11.** But and if she depart, let her
remain unmarried, or be reconciled to *her* husband: and let not the
husband put away *his* wife.

<span id="xiv.iv-p5"></span>**11.** Quodsi discesserit, maneat innupta,
aut viro reconcilietur: et vir uxorem ne dimittat.

<span id="xiv.iv-p6"></span>**12.** But to the rest speak I, not the
Lord: If any brother hath a wife that believeth not, and she be pleased
to dwell with him, let him not put her away.

<span id="xiv.iv-p7"></span>**12.** Reliquis ego dico, non Dominus: Si
quis frater uxorem habet infidelem, et ipsa consentit cum eo habitare,
ne dimittat eam:

<span id="xiv.iv-p8"></span>**13.** And the woman which hath an husband
that believeth not, and if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not
leave him.

<span id="xiv.iv-p9"></span>**13.** Et mulier si maritum habet
infidelem, et ipse consentit cum ea habitare, ne relinquat eum.

<span id="xiv.iv-p10"></span>**14.** For the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the
husband: else were your children unclean; but now are they holy.

<span id="xiv.iv-p11"></span>**14.** Sanctificatus est enim vir
infidelis in uxore: et sanctificata est uxor incredula in viro: alioque
liberi vestri immundi essent: nunc autem sancti sunt.

<span id="xiv.iv-p12"></span>**15.** But if the unbelieving depart, let
him depart. A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such *cases*:
but God hath called us to peace.

<span id="xiv.iv-p13"></span>**15.** Quod si infidelis discedit,
discedat: non enim subiectus est servituti frater ant soror in talibus,
in pace autem vocavit nos Deus.

<span id="xiv.iv-p14"></span>**16.** For what knowest thou, O wife,
whether thou shalt save *thy* husband? or how knowest thou, O man,
whether thou shalt save *thy* wife?

<span id="xiv.iv-p15"></span>**16.** Quid enim scis, mulier, an maritum
servatura sis? ant quid scis, O vir, an uxorem sis servaturus?

<span id="xiv.iv-p16"></span>**17.** But as God hath distributed to
every man, as the Lord hath called every one, so let him walk. And so
ordain I in all churches.

<span id="xiv.iv-p17"></span>**17.** Nisi unusquisque ut ei gratiam
divisit Dominns, sic ambulet: et sic in Ecclesiis omnibus praecipio.

<span id="xiv.iv-p18"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iv-p19"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p20"></span>**10.** *To the married I command.* He now
treats of another condition of marriage — its being an indissoluble tie.
Accordingly, he condemns all those divorces that were of daily
occurrence among the heathens, and were not punished among the Jews by
the law of Moses. *Let not,* says he, *the husband put away his wife,
and let not the wife depart from her husband.* Why? Because they are
joined together by an indissoluble bond. It is surprising, however, that
he does not make an exception, at least in case of adultery; for it is
not likely that he designed to curtail in anything the doctrine of
Christ. To me it appears clear, that the reason why he has made no
mention of this  <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398.md) is, that as he
is discoursing of these things only in passing, he chose rather to send
back the Corinthians to the Lord’s permission or prohibition, than to go
over everything in detail. For when persons intend to teach anything in
short compass, they content themselves with a general statement.
Exceptions are reserved for a minuter and more extended and particular
discussion.

<span id="xiv.iv-p22"></span>But as to what he subjoins — *not I, but
the Lord* — he intimates by this correction, that what he teaches here
is taken from the law of God. For other things that he taught he had
also from the revelation of the Spirit; but he declares that God is the
author of this, in respect of its being expressly taken from the law of
God. If you inquire as to the particular passage, you will nowhere find
it in so many words; but as Moses in the beginning testifies, that the
connection between a husband and wife is so sacred, that for the sake of
it

<span id="xiv.iv-p23"></span>a man ought to leave his father and mother.
(<span id="xiv.iv-p23.1"></span>[Ge
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="xiv.iv-p23.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.iv-p24"></span>It is easy to gather from this, how
inviolable a connection it is. For by right of nature a son is bound to
his father and mother, and cannot shake off that yoke. As the connection
of marriage is preferred to that bond, much less ought *it* to be
dissolved.

<span id="xiv.iv-p25"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p26"></span>**11.** *But if she depart* That this is
not to be understood of those who have been put away for adultery, is
evident from the punishment that followed in that case; for it was a
capital crime even by the Roman laws, and almost by the common law of
nations. But as husbands frequently divorced their wives, either because
their manners were not congenial, or because their personal appearance
did not please them, or because of some offense;  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399.md) and as wives, too, sometimes deserted
their husbands on account of their cruelty, or excessively harsh and
dishonorable treatment, he says that marriage is not dissolved by
divorces or dissensions of that nature. For it is an agreement that is
consecrated by the name of God, which does not stand or fall according
to the inclination of men, so as to be made void whenever we may choose.
The sum is this: other contracts, as they depend on the mere inclination
of men, are in like manner dissolved by that same inclination; but those
who are connected by marriage are no longer free, so as to be at
liberty, if they change their mind, to *break in pieces the pledge,*
 <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) (as the expression is,.md) and go
each of them elsewhere in quest of a new connection. For if the rights
of nature cannot be dissolved, much less can this, which, as we have
said already, is preferred before the principal tie of nature.

<span id="xiv.iv-p29"></span>But as to his commanding the wife, who is
separated from her husband, to *remain unmarried*, he does not mean by
this that separation is allowable, nor does he give permission to the
wife to live apart from her husband; but if she has been expelled from
the house, or has been put away, she must not think that even in that
case she is set free from his power; for it is not in the power of a
husband to dissolve marriage. He does not therefore give permission here
to wives to withdraw, of their own accord, from their husbands, or to
live away from their husband’s establishment, as if they were in a state
of widowhood; but declares, that even those who are not received by
their husbands, continue to be bound, so that they cannot take other
husbands.

<span id="xiv.iv-p30"></span>But what if a wife is wanton, or otherwise
incontinent? Would it not be inhuman to refuse her the remedy, when,
constantly burning with desire? I answer, that when we are prompted by
the infirmity of our flesh, we must have recourse to the remedy; after
which it is the Lord’s part to bridle and restrain our affections by his
Spirit, though matters should not succeed according to our desire. For
if a wife should fall into a protracted illness, the husband would,
nevertheless, not be justified in going to seek another wife. In like
manner, if a husband should, after marriage, begin to labor under some
distemper, it would not be allowable for his wife to change her
condition of life. The sum is this — God having prescribed lawful
marriage as a remedy for our incontinency, let us make use of it, that
we may not, by tempting him, pay the penalty of our rashness. Having
discharged this duty, let us hope that he will give us aid should
matters go contrary to our expectations.

<span id="xiv.iv-p31"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p32"></span>**12.** *To the rest I say* By *the rest*
he means those who are exceptions, so that the law, common to others, is
not applicable to them; for an unequal marriage is on a different
footing, when married persons differ among themselves in respect of
religion; Now this question he solves in two clauses. The *first* is,
that the believing party ought not to withdraw from the unbelieving
party, and ought not to seek divorce, unless she is put away. The
*second* is, that if an unbeliever put away his wife on account of
religion, a *brother* or a *sister* is, by such rejection, freed from
the bond of marriage. But why is it that Paul speaks of himself as the
author of these regulations, while they appear to be somewhat at
variance with what he had, a little before, brought forward, as from the
Lord? He does not mean that they are from himself in such a way as not
to be derived from the Spirit of God; but, as there was nowhere in the
law or in the Prophets any definite or explicit statement on this
subject, he anticipates in this way the calumnies of the wicked, in
claiming as his own what he was about to state. At the same time, lest
all this should be despised as the offspring of man’s brain, we shall
find him afterwards declaring, that his statement are not the
contrivances of his own understanding. There is, however, nothing
inconsistent with what goes before; for as the obligation and sanctity
of the marriage engagement depend upon God, what connection can a pious
woman any longer maintain with an unbelieving husband, after she has
been driven away through hatred of God?

<span id="xiv.iv-p33"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p34"></span>**14.** *For the unbelieving husband is
sanctified* He obviates an objection, which might occasion anxiety to
believers. The relationship of marriage is singularly close, so that the
wife is the half of the man — so that *they two are one flesh* — (<span
id="xiv.iv-p34.1"></span>[1Co
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#016)<span id="xiv.iv-p34.1"></span>.md) —
so that *the husband is the head of the wife*; (<span
id="xiv.iv-p34.2"></span>[Eph
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023)<span id="xiv.iv-p34.2"></span>;.md)
and she is her husband’s partner in everything; hence it seems
impossible that a believing husband should live with an ungodly wife, or
the converse of this, without being polluted by so close a connection.
Paul therefore declares here, that marriage is, nevertheless, sacred and
pure, and that we must not be apprehensive of contagion, as if the wife
would contaminate the husband. Let us, however, bear in mind, that he
speaks here not of contracting marriages, but of maintaining those that
have been already contracted; for where the matter under consideration
is, whether one should marry an unbelieving wife, or whether one should
marry an unbelieving husband, then that exhortation is in point —

<span id="xiv.iv-p35"></span>Be not yoked with unbelievers, for there is
no agreement between Christ and Belial. (<span
id="xiv.iv-p35.1"></span>[2Co
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span id="xiv.iv-p35.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.iv-p36"></span>But he that is already bound has no longer
liberty of choice; hence the advice given is different.

<span id="xiv.iv-p37"></span>While this *sanctification* is taken in
various senses, I refer it simply to marriage, in this sense — It might
seem (judging from appearance) as if a believing wife contracted
infection from an unbelieving husband, so as to make the connection
unlawful; but it is otherwise, for the piety of the one has more effect
in sanctifying marriage than the impiety of the other in polluting it.
Hence a believer may, with a pure conscience, live with an unbeliever,
for in respect of the use and intercourse of the marriage bed, and of
life generally, he is sanctified, so as not to infect the believing
party with his impurity. Meanwhile this *sanctification* is of no
benefit to the unbelieving party; it only serves thus far, that the
believing party is not contaminated by intercourse with him, and
marriage itself is not profaned.

<span id="xiv.iv-p38"></span>But from this a question arises — “If the
faith of a husband or wife who is a Christian *sanctifies* marriage, it
follows that all marriages of ungodly persons are impure, and differ
nothing from fornication.” I answer, that *to the ungodly all things are
impure*, (<span id="xiv.iv-p38.1"></span>Titus 1:15,) because they
pollute by their impurity even the best and choicest of God’s creatures.
Hence it is that they pollute marriage itself, because they do not
acknowledge God as its Author, and therefore they are not capable of
true sanctification, and by an evil conscience abuse marriage. It is a
mistake, however, to conclude from this that it differs nothing from
fornication; for, however impure it is to them, it is nevertheless pure
in itself, inasmuch as it is appointed by God, serves to maintain
decency among men, and restrains irregular desires; and hence it is for
these purposes approved by God, like other parts of political order. We
must always, therefore, distinguish between the nature of a thing and
the abuse of it.

<span id="xiv.iv-p39"></span>*Else were your children* It is an argument
taken from the effect — “If your marriage were impure, then the children
that are the fruit of it would be impure; but *they are holy*; hence the
marriage also is holy. As, then, the ungodliness of one of the parents
does not hinder the children that are born from being holy, so neither
does it hinder the marriage from being pure.” Some grammarians explain
this passage as referring to a civil sanctity, in respect of the
children being reckoned legitimate, but in this respect the condition of
unbelievers is in no degree worse. That exposition, therefore, cannot
stand. Besides, it is certain that Paul designed here to remove scruples
of conscience, lest any one should think (as I have said) that he had
contracted defilement. The passage, then, is a remarkable one, and drawn
from the depths of theology; for it teaches, that the children of the
pious are set apart from others by a sort of exclusive privilege, so as
to be reckoned *holy* in the Church.

<span id="xiv.iv-p40"></span>But how will this statement correspond with
what he teaches elsewhere — that *we are all by nature children of
wrath*; (<span id="xiv.iv-p40.1"></span>[Eph
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span id="xiv.iv-p40.1"></span>;.md)
or with the statement of David — *Behold I was conceived in sin*, *etc*.
(<span id="xiv.iv-p40.2"></span>[Ps
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span id="xiv.iv-p40.2"></span>..md)
I answer, that there is a universal propagation of sin and damnation
throughout the seed of Adam, and all, therefore, to a man, are included
in this curse, whether they are the offspring of believers or of the
ungodly; for it is not as regenerated by the Spirit, that believers
beget children after the flesh. The natural condition, therefore, of all
is alike, so that they are liable equally to sin and to eternal death.
As to the Apostle’s assigning here a peculiar privilege to the children
of believers, this flows from the blessing of the covenant, by the
intervention of which the curse of nature is removed; and those who were
by nature unholy are consecrated to God by grace. Hence Paul argues, in
his Epistle to the Romans, (<span id="xiv.iv-p40.3"></span>[Ro
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span id="xiv.iv-p40.3"></span>,.md)
that the whole of Abraham’s posterity are holy, because God had made a
covenant of life with him — *If* *the root be holy*, says he, *then the
branches are holy also*. And God calls all that were descended from
Israel his sons’ now that the partition is broken down, the same
covenant of salvation that was entered into with the seed of Abraham
 <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401.md) is communicated to us. But if
the children of believers are exempted from the common lot of mankind,
so as to be set apart to the Lord, why should we keep them back from the
sign? If the Lord admits them into the Church by his word, why should we
refuse them the sign? In what respects the offspring of the pious are
holy, while many of them become degenerate, you will find explained in
<span id="xiv.iv-p41.2"></span>[Ro
10:1-11:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiv.iv-p41.2"></span> the Epistle to the Romans; and I have handled
this point there.

<span id="xiv.iv-p42"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p43"></span>**15.** *But if an unbeliever depart.* This
is the second department of his statement, in which he sets at liberty a
believing husband, who is prepared to dwell with an unbelieving wife,
but is rejected by her, and in like manner a woman who is, without any
fault on her part, repudiated by her husband; for in that case the
unbelieving party makes a divorce with God rather than with his or her
partner. There is, therefore, in this case a special reason, inasmuch as
the first and chief bond is not merely loosed, but even utterly broken
through. While some are of opinion that we are at this day situated in a
much similar way with Papists,  <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402.md)
we ought to consider wisely what difference there is between the two
cases, that we may not attempt anything rashly.

<span id="xiv.iv-p45"></span>*In peace.* Here, too, interpreters differ;
for some take it in this way — “We are called *in peace:* let us
therefore avoid all ground and occasion of quarrels.” I take it in a
more simple way: “Let us, so far as we can, cultivate peace with all, to
which we have been called. We must not, therefore, rashly separate from
unbelievers, unless they first make a divorce. God, therefore, has
*called us in peace* to this end, that we might cultivate peace with
all, by acting properly towards every one.” This, then, belongs to the
former department of his statement — that

<span id="xiv.iv-p46"></span>believers ought to remain with unbelievers,
if they are p1eased, etc., (<span id="xiv.iv-p46.1"></span>[1 Cor.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#013)<span id="xiv.iv-p46.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="xiv.iv-p47"></span>because a desire for divorce is at variance
with our profession.

<span id="xiv.iv-p48"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p49"></span>**16.** *For what knowest thou, O woman?*
Those who are of opinion that this observation is a confirmation of the
*second* department of his statement, expound it thus. “An uncertain
hope ought not to detain thee,” etc. But, in my opinion, the exhortation
is taken from the advantage to be derived; for it is a great and
distinguished blessing if a wife *gain* (<span
id="xiv.iv-p49.1"></span>[1Co
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019)<span id="xiv.iv-p49.1"></span>.md)
her husband. Now, unbelievers are not in so hopeless a condition but
that they may be brought to believe. They are dead, it is true, but God
can even raise the dead. So long, therefore, as there remains any hope
of doing good, and the pious wife knows not but that she may by her
*holy conversation* (<span id="xiv.iv-p49.2"></span>[1Pe
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001)<span id="xiv.iv-p49.2"></span>.md)
bring back her husband into the way,  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403.md) she ought to try every means before
leaving him; for so long as a man’s salvation is doubtful, it becomes us
to be prepared rather to hope the best.

<span id="xiv.iv-p51"></span>As to his saying, however, that *a husband
may be saved by his wife*, the expression, it is true, is not strictly
accurate, as he ascribes to man what belongs to God; but there is no
absurdity in it. For as God acts efficaciously by his instruments which
he makes use of, he does, in a manner, communicate his power to them,
or, at least, he connects it with their service in such a manner, that
what he does he speaks of as being done by them, and hence, too, he
sometimes ascribes to them the honor which is due to himself alone. Let
us, however, bear in mind, that we have nothing in our power, except in
so far as we are directed by him as instruments.

<span id="xiv.iv-p52"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p53"></span>**17.** *Unless every one, according as God
has dispensed his grace,* etc. Such is the literal meaning: only I have
in my rendering made use of the nominative,  <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404.md) in order that the connection may be
more easy and natural. The meaning is: “What, then, is to be done,
*unless*  <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405.md) that every one walk
according to the grace given to him, and according to his calling? Let
every one, therefore, labor for this, and use his endeavor, that he may
do good to his neighbors, and, more especially, when he ought to be
excited to it by the particular duty of his calling.” He mentions two
things — the *calling*, and *the measure of grace* These he desires us
to look to in deliberating as to this matter; as it ought to be no small
stimulus to us to duty, that God condescends to make us ministers of his
grace for the salvation of our brethren; while the *calling*, on the
other hand, should hold us, as it were, under God’s yoke, even where an
individual feels his situation to be an unpleasant one.

<span id="xiv.iv-p56"></span>*And so in all the Churches.* I am of
opinion that he added this, with the view of obviating the calumnies of
some who boasted that he assumed more authority over the Corinthians
than he ventured to do over others. At the same time he might have also
another end in view — that this doctrine might have the more weight,
when the Corinthians understood that it was already published *in all
the Churches.* For we embrace the more readily what we understand that
we have in common with all the pious. The Corinthians, on the other
hand, would have felt it hateful to be bound more closely than others.

<span id="xiv.v"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p1"></span><span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
7:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#018.md)<span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p2"></span>**18.** Is any man called being circumcised?
let him not become uncircumcised. Is any called in uncircumcision? let
him not be circumcised.

<span id="xiv.v-p3"></span>**18.** Circumcisus aliquis vocatus est? ne
arcessat praeputium: in praeputio aliquis vocatus est? ne circumcidatur.

<span id="xiv.v-p4"></span>**19.** Circumcision is nothing, and
uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.

<span id="xiv.v-p5"></span>**19.** Circumcisio nihil est, et praeputium
nihil est, sed observatio mandatorum Dei.

<span id="xiv.v-p6"></span>**20.** Let every man abide in the same
calling wherein he was called.

<span id="xiv.v-p7"></span>**20.** Unusquisque in qua vocatione fuit
vocatus, maneat.

<span id="xiv.v-p8"></span>**21.** Art thou called *being* a servant?
care not for it: but if thou mayest be made free, use *it* rather.

<span id="xiv.v-p9"></span>**21.** Servus vocatus es? ne sit tibi curae:
at si etiam possis liber fieri, magis utere.

<span id="xiv.v-p10"></span>**22.** For he that is called in the Lord,
*being* a servant, is the Lord’s freeman: likewise also he that is
called *being* free, is Christ’s servant.

<span id="xiv.v-p11"></span>**22.** Etenim qui in Domino vocatus est
servus, libertus Domini est: similiter et qui liber vocatus est, servus
est Christi.

<span id="xiv.v-p12"></span>**23.** Ye are bought with a price; be not
ye the servants of men.

<span id="xiv.v-p13"></span>**23.** Pretio empti estis: nolite fieri
servi hominum.

<span id="xiv.v-p14"></span>**24.** Brethren, let every man, wherein he
is called, therein abide with God.

<span id="xiv.v-p15"></span>**24.** Unusquisque in eo, in quo vocatus
est, fratres, maneat apud Deum.

<span id="xiv.v-p16"></span> 

<span id="xiv.v-p17"></span><span id="xiv.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p18"></span>**18.** *Circumcised*, etc. As he had made
mention of the *calling*, he takes occasion, from a particular instance,
to make a digression for a little into a general exhortation, as he is
wont to do in many instances; and, at the same time, he confirms, by
different examples, what he had said respecting marriage. The sum is
this, that in external things you must not rashly abandon the *calling*
on which you have once entered by the will of God. And he begins with
*circumcisions*, respecting which many at that time disputed. Now, he
says that with God it makes no difference whether you are a Gentile or a
Jew. Hence he exhorts every one to be contented with his condition. It
must always be kept in view, that he treats only of lawful modes of
life, which have God as their approver and author.

<span id="xiv.v-p19"></span><span id="xiv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p20"></span>**19.** *Circumcision is nothing* While this
similitude was suited to the subject in hand, it appears to have been
designedly made use of with the view of reproving, in passing, the
superstition and haughtiness of the Jews. For, as the Jews gloried in
circumcision, it was possible that many might feel dissatisfied with the
want of it, as if their condition were the worse on that account. Paul,
therefore, places both conditions upon a level, lest, through hatred of
the one, the other should be foolishly desired. These things, however,
must be understood as referring to the time when circumcision was at
length abolished; for, if he had had an eye to the covenant of God, and
his commandment, he would, without doubt, have estimated it higher. In
another passage, it is true, he makes light of *the letter of
circumcision*, (<span id="xiv.v-p20.1"></span>[Ro
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#027)<span id="xiv.v-p20.1"></span>,.md)
and declares that it is of no account in the sight of God; but here, as
he simply contrasts circumcision with uncircumcision, and makes both
alike, it is certain that he speaks of it as a matter of indifference
and of no moment. For the abolishing of it has this effect — that the
mystery which had been previously conveyed under it, does not now any
longer belong to it: nay more, it is now no longer a sign, but a thing
of no use. For baptism has come in the place of the symbol used under
the law on this footing, that it is enough that we be circumcised by the
Spirit of Christ, while our old man is buried with Christ.

<span id="xiv.v-p21"></span>*But the keeping of the commandments* As
this was one of the *commandments*, so long as the Church was bound to
legal ceremonies, we see that it is taken for granted, that circumcision
had been abolished by the advent of Christ, so that the *use* of it,
indeed, was allowed among the ignorant and weak, but *advantage* in it —
there was none. For Paul speaks of it here as a thing of no moment: “As
these are outward things, let them not take up your attention, but
devote yourself rather to piety and the duties which God requires, and
which are alone precious in his sight.” As to the circumstance that
Papists bring forward this passage for the purpose of overthrowing
justification by faith, it is utterly childish; for Paul is not
disputing here as to the ground of justification, or the way in which we
obtain it, but simply as to the object to which the aim of believers
ought to be directed. “Do not occupy yourselves to no purpose in things
of no profit, but, on the contrary, exercise yourselves in duties that
are well pleasing to God.”

<span id="xiv.v-p22"></span><span id="xiv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p23"></span>**20.** *Every man in the calling in which.*
This is the source from which other things are derived, — that every one
should be contented with his *calling*, and pursue it, instead of
seeking to betake himself to anything else. A *calling* in Scripture
means a lawful mode of life, for it has a relation to God as *calling*
us,  <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406.md) — lest any one should abuse
this statement  <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407.md) to justify modes
of life that are evidently wicked or vicious. But here it is asked,
whether Paul means to establish any obligation,  <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408.md) for it might seem as though the words
conveyed this idea, that every one is bound to his *calling*, so that he
must not abandon it. Now it were a very hard thing if a tailor  <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409.md) were not at liberty to learn another
trade, or if a merchant were not at liberty to betake himself to
farming. I answer, that this is not what the Apostle intends, for he has
it simply in view to correct that inconsiderate eagerness, which prompts
some to change their condition without any proper reason, whether they
do it from superstition, or from any other motive. Farther, he calls
every one to this rule also — that they bear in mind what is suitable to
their *calling* He does not, therefore, impose upon any one the
necessity of continuing in the kind of life which he has once taken up,
but rather condemns that restlessness, which prevents an individual from
remaining in his condition with a peaceable mind  <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410.md) and he exhorts, that every one stick
by his trade, as the old proverb goes.

<span id="xiv.v-p29"></span><span id="xiv.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p30"></span>**21.** *Art thou called being a servant*?
We see here that Paul’s object  <span id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411.md)
is to satisfy their consciences; for he exhorts servants to be of good
cheer, and not be cast down, as if servitude were a hinderance in the
way of their serving God. *Care not for it then*, that is to say, be not
concerned how you may throw off the yoke, as if it were a condition
unbecoming a Christian, but be contented in mind. And hence we infer,
not merely that it is owing to the providence of God that there are
different ranks and stations in the world, but also, that a regard to
them is enjoined by his word.

<span id="xiv.v-p32"></span>*But if thou mayest even be made free* The
particle *even* (in my opinion) has simply this force, — “If, in place
of servitude, you could attain *even* to liberty, it would be more
advantageous for you.” It is uncertain, however, whether he continues
his discourse to servants, or turns to address those that are free. In
the latter case,<span id="xiv.v-p32.1"></span> γενέσθαι would here mean
simply *to be* Either meaning suits sufficiently well, and they amount
to the same thing. He means to intimate, that liberty is not merely
good, but also more advantageous than servitude. If he is speaking to
*servants*, his meaning will be this — While I exhort you to be free
from anxiety, I do not hinder you from *even* availing yourselves of
liberty, if an opportunity presents itself to you. If he is addressing
himself to those that are *free*, it will be a kind of concession, as
though he had said — I exhort servants to be of good courage, though a
state of freedom is preferable,  <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412.md)
and more to be desired, if one has it in his choice.

<span id="xiv.v-p34"></span><span id="xiv.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p35"></span>**22.** *For he that is called in the Lord,
being a servant* To be *called in the Lord, being a servant*, is to be
chosen out of the rank of servants, and made a partaker of the grace of
Christ. Now this statement is designed to furnish consolation to
servants, and, at the same time, to beat down the haughtiness of those
that are free-born. As servants feel their situation irksome, in respect
of their being mean and despicable, it is of importance that the
bitterness of servitude be alleviated by some consolation. Those, on the
other hand, that are free, need to be restrained, in order that they may
not be unduly elated on account of their more honorable condition, and
be lifted up with pride. The Apostle does both; for he teaches, that as
the liberty of the spirit is greatly preferable to the liberty of the
flesh, servants ought to feel the unpleasantness of their condition the
more tolerable, when they take into view that inestimable gift with
which they have been endowed; and, on the other hand, that those who are
free ought not to be puffed up, inasmuch as their condition in the
principal respect is not superior to that of servants. We must not,
however, infer from this, that those that are free are made inferior to
servants, or that political order is subverted. The Apostle saw what
suited both. Those that were free required (as I have said) to be
restrained, that they might not in a wanton manner triumph over
servants. To servants, on the other hand, some consolation required to
be administered, that they might not be disheartened. Now these things
tend rather to confirm political order, while he teaches that the
inconvenience of the flesh is compensated by a spiritual benefit.

<span id="xiv.v-p36"></span><span id="xiv.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p37"></span>**23.** *Yea are bought with a price* We had
these words in the preceding chapter, (<span
id="xiv.v-p37.1"></span>[1Co 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020.md)<span
id="xiv.v-p37.1"></span>,) but for a different purpose. As to the word
*price*, I have stated there, what is my view of it. The sum is this,
that he exhorts servants, indeed, not to be anxious as to their
condition, but wishes them rather to take heed not to subject themselves
to the wicked or depraved inclinations of their masters. “We are holy to
the Lord, because he has redeemed us: let us, therefore, not defile
ourselves for the sake of men, as we do when we are subject to their
corrupt desires.” This admonition was very necessary at that time, when
servants were driven by threats and stripes, and even fear of death, to
obey every kind of command without selection or exception, so that they
reckoned the procuring of prostitutes, and other crimes of that nature,
to be duties belonging to servants, equally with honorable employment’s.
It is, therefore, not without reason that Paul makes this exception —
that they are not to yield obedience in things base and wicked. Would
that this were thoroughly and entirely impressed upon the minds of all!
There would not, in that case, be so many that prostitute themselves to
the lusts of men, as if exposed for sale. As for us, let us bear in
mind, that we belong to him who has redeemed us.

<span id="xiv.v-p38"></span><span id="xiv.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p39"></span>**24.** *Let him abide with God.* I have
already noticed above, that men are not here bound by a perpetual
necessity, so as never to have it in their power to change their
condition, if at any time there should be a fit occasion for it; but
that he simply represses those thoughtless humors, which hurry men
hither and thither, so that they are harassed by a continual
restlessness. Hence Paul says, that it is all one in the sight of God
what a person’s manner of life is in this world, inasmuch as this
diversity does not hinder agreement in piety.

<span id="xiv.vi"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
7:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025.md)<span id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p2"></span>**25.** Now concerning virgins I have no
commandment of the Lord: yet I give my judgment, as one that hath
obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful.

<span id="xiv.vi-p3"></span>**25.** De virginibus autem praeceptum
Domini non habeo: sed consilium do, tanquam misericordiam consequutus a
Domino, ut sim fidelis.

<span id="xiv.vi-p4"></span>**26.** I suppose therefore that this is
good for the present distress, *I say,* that *it is* good for a man so
to be.

<span id="xiv.vi-p5"></span>**26.** Arbitror igitur hoc bonum esse
propter instantem necessitatem, quod bonum sit homini sic esse.

<span id="xiv.vi-p6"></span>**27.** Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not
to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.

<span id="xiv.vi-p7"></span>**27.** Alligatus es uxori? ne quaeras
solutionem. Solutus es ab uxore? ne quaeras uxorem

<span id="xiv.vi-p8"></span>**28.** But and if thou marry, thou hast not
sinned; and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned. Nevertheless such
shall have trouble in the flesh: but I spare you.

<span id="xiv.vi-p9"></span>**28.** Quodsi etiam duxeris uxorem,non
peccasti: et si nupserit virgo,non peccavit: attamen afflictionem in
carne habebunt eiusmodi. Ego autem vobis parco.

<span id="xiv.vi-p10"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vi-p11"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p12"></span>**25.** *Concerning virgins* He now returns
to treat of marriage, of which he had begun to speak in the commencement
of the chapter. What he is now about to state he had previously touched
upon, but briefly and somewhat obscurely. He accordingly intimates more
explicitly what his views are respecting *virginity*; but as it is a
matter that is liable to be misapprehended, and is full of difficulties,
he always speaks, as we shall see, conditionally. *Virgins* here I
understand as meaning virginity. As to this, he says *he has no
commandment of the Lord*; because the Lord does not in any part of the
Scriptures declare what persons ought to remain unmarried. Nay, on the
contrary, inasmuch as the Scripture says, that

<span id="xiv.vi-p13"></span>male and female were created together,
(<span id="xiv.vi-p13.1"></span>[Ge
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021)<span id="xiv.vi-p13.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="xiv.vi-p14"></span>it seems as if it called every one equally
and without exception to marriage:  <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413.md) at least celibacy is nowhere enjoined
upon any one, or commended.

<span id="xiv.vi-p16"></span>He says that *he gives advice*, not as if
there were anything doubtful in it, and had little or no stability, but
as being certain, and deserving to be maintained without any
controversy. The word, too, that he employs, <span
id="xiv.vi-p16.1"></span>γνώμη, signifies not merely advice, but a
decisive judgment.  <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414.md) Papists,
however, rashly infer from this, that it is allowable to go beyond the
limits of God’s word, since nothing was farther from Paul’s intention
than to go beyond the limits of God’s word for if any one attends more
closely, he will see, that Paul here advances nothing but what is
included in what Christ says in <span id="xiv.vi-p17.2"></span>[Mt
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032.md)<span id="xiv.vi-p17.2"></span>,
and <span id="xiv.vi-p17.3"></span>[Mt
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#005.md)<span id="xiv.vi-p17.3"></span>;
but in the way of anticipating an objection, he acknowledges that he has
no express precept in the law, pointing out *who* ought to marry, and
*who not*

<span id="xiv.vi-p18"></span>*Having obtained mercy to be faithful.* He
secures authority for his decision, that no one may think himself at
liberty to reject it, if he chooses. For he declares that he does not
speak simply as a man, but as a faithful teacher of the Church, and an
Apostle of Christ. According to his custom, he declares himself to be
indebted for this to *the mercy of God*,  <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415.md) as it was no common honor, nay
superior to all human merits. Hence it appears, that whatever things
have been introduced into the Church by human authority,  <span
id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416.md) have nothing in common with this
advice of Paul. But *faithful* here means *truthful* — one who does not
do what he does merely from pious zeal, but is also endowed with
knowledge, so as to teach with purity and *faithfulness* For it is not
enough for a teacher to be conscientious, if he has not also prudence
and acquaintance with the truth.

<span id="xiv.vi-p21"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p22"></span>**26.** *I think therefore that this is
good.* While I translate this passage of Paul’s writings differently
from Erasmus or the Vulgate, I at the same time do not differ from them
as to its meaning. They divide Paul’s words in such a way, that the same
thing is repeated twice. I, on the other hand, make it simply one
proposition, and not without authority, for I follow ancient and
approved manuscripts, which make it all one sentence, with merely a
*colon* between. The meaning is this: “I think it expedient on account
of the necessity, with which the saints are always harassed in this
life, that all should enjoy the liberty and advantage of celibacy, as
this would be of advantage to them.” There are some, however, that view
the term *necessity* as referring to the age of the Apostle, which was,
undoubtedly, full of trouble to the pious: but he appears to me to have
had it rather in view to express the disquietude with which the saints
are incessantly harassed in the present life. I view it, therefore, as
extending to all ages, and I understand it in this way, that the saints
are often, in this world, driven hither and thither, and are exposed to
many and various tempests,  <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417.md) so
that their condition appears to be unsuitable for marriage. The phrase
*so to be*, signifies to remain unmarried, or to abstain from marriage.

<span id="xiv.vi-p24"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p25"></span>**27.** *Art thou bound to a wife?* Having
stated what would be most advantageous, he adds at the same time, that
we ought not to be so much influenced by the advantages of celibacy,
that one that is bound by the tie of marriage should shake off the
connection. It is therefore a restriction upon the preceding statement,
lest any one, influenced by his commendation of celibacy, should turn
his thoughts to it, and despise marriage, forgetful of his necessity or
of his *calling* Now in these words he does not merely forbid the
breaking up of the connection of marriage, but also represses the
dislikes that are wont to creep in, that every one may continue to live
with his wife willingly and cheerfully.

<span id="xiv.vi-p26"></span>*Art thou loosed from a wife?* This second
clause must be taken with a reservation, as is manifest from the entire
context. He does not, then, allow to all the choice of perpetual
celibacy, but only to those to whom it is given. Let no one, therefore,
who is not constrained by any necessity, rashly ensnare himself, for
liberty ought not to be lightly thrown away.  <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418.md)

<span id="xiv.vi-p28"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p29"></span>**28.** *But if thou shouldest even marry.*
As there was a danger of one’s thinking from the preceding statement,
that he tempted God, if he knowingly and willingly bound himself to
marriage, (as that would be to renounce his liberty,) he removes this
scruple; for he gives liberty to widows to marry, and says, that those
that marry do not sin. The word *even* also seems to be emphatic — to
intimate, that even though there be no positive necessity urging to it,
the unmarried are not prohibited from marrying whenever they may see
fit.

<span id="xiv.vi-p30"></span>*And if a virgin marry* Whether this is an
amplification, or simply an illustration, this, in the first place, is
beyond all controversy, that Paul designed to extend the liberty of
marriage to all. Those who think that it is an amplification, are led to
think so by this, that it seems to approach nearer to a fault, and is
more open to reprehension, or at least has more occasion of shame, to
loose the virgin girdle (as the ancients express themselves) than, upon
the death of a husband, to enter into a second marriage. The argument
then would be this: “If it is lawful for a virgin to marry, much more
may widows.” I am rather of opinion, that he makes both equal in this
way: “As it is allowable for a virgin, so is it for widows also.” For
second marriages among the ancients were not without some mark of
reproach, as they adorned those matrons, who had contented themselves
with one marriage during their whole life, with a chaplet of chastity
 <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419.md) — an honor that tended to
reflect reproach upon those that had married repeatedly. And it is a
well known saying of Valerius,  <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420.md)
that “it betokens a legitimate excess  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421.md) when a second marriage is desired.”
The Apostle, therefore, makes virgins and widows alike as to liberty of
marriage.

<span id="xiv.vi-p34"></span>*Nevertheless such shall have trouble in
the flesh*. He frequently repeats the reason why he leans more to the
side of celibacy in his exhortations, lest he should seem to prefer the
one condition to the other on its own account, rather than on account of
its consequences. He says, that there are many troubles that are
connected with the married life, and that on that account he wishes all
to be free from marriage, who desire to be exempt from troubles. When he
says, that they will have *trouble of the flesh*, or *in the flesh*, he
means, that the anxieties and distresses in which married persons are
involved arise from the affairs of the world. The *flesh*, therefore, is
taken here to mean the outward man. To *spare* means to *indulge*, or to
wish them to be exempted from the troubles that are connected with
marriage. “I am desirous to make provision for your infirmity, that you
may not have trouble: now marriage brings with it many troubles. This is
the reason why I should wish you not to require to marry — that you may
be exempt from all its evils.” Do not, however, infer from this that
Paul reckons marriage to be a necessary evil for those troubles of which
he speaks do not arise so much from the nature of marriage, as from the
corruption of it, for they are the fruits of original sin.

<span id="xiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 7:29-35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029.md)<span
id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p2"></span>**29.** But this I say, brethren, the time
*is* short: it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though
they had none;

<span id="xiv.vii-p3"></span>**29.** Hoc autem dico, fratres, quia
 <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422.md) tempus contractum est: reliquum
est, ut qui uxores habent, sint tanquam non habentes:

<span id="xiv.vii-p5"></span>**30.** And they that weep, as though they
wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they
that buy, as though they possessed not;

<span id="xiv.vii-p6"></span>**30.** Et qui flent, tanquam non flentes:
et qui gaudent, tanquam non gandentes: et qui emunt, tanquam non
possidentes:

<span id="xiv.vii-p7"></span>**31.** And they that use this world, as
not abusing *it*: for the fashion of this world passeth away.

<span id="xiv.vii-p8"></span>**31.** Et qui utuntur hoc mundo,tanquam
non utentes: praeterit enim figura mundi hujus.

<span id="xiv.vii-p9"></span>**32.** But I would have you without
carefulness. He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to
the Lord, how he may please the Lord:

<span id="xiv.vii-p10"></span>**32.** Velim autem vos absque
solicitudine esse. Qui coelebs est,curat ea quae sunt Domini, quomodo
placiturus sit Domino:

<span id="xiv.vii-p11"></span>**33.** But he that is married careth for
the things that are of the world, how he may please *his* wife.

<span id="xiv.vii-p12"></span>**33.** Coniugatus curat ea quae sunt
mundi, qualiter uxori placiturus sit, et divisus est.

<span id="xiv.vii-p13"></span>**34.** There is difference *also* between
a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman careth for the things of the
Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit: but she that is
married careth for the things of the world, how she may please *her*
husband

<span id="xiv.vii-p14"></span>**34.** Et mulier caelebs, et virgo curat
ea quae sunt Domini, ut sancta sit corpore et spiritu: at quae maritum
habet, curat ea quae sunt mundi, quomodo placitura sit marito.

<span id="xiv.vii-p15"></span>**35.** And this I speak for your own
profit; not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is
comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.

<span id="xiv.vii-p16"></span>**35.** Hoc autem ad utilitatem vestram
dico, non ut laqueum vobis iniiciam, sed ad honestatem ac decorum, ut
Domino adhaereatis absque ulla distractione.

<span id="xiv.vii-p17"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vii-p18"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p19"></span>**29.** *Because the time is short*, etc.
Again he discourses respecting the holy use of marriage, for the purpose
of repressing the wantonness of those who, when they have married, think
of nothing but the delights of the flesh. They have no remembrance of
God. Hence he exhorts believers not to give way to unbridled desire in
such a way, that marriage should have the effect of plunging them into
the world. Marriage is a remedy for incontinency. It has really the
effect, if it be used with moderation. He therefore exhorts married
persons to live together chastely in the fear of the Lord. This will be
effected, if marriage is made use of by them, like other helps of this
earthly life, having their hearts directed upwards to meditation on the
heavenly life. Now, he draws his argument from the shortness of human
life: “This life,” says he, “which we are now spending is frail, and of
short duration. Let us not therefore be held entangled by it. Let
*those* accordingly *who have wives, be as though they had none*.” Every
one, it is true, has this philosophy in his mouth, but few have it truly
and in good earnest impressed upon their minds. In my first translation,
I had followed a manuscript, to which (as I afterwards discovered) not
one of the many others gave any countenance. I have accordingly deemed
it proper to insert the particle *because*, to make the meaning more
apparent, and in accordance also with the reading in some ancient
copies. For as in those cases in which we are deliberating as to
anything, we look to the future rather than to the past, he admonishes
us as to the shortness of the time that is to come.

<span id="xiv.vii-p20"></span>*As though they had none* All things that
are connected with the enjoyment of the present life are sacred gifts of
God, but we pollute them when we abuse them. If the reason is asked, we
shall find it to be this, that we always dream of continuance in the
world, for it is owing to this that those things which ought to be helps
in passing through it become hindrances to hold us fast. Hence, it is
not without good reason, that the Apostle, with the view of arousing us
from this stupidity, calls us to consider the shortness of this life,
and infers from this, that we ought to *use* all the things of this
world, as *if we did not use* them. For the man who considers that he is
a stranger in the world uses the things of this world as if they were
another’s — that is, as things that are lent us for a single day. The
sum is this, that the mind of a Christian ought not to be taken up with
earthly things, or to repose in them; for we ought to live as if we were
every moment about to depart from this life. By *weeping* and
*rejoicing*, he means adversity and prosperity; for it is customary to
denote causes by their effects.  <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423.md)
The Apostle, however, does not here command Christians to part with
their possessions, but simply requires that their minds be not engrossed
in their possessions.  <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424.md)

<span id="xiv.vii-p23"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p24"></span>**31.** *And they that use this world* In
the *first* clause there is the participle <span
id="xiv.vii-p24.1"></span>χρώμενοι (*using*,) in the *second*, there is
a compound of it — <span id="xiv.vii-p24.2"></span>καταχρώμενοι
(*abusing*.) Now the preposition <span id="xiv.vii-p24.3"></span>κατα in
a compound state is generally taken in a bad sense, or at least denotes
intensity.  <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425.md) Paul, therefore,
directs us to a sober and frugal use of things, such as may not impede
or retard our course, but may allow of our always hastening forward
toward the goal.

<span id="xiv.vii-p26"></span>*For the fashion of this world passeth
away* By the term here used, the Apostle has elegantly expressed the
vanity of the world. “There is nothing,” says he, “that is firm or
solid;  <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426.md) for it is a mere show or
outward appearance, as they speak.” He seems, however, to have had an
allusion to theatrical representations, in which, on the curtain being
drawn up in a single moment, a new appearance is presented, and those
things that held the eyes of the spectators in astonishment, are
immediately withdrawn from their view. I do not see why it is that
Erasmus has preferred the term <span id="xiv.vii-p27.2"></span>*habitus*
(form.) He certainly, in my opinion, obscures Paul’s doctrine; for the
term *fashion* is tacitly opposed to substance.  <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427.md)

<span id="xiv.vii-p29"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p30"></span>**32.** *But I would wish you.* He returns
to the *advice* which he had spoken of, (<span
id="xiv.vii-p30.1"></span>[1Co
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)<span id="xiv.vii-p30.1"></span>,.md)
but had not as yet fully explained, and in the outset he pronounces, as
he is wont, a commendation upon celibacy, and then afterwards allows
every one the liberty of choosing what he may consider to suit him best.
It is not, however, without good reason that he returns so frequently to
proclaim the advantages of celibacy, for he saw that the burdens of
matrimony were far from light. The man who can exempt himself from them,
ought not to refuse such a benefit, and it is of advantage for those who
resolve to marry, to be forewarned of those inconveniences, that they
may not afterwards, on meeting with them unexpectedly, give way to
despondency. This we see happens to many, for having promised themselves
unmixed honey, on being disappointed in that expectation, they are very
readily cast down by the slightest mishap.  <span
id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428.md) Let them know, therefore, in good
time, what they have to expect, that they may be prepared to endure
everything patiently. The meaning is this: “Marriage brings along with
it hindrances, from which I should wish you to be free and exempt.”

<span id="xiv.vii-p32"></span>As, however, he has previously made use of
the term *trouble*, (<span id="xiv.vii-p32.1"></span>[1Co
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028)<span id="xiv.vii-p32.1"></span>,.md)
and now makes mention of *cares* or *anxieties*, it may admit of doubt
whether they have a different signification, or not. I am of opinion
that the *trouble* referred to is what arises from things of a
distressing nature, such as loss of children, widowhood, quarrels, and
little differences, (as lawyers speak,)  <span
id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429.md) many occasions of dislike, faults of
children, difficulty in bringing up a family, and the like. The
*anxieties*, on the other hand, are, in my opinion, connected with
things that are joyful, as for example marriage fooleries, jests, and
other things with which married persons are taken up.  <span
id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430.md)

<span id="xiv.vii-p35"></span>*He that is unmarried careth for the
things of the Lord.* Mark the kind of exemption from anxieties that he
desires in behalf of Christians — that they may devote to the Lord all
their thoughts and aims. This, he says, belongs to celibacy; and
therefore he desires all to enjoy this liberty. He does not mean,
however, that it is invariably so in unmarried life, as experience shows
it to be quite otherwise in priests, monks, and nuns, than whose
celibacy nothing can be conceived to be farther from God. Add to this
the many base fornicators who abstain from marriage for the very purpose
of having greater liberty for the indulgence of lust, and that their
vice may not appear. Where there is *burning*, (<span
id="xiv.vii-p35.1"></span>[1Co
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009)<span id="xiv.vii-p35.1"></span>,.md)
no love of God can exist. But Paul’s meaning is this — that an unmarried
person is free, and is not hindered from thinking of the things of God.
The pious make use of this liberty. Others turn everything to their own
destruction.

<span id="xiv.vii-p36"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p37"></span>**33.** *He that is married careth for the
things of the world*. By *the things of the world* you must understand
the things that belong to the present life; for the world is taken here
to mean the condition of this earthly life. But from this someone will
infer, that all, therefore, who are married are strangers to the kingdom
of God,  <span id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431.md) as thinking of nothing
but this earth. I answer, that the Apostle speaks only of a portion of
the thoughts, as though he had said: “They have one eye directed to the
Lord, but in such a way as to have the other directed to their wife; for
marriage is like a burden, by which the mind of a pious man is weighed
down, so that he does not move God-ward with so much alacrity.” Let us
always, however, bear in mind, that these evils do not belong to
marriage, but proceed from the depravity of men. Hence the calumnies of
Jerome,  <span id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432.md) who scrapes together
all these things for the purpose of bringing marriages into disrepute,
fall. For, were any one to condemn agriculture, merchandise, and other
modes of life, on this ground, that amidst so many corruption’s of the
world, there is not one of them that is exempt from certain evils, who
is there that would not smile at his folly? Observe, then, that whatever
evil there is in marriage, has its origin somewhere else; for at this
day a man would not have been turned away from the Lord by the society
of his wife, if he had remained in a state of innocence, and had not
corrupted the holy institution of God; but a wife would have been a
*help-meet to* him in everything good, as she was created for that end.
(<span id="xiv.vii-p39.1"></span>[Ge
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018)<span id="xiv.vii-p39.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.vii-p40"></span>But some one will say: “If anxieties that
are faulty and blameworthy are invariably connected with marriage, how
is it possible for married persons to call upon God, and serve him, with
a pure conscience?” I answer, that there are *three* kinds of anxieties.
There are some that are evil and wicked in themselves, because they
spring from distrust. Of these Christ speaks in <span
id="xiv.vii-p40.1"></span>[Mt
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025.md)<span id="xiv.vii-p40.1"></span>:
There are others that are necessary, and are not displeasing to God; as,
for example, it becomes the father of a family to be concerned for his
wife and children, and God does not mean that we should be mere stumps,
so as to have no concern as to ourselves. The *third* class are a
mixture of the two former; when we are anxious respecting those things
as to which we ought to feel anxiety, but feel too keenly excited, in
consequence of that excess which is natural to us. Such anxieties,
therefore, are not by any means wrong in themselves, but they are
corrupt, in consequence of <span id="xiv.vii-p40.2"></span>αταξια, that
is to say, undue excess. And the Apostle did not intend merely to
condemn here those vices by which we contract guilt in the sight of God,
but he desires in a general way, that we may be freed from all
impediments, so as to be wholly at leisure for the service of God.

<span id="xiv.vii-p41"></span>*And is divided.* It is surprising how
there has come to be so much diversity upon this passage. For the common
Greek version is so widely different from the old Latin translation,
that the diversity cannot be ascribed to mistake or inadvertence, in the
way in which a mistake often happens in a single letter or a single
word. Now the Greeks commonly read it literally, “He that is married
thinks of the things of the world, how he may please his wife: a married
woman and a virgin are divided: She that is unmarried, thinketh of the
things of the Lord,” etc. And *being divided* they understand as meaning
*to differ*, as if it had been said: “There is a great difference
between a married woman and a virgin; for the one is at leisure to
attend to the things of God exclusively, while the other is taken up
with various matters.” But as this interpretation is somewhat at
variance with the simple meaning of the word, I do not approve of it,
especially as the meaning of the other reading (which is found also in
some Greek manuscripts) is more suitable and less forced. We may,
accordingly, understand it in this manner — that a man who is married is
*divided*,  <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433.md) inasmuch as he
devotes himself partly to God and partly to his wife, and is not wholly
and exclusively God’s.

<span id="xiv.vii-p43"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p44"></span>**34.** *The unmarried woman and the
virgin.* What he had laid down as to men he now declares in like manner
as to women — that virgins and widows are not prevented by earthly
things from devoting their whole cares and their whole affections to
God. Not that all act this part, but that there is opportunity for it,
if the mind is so disposed. When he says, *that she may be holy in body
and in spirit*, he shows what kind of chastity is true and acceptable to
God — when the mind is kept unpolluted in the sight of God. Would to God
that this were more carefully attended to! As to *the body,* we see what
kind of devotement to the Lord there commonly is on the part of monks,
nuns, and the whole scum of the Papistical clergy, than whose celibacy
nothing can be imagined that is more obscene.  <span
id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434.md) But not to speak at present of
chastity of *body*, where is there one to be found among those that are
held in admiration in consequence of their reputation for continency,
that does not burn with base lusts? We may, however, infer from this
statement of Paul, that no chastity is well pleasing to God that does
not extend to the *soul* as well as to the *body* Would to God that
those who prate in such haughty terms as to continency, did but
understand that they have to do with God! They would not be so confident
in their contendings with us. At the same time, there are none in the
present day who dispute on the subject of continency in more magnificent
style than those who are openly and in the most shameless manner guilty
of fornication. But though they should conduct themselves ever so
honorably in the sight of men, that is nothing, if they do not keep
their minds pure and exempt from all uncleanness.

<span id="xiv.vii-p46"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p47"></span>**35.** *And this for your benefit.*
Observe the Apostle’s moderation.  <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435.md) Though he knew the vexations,
troubles, and difficulties of the married life, and, on the other hand,
the advantages of celibacy, yet he does not venture to prescribe. On the
contrary, having commended celibacy, and being afraid that some of his
readers might be led away by such commendations, and might straightway
say within themselves what the Apostles said in reply to Christ — *It*
*is good*, *therefore*, *so to be*, (<span id="xiv.vii-p48.2"></span>[Mt
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#010)<span id="xiv.vii-p48.2"></span>.md)
 <span id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436.md) — not in the meantime taking
into view their ability, he here declares in express terms, that he
points out, indeed, what is most advantageous, but does not wish to
impose a necessity upon any one.

<span id="xiv.vii-p50"></span>And here you have two things worthy of
observation. The *first* is, for what purpose celibacy is to be desired
— not on its own account, nor on the ground of its being a state that is
nearer to perfection, but that we may cleave to God without distraction
— *that* being the one thing that a Christian man ought exclusively to
look to during his whole life. The *second* thing is, that no snare must
be put upon men’s consciences, so as to keep back any one from marriage,
but that every one must have liberty allowed him. It is well known what
grievous errors have been fallen into on both these points. As to the
*second* point, those assuredly have been bolder than Paul, who have not
shrunk from passing a law respecting celibacy, with the view of
prohibiting the whole of the clergy from matrimony. The same may be said
of those who have made vows of perpetual continency, which are snares by
which not a few myriads of souls have been drawn into endless ruin.
Hence, if the Holy Spirit has spoken by the mouth of Paul, Papists
cannot clear themselves from the crime of *fighting against God*, (<span
id="xiv.vii-p50.1"></span>[Ac
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039)<span id="xiv.vii-p50.1"></span>,.md)
while binding men’s consciences in a matter in which He designed that
they should remain free unless, perhaps, He  <span
id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437.md) has since that time adopted a new
plan, so as to construct a snare, which he had previously disapproved
of.

<span id="xiv.viii"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 7:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#036.md)<span
id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p2"></span>**36.** But if any man think that he
behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin, if she pass the flower of
*her* age, and need so require, let him do what he will, he sinneth not:
let them marry.

<span id="xiv.viii-p3"></span>**36.** Si quis autem virgini suae
indecorum iudicat, si excedat florem aetatis, et ita fieri debet: quod
voluerit faciat, non peccat: nubant.

<span id="xiv.viii-p4"></span>**37.** Nevertheless he that standeth
steadfast in his heart, having no necessity, but hath power over his own
will, and hath so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin,
doeth well.

<span id="xiv.viii-p5"></span>**37.** Qui autem stat firmus in corde,
necessitatem non habens, potestatem vero habens supra sua voluntate, et
hoc decrevit in corde suo, servare suam virginem, bene facit.

<span id="xiv.viii-p6"></span>**38.** So then he that giveth *her* in
marriage doeth well; but he that giveth *her* not in marriage doeth
better.

<span id="xiv.viii-p7"></span>**38.** Itaque et qui nuptum collocat,
bene facit; et qui non collocat,melius facit.

<span id="xiv.viii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xiv.viii-p9"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p10"></span>**36.** *But if any one thinketh that it
were unseemly for his virgin.* He now directs his discourse to parents,
who had children under their authority. For having heard the praises of
celibacy, and having heard also of the inconveniences of matrimony, they
might be in doubt, whether it were at all a kind thing to involve their
children in so many miseries, lest it should seem as if *they* were to
blame for the troubles that might befall them. For the greater their
attachment to their children, so much the more anxiously do they
exercise fear and caution on their account.  <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438.md) Paul, then, with the view of relieving
them from this difficulty, teaches that it is their duty to consult
their advantage, exactly as one would do for himself when at his own
disposal.  <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439.md) Now he still keeps up
the distinction, which he has made use of all along, so as to commend
celibacy, but, at the same time, to leave marriage as a matter of
choice; and not simply a matter of choice, but a needful remedy for
incontinency, which ought not to be denied to any one. In *the first*
part of the statement he speaks as to the giving of daughters in
marriage, and he declares that those do not sin in giving away their
daughters in marriage, who are of opinion that an unmarried life is not
suitable for them.

<span id="xiv.viii-p13"></span>The word <span
id="xiv.viii-p13.1"></span>ἀσχημονεῖν (to be *unseemly*) must be taken
as referring to a special propriety, which depends on what is natural to
the individual; for there is a *general* propriety, which philosophers
make to be a part of temperance. *That* belongs equally to all. There is
another, that is *special*, because one thing becomes one individual
that would not be *seemly* in another. Every one therefore should
consider (as Cicero observes) what is the part that nature has assigned
to him.  <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440.md) Celibacy will be
*seemly* for one, but he must not measure all by his own foot;  <span
id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441.md) and others should not attempt to
imitate him without taking into view their ability; for it is the
imitation of the ape — which is at variance with nature. If, therefore,
a father, having duly considered his daughter’s disposition, is of
opinion that she is not prepared for celibacy, let him give her away in
marriage.  <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442.md)

<span id="xiv.viii-p17"></span>By *the flower of her age* he means the
marriageable age. This lawyers define to be from twelve to twenty years
of age. Paul points out, in passing, what equity and humanity ought to
be exercised by parents, in applying a remedy in that tender and
slippery age, when the force of the disease requires it. *And it
requires to be so.* In this clause I understand him as referring to the
girl’s infirmity — in the event of her not having the gift of
continency; for in that case, necessity constrains her to marry. As to
Jerome’s making a handle of the expression *sinneth not*, for reviling
marriage, with a view to its disparagement, as if it were not a
praiseworthy action to dispose of a daughter in marriage, it is quite
childish.  <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443.md) For Paul reckoned it
enough to exempt fathers from blame, that they might not reckon it a
cruel thing to subject their daughters to the vexations connected with
marriage.

<span id="xiv.viii-p19"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p20"></span>**37.** *But he who standeth firm in his
heart.* Here we have the *second* part of the statement, in which he
treats of young women who have the gift of abstaining from marriage. He
commends therefore those fathers who make provision for their
tranquillity; but let us observe what he requires. In the *first* place,
he makes mention of a steadfast purpose — *If any one has fully resolved
with himself.* You must not, however, understand by this the resolution
formed by monks — that is, a voluntary binding over to perpetual
servitude — for such is the kind of vow that they make; but he expressly
makes mention of this *firmness* of purpose, because mankind often
contrive schemes which they next day regret. As it is a matter of
importance, he requires a thoroughly matured purpose.

<span id="xiv.viii-p21"></span>In the *second* place he speaks of the
person as *having no necessity*; for many, when about to deliberate,
bring obstinacy with them rather than reason. And in the present case
 <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444.md) they do not consider, when they
renounce marriage, what is in their *power*, but reckon it enough to say
— “such is my *choice*.” Paul requires them to have *power*, that they
may not decide rashly, but according to the measure of the grace that
has been *given* them. The absence of *necessity* in the case he
appropriately expresses in the following clause, when he says that *they
have power over their own will.* For it is as though he had said — “I
would not have them resolve before knowing that they have power to
fulfill, for it is rash and ruinous  <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445.md) to struggle against an appointment of
God.” But, “*according* to this system,” some one will say, “vows are
not to be condemned, provided these conditions were annexed.” I answer
that, as to the gift of continency, as we are uncertain respecting the
will of God as to the future, we ought not to form any determination for
our whole life. Let us make use of the gift as long as it is allowed us.
In the meantime, let us commit ourselves to the Lord, prepared to
*follow whithersoever he may call us* (<span
id="xiv.viii-p23.2"></span>[Re
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004.md)<span
id="xiv.viii-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.viii-p24"></span>*Hath decreed in his heart.* Paul seems
to have added this to express the idea more fully, that fathers ought to
look carefully on all sides, before giving up anxiety and intention as
to giving away their daughters in marriage. For they often decline
marriage, either from shame or from ignorance of themselves, while, in
the meantime, they are not the less wanton, or prone to be led astray
 <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446.md) Parents must here consider well
what is for the interests of their daughters, that by their prudence
they may correct their ignorance, or unreasonable desire.

<span id="xiv.viii-p26"></span>Now this passage serves to establish the
authority of parents, which ought to be held sacred, as having its
origin in the common rights of nature. Now if in other actions of
inferior moment no liberty is allowed to children, without the authority
of their parents, much less is it reasonable that they should have
liberty given them in the contracting of marriage. And that has been
carefully enacted by civil law, but more especially by the law of God.
So much the more detestable, then, is the wickedness of the Pope, who,
laying aside all respect, either for Divine or human laws, has been so
daring as to free children from the yoke of subjection to their parents.
It is of importance, however, to mark the reason. This, says he, is on
account of the dignity of the sacrament. Not to speak of the ignorance
of making marriage a sacrament, what honor is there, I beseech you, or
what dignity, when, contrary to the general feeling of propriety in all
nations, and contrary to God’s eternal appointment, they take off all
restraints from the lusts of young persons, that they may, without any
feeling of shame, sport themselves,  <span
id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447.md) under pretense of its being a
sacrament? Let us know, therefore, that in disposing of children in
marriage, the authority of parents is of first-rate importance, provided
they do not tyrannically abuse it, as even the civil laws restrict it.
 <span id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448.md) The Apostle, too, in requiring
exemption from *necessity*,  <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449.md)
intimated that the deliberations of parents ought to be regulated with a
view to the advantage of their children. Let us bear in mind, therefore,
that this limitation is the proper rule — that children allow themselves
to be governed by their parents, and that they, on the other hand, do
not drag their children by force to what is against their inclination,
and that they have no other object in view, in the exercise of their
authority, than the advantage of their children.

<span id="xiv.viii-p30"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p31"></span>**38.** *Therefore he that giveth in
marriage.* Here we have the conclusion from both parts of the statement,
in which he states, in a few words, that parents are free from blame if
they give away their daughters in marriage, while he at the same time
declares that *they do better* if they keep them at home unmarried. You
are not, however, to understand that celibacy is here preferred to
marriage, otherwise than under the exception which was a little before
expressed. For if power be wanting on the part of the daughter,  <span
id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450.md) the father acts an exceedingly bad
part if he endeavors to keep her back from marriage, and would be no
longer a father to her, but a cruel tyrant. The sum of the whole
discussion amounts to this — that celibacy is better than marriage,
because it has more liberty, so that persons can serve God with greater
freedom; but at the same time, that no necessity ought to be imposed, so
as to make it unlawful for individuals to marry, if they think proper;
and farther, that marriage itself is a remedy appointed by God for our
infirmity,  <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451.md) which all ought to
use that are not endowed with the gift of continency. Every person of
sound judgment will join with me in acknowledging and confessing, that
the whole of Paul’s doctrine on this point is comprehended in these
*three* articles.

<span id="xiv.ix"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
7:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039.md)<span id="xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p2"></span>**39.** The wife is bound by the law as long
as her husband liveth; but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to
be married to whom she will; only in the Lord.

<span id="xiv.ix-p3"></span>**39.** Muller alligata est Legi, quamdiu
maritus ejus vivit: si auterm dormierit maritus ejus, libera est, ut cui
vult nubat, modo in Domino.

<span id="xiv.ix-p4"></span>**40.** But she is happier if she so abide,
after my judgment: and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.

<span id="xiv.ix-p5"></span>**40.** Beatior vero est, si sic
maneat,secundum meam sententiam: existimo autem, me quoque Spiritum Dei
habere.

<span id="xiv.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ix-p7"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p8"></span>**39.** *The wife is bound* He had
previously spoken indiscriminately of husbands and wives, but as wives,
on account of the modesty of their sex, might seem to have less liberty,
he has thought it necessary to give in addition some special directions
in reference to them. He now, therefore, teaches that women are not less
at liberty than men to marry a second time, on their becoming widows.
 <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452.md) We have already mentioned
above, that those who desired a second marriage were branded with the
reproach of intemperance, and that, with the view of putting some kind
of slight upon them, those who had been contented with being once
married, were wont to be presented with the “chaplet of chastity.” Nay
more, this first opinion had, in course of time, become prevalent among
Christians; for second marriages had no blessing pronounced upon them,
and some Councils prohibited the clergy from being present on such
occasions. The Apostle here condemns tyranny of that sort, and declares,
that no hindrance ought to be thrown in the way of widows’ marrying, if
they think proper.

<span id="xiv.ix-p10"></span>It is of little consequence, and so far as
the sense is concerned it matters nothing, whether we say that the wife
is bound <span id="xiv.ix-p10.1"></span>*legi*, (*to* the law,) in the
dative, or <span id="xiv.ix-p10.2"></span>*lege*, (*by* the law,) in the
ablative. For it is the law that declares the connection between husband
and wife to be indissoluble. If, however, you read it in the dative, the
term will convey the idea of authority or obligation.  <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453.md) Now he reasons from contraries; for if
a woman is bound to her husband for life, she is, then, set at liberty
by his death. After she has been set at liberty, *let her be married to
whom she will*

<span id="xiv.ix-p12"></span>When the verb *to sleep* means *to die*,
 <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454.md) it refers not to the soul, but
to the body, as is manifest from its constant use in Scripture.  <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455.md) It is a foolish part, therefore, that
is acted by certain fanatics, who, from this little word, make it their
endeavor to prove that the souls of men, after being separated from
their bodies, are destitute of thought and intelligence, or, in other
words, of their life.

<span id="xiv.ix-p15"></span>*Only in the Lord* This is thought to be
added for the purpose of admonishing them in passing, that they ought
not to yoke themselves with the irreligious, or to covet their society.
This, I acknowledge, is true, but I am of opinion that more is meant
that they should do this in a religious way, and in the fear of the
Lord,  <span id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456.md) for it is in this manner
that marriages are formed auspiciously.

<span id="xiv.ix-p17"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p18"></span>**40.** *But she is happier if she so
abide* Why? Is it because widowhood is of itself a virtue? No; but
because it will have less to distract, and is more exempt from earthly
cares. As to what he adds — *according to my judgment*, he does not mean
by this expression that his opinion was doubtful; but it is as if he had
said that such was his *decision* as to this question; for he
immediately adds that *he has the Spirit of God*, which is sufficient to
give full and perfect authority. There appears, at the same time, to be
somewhat of irony when he says *I think* For as the false apostles were
ever and anon boasting in high-sounding terms of their having the Spirit
of God, for the purpose of arrogating to themselves authority, and in
the meantime endeavored to derogate from that of Paul, he says that he
thinks that *he* is not less a partaker of the Spirit than *they*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc39013.htm#fr_366.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>C’est a dire,
l’abstinence du mariage;” — “That is to say, abstinence from marriage.”

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc39013.htm#fr_367.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span> Our Author, when commenting on <span
id="xiv.i-p11.1"></span>[Mt 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p11.1"></span>, animadverts in strong terms on Jerome’s manner
of handling the subject of marriage, as discovering “a malicious and
wicked disposition.” *Harmony*, volume 2 p. 386. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc39013.htm#fr_368.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p12.1"></span>C’est autant
de perdu quant aux choses spirituelles;” — “It is so much of loss as to
spiritual things.”

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc39013.htm#fr_369.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p13.1"></span>Nous
employer entierement et incessaumment;” — “Employ ourselves entirely and
unceasingly.”

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc39013.htm#fr_370.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p18.1"></span>Il laisse la
liberte de se marier ou ne se marier point;” — “He gives liberty to
marry or not marry.”

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc39013.htm#fr_371.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p13.1"></span>Ou qu’ils
soyent tentez de se debaucher en pallardises;” — “Or are tempted to
defile themselves with whoredoms.”

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc39013.htm#fr_372.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p15.1"></span>Un seruice
agreable a Dieu;” — “A service agreeable to God.”

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc39013.htm#fr_373.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p16.1"></span>Solicite
et induit plusieurs;” — “Enticed and induced many.”

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc39013.htm#fr_374.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p19"></span> “<span
id="xiv.ii-p19.1"></span>L’affection du coeur plus ardente et
extraordinaire;” — “A more ardent and extraordinary affection of the
mind.” See *Institutes* (volume 3.)

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc39013.htm#fr_375.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>Comme
quand on vent elire ou ordonner des pasteurs et ministres;” — “As when
persons wish to elect or ordain pastors and ministers.”

<span id="fn_376"></span>[377](cc39013.htm#fr_376.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p24"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p24.1"></span>Par dessus
nos forces, et la mesure de nostre imbecilite;” — “Beyond our strength,
and the measure of our weakness.”

<span id="fn_377"></span>[378](cc39013.htm#fr_377.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p25.1"></span>Mais (dira
quelqu’vn)il faut resister a Satan;” — “But (some will say) we must
resist Satan.”

<span id="fn_378"></span>[379](cc39013.htm#fr_378.md) <span
id="xiv.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p26.1"></span>Qu’il leur
donnera tousiours la puissance de s’en passer;” — “That he would give
them always the power to do without it.”

<span id="fn_379"></span>[380](cc39013.htm#fr_379.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p13.1"></span>Leurs
affections desordonnees;” — “Their inordinate affections.”

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc39013.htm#fr_380.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p14.1"></span>Les
hypocrites qui veulent estre estimez de petis saincts;” — “Hypocrites,
who wish to be regarded as little saints.”

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc39013.htm#fr_381.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p16.1"></span>Les sots
et indiscrets zelateurs;” — “Foolish and inconsiderate zealots.”

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc39013.htm#fr_382.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p17.1"></span>Ou
permission et pardon ha lieu;” — “Where permission and pardon have
place.”

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc39013.htm#fr_383.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p18"></span> The term <span
id="xiv.iii-p18.1"></span>ἀταξία is used by our author in the Harmony
(volume 1) to mean *disorder*, as contrasted with the *orderly*
condition of the *kingdom of God* It contains an allusion to the
*disorderly conduct of soldiers*, *who quit their ranks* It is used in
this sense by Thucydides (7:43.) — *Ed*

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc39013.htm#fr_384.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p19"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p19.1"></span>Vn
appetit desmesure, lequel ie concede estre vicieux;” — “An immoderate
desire, which, I allow, is vicious.”

<span id="fn_385"></span>[386](cc39013.htm#fr_385.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p20.1"></span>Pour
resolution done de ce poinet en peu de paroles, disons en ceste sorte;”
— “For a solution, then, of this point in a few words, let us express it
in this way.”

<span id="fn_386"></span>[387](cc39013.htm#fr_386.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p23.1"></span>Donne de
Dieu;” — “Given by God.”

<span id="fn_387"></span>[388](cc39013.htm#fr_387.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p28"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p28.1"></span>Comme vn
service agreable a Dieu;” — “As a service agreeable to God.”

<span id="fn_388"></span>[389](cc39013.htm#fr_388.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p29.1"></span>Comme vn
estat indigne et non conuenable a la sanctete de l’ordre;” — “As a
condition unbefitting, and unsuitable to the holiness of their order.”

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc39013.htm#fr_389.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p30"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p30.1"></span>De
passions et cupiditez desordonnees;” — “Of inordinate passions and
lusts.”

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc39013.htm#fr_390.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p31"></span> The reader will find the same subject
largely treated of by our author in the *Institutes*, volume 3. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc39013.htm#fr_391.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p34"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p34.1"></span>Se
mesure a son aulne (comme on dit) c’est a dire, selon sa faculte;” —
“Measures himself by his own ell, (as they say,) that is to say,
according to his ability.”

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc39013.htm#fr_392.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p36"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p36.1"></span>Qu’il
estoit sans femme,” — “That he was unmarried.”

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc39013.htm#fr_393.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p37"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p37.1"></span>Entre
ceux qui n’estoyent point mariez;” — “Among those that were unmarried.”

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc39013.htm#fr_394.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p38"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p38.1"></span>Car
comment se fust-il done acquitte de ce qu’il commande yci aux gens
mariez?” — “For how, in that case, would he have discharged the duty
that he enjoins upon married persons?”

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc39013.htm#fr_395.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p42"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p42.1"></span>Vn
sophisme plus que puerile;” — “A worse than childish sophism.”

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc39013.htm#fr_396.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p44"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p44.1"></span>Auee
pleurs et humilite;” — “With tears and humility.”

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc39013.htm#fr_397.md) <span
id="xiv.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p46"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p46.1"></span>Il y a
vne autre espece de tentation moyenne entre les deux que i’ay dites;” —
“There is another kind of temptation, intermediate between the two, that
I have mentioned.”

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc39013.htm#fr_398.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p21.1"></span>Il n’a pas
voulu toucher ce poinct;” — “He has not chosen to touch upon this
point.”

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc39013.htm#fr_399.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p27"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p27.1"></span>Pource
qu’elles n’estoyent assez belles, ou pour quelque autre despit ou
desplaisir;” — “Because they were not handsome enough, or on the ground
of some other offense or dislike.”

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc39013.htm#fr_400.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p28"></span> The phrase used by our *Author* — <span
id="xiv.iv-p28.1"></span>*frangant tesseram* — (*break the pledge*)
contains an allusion to the custom among the Romans of having, on
occasion of a league of hospitality being formed, a tally (<span
id="xiv.iv-p28.2"></span>*tessera*) or piece of wood cut into two parts,
of which each party kept one. If either of the parties acted
inconsistently with the engagement, he was *said* — <span
id="xiv.iv-p28.3"></span>*confregisse resseraph* — *to have broken the
pledge*. See Plaut. Cist. 2. 1:27. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc39013.htm#fr_401.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p40.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p41"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p41.1"></span>Auec
Abraham, et auec la semence;” — “With Abraham and with his seed.”

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc39013.htm#fr_402.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p44"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p44.1"></span>Que nous
auons auiourd’huy semblable cause de nous departir d’avec les Papistes;”
— “That we have at this day similar ground of separation from Papists.”

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc39013.htm#fr_403.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p49.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p50"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p50.1"></span>Au bon
chemin;” — “Into the good way.”

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc39013.htm#fr_404.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p54"></span> “Our Author refers to the word <span
id="xiv.iv-p54.1"></span>ἑκαστος, (every one,) which occurs in the first
clause of the verse in the dative case, and in the second clause in the
accusative, and in both instances rendered by him in the nominative —
<span id="xiv.iv-p54.2"></span>*unusquisque* (*every one*.) — *Ed*

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc39013.htm#fr_405.md) <span
id="xiv.iv-p54.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p55"></span> The particles which occur in the original,
<span id="xiv.iv-p55.1"></span>ἐι μὴ, (*unless*,) might in this passage,
and in several other instances in the New Testament, (as well as in
classical writers,) be rendered *only* They correspond to the Hebrew
particles <span id="xiv.iv-p55.2"></span>אם-לא. See <span
id="xiv.iv-p55.3"></span>[Ge
24:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#038.md)<span id="xiv.iv-p55.3"></span>.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc39013.htm#fr_406.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p24"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p24.1"></span>Car d’autant
que ce nom vient d’vn mot qui signifie *Appeler*, il ha vne
correspondance mutuelle a Dieu, qui nous *appelle* a ceci ou a cela;” —
“For as this term comes from a word which signifies *to call*, it has a
mutual relationship to God, who *calls* us to this or that.”

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc39013.htm#fr_407.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p25"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p25.1"></span>Ceque ie di,
afinque nul n’abuse ceste sentence;” — “Which thing I say, in order that
no one may abuse this statement.”

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc39013.htm#fr_408.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p26"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p26.1"></span>Vne
obligation et necessite;” — “An obligation and necessity.”

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc39013.htm#fr_409.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p27"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p27.1"></span>Vn
cordonnier;” — “A shoemaker.”

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc39013.htm#fr_410.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p28"></span> “<span
id="xiv.v-p28.1"></span>Paisiblement, et en repos de conscience;” —
“Peaceably, and with quiet of conscience.”

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc39013.htm#fr_411.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p31"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p31.1"></span>Tout le but
a quoy tend Sainct Paul;” — “The whole object at which St. Paul aims.”

<span id="fn_412"></span>[413](cc39013.htm#fr_412.md) <span
id="xiv.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p33"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p33.1"></span>Soit
beaucoup meilleur;” — “Is much better.”

<span id="fn_413"></span>[414](cc39013.htm#fr_413.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p15.1"></span>Appelle
indifferemment et sans exception tous hommes et femmes a se marier;” —
“Calls all men and women indiscriminately and without exception to
marry.”

<span id="fn_414"></span>[415](cc39013.htm#fr_414.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p17"></span> Such is the view that Beza takes of the
meaning of the term here — “<span id="xiv.vi-p17.1"></span>Sententiam in
hac re meam dico;” — “I give you my authoritative decision as to this
matter.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[416](cc39013.htm#fr_415.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p19"></span> The original word, <span
id="xiv.vi-p19.1"></span>ἠλεημένος, which has occasioned no
inconsiderable difficulty to interpreters, is ingeniously supposed by
*Granville Penn*, in his *Supplemental Annotations*, to be a dialectic
variation of <span id="xiv.vi-p19.2"></span>ηλημενος, for <span
id="xiv.vi-p19.3"></span>ειλημενος, *bound*, (from <span
id="xiv.vi-p19.4"></span>ειλεω, *to bind*,) in which case the meaning
would be this: “as one *bound* by the Lord to be faithful.” Taking the
word in this light, the expression is much similar to what we find
employed by the Apostle in a subsequent chapter of this Epistle — <span
id="xiv.vi-p19.5"></span>ἀνάγκη γάρ μοι ἐπίκειται, *necessity is laid
upon me* (<span id="xiv.vi-p19.6"></span>[1Co
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016)<span id="xiv.vi-p19.6"></span>..md)
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_416"></span>[417](cc39013.htm#fr_416.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p19.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p20.1"></span>Du cerueau
des hommes;” — “From man’s brain.”

<span id="fn_417"></span>[418](cc39013.htm#fr_417.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p23"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p23.1"></span>Diuerses
afflictions et orages;” — “Various afflictions and tempests.”

<span id="fn_418"></span>[419](cc39013.htm#fr_418.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p27"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p27.1"></span>Car il ne
faut pas quitter legerement sa liberte sans y bien penser;” — “For he
ought not to abandon his liberty lightly, without thinking much as to
it.”

<span id="fn_419"></span>[420](cc39013.htm#fr_419.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p31"></span> In accordance with this, <span
id="xiv.vi-p31.1"></span>*Univira*, (the wife of *one* husband,) is
often found in ancient inscriptions as an epithet of honor. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[421](cc39013.htm#fr_420.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p32"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p32.1"></span>Autheur
aneien;” — “An ancient author.”

<span id="fn_421"></span>[422](cc39013.htm#fr_421.md) <span
id="xiv.vi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p33"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p33.1"></span>C’est a
dire, coloree et reglee par les lois;” — “That is to say, colored over
and regulated by the laws.”

<span id="fn_422"></span>[423](cc39013.htm#fr_422.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p4"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p4.1"></span>Ou, Mais
ie vous di ceci, mes freres, que le temps;” — “Or, But I say this to
you, my brethren, that the time.”

<span id="fn_423"></span>[424](cc39013.htm#fr_423.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p21"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p21.1"></span>Or de
prosperite s’ensuit ioye, comme d’aduersitez pleurs;” — “Now joy is
attendant on prosperity, as tears are on adversities.”

<span id="fn_424"></span>[425](cc39013.htm#fr_424.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p22"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p22.1"></span>Enterrez
en icelles;” — “Buried in them.”

<span id="fn_425"></span>[426](cc39013.htm#fr_425.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p25"></span> “<span
id="xiv.vii-p25.1"></span>Tellement que le mot signifie yci, Abusans, ou
Vsans trop;” — “So that the word means here abusing, or using too much.”
The verb <span id="xiv.vii-p25.2"></span>καταχράομαι, is frequently made
use of by classical writers to mean *using to the uttermost*, *using
up*, or *misusing* See *Dem* 430, 10, and *Lys* 153, 46. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_426"></span>[427](cc39013.htm#fr_426.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p27"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p27.1"></span>En ce
monde;” — “In this world.”

<span id="fn_427"></span>[428](cc39013.htm#fr_427.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p28"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p28.1"></span>Comme
s’il disoit, que ce monde n’ha point vn estre, mais seulement vne
monstre et vaine apparence;” — “As if he had said, that this world has
not an existence, but only a show and mere appearance.”

<span id="fn_428"></span>[429](cc39013.htm#fr_428.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p31"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p31.1"></span>Qu’ils
puissent rencontrer;” — “That they may meet with.”

<span id="fn_429"></span>[430](cc39013.htm#fr_429.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p33"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p33.1"></span>Qui
sourdent entre le man et la femme;” — “that arise between a husband and
wife.”

<span id="fn_430"></span>[431](cc39013.htm#fr_430.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p34"></span> Our Author’s meaning is, that while <span
id="xiv.vii-p34.1"></span>θλιψις (trouble) invariably relates to what is
of a distressing nature, <span id="xiv.vii-p34.2"></span>μεριμνα (care)
is applied to anything that *takes up* the attention of the mind. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_431"></span>[432](cc39013.htm#fr_431.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p38"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p38.1"></span>Forclos
du royaume de Dieu;” — “Shut out from the kingdom of God.”

<span id="fn_432"></span>[433](cc39013.htm#fr_432.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p39"></span> See *Harmony*, volume 2.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[434](cc39013.htm#fr_433.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p42"></span> Kypke (in his *Observationes Sacrae*)
renders the original word <span id="xiv.vii-p42.1"></span>μεμέπισται, as
Calvin *does* — *divided* or *perplexed*, and brings forward a passage
from *Achilles Tatius*, in which <span
id="xiv.vii-p42.2"></span>εμεμεριστο is used in a similar sense. In the
Syriac version, on the other hand, the rendering is as follows: <span
id="xiv.vii-p42.3"></span>*Discrimen autem est inter mulierem et
virginem* — *There is a difference between a wife and a virgin* The
Greek commentators interpret the clause thus: — <span
id="xiv.vii-p42.4"></span>Μεμέρισται, τουτ ᾿ εστιν, διαφερουσιν αλληλων,
και ου την αὐτην εχουσι φροντιδὰ — *They differ from one another and
have not the same care* Bloomfield considers *divided* or *distracted*
to be a harsh interpretation, and not agreeable to the context, and
renders the clause — “There is a difference between.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_434"></span>[435](cc39013.htm#fr_434.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p45"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p45.1"></span>Plus
infame et puante;” — “More infamous and abominable.”

<span id="fn_435"></span>[436](cc39013.htm#fr_435.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p48"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p48.1"></span>La
prudence et moderation de l’Apostre;” — “The prudence and moderation of
the Apostle.”

<span id="fn_436"></span>[437](cc39013.htm#fr_436.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p49"></span> Our author, quoting from memory, gives
the substance of the passage referred to, while the words which he
employs correspond with what we find in the 26th verse of this chapter.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[438](cc39013.htm#fr_437.md) <span
id="xiv.vii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p51"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p51.1"></span>Le
Sainct Esprit;” — “The Holy Spirit.”

<span id="fn_438"></span>[439](cc39013.htm#fr_438.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p11.1"></span>Tant
plus ils craignent qu’il ne leur adviene quelque inconvenient, et tant
plus sont ils diligens a se donner garde pour eux;” — “So much the more
do they fear lest they should meet with any inconvenience, and so much
the more careful are they to use precautions on their account.”

<span id="fn_439"></span>[440](cc39013.htm#fr_439.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p12"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p12.1"></span>Quand
il n’est point sous la puissance d’autruy;” — “When he is not under the
power of another.”

<span id="fn_440"></span>[441](cc39013.htm#fr_440.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p14.1"></span>La
condition et propriete que nature luy a donnee;” — “The condition and
propriety that nature has assigned to him.” See Cic. de Off. 1. 28. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[442](cc39013.htm#fr_441.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p15.1"></span>Comme
on dit;” — “As they say.”

<span id="fn_442"></span>[443](cc39013.htm#fr_442.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p16"></span> Calvin seems to have understood the verb
<span id="xiv.viii-p16.1"></span>ἀσχημονεῖν here as meaning *to be
unseemly* The ordinary meaning of the word is, *to act in an unseemly
manner* It occurs in this sense in <span id="xiv.viii-p16.2"></span>[1Co
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005.md)<span id="xiv.viii-p16.2"></span>,
and in various instances in the Classics, (see Eur. Hec. 407,) and the
construction of the passage seems to require that it be understood as
meaning, that the father thinks that he *acts improperly towards* his
virgin daughter, or *incurs somewhat of disgrace with respect to her*. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_443"></span>[444](cc39013.htm#fr_443.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p18.1"></span>C’est
vne cauillation puerile;*”* — “It is a childish cavil.”

<span id="fn_444"></span>[445](cc39013.htm#fr_444.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p22"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p22.1"></span>Et
mesme quand il est question du propos dont il est yci fait mention;” —
“And even when there is a doubt on the subject, of which he has here
made mention.”

<span id="fn_445"></span>[446](cc39013.htm#fr_445.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p23"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p23.1"></span>Vne
arrogance pernicieuse;” — “pernicious arrogance.”

<span id="fn_446"></span>[447](cc39013.htm#fr_446.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p25"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p25.1"></span>Elles
ne sont de rien moins suiettes a affections desordonnees, ou a estre
seduites et abusees;” — “They are not at all the less liable to
inordinate affections, or to be seduced and deceived.”

<span id="fn_447"></span>[448](cc39013.htm#fr_447.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p27"></span> “<span
id="xiv.viii-p27.1"></span>S’esgayent et desbauchent;” — “Sport and
debauch themselves.”

<span id="fn_448"></span>[449](cc39013.htm#fr_448.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p28"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p28.1"></span>Comme
aussi a ceste fin les loix ciuiles restraigment l’authorite d’iceux;” —
“As also for this end civil laws restrict their authority.”

<span id="fn_449"></span>[450](cc39013.htm#fr_449.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p29"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p29.1"></span>En
requirant yci que les enfans sentent en eux ceste liberte et exemption
de la necessite du mariage;” — “In requiring here that children feel in
themselves this freedom and exemption from the necessity of marriage.”

<span id="fn_450"></span>[451](cc39013.htm#fr_450.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p32"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p32.1"></span>Car
quand la puissance defaudra a la fille de s’abstenir de mariage;” — “For
when the daughter has not power to abstain from marriage.”

<span id="fn_451"></span>[452](cc39013.htm#fr_451.md) <span
id="xiv.viii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p33"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p33.1"></span>Pour
subuenir a nostre infirmite;” — “To help our infirmity.”

<span id="fn_452"></span>[453](cc39013.htm#fr_452.md) <span
id="xiv.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.ix-p9.1"></span>Apres auoir
perdu lears premiers maris;” — “After having lost their first husbands.”

<span id="fn_453"></span>[454](cc39013.htm#fr_453.md) <span
id="xiv.ix-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p11"></span> “<span id="xiv.ix-p11.1"></span>Authoritc
ou puissance et suiection;” — “Authority or power and subjection.”

<span id="fn_454"></span>[455](cc39013.htm#fr_454.md) <span
id="xiv.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.ix-p13.1"></span>Comme en
ce passage;” — “As in this passage.”

<span id="fn_455"></span>[456](cc39013.htm#fr_455.md) <span
id="xiv.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p14"></span> The original expression is <span
id="xiv.ix-p14.1"></span>ἐὰν δὲ κοιμηθὟ ὁ ἀνὴρ αὐτὢς, — “If her husband
has *fallen asleep*.” The metaphor is not peculiar to the Scriptures,
but is made use of also by heathen writers, of which we have a beautiful
instance in Callimachus — <span id="xiv.ix-p14.2"></span>ἱερον ὑπνον
Κοιμαται· Θνησκειν μη λεγε τους αγαθους· *He sleeps a sacred sleep* —
*say not that good men die*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_456"></span>[457](cc39013.htm#fr_456.md) <span
id="xiv.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p16"></span> “<span id="xiv.ix-p16.1"></span>Auce
reuerence, sagement, et en la erainte du Seigneur;” — “With reverence,
wisely, and in the fear of the Lord.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc39014.md)
