[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc39006)  [Next](cc39008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>COMMENTARY ON THE

<span id="viii-p2"></span>FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS

<span id="viii-p3"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Paul, called *to be* an apostle of
Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Sosthenes *our* brother,

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Paulus, vocatus apostolus Jesu
Christi per voluntatem Dei, et Sosthenes frater,

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Unto the church of God which is at
Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called *to* *be*
saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ
our Lord, both theirs and ours:

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ecclesiae Dei quae est Corinthi,
sanctificatis in Christo Jesu, vocatis sanctis, una cum omnibus qui
invocant nomen Domini nostri Jesu Christi in quovis loco tam sui quam
nostri:  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Grace *be* unto you, and peace, from
God our Father, and *from* the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span>**3.** Gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre
nostro, et Domino Jesu Christi.

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span><span id="viii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span>**1.** *Paul, called to be an Apostle* In
this manner does Paul proceed, in almost all the introductions to his
Epistles, with the view of procuring for his doctrine authority and
favor. The former he secures to himself from the station that had been
assigned to him by God, as being an Apostle of Christ sent by God; the
latter by testifying his affection towards those to whom he writes. We
believe much more readily the man whom we look upon as regarding us with
affection, and as faithfully endeavoring to promote our welfare. In this
salutation, therefore, he claims for himself authority, when he speaks
of himself as *an Apostle of Christ*, and that, too, as *called by God*,
that is, set apart *by* *the will of God* Now, two things are requisite
in any one that would be listened to in the Church, and would occupy the
place of a teacher; for he must be *called* by God to that office, and
he must faithfully employ himself in the discharge of its duties. Paul
here lays claim to both. For the name, *Apostle*, implies that the
individual conscientiously acts the part of an ambassador for Christ
(<span id="viii.i-p11.1"></span>[2Co
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)<span id="viii.i-p11.1"></span>),
and proclaims the pure doctrine of the gospel. But as no one ought to
assume this honor to himself, unless he be *called* to it, he adds, that
he had not rashly intruded into it, but had been appointed  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) to it by God.

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span>Let us learn, therefore, to take these two
things together when we wish to ascertain what kind of persons we ought
to esteem as ministers of Christ, — a call to the office, and
faithfulness in the discharge of its duties. For as no man can lawfully
assume the designation and rank of a minister, unless he be called, so
it were not enough for any one to be called, if he does not also fulfill
the duties of his office. For the Lord does not choose ministers that
they may be dumb idols, or exercise tyranny under pretext of their
calling, or make their own caprice their law; but at the same time marks
out what kind of persons they ought to be, and binds them by his laws,
and in fine chooses them for the ministry, or, in other words, that in
the first place they may not be idle, and, secondly, that they may
confine themselves within the limits of their office. Hence, as the
apostleship depends on the *calling*, so the man who would be reckoned
an apostle, must show himself to be really such: nay more, so must every
one who demands that credit be given him, or that his doctrine be
listened to. For since Paul rests on these arguments for establishing
his authority, worse than impudent were the conduct of that man who
would think to have any standing without such proofs.

<span id="viii.i-p14"></span>It ought, however, to be observed, that it
is not enough for any one to hold out to view the title to a call to the
office, along with faithfulness in discharging its duties, if he does
not in reality give proof of both. For it often happens that none boast
more haughtily of their titles than those that are destitute of the
reality; as of old the false prophets, with lofty disdain, boasted that
they had been sent by the Lord. Nay, at the present day, what else do
the Romanists make a noise about, but “ordination from God, and an
inviolably sacred succession even from the Apostles themselves,”  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) while, after all, it appears that they
are destitute of those things of which they vaunt? Here, therefore, it
is not boasting that is required, but reality. Now, as the name is
assumed by good and bad alike, we must come to the test, that we may
ascertain who has a right to the name of Apostle, and who has not. As to
Paul, God attested his *calling* by many revelations, and afterwards
confirmed it by miracles. The *faithfulness* must be estimated by this,
— whether or not he proclaimed the pure doctrine of Christ. As to the
twofold call — that of God and that of the Church — see my Institutes.
 <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37)

<span id="viii.i-p17"></span>*An Apostle* Though this name, agreeably to
its etymology, has a general signification, and is sometimes employed in
a general sense, to denote any kind of ministers,  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) yet, as a peculiar designation, it is
applicable to those that were set apart by the Lord’s appointment to
publish the Gospel throughout the whole world. Now, it was of importance
that Paul should be reckoned in that number, for two *reasons*, —
*first*, because much more deference was paid to them than to other
ministers of the gospel; and, *secondly*, because they alone, properly
speaking, had authority to instruct all the Churches.

<span id="viii.i-p19"></span>*By the will of God* While the Apostle is
accustomed cheerfully to *acknowledge* himself indebted to God for
whatever he has of good, he does so more especially in reference to his
apostleship, that he may free himself from all appearance of
presumption. And assuredly as a call to salvation is of grace, so also a
call to the office of apostle is of grace, as Christ teaches in these
words:

<span id="viii.i-p20"></span>“Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you,”  
(<span id="viii.i-p20.2"></span>[Joh
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)<span id="viii.i-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p21"></span>Paul, however, at the same time indirectly
intimates, that all who attempt to undermine his apostleship, or in any
way oppose it, contend against an appointment of God. For Paul here
makes no useless boast of honorary titles, but designedly vindicates his
apostleship from malicious aspersions. For as his authority must have
been sufficiently established in the view of the Corinthians, it would
have been superfluous to make particular mention of “the will of God,”
had not *wicked* men attempted by indirect means to undermine that
honorable rank which had been divinely assigned him.

<span id="viii.i-p22"></span>*And Sosthenes our brother* This is that
Sosthenes who was ruler of the Jewish synagogue that was at Corinth, of
whom *Luke* makes mention in <span id="viii.i-p22.1"></span>[Ac
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017)<span id="viii.i-p22.1"></span>.
His name is added for this reason, that the Corinthians, knowing his
ardor and steadfastness in the gospel, could not but hold him in
deserved esteem, and hence it is still more to his honor to be made
mention of now as Paul’s *brother*, than formerly as *ruler of the
synagogue*

<span id="viii.i-p23"></span><span id="viii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p24"></span>**2.** *To the Church of God which is at
Corinth.* It may perhaps appear strange that he should give the name of
a Church of God to a multitude of persons that were infested with so
many distempers, that Satan might be said to reign among them rather
than God. Certain it is, that he did not mean to flatter the
Corinthians, for he speaks under the direction of the Spirit of God, who
is not accustomed to flatter. But  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)
among so many pollutions, what appearance of a Church is any longer
presented? I answer, the Lord having said to him, “Fear not: I have much
people in this place” (<span id="viii.i-p25.2"></span>[Acts
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010)<span id="viii.i-p25.2"></span>;)
keeping this promise in mind, he conferred upon a godly few so much
honor as to recognize them as a Church amidst a vast multitude of
ungodly persons. Farther, notwithstanding that many vices had crept in,
and various corruptions both of doctrine and manners, there were,
nevertheless, certain tokens still remaining of a true Church. This is a
passage that ought to be carefully observed, that we may not require
that the Church, while in this world, should be free from every wrinkle
and stain, or forthwith pronounce unworthy of such a title every society
in which everything is not as we would wish it. For it is a dangerous
temptation to think that there is no Church at all where perfect purity
is not to be seen. For the man that is prepossessed with this notion,
must necessarily in the end withdraw from all others, and look upon
himself as the only saint in the world, or set up a peculiar sect in
company with a few hypocrites.

<span id="viii.i-p26"></span>What ground, then, had Paul for recognizing
a Church at Corinth? It was this: that he saw among them the doctrine of
the gospel, baptism, the Lord’s Supper — tokens by which a Church ought
to be judged of. For although some had begun to have doubts as to the
resurrection, the error not having spread over the entire body, the name
of the Church and its reality are not thereby affected. Some faults had
crept in among them in the administration of the Supper, discipline and
propriety of conduct had very much declined: despising the simplicity of
the gospel, they had given themselves up to show and pomp; and in
consequence of the ambition of their ministers, they were split into
various parties. Notwithstanding of this, however, inasmuch as they
retained fundamental doctrine: as the one God was adored among them, and
was invoked in the name of Christ: as they placed their dependence for
salvation upon Christ, and, had a ministry not altogether corrupted:
there was, on these accounts, a Church still existing among them.
Accordingly, wherever the worship of God is preserved uninfringed, and
that fundamental doctrine, of which I have spoken, remains, we must
without hesitation conclude that in that case a Church exists.

<span id="viii.i-p27"></span>*Sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
saints* He makes mention of the blessings with which God had adorned
them, as if by way of upbraiding them, at least in the event of their
showing no gratitude in return. For what could be more base than to
reject an Apostle through whose instrumentality they had been set apart
as God’s peculiar portion. Meanwhile, by these two epithets, he points
out what sort of persons ought to be reckoned among the true members of
the Church, and who they are that belong of right to her communion. For
if you do not by holiness of life show yourself to be a Christian, you
may indeed be *in* the Church, and pass undetected,  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) but of it you cannot be. Hence all must
be *sanctified in Christ* who would be reckoned among the people of God.
Now the term *sanctification* denotes *separation* This takes place in
us when we are regenerated by the Spirit to newness of life, that we may
serve God and not the world. For while by nature we are unholy, the
Spirit consecrates us to God. As, however, this is effected when we are
engrafted into the body of Christ, apart from whom there is nothing but
pollution, and as it is also by Christ, and not from any other source
that the Spirit is conferred, it is with good reason that he says that
we are *sanctified in Christ*, inasmuch as it is by Him that we cleave
to God, and in Him become new creatures.

<span id="viii.i-p29"></span>What immediately follows — *called to be
saints* — I understand to mean: As ye have been called unto holiness. It
may, however, be taken in two senses. Either we may understand Paul to
say, that the ground of sanctification is the call of God, inasmuch as
God has chosen them; meaning, that this depends on his grace, not on the
excellence of men; or we may understand him to mean, that, it accords
with our profession that we be holy, this being the design of the
doctrine of the gospel. The former interpretation appears to suit better
with the context, but it is of no great consequence in which way you
understand it, as there is an entire agreement between the two following
positions — that our holiness flows from the fountain of divine
election, and that it, is the end of our calling.

<span id="viii.i-p30"></span>We must, therefore, carefully maintain,
that it is not through our own efforts that we are holy, but by the call
of God, because He alone sanctifies those who were by nature unclean.
And certainly it appears to me probable, that, when Paul has pointed out
as it were with his finger the fountain of holiness thrown wide open, he
mounts up a step higher, to the good pleasure of God, in which also
Christ’s mission to us originated. As, however, we are called by the
gospel to harmlessness of life (<span id="viii.i-p30.1"></span>[Php
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015)<span id="viii.i-p30.1"></span>,)
it is necessary that this be accomplished in us in reality, in order
that our calling may be effectual. It will, however, be objected, that,
there were not many such among the Corinthians. I answer, that the weak
are not excluded from this number; for here God only begins his work in
us, and by little and little carries it forward gradually and by
successive steps. I answer farther, that Paul designedly looks rather to
the grace of God in them than to their own defects, that he may put them
to shame for their negligence, if they do not act a suitable part.

<span id="viii.i-p31"></span>*With all that call.* This, too, is an
epithet common to all the pious; for as it is one chief exercise of
faith to *call upon the name* of God, so it is also by this duty chiefly
that believers are to be estimated. Observe, also, that he says that
Christ is called upon by believers, and this affords a proof of his
divinity — invocation being one of the first expressions of Divine
homage. Hence invocation here by synecdoche  <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) (<span id="viii.i-p32.1"></span>κατὰ
συνεκδοχήν) denotes the entire profession of faith in Christ, as in many
passages of Scripture it is taken generally for the whole of Divine
worship. Some explain it as denoting mere profession, but this appears
to be meager, and at variance with its usual acceptation in Scripture.
The little words <span id="viii.i-p32.2"></span>*nostri* (*ours*) and
<span id="viii.i-p32.3"></span>*sui* (*theirs*) I have put in the
genitive, understanding them as referring to Christ, while others,
understanding them as referring to place, render them in the ablative.
In doing so I have followed Chrysostom. This will, perhaps, appear
harsh, as the expression *in every place* is introduced in the middle,
but in Paul’s Greek style there is nothing of harshness in this
construction. My reason for preferring this rendering to that of the
Vulgate is, that if you understand it as referring to place, the
additional clause will be not merely superfluous, but inappropriate. For
what place would Paul call his own? *Judea* they understand him to mean;
but on what ground? And then, what place could he refer to as inhabited
by others? “All other places of the world” (say they;) but this, too,
does not suit well. On the other hand, the meaning that I have given it
suits most admirably; for, after making mention of *all that in every
place call upon the name of Christ our Lord,* he adds, *both theirs and
ours*, manifestly for the purpose of showing that Christ is the one
common Lord, without distinction, of all that call upon him, whether
they be Jews or Gentiles.

<span id="viii.i-p33"></span>*In every place* This Paul has added,
contrary to his usual manner; for in his other Epistles he makes mention
in the salutation of those only for whom they are designed. He seems,
however, to have had it in view to anticipate the slanders of wicked
men, that they might not have it to allege that, in addressing the
Corinthians, he assumed a confident air, and claimed for himself an
authority that he would not venture to assert in writing to other
Churches. For we shall see by and by, that he was unjustly loaded with
this reproach, too, as though he were preparing little nests  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) for himself, with the view of shunning
the light, or were withdrawing himself in a clandestine way from the
rest of the Apostles. It appears, then, that expressly for the purpose
of refuting this falsehood, he places himself in a commanding position,
from which he may be heard afar off.

<span id="viii.i-p35"></span><span id="viii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p36"></span>**3.** *Grace be to you and peace* For an
exposition of this prayer, let my readers consult the beginning of my
Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans (<span
id="viii.i-p36.1"></span>[Ro 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i-p36.1"></span>;) for I do not willingly burden my readers
with repetitions.

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 1:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004)<span
id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** I thank my God always on your
behalf, for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ;

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Gratias ago Deo meo semper de vobis
propter gratiam Dei, quae data vobis est in Christo Jesu.

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span>**5.** That in every thing ye are enriched
by him, in all utterance, and *in* all knowledge;

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span>**5.** Quia in onmibus ditati estis in
ipso, in omni sermone,  <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) et in omni
cognitione.

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span>**6.** Even as the testimony of Christ was
confirmed in you:

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span>**6.** Quemadmodum testimonium Christi
confirmatum fuit in vobis.

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span>**7.** So that ye come behind in no gift;
waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span>**7.** Ut nullo in dono destituamini,
exspectantes revelationem Domini nostri Jesu Christi.

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span>**8.** Who shall also confirm you unto the
end, *that ye may be* blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="viii.ii-p12"></span>**8.** Qui etiam confirmabit vos usque in
finem inculpatos, in diem Domini nostri Jesu Christi.

<span id="viii.ii-p13"></span>**9.** God *is* faithful, by whom ye were
called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="viii.ii-p14"></span>**9.** Fidelis Deus, per quem vocati estis
in communionem Filii ipsius Jesu Christi Domini nostri.

<span id="viii.ii-p15"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii-p16"></span><span id="viii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p17"></span>**4.** *I give thanks to my God.* Having
in the salutation secured for himself authority from the station
assigned him, he now endeavors to procure favor for his doctrine, by
expressing his affection for them. In *this* way he soothes their minds
beforehand, that they may listen patiently to his reproofs.  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) He persuades them of his affection for
them by the following tokens — his discovering as much joy in the
benefits bestowed upon them, as if they had been conferred upon himself;
and his declaring that he entertains a favorable opinion of them, and
has good hopes of them as to the future. Farther, he qualifies his
congratulations in such a way as to give them no occasion to be puffed
up, as he traces up to God all the benefits that they possessed, that
the entire praise may redound to him, inasmuch as they are the fruits of
his grace. It is as though he had said — “I congratulate you indeed, but
it is in such a way as to ascribe the praise to God.” His meaning, when
he calls God *his* God, I have explained in my Commentary upon the
Epistle to the Romans (<span id="viii.ii-p18.2"></span>[Ro
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008)<span id="viii.ii-p18.2"></span>.)
As Paul was not prepared to flatter the Corinthians, so neither has he
commended them on false grounds. For although all were not worthy of
such commendations, and though they corrupted many excellent gifts of
God by ambition, yet the gifts themselves it became him not to despise,
because they were, in themselves, deserving of commendation. Farther, as
the gifts of the Spirit are conferred for the edification of all, it is
with good reason that he enumerates them as gifts common to the whole
Church.  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) But let us see what he
commends in them.

<span id="viii.ii-p20"></span>*For the grace*, etc. This is a general
term, for it comprehends blessings of every kind that they had obtained
through means of the gospel. For the term *grace* denotes here not the
favor of God, but by metonymy  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)
(<span id="viii.ii-p21.1"></span>μετωνυμικῶς), the gifts that he bestows
upon men gratuitously. He immediately proceeds to specify particular
instances, when he says that *they are enriched in all things*, and
specifies what those *all things* are — the doctrine and word of God.
For in these riches it becomes Christians to abound; and they ought also
to be esteemed by us the more, and regarded by us as so much the more
valuable, in proportion as they are ordinarily slighted. The phrase *in
ipso* (*in him*) I have preferred to retain, rather than render it <span
id="viii.ii-p21.2"></span>*per ipsum* (*by him*,) because it has in my
opinion more expressiveness and force. For we are *enriched in Christ*,
inasmuch as we are members of his body, and are engrafted into him: nay
more, being made one with him, he makes us share with him in everything
that he has received from the Father.

<span id="viii.ii-p22"></span><span id="viii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p23"></span>**6.** *Even as the testimony*, etc.
Erasmus gives a different rendering, to this effect, “that by these
things the testimony of Christ was confirmed in them;” that is, by
knowledge and by the word. The words, however, convey another meaning,
and if they are not wrested, the meaning is easy — that God has sealed
the truth of his gospel among the Corinthians, for the purpose of
confirming it. Now, this might be done in two ways, either by miracles,
or by the inward testimony of the Holy Spirit. Chrysostom seems to
understand it of miracles, but I take it in a larger sense; and, first
of all, it is certain, that the gospel is properly confirmed in our
experience by faith, because it is only when we receive it by faith that
we “set to our seal that God is true” (<span
id="viii.ii-p23.1"></span>[Joh
3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033)<span id="viii.ii-p23.1"></span>.)
And though I admit that miracles ought to have weight for the
confirmation of it, yet we must go higher in search of the origin,
namely this, that the Spirit of God is the earnest and seal.
Accordingly, I explain these words in this manner — that the Corinthians
excelled in knowledge, inasmuch as God had from the beginning given
efficacy to his gospel among them, and that not in one way merely, but
had done so both by the internal influence of the Spirit, and by
excellence and variety of gifts, by miracles, and by all other helps. He
calls the gospel *the testimony of Christ*, or *respecting* Christ,
because the entire sum of it tends to discover Christ to us,

<span id="viii.ii-p24"></span>“In whom all the treasures of knowledge
are hid” (<span id="viii.ii-p24.1"></span>[Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii-p25"></span>If any one prefers to take it in an active
sense, on the ground that Christ is the primary author of the gospel, so
that the Apostles were nothing but secondary or inferior witnesses, I
shall not much oppose it. I feel better satisfied, however, with the
former exposition. It is true that a little afterwards (<span
id="viii.ii-p25.1"></span>[1Co
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii-p25.1"></span>)
*the testimony of God* must, beyond all controversy, be taken in an
active sense, as a passive signification would not be at all suitable.
Here, however, the case is different, and, what is more, that passage
strengthens my view, as he immediately subjoins what it is  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) — *to know nothing but Christ*. (<span
id="viii.ii-p26.2"></span>[1Co
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002)<span id="viii.ii-p26.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii-p27"></span><span id="viii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p28"></span>**7.** *So that ye come behind in no gift*
<span id="viii.ii-p28.1"></span>̔Υστερεισθαι means to be in want of what
you would otherwise stand in need of.  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) He means, therefore, that the Corinthians
abound in all the gifts of God, so as not to be in want of anything, as
if he had said, “The Lord has not merely honored you with the light of
the gospel, but has eminently endowed you with all those graces that may
be of service to the saints for helping them forward in the way of
salvation.” For he gives the name of gifts (<span
id="viii.ii-p29.6"></span>χαρίσματα) to those spiritual graces that are,
as it were, means of salvation to the saints. But it is objected, on the
other hand, that the saints are never in such abundance as not to feel
in want of graces to some extent, so that they must always of necessity
be “*hungering and thirsting*” (<span id="viii.ii-p29.7"></span>[Mt
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii-p29.7"></span>.)
For where is the man that does not come far short of perfection? I
answer, “As they are sufficiently endowed with needful gifts, and are
never in such destitution but that the Lord seasonably relieves their
need; Paul on this ground ascribes to them such wealth.” For the same
reason he adds: *waiting for the manifestation*, meaning, that he does
not ascribe to them such abundance as to leave nothing to be desired;
but merely as much as will suffice, until they shall have arrived at
perfection. The participle *waiting* I understand in this sense, “In the
meantime while you are waiting.” Thus the meaning will be, “So that ye
are in want of no gift in the meantime while you are waiting for the day
of perfected revelation, by which Christ our wisdom (<span
id="viii.ii-p29.8"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="viii.ii-p29.8"></span>)
will be fully manifested.”

<span id="viii.ii-p30"></span><span id="viii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p31"></span>**8.** *Who will also confirm you.* The
relative here refers not to Christ, but to God, though the word *God* is
the remoter antecedent. For the Apostle is going on with his
congratulation, and as he has told them previously what he thought of
them, so he now lets them know what hope he has of them as to the
future, and this partly for the purpose of assuring them still farther
of his affection for them, and partly that he may exhort them by his own
example to cherish the same hope. It is as if he had said — Though the
expectation of a salvation to come keeps you still in suspense, you
ought nevertheless to feel assured that the Lord will never forsake you,
but will on the contrary increase what he has begun in you, that when
that day comes on which

<span id="viii.ii-p32"></span>“we must all appear before the
judgment-seat of Christ,”  
(<span id="viii.ii-p32.2"></span>[2Co
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="viii.ii-p32.2"></span>,)

<span id="viii.ii-p33"></span>we may be found there blameless.

<span id="viii.ii-p34"></span>*Blameless* In his Epistles to the
Ephesians and Colossians (<span id="viii.ii-p34.2"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="viii.ii-p34.2"></span>,
and <span id="viii.ii-p34.3"></span>[Col
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022)<span id="viii.ii-p34.3"></span>)
he teaches that this is the end of our calling — that we may appear pure
and unreproachable in the presence of Christ. It is, however, to be
observed, that this glorious purity is not in the first instance
perfected in us; nay, rather, it goes well with us if we are every day
making progress in penitence, and are being *purged from the sins*
(<span id="viii.ii-p34.4"></span>[2Pe
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#009)<span id="viii.ii-p34.4"></span>)
that expose us to the displeasure of God, until at length we put off,
along with the mortal body, all the offscourings of sin. Of the *day of
the Lord* we shall have occasion to speak when we come to the fourth
chapter.

<span id="viii.ii-p35"></span><span id="viii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p36"></span>**9.** *God is faithful* When the
Scripture speaks of God as faithful the meaning in many cases is, that
in God there is steadfastness and evenness of tenor, so that what he
begins he *prosecutes* to the end,  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)
as Paul himself says elsewhere, that *the calling of God is without
repentance* (<span id="viii.ii-p37.4"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span
id="viii.ii-p37.4"></span>.) Hence, in my opinion, the meaning of this
passage is, that God is steadfast in what he purposes. This being the
case, he consequently does not make sport as to his calling, but will
unceasingly take care of his work.  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)
From God’s past benefits we ought always to hope well as to the future.
Paul, however, has something higher in view, for he argues that the
Corinthians cannot be cast off, having been once called by the Lord into
Christ’s fellowship. To apprehend fully, however, the force of this
argument, let us observe first of all, that every one ought to regard
his calling as a token of his election. Farther, although one cannot
judge with the same certainty as to another’s election, yet we must
always in the judgment of charity conclude that all that are called are
called to salvation; I mean efficaciously and fruitfully. Paul, however,
directed his discourse to those in whom the word of the Lord had taken
root, and in whom some fruits of it had been produced.

<span id="viii.ii-p39"></span>Should any one object that many who have
once received the word afterwards fall away, I answer that the Spirit
alone is to every one a faithful and sure witness of his election, upon
which perseverance depends. This, however, did not stand in the way of
Paul’s being persuaded, in the judgment of charity, that the calling of
the Corinthians would prove firm and immovable, as being persons in whom
he saw the tokens of God’s fatherly benevolence. These things, however,
do not by any means tend to beget carnal security, to divest us of which
the Scriptures frequently remind us of our weakness, but simply to
confirm our confidence in the Lord. Now this was needful, in order that
their minds might not be disheartened on discovering so many faults, as
he comes afterwards to present before their view. The sum of all this
may be stated thus, — that it is the part of Christian candor to hope
well of all who have entered on the right way of salvation, and are
still persevering in that course, notwithstanding that they are at the
same time still beset with really distempers. Every one of us, too, from
the time of his being *illuminated* (<span
id="viii.ii-p39.1"></span>[Heb
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032)<span id="viii.ii-p39.1"></span>)
by the Spirit of God in the knowledge of Christ, ought to conclude with
certainty from this that he has been adopted by the Lord to an
inheritance of eternal life. For effectual calling ought to be to
believers an evidence of divine adoption; yet in the meantime we must
all walk *with fear and trembling* (<span id="viii.ii-p39.2"></span>[Php
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012)<span id="viii.ii-p39.2"></span>.)
On this point I shall touch again to some extent when we come to the
tenth chapter.

<span id="viii.ii-p40"></span>*Into the fellowship.* Instead of this
rendering Erasmus translates it *into partnership* The old interpreter
renders it *society* I have preferred, however, to render it
*fellowship*, as bringing out better the force of the Greek word <span
id="viii.ii-p40.1"></span>κοινωνιας  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) For this is the design of the gospel,
that Christ may become ours, and that we may be engrafted into his body.
Now when the Father gives him to us in possession, he also communicates
himself to us in him; and hence arises a participation in every benefit.
Paul’s argument, then, is this — “Since you have, by means of the gospel
which you have received by faith, been called into the fellowship of
Christ, you have no reason to dread the danger of death,  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) having been made *partakers* of him
(<span id="viii.ii-p42.2"></span>[Heb
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#014)<span id="viii.ii-p42.2"></span>)
who rose a conqueror over death.” In fine, when the Christian looks to
himself he finds only occasion for trembling, or rather for despair; but
having been called into the fellowship of Christ, he ought, in so far as
assurance of salvation is concerned, to think of himself no otherwise
than as a member of Christ, so as to reckon all Christ’s benefits his
own. Thus he will obtain an unwavering hope of final perseverance, (as
it is called,) if he reckons himself a member of him who is beyond all
hazard of falling away.

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 1:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)<span
id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Now I beseech you, brethren, by
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and
*that* there be no divisions among you; but *that* ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment.

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Observo autem vos, fratres, per
nomen Domini nostri Jesu Christi, ut idem loquamini omnes, et non sint
inter vos dissidia: sed apte cohaereatis in una mente et in una
sententia.  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53)

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span>**11.** For it hath been declared unto me
of you, my brethren, by them *which are of the house* of Chloe, that
there are contentions among you.

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span>**11.** Significatum enim mihi de vobis
fuit, fratres mei, ab iis qui sunt Chloes, quod contentiones sint inter
vos.

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Now this I say, that every one of
you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of
Christ.

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span>**12.** Dico autem illud,  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) quod unusquisque vestrum dicat, Ego
quidem sum Pauli, ego autem Apollo, ego autem Cephae:, ego autem
Christi.

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span>**13.** Is Christ divided? was Paul
crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span>**13.** Divisusne est Christus? numquid
pro vobis crucifixus est Paulus? aut vos in nomen Pauli baptizati estis?

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span><span id="viii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span>**10.** *Now I beseech you, brethren*
Hitherto he has handled the Corinthians mildly, because he knew that
they were much too sensitive. Now, however, after preparing their minds
for receiving correction, acting the part of a good and skillful
surgeon, who soothes the wound when about to apply a painful remedy, he
begins to handle them with more severity. Even here, however, as we
shall still farther see, he uses great moderation. The sum is this: “It
is my hope that the Lord has not in vain conferred upon you so many
gifts, so as not to have it in view to bring you to salvation, but you
ought at the same time to take heed lest graces so distinguished be
polluted by your vices. See, then, that you be agreed among yourselves;
and it is not without good reason that I call for agreement among
yourselves, for I have been informed that you are in a state of
disagreement, amounting even to hostility, and that there are parties
and contentions raging among you, by which true unity of faith is torn
asunder.” As, however, they might not perhaps be sufficiently aroused by
mere exhortation, he uses earnest entreaty, for he adjures them, *by the
name of Christ,* that, as they loved him, they should aim at promoting
harmony.

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span>*That ye all speak the same thing* In
exhorting them to harmony, he employs three different forms of
expression: for, *in the first place*, he requires such agreement among
them that all shall have one voice; *secondly*, he takes away the evil
by which unity is broken and torn asunder; and, *thirdly*, he unfolds
the nature of true harmony, which is, that they be agreed among
themselves in mind and will. What he has placed *second* is *first in
order*, — that we beware of strifes. For from this a *second* thing will
naturally follow, — that we be in harmony; and then at length a *third*
thing will follow, which is here mentioned *first*, — that we all speak,
as it were, with one mouth; a thing exceedingly desirable as a fruit of
Christian harmony. Let us then observe, that nothing is more
inconsistent on the part of Christians than to be at variance among
themselves, for it is the main article of our religion that we be in
harmony among ourselves; and farther, on such agreement the safety of
the Church rests and is dependent.

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span>But let us see what he requires as to
Christian unity. If any one is desirous of nice distinctions — he would
have them *first of all* joined together in one mind; *secondly*, in one
judgment; and, *thirdly*, he would have them declare in words that
agreement. As, however, my rendering differs somewhat from that of
Erasmus, I would, in passing, call my readers to observe, that Paul here
makes use of a participle, which denotes things that are *fitly and
suitably joined together*  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) For the
verb <span id="viii.iii-p17.2"></span>καταρτιζεσθαι itself (from which
the participle <span id="viii.iii-p17.3"></span>κατηρτισμένος comes)
properly signifies, to be *fitted* and *adjusted*, just as the members
of the human body are connected together by a most admirable symmetry.
 <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span>For <span
id="viii.iii-p19.1"></span>*sententia* (judgment) Paul has <span
id="viii.iii-p19.2"></span>γνώμην: but I understand it here as denoting
the will, so that there is a complete division of the soul, and the
*first* clause refers to faith, the *second* to love. Then only will
there be Christian unity among us, when there is not merely a good
agreement as to doctrine, but we are also in harmony in our affections
and dispositions, and are thus in all respects of one mind. Thus Luke
bears witness to believers in the primitive Church, (<span
id="viii.iii-p19.3"></span>[Ac
2:46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046)<span
id="viii.iii-p19.3"></span>,) that they had “one heart and one soul.”
And without doubt this will be found wherever the Spirit of Christ
reigns. When, however, he exhorts them to speak the same thing, he
intimates still more fully from the effect, how complete the agreement
ought to be — so that no diversity may appear even in words. It is
difficult, indeed, of attainment, but still it is necessary among
Christians, from whom there is required not merely one faith, but also
one confession.

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span><span id="viii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span>**11.** *It has been declared.* As
general observations have usually little effect, he intimates, that what
he had said was more particularly applicable to them. The application,
therefore, is designed with the view of leading the Corinthians to
perceive, that it was not without good reason that Paul had made mention
of harmony. For he shows that they had not merely turned aside from a
holy unity,  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) but had even fallen
into contentions, which are worse  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)
than jarrings of sentiment. And that he may not be charged with
believing too readily what was said,  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) as though he lightly lent his ear to
false accusations, he speaks with commendation of his informants, who
must have been in the highest esteem, as he did not hesitate to adduce
them as competent witnesses against an entire Church. It is not indeed
altogether certain, whether *Chloe* is the name of a place or of a
woman, but to me it appears more probable that it is the name of a
woman.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) I am of opinion, therefore,
that it was a well-regulated household that acquainted Paul with the
distempered condition of the Corinthian Church, being desirous that it
might be remedied by him. The idea entertained by many, in accordance
with Chrysostom’s view, that he refrained from mentioning names, lest he
should bring odium upon them, appears to me to be absurd. For he does
not say that some of the household had reported this to him, but, on the
contrary, makes mention of them all, and there is no doubt that they
would willingly have allowed their names to be made use of. Farther,
that he might not exasperate their minds by undue severity, he has
modified the reproof by an engaging form of address; not as though he
would make light of the distemper, but with the view of bringing them to
a more teachable spirit, for perceiving the severity of the malady.

<span id="viii.iii-p26"></span><span id="viii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p27"></span>**12.** *I say then, etc.* Some think
there is here an instance of <span id="viii.iii-p27.2"></span>μιμησις,
*imitation*, as if Paul were here repeating their expressions. Now,
although the manuscripts differ as to the particle <span
id="viii.iii-p27.3"></span>ὅτι, I am of opinion that it is the
conjunction (*because*) rather than the relative (*which*), so that
there is simply an explanation of the preceding statement in this sense.
“My reason for saying that there are contentions among you is, because
every one of you glories in the name of some individual.” It will,
however, be objected, that in these words there is no appearance as yet
of contention. My answer is, that where there are jarrings in religion,
it cannot but be that men’s minds will soon afterwards burst forth in
open strife. For as nothing is more effectual for uniting us, and there
is nothing that tends more to draw our minds together, and keep them in
a state of peace, than agreement in religion, so, on the other hand, if
any disagreement has arisen as to matters of this nature, the effect
necessarily is, that men’s minds are straightway stirred up for combat,
and in no other department are there more fierce contendings.  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) Hence it is with good reason that Paul
brings it forward as a sufficient evidence of contention, that the
Corinthians were infested with sects and parties.

<span id="viii.iii-p29"></span>*I am of Paul* He makes mention here of
Christ’s faithful servants — Apollos, who had been his successor at
Corinth, and Peter himself too, and then adds himself to their number,
that he may appear to plead not so much his own cause as that of Christ.
In any other point of view it is not likely that there were any parties
that espoused the separate interests of ministers joined together by a
sacred agreement.  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) He has, however,
as he afterwards mentions, transferred to himself and Apollos what was
applicable to others; and this he has done, in order that they might
more candidly consider the thing itself, viewing it apart from respect
of persons. It will, however, be replied, that he makes mention here
even of those who professed that they were *of Christ* Was this, too,
worthy of blame? I answer, that in this way he shows more fully what
unseemly consequences result from those depraved affections, when we
give ourselves up to men, as in that case Christ must be acknowledged
merely in part, and the pious have no alternative left them, but to
separate themselves from others, if they would not renounce Christ.

<span id="viii.iii-p31"></span>As, however, this passage is wrested in
various ways, we must endeavor to ascertain more minutely what Paul
intends here. His object is, to maintain Christ’s exclusive authority in
the Church, so that we may all exercise dependence upon him, that he
alone may be recognized among us as Lord and Master, and that the name
of no individual be set in opposition to his. Those, therefore, that
draw away disciples after them (<span id="viii.iii-p31.1"></span>[Ac
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030)<span
id="viii.iii-p31.1"></span>,) with the view of splitting the Church into
parties, he condemns as most destructive enemies of our faith. Thus then
he does not, suffer men to have such pre-eminence in the Church as to
usurp Christ’s supremacy. He does not allow them to be held in such
honor as to derogate even in the slightest degree from Christ’s dignity.
There is, it is true, a certain degree of honor that is due to Christ’s
ministers, and they are also themselves masters in their own place, but
this exception must always be kept in view, that Christ must have
without any infringement what belongs to him — that he shall
nevertheless be the sole Master, and looked upon as such. Hence the aim
of good ministers is this, that they may all in common serve Christ, and
claim for him exclusively power, authority, and glory — fight under his
banner — obey him alone, and bring others in subjection to his sway. If
any one is influenced by ambition, that man gathers disciples, not to
Christ, but to himself. This then is the fountain of all evils — this
the most hurtful of all plagues — this the deadly poison of all
Churches, when ministers seek their own interests rather than those of
Christ. In short, the unity of the Church consists more especially in
this one thing — that we all depend upon Christ alone, and that men thus
occupy an inferior place, so as not to detract in any degree from his
pre-eminence.

<span id="viii.iii-p32"></span><span id="viii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p33"></span>**13.** *Is Christ divided?* This
intolerable evil was consequent upon the divisions that prevailed among
the Corinthians: for Christ alone must reign in the Church. And as the
object of the gospel is, that we be reconciled to God through him, it is
necessary, in the first place, that we should all be bound together in
him. As, however, only a very few of the Corinthians, who were in a
sounder condition than the others,  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)
retained Christ as their Master, (while all made it their boast that
they were Christians,) Christ was by this means torn asunder. For we
must be one body, if we would be kept together under him as our head.
If, on the other hand, we are split asunder into different bodies, we
start aside from him also. Hence to glory in his name amidst strifes and
parties is to tear him in pieces: which indeed is impossible, for never
will he depart from unity and concord, because “He cannot deny himself”
(<span id="viii.iii-p34.2"></span>[2Ti
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)<span
id="viii.iii-p34.2"></span>.) Paul, therefore, by setting before them
this absurdity, designs to lead the Corinthians to perceive that they
are estranged from Christ, inasmuch as they are divided, for *then* only
does he reign in us, when we have him as the bond of an inviolably
sacred unity.

<span id="viii.iii-p35"></span>*Was Paul crucified for you?* By two
powerful considerations, he shows how base a thing  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) it is to rob Christ of the honor of being
the sole Head of the Church — the sole Teacher — the sole Master; or to
draw away from him any part of that honor, with the view of transferring
it to men. The *first* is, that we have been redeemed by Christ on this
footing, that we are not our own masters. This very argument Paul makes
use of in his Epistle to the Romans (<span
id="viii.iii-p36.2"></span>[Ro
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)<span
id="viii.iii-p36.2"></span>,) when he says,

<span id="viii.iii-p37"></span>“For this end Christ died and rose again,
that he might be Lord both of the living and the dead.”

<span id="viii.iii-p38"></span>To him, therefore, let us live and die,
because we are always his. Also in this same Epistle (<span
id="viii.iii-p38.1"></span>[1Co
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023)<span
id="viii.iii-p38.1"></span>,)

<span id="viii.iii-p39"></span>“Ye are bought with a price: be not ye
the servants of men.”

<span id="viii.iii-p40"></span>As the Corinthians, therefore, had been
purchased with the blood of Christ, they in a manner renounced the
benefit of redemption, when they attached themselves to other leaders.
Here is a doctrine that is deserving of special notice — that we are not
at liberty to put ourselves under bondage to men,  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) because we are the Lord’s heritage. Here,
therefore, he accuses the Corinthians of the basest ingratitude, in
estranging themselves from that Leader, by whose blood they had been
redeemed, however they might have done so unwittingly.

<span id="viii.iii-p42"></span>Farther, this passage militates against
the wicked contrivance of Papists, by which they attempt to bolster up
their system of indulgences. For it is from the blood of Christ and the
martyrs  <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) that they make up that
imaginary treasure of the Church, which they tell us is dealt out by
means of indulgences. Thus they pretend that the martyrs by their death
merited something for us in the sight of God, that we may seek help from
this source for obtaining the pardon of our sins. They will deny,
indeed, that they are on that account our redeemers; but nothing is more
manifest than that the one thing follows from the other. The question is
as to the reconciling of sinners to God; the question is as to the
obtaining of forgiveness; the question is as to the appeasing of the
Lord’s anger; the question is as to redemption from our iniquities. This
they boast is accomplished partly by the blood of Christ, and partly by
that of the martyrs. They make, therefore, the martyrs partners with
Christ in procuring our salvation. Here, however, Paul in strong terms
denies that any one but Christ has been crucified for us. The martyrs,
it is true, died for our benefit, but (as Leo  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) observes) it was to furnish an example of
perseverance, not to procure for us the gift of righteousness.

<span id="viii.iii-p45"></span>*Or were ye baptized in the name of
Paul?* Here we have *a second* argument, which is taken from the
profession of baptism; for we enlist ourselves under the banners of him
in whose name we are baptized. We are, accordingly, bound  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) to Christ, in whose name our baptism is
celebrated. Hence it follows that the Corinthians are chargeable with
perfidy and apostasy, if they place themselves under subjection to men.
Observe here that the nature of baptism resembles a contract  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) of mutual obligation; for as the Lord by
that symbol receives us into his household, and introduces us among his
people, so we pledge our fidelity to him, that we will never afterwards
have any other spiritual Lord. Hence as it is on God’s part a covenant
of grace that he contracts with us, in which he promises forgiveness of
sins and a new life, so on our part it is an oath of spiritual warfare,
in which we promise perpetual subjection to him. The former department
Paul does not here touch upon, because the subject did not admit of it;
but in treating of baptism it ought not to be omitted. Nor does Paul
charge the Corinthians with apostasy simply on the ground of their
forsaking Christ and betaking themselves to men; but he declares that if
they do not adhere to Christ alone — that very thing would make them
covenant-breakers.

<span id="viii.iii-p48"></span>It is asked, what it is to be *baptized
in the name of Christ?* I answer that by this expression it is not
simply intimated that baptism is founded on the authority of Christ, but
depends also on his influence, and does in a manner consist in it; and,
in fine, that the whole effect of it depends on this — that the name of
Christ is therein invoked. It is asked farther, why it is that Paul says
that the Corinthians were *baptized in the name of Christ*, while Christ
himself commanded (<span id="viii.iii-p48.1"></span>[Mt
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="viii.iii-p48.1"></span>) the Apostles to baptize in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. I answer, that in
baptism the *first* thing to be considered is, that God the Father, by
planting us in his Church in unmerited goodness, receives us by adoption
into the number of his sons. *Secondly*, as we cannot have any
connection with him except by means of reconciliation, we have need of
Christ to restore us to the Father’s favor by his blood. *Thirdly*, as
we are by baptism consecrated to God, we need also the interposition of
the Holy Spirit, whose office it is to make us new creatures. Nay
farther, our being washed in the blood of Christ is peculiarly his work;
but as we do not obtain the mercy of the Father, or the grace of the
Spirit, otherwise than through Christ alone, it is on good grounds that
we speak of him as the peculiar object in view in baptism, and more
particularly inscribe his name upon baptism. At the same time this does
not by any means exclude the name of the Father and of the Spirit; for
when we wish to sum up in short compass the efficacy of baptism, we make
mention of Christ alone; but when we are disposed to speak with greater
minuteness, the name of the Father and that of the Spirit require to be
expressly introduced.

<span id="viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 1:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014)<span
id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p2"></span>**14.** I thank God that I baptized none of
you, but Crispus and Gaius;

<span id="viii.iv-p3"></span>**14.** Gratias ago Deo meo, quod neminem
baptizaverim vestrum, nisi Crispurn et Gaium:

<span id="viii.iv-p4"></span>**15.** Lest any should say that I had
baptized in mine own name.

<span id="viii.iv-p5"></span>**15.** Ne quis dieat, quod in meum nomen
baptizaverim.

<span id="viii.iv-p6"></span>**16.** And I baptized also the household
of Stephanas: besides, I know not whether I baptized any other.

<span id="viii.iv-p7"></span>**16.** Baptizavi autem et Stephanae
familiam; praeteterea nescio, num quem alium baptizaverim.

<span id="viii.iv-p8"></span>**17.** For Christ sent me not, to baptize,
but to preach the gospel: not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of
Christ should be made of none effect.

<span id="viii.iv-p9"></span>**17.** Non enim misit me Christus ut
baptizarem, sed ut evangelizarem: non in sapientia sermonis, ne inanis
reddatur crux Christi.

<span id="viii.iv-p10"></span>**18.** For the preaching of the cross is
to them that perish foolishness; but unto us which are saved it is the
power of God.

<span id="viii.iv-p11"></span>**18.** Nam sermo erucis iis, qui pereunt,
stultitia est; at nobis qui salutem consequimur, potentia Dei est.

<span id="viii.iv-p12"></span>**19.** For it is written, I will destroy
the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of
the prudent.

<span id="viii.iv-p13"></span>**19.** Scriptum est enim; (<span
id="viii.iv-p13.1"></span>[Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)<span
id="viii.iv-p13.1"></span>): perdam sapientiam sapientum, et
intelligentiam intelligentum auferam e medio.

<span id="viii.iv-p14"></span>**20.** Where *is* the wise? where *is*
the scribe? where *is* the disputer of this world? hath not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world?

<span id="viii.iv-p15"></span>**20.** Ubi sapiens? ubi scriba? ubi
disputator hujus saeculi? nonne infatuavit Deus sapientiam mundi hujus?

<span id="viii.iv-p16"></span> 

<span id="viii.iv-p17"></span><span id="viii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p18"></span>**14.** *I thank my God.* In these words
he reproves very sharply the perversity of the Corinthians, which made
it necessary for him to avoid, in a manner, a thing so sacred and
honorable as that of the administration of baptism. Paul, indeed, would
have acted with propriety, and in accordance with the nature of his
office, though he had baptized ever so many. He rejoices, however, that
it had happened otherwise, and acknowledges it as having been so
ordered, in the providence of God, that they might not take occasion
from that to glory in him, or that he might not bear any resemblance to
those ambitious men who endeavored in this way to catch followers. But
what if he had baptized many? There would have been no harm in it, but
(as I have said) there is couched under this a heavy reproach against
the Corinthians and their false apostles, inasmuch as a servant of the
Lord found occasion to rejoice that he had refrained from a work,
otherwise good and commendable, lest it should become an occasion of
harm to them.

<span id="viii.iv-p19"></span><span id="viii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p20"></span>**17.** *For Christ sent me not.* He
anticipates an objection that might, perhaps, be brought against him —
that he had not discharged his duty, inasmuch as Christ commands his
Apostles to baptize as well as teach. Accordingly he replies, that this
was not the principal department of his office, for the duty of teaching
had been principally enjoined upon him as that to which he should apply
himself. For when Christ says to the Apostles, (<span
id="viii.iv-p20.1"></span>[Mt
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="viii.iv-p20.1"></span>,
<span id="viii.iv-p20.2"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span
id="viii.iv-p20.2"></span>,) *Go*, *preach and baptize*, he connects
baptism with teaching simply as an addition or appendage, so that
teaching always holds the first place.

<span id="viii.iv-p21"></span>Two things, however, must be noticed here.
The *first* is, that the Apostle does not here absolutely deny that he
had a command to baptize, for this is applicable to all the Apostles:
*Go and baptize*; and he would have acted rashly in baptizing even
*one*, had he not been furnished with authority, but simply points out
what was the chief thing in his calling. The *second* thing is, that he
does not by any means detract here, as some think, from the dignity or
utility of the sacrament. For the question here is, not as to the
efficacy of baptism, and Paul does not institute this comparison with
the view of detracting in any degree from *that*; but because it was
given to few to teach, while many could baptize; and farther, as many
could be taught at the same time, while baptism could only be
administered to individuals successively, one by one, Paul, who excelled
in the gift of teaching, applied himself to the work that was more
especially needful for him, and left to others what they could more
conveniently accomplish. Nay farther, if the reader considers minutely
all the circumstances of the case, he will see that there is *irony*
 <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) tacitly conveyed here, dexterously
contrived for making those feel acutely, who, under color of
administering a ceremony, endeavor to catch a little glory at the
expense of another’s labor. Paul’s labors in building up that Church had
been incredible. There had come after him certain effeminate masters,
who had drawn over followers to their party by the sprinkling of water;
 <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) Paul, then, giving up to them the
title of honor, declares himself contented with having had the burden.
 <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72)

<span id="viii.iv-p25"></span>*Not with wisdom of words* There is here
an instance of *anticipation*, by which a twofold objection is refuted.
For these pretended teachers might reply that it was ludicrous to hear
Paul, who was not endowed with eloquence, making it his boast that the
department of teaching had been assigned to him. Hence he says, by way
of concession, that he had not been formed to be an orator,  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) to set himself off by elegance of speech:
but a minister of the Spirit, that he might, by plain and homely speech,
bring to nothing the wisdom of the world. Now, lest any one should
object that he hunted after glory by his preaching, as much as others
did by baptism, he briefly replies, that as the method of teaching that
he pursued was the farthest removed from show, and breathed nothing of
ambition, it could give no ground of suspicion on that head. Hence, too,
if I mistake not, it may readily be inferred what was the chief ground
of the controversy that Paul had with the wicked and unfaithful
ministers of the Corinthians. It was that, being puffed up with
ambition, that they might secure for themselves the admiration of the
people, they recommended themselves to them by a show of words and mask
of human wisdom.

<span id="viii.iv-p27"></span>From this main evil two others necessarily
followed — that by these disguises (so to speak) the simplicity of the
gospel was disfigured, and Christ was, as it were, clothed in a new and
foreign garb, so that the pure and unadulterated knowledge of him was
not to be found. Farther, as men’s minds were turned aside to neatness
and elegance of expression, to ingenious speculations, and to an empty
show of superior sublimity of doctrine, the efficacy of the Spirit
vanished, and nothing remained but the dead letter. The majesty of God,
as it shines forth in the gospel, was not to be seen, but mere disguise
and useless show. Paul, accordingly, with the view of exposing these
corruptions of the gospel, makes a transition here to the manner of his
preaching. This he declares to be right and proper, while at the same
time it was diametrically opposed to the ambitious ostentation of those
men.  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) It is as though he had said —
“I am well aware how much your fastidious teachers delight themselves in
their high-sounding phrases. As for myself, I do not simply *confess*
that my preaching has been conducted in a rude, coarse, and unpolished
style, but I even *glory* in it. For it was right that it should be so,
and this was the method that was divinely prescribed to *me*.” By the
*wisdom of words*, he does not mean <span
id="viii.iv-p28.2"></span>λογοδαιδαλία,  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) which is mere empty talk, but true
eloquence, which consists in skillful contrivance of subjects, ingenious
arrangement, and elegance of expression. He declares that he had nothing
of this: nay more, that it was neither suitable to his preaching nor
advantageous.

<span id="viii.iv-p30"></span>*Lest the cross of Christ should be made
of none effect* As he had so often previously presented the name of
Christ in contrast with the arrogant wisdom of the flesh, so now, with
the view of bringing down thereby all its pride and loftiness, he brings
forward to view the cross of Christ. For all the wisdom of believers is
comprehended in the cross of Christ, and what more contemptible than a
cross? Whoever, therefore, would desire to be truly wise in God’s
account, must of necessity stoop to this abasement of the cross, and
this will not be accomplished otherwise than by his first of all
renouncing his own judgment and all the wisdom of the world. Paul,
however, shows here not merely what sort of persons Christ’s disciples
ought to be, and what path of learning they ought to pursue, but also
what is the method of teaching in Christ’s school. “*The cross of
Christ* (says he) would have been *made of none effect,* if my preaching
had been adorned with eloquence and show.” *The cross of Christ* he has
put here for the benefit of redemption, which must be sought from Christ
crucified. Now the doctrine of the gospel which calls us to this, should
savor of the nature of the Cross, so as to be despised and contemptible,
rather than glorious, in the eyes of the world. The meaning, therefore,
is, that if Paul had made use of philosophical acuteness and studied
address in the presence of the Corinthians, the efficacy of the cross of
Christ, in which the salvation of men consists, would have been buried,
because it cannot come to us in that way.

<span id="viii.iv-p31"></span>Here two questions are proposed: *first*,
whether Paul here condemns in *every* respect *the wisdom of words*, as
opposed to Christ; and *secondly*, whether he means that *eloquence* and
the doctrine of the gospel are invariably opposed, so they cannot agree
together, and that the preaching of the gospel is vitiated, if the
slightest tincture of eloquence  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) is
made use of for adorning it. To the *first* of these I answer — that it
were quite unreasonable to suppose, that Paul would utterly condemn
those arts which, it is manifest, are *excellent* gifts of God, and
which serve as instruments, as it were, to assist men in the
accomplishment of important purposes. As for those arts, then, that have
nothing of superstition, but contain solid learning,  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) and are founded on just principles, as
they are useful and suited to the common transactions of human life, so
there can be no doubt that they have come forth from the Holy Spirit;
and the advantage which is derived and experienced from them, ought to
be ascribed exclusively to God. What Paul says here, therefore, ought
not to be taken as throwing any disparagement upon the arts, as if they
were unfavorable to piety.

<span id="viii.iv-p34"></span>The *second* question is somewhat more
difficult, for he says, *that the cross of Christ* is *made of none
effect* if there be any admixture of *the wisdom of words* I answer,
that we must consider who they are that Paul here addresses. The ears of
the Corinthians were *tickled* with a silly fondness for high sounding
style.  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) Hence they needed more than
others to be brought back to the abasement of the cross, that they might
learn to embrace Christ as he is, unadorned, and the gospel in its
simplicity, without any false ornament. I acknowledge, at the same time,
that this sentiment in some respects holds invariably, that *the cross
of Christ* is *made of none effect*, not merely by the wisdom of the
world, but also by elegance of address. For the preaching of Christ
crucified is simple and unadorned, and hence it ought not to be obscured
by false ornaments of speech. It is the prerogative of the gospel to
bring down the wisdom of the world in such a way that, stripped of our
own understanding, we show ourselves to be simply docile, and do not
think or even desire to know anything, but what the Lord himself
teaches. As to the wisdom of the flesh, we shall have occasion to
consider more at large ere long, in what respects it is opposed to
Christ. As to eloquence, I shall advert to it here in a few words, in so
far as the passage calls for.

<span id="viii.iv-p36"></span>We see that God from the beginning ordered
matters so, that, the gospel should be administered in simplicity,
without any aid from eloquence. Could not he who fashions the tongues of
men for eloquence, be himself eloquent if he chose to be so? While he
*could* be so, he did not *choose* to be so. *Why* it was that he did
not choose this, I find two reasons more particularly. The *first* is,
that in a plain and unpolished manner of address, the majesty of the
truth might shine forth more conspicuously, and the simple efficacy of
his Spirit, without external aids, might make its way into the hearts of
men. The *second* is, that he might more effectually try our obedience
and docility, and train us at the same time to true humility. For the
Lord admits none into his school but little children.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) Hence those alone are capable of heavenly
wisdom who, contenting themselves with the preaching of the cross,
however contemptible it may be in appearance, feel no desire whatever to
have Christ under a mask. Hence the doctrine of the gospel required to
be regulated with this view, that believers should be drawn off from all
pride and haughtiness.

<span id="viii.iv-p38"></span>But what if any one should at the present
day, by discoursing with some degree of elegance, adorn the doctrine of
the gospel by eloquence? Would he deserve to be on that account
rejected, as though he either polluted it or obscured Christ’s glory. I
answer in the *first* place, that eloquence is not at all at variance
with the simplicity of the gospel, when it does not merely not disdain
to give way to it, and be in subjection to it, but also yields service
to it, as a handmaid to her mistress. For as Augustine says, “He who
gave Peter a fisherman, gave also Cyprian an orator.” By this he means,
that both are from God, notwithstanding that the one, who is much the
superior of the other as to dignity, is utterly devoid of gracefulness
of speech; while the other, who sits at his feet, is distinguished by
the fame of his eloquence. That eloquence, therefore, is neither to be
condemned nor despised, which has no tendency to lead Christians to be
taken up with an outward glitter of words, or intoxicate them with empty
delight, or tickle their ears with its tinkling sound, or cover over the
cross of Christ with its empty show as with a veil;  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) but, on the contrary, tends to call us
back to the native simplicity of the gospel, tends to exalt the simple
preaching of the cross by voluntarily abasing itself, and, in fine, acts
the part of a herald  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) to procure a
hearing for those fishermen and illiterate persons, who have nothing to
recommend them but the energy of the Spirit.

<span id="viii.iv-p41"></span>I answer *secondly*, that the Spirit of
God, also, has an eloquence of his own, but of such a nature as to shine
forth with a native luster peculiar to itself, or rather (as they say)
intrinsic, more than with any adventitious ornaments. Such is the
eloquence that the Prophets have, more particularly Isaiah, David, and
Solomon. Moses, too, has a sprinkling of it. Nay farther, even in the
writings of the Apostles, though they are more unpolished, there are
notwithstanding some sparks of it occasionally emitted. Hence the
eloquence that is suited to the Spirit of God is of such a nature that
it does not swell with empty show, or spend itself in empty sound, but
is solid and efficacious, and has more of substance than elegance.

<span id="viii.iv-p42"></span><span id="viii.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p43"></span>**18.** *For the preaching of the cross*,
etc. In this first clause a concession is made. For as it might very
readily be objected, that the gospel is commonly held in contempt, if it
*be* presented in so bare and abject a form, Paul of his own accord
concedes this, but when he adds, that it is so in the estimation of
*them that perish*, he intimates that no regard must be paid to their
judgment. For who would choose to despise the gospel at the expense of
perishing? This statement, therefore, must be understood in this way:
“However the preaching of the cross, as having nothing of human wisdom
to recommend it to esteem, is *reckoned foolishness* by *them that
perish*; in *our* view, notwithstanding, the wisdom of God clearly
shines forth in it.” He indirectly reproves, however, the perverted
judgment of the Corinthians, who, while they were, through seduction of
words, too easily allured by ambitious teachers, regarded with disdain
an Apostle who was endowed with *the power of God* for their
*salvation*, and that simply because he devoted himself to the preaching
of Christ. In what way the preaching of the cross is the power of God
unto salvation, we have explained in commenting upon <span
id="viii.iv-p43.1"></span>[Ro
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="viii.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p44"></span><span id="viii.iv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p45"></span>**19.** *For it is written*, etc. He shows
still farther, from the testimony of Isaiah, how unreasonable a thing it
is that the truth of the gospel should be regarded with prejudice on the
ground that the wise of this world hold it in contempt, not to say
derision. For it is evident from the words of the Prophet, that their
opinion is regarded as nothing in the account of God. The passage is
taken from <span id="viii.iv-p45.1"></span>[Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014)<span id="viii.iv-p45.1"></span>,
where the Lord threatens that he will avenge himself upon the hypocrisy
of the people by this kind of punishment, that *wisdom will perish from
the wise*, etc. Now the application of this to the subject in hand is
this: “It is nothing new or unusual for men to form utterly absurd
judgments, who appear in other respects to be distinguished for wisdom.
For in this manner the Lord has been wont to punish the arrogance of
those who, depending on their own judgment, think to be leaders to
themselves and others. In this manner did He, among the Israelitish
people of old, destroy the wisdom of those who were the leaders of the
people. If this happened among a people, whose wisdom the other nations
had occasion to admire, what will become of others?”

<span id="viii.iv-p46"></span>It is proper, however, to compare the
words of the Prophet with those of Paul, and to examine the whole matter
still more closely. The Prophet, indeed, makes use of neuter verbs when
he says, Wisdom will perish and prudence will vanish, while Paul turns
them into the active form, by making them have a reference to God. They
are, however, perfectly the same in meaning. For this is a great prodigy
which God declares he will exhibit, so that all will be filled with
astonishment. Wisdom, therefore, perishes, but it is by the Lord’s
destroying it: wisdom vanishes, but it is by the Lord’s covering it over
and effacing it. As to the second term <span
id="viii.iv-p46.1"></span>αθετεῖν, (which Erasmus renders reject,) as it
is ambiguous, and is sometimes taken to mean efface, or expunge, or
obliterate, I prefer to understand it in this sense here, so as to
correspond with the Prophet’s word vanish, or be hid. At the same time,
there is another reason that has weighed more with me,  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) — that the word reject was not in
accordance with the subject, as will appear ere long. Let us see, then,
as to the meaning.

<span id="viii.iv-p48"></span>The Prophet’s meaning, without doubt, is
precisely this, that they would no longer have governors that would rule
well, because the Lord will deprive them of sound judgment and
intelligence. For as he elsewhere threatens to send blindness upon the
whole nation (<span id="viii.iv-p48.1"></span>[Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span id="viii.iv-p48.1"></span>,)
so here, upon the leaders; which is just as though he were plucking the
eyes out of the body. However this may be, a great difficulty arises
from the circumstance, that the term wisdom or prudence was taken by
Isaiah in a good sense, while Paul quotes it for an opposite purpose, as
though the wisdom of men were condemned by God, as being perverted, and
their prudence set aside as being mere vanity. I confess that it is
commonly expounded in this way; but as it is certain that the oracles of
the Holy Spirit are not perverted by the Apostles to meanings foreign to
their real design, I choose rather to depart from the common opinion of
interpreters than to charge Paul with falsehood. In other respects, too,
the natural meaning of the Prophet’s words accords not ill with Paul’s
intention; for if even the wisest become fools, when the Lord takes away
a right spirit, what confidence is to be placed in the wisdom of men?
Farther, as it is God’s usual way of punishing, to strike blind those
who, following implicitly their own judgment, are wise in their own
esteem, it is not to be wondered if carnal men, when they rise up
against God, with the view of subjecting His eternal truth to their
rashness, are turned into fools, and become vain in their imaginations.
We now see with what appropriateness Paul makes use of this testimony.
Isaiah declares that the vengeance of God upon all those that served God
with their own inventions would be, that wisdom would vanish from their
wise men. Paul, with the view of proving that the wisdom of this world
is vain and worthless, when it exalts itself against God, adduces this
testimony from Isaiah.

<span id="viii.iv-p49"></span><span id="viii.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p50"></span>**20.** *Where is the wise? where is the
scribe?* This expression of triumph is added for the purpose of
illustrating the Prophet’s testimony. Paul has not taken this sentiment
from Isaiah, as is commonly thought, but speaks in his own person. For
the passage which they point to (<span id="viii.iv-p50.1"></span>[Isa
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#018)<span id="viii.iv-p50.1"></span>)
has nothing corresponding to the subject in hand, or nearly approaching
to it. For in that passage, while he promises to the Jews deliverance
from the yoke of Sennacherib, that he may magnify the more this great
blessing from God, he shows how miserable is the condition of those that
are oppressed by the tyranny of foreigners. He says, that they are in a
constant fever of anxiety, from thinking themselves beset with scribes
or questors, treasurers, and counters of towers. Nay more, he says, that
the Jews were involved in such difficulties, that they were stirred up
to gratitude by the very remembrance of them.  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) It is a mistake, therefore, to suppose
that this sentence is taken from the Prophet.  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) The term *world*, ought not to be taken
in connection with the last term merely, but also with the other two.
Now, by the *wise of this world*, he means those who do not derive their
wisdom from illumination by the Spirit through means of the word of God,
but, endowed with mere worldly sagacity, rest on the assurance which it
affords.

<span id="viii.iv-p53"></span>It is generally agreed, that by the term
*scribes* is meant teachers. For as <span id="viii.iv-p53.1"></span>ספר,
*saphar*, among the Hebrews, means to relate or recount, and the noun
derived from it, <span id="viii.iv-p53.2"></span>ספר, *sepher*,, is used
by them to signify a book or volume, they employ the term <span
id="viii.iv-p53.3"></span>סופרימ, *sopherim*, to denote learned men, and
those that are conversant with books; and, for the same reason, too,
<span id="viii.iv-p53.4"></span>*sopher regis* is often used to denote a
*chancellor* or *secretary* The Greeks, following the etymology of the
Hebrew term, have translated it <span
id="viii.iv-p53.5"></span>γραμματεις, *scribes*  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) He appropriately gives the name of
investigators  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) to those that show
off their acuteness by starting difficult points and involved questions.
Thus in a general way he brings to nothing man’s entire intellect, so as
to give it no standing in the kingdom of God. Nor is it without good
reason that he inveighs so vehemently against the wisdom of men, for it
is impossible to express how difficult a thing it is to eradicate from
men’s minds a misdirected confidence in the flesh, that they may not
claim for themselves more than is reasonable. Now there is more than
ought to be, if, depending even in the slightest degree upon their own
wisdom, they venture of themselves to form a judgment.

<span id="viii.iv-p56"></span>*Hath not God made foolish*, *etc* By
*wisdom* here he means everything that man can comprehend either by the
natural powers of his understanding, or as deriving aid from practice,
from learning, or from a knowledge of the arts. For he contrasts the
wisdom of the world with the wisdom of the Spirit. Hence, whatever
knowledge a man may come to have without the illumination of the Holy
Spirit, is included in the expression, *the wisdom of this world* This
he says God has utterly *made foolish*, that is, He has convicted it of
folly. This you may understand to be effected in two ways; for whatever
a man knows and understands, is mere vanity, if it is not grounded in
true wisdom; and it is in no degree better fitted for the apprehension
of spiritual doctrine than the eye of a blind man is for discriminating
colors. We must carefully notice these two things — that a knowledge of
all the sciences is mere smoke, where the heavenly science of Christ is
wanting; and man, with all his acuteness, is as stupid for obtaining of
himself a knowledge of the mysteries of God, as an ass is unqualified
for understanding musical harmonies. For in this way he reproves the
destructive pride of those who glory in the wisdom of the world so as to
despise Christ, and the entire doctrine of salvation, thinking
themselves happy when they are taken up with creatures; and he beats
down the arrogance of those who, trusting to their own understanding,
attempt to scale heaven itself.

<span id="viii.iv-p57"></span>There is also a solution furnished at the
same time to the question, how it happens that Paul in this way throws
down upon the ground every kind of knowledge that is apart from Christ,
and tramples, as it were, under foot what is manifestly one of the chief
gifts of God in this world. For what is more noble than man’s reason, in
which man excels the other animals? How richly deserving of honor are
the liberal sciences, which polish man, so as to give him the dignity of
true humanity! Besides this, what distinguished and choice fruits they
produce! Who would not extol with the highest commendations civil
prudence  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) (not to speak of other
things,) by which governments, principalities, and kingdoms are
maintained? A solution of this question, I say, is opened up to view
from the circumstance, that Paul does not expressly condemn either man’s
natural perspicacity, or wisdom acquired from practice and experience,
or cultivation of mind attained by learning; but declares that all this
is of no avail for acquiring spiritual wisdom. And, certainly, it is
madness for any one, confiding either in his own acuteness, or the
assistance of learning, to attempt to fly up to heaven, or, in other
words, to judge of the secret mysteries of the kingdom of God,  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) or to break through (<span
id="viii.iv-p59.1"></span>[Ex
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021)<span id="viii.iv-p59.1"></span>)
to a discovery of them, for they are hid from human view. Let us, then,
take notice, that we must restrict to the specialities of the case in
hand what Paul here teaches respecting the vanity of the wisdom of this
world — that it rests in the mere elements of the world, and does not
reach to heaven. In other respects, too, it holds true, that without
Christ sciences in every department are vain, and that the man who knows
not God is vain, though he should be conversant with every branch of
learning. Nay more, we may affirm this, too, with truth, that these
choice gifts of God — expertness of mind, acuteness of judgment, liberal
sciences, and acquaintance with languages, are in a manner profaned in
every instance in which they fall to the lot of wicked men.

<span id="viii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p1"></span><span id="viii.v-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
1:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021)<span id="viii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p2"></span>**21.** For after that in the wisdom of God
the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe.

<span id="viii.v-p3"></span>**21.** Quoniam enim in sapientia Dei non
cognovit mundus per sapientiam Deum, placuit Deo per stultitiam
praedicationis salvos facere credentes.

<span id="viii.v-p4"></span>**22.** For the Jews require a sign, and the
Greeks seek after wisdom:

<span id="viii.v-p5"></span>**22.** Siquidem et Judaei signum petunt et
Graeci sapientiam quaerunt.

<span id="viii.v-p6"></span>**23.** But we preach Christ crucified, unto
the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks foolishness;

<span id="viii.v-p7"></span>**23.** Nos autem praedicamus Christum
crucifixum, Judaeis quidem scandalum, Graecis autem stultitiam:

<span id="viii.v-p8"></span>**24.** But unto them which are called, both
Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

<span id="viii.v-p9"></span>**24.** Ipsis autem vocatis, tam Judaeis,
quam Graecis, Christum Dei potentiam, et Dei sapientiara.

<span id="viii.v-p10"></span>**25.** Because the foolishness of God is
wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men.

<span id="viii.v-p11"></span>**25.** Nam stultitia Dei sapientior est
hominibus, et infirmitas Dei robustior est hominibus.

<span id="viii.v-p12"></span> 

<span id="viii.v-p13"></span><span id="viii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p14"></span>**21.** *For since the world knew not.* The
right order of things was assuredly this, that man, contemplating the
wisdom of God in his works, by the light of the understanding furnished
him by nature, might arrive at an acquaintance with him. As, however,
this order of things has been reversed through man’s depravity, God
designs in the first place to make us see ourselves to be fools, before
*he makes us wise unto salvation*, (<span id="viii.v-p14.2"></span>[2Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)<span id="viii.v-p14.2"></span>;)
and secondly, as a token of his wisdom, he presents to us what has some
appearance of folly. This inversion of the order of things the
ingratitude of mankind deserved. By *the wisdom of God* he means the
workmanship of the whole world, which is an illustrious token and clear
manifestation of his wisdom: God therefore presents before us in his
creatures a bright mirror of his admirable wisdom, so that every one
that looks upon the world, and the other works of God, must of necessity
break forth in admiration of him, if he has a single spark of sound
judgment. If men were guided to a right knowledge of God by the
contemplation of his works, they would know God in the exercise of
wisdom, or by a natural and proper method of acquiring wisdom; but as
the whole world gained nothing in point of instruction from the
circumstance, that God had exhibited his wisdom in his creatures, he
then resorted to another method for instructing men.  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) Thus it must be reckoned as our own
fault, that we do not attain a saving acquaintance with God, before we
have been emptied of our own understanding.

<span id="viii.v-p16"></span>He makes a concession when he calls the
gospel *the foolishness of preaching*, having that appearance in the
view of those foolish sages (<span id="viii.v-p16.1"></span>μωροσόφοις)
who, intoxicated with false confidence,  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) fear not to subject God’s sacred truth to
their senseless criticism. And indeed in another point of view nothing
is more absurd in the view, of human reason than to hear that God has
become mortal — that life has been subjected to death — that
righteousness has been veiled under the appearance of sin — and that the
source of blessing has been made subject to the curse, that by this
means men might be redeemed from death, and become partakers of a
blessed immortality — that they might obtain life — that, sin being
destroyed, righteousness might reign — and that death and the curse
might be swallowed up. We know, nevertheless, in the meantime, that the
gospel is *the hidden wisdom*, (<span id="viii.v-p17.2"></span>[1Co
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#007)<span id="viii.v-p17.2"></span>,)
which in its height surmounts the heavens, and at which angels
themselves stand amazed. Here we have a most beautiful passage, from
which we may see how great is the blindness of the human mind, which in
the midst of light discerns nothing. For it is true, that this world is
like a theater, in which the Lord presents to us a clear manifestation
of his glory, and yet, notwithstanding that we have such a spectacle
placed before our eyes, we are stone-blind, not because the
manifestation is furnished obscurely, but because we are *alienated in
mind*, (<span id="viii.v-p17.3"></span>[Col
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021)<span
id="viii.v-p17.3"></span>,)and for this matter we lack not merely
inclination but ability. For notwithstanding that God shows himself
openly, it is only with the eye of faith that we can behold him, save
only that we receive a slight perception of his divinity, sufficient to
render us inexcusable.

<span id="viii.v-p18"></span>Accordingly, when Paul here declares that
God is not known through means of his creatures, you must understand him
to mean that a pure knowledge of him is not attained. For that none may
have any pretext for ignorance, mankind make proficiency in the
universal school of nature; so far as to be affected with some
perception of deity, but what God is, they know not, nay more, they
straightway become vain in their imaginations, (<span
id="viii.v-p18.1"></span>[Ro 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span
id="viii.v-p18.1"></span>.) Thus the light shineth in darkness, (<span
id="viii.v-p18.2"></span>[Joh 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span
id="viii.v-p18.2"></span>.) It follows, then, that mankind do not err
thus far through mere ignorance, so as not to be chargeable with
contempt, negligence, and ingratitude. Thus it holds good, that all

<span id="viii.v-p19"></span>have known God, and yet have not glorified
him,  
(<span id="viii.v-p19.2"></span>[Ro
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021)<span id="viii.v-p19.2"></span>,)

<span id="viii.v-p20"></span>and that, on the other hand, no one under
the guidance of mere nature ever made such proficiency as to know God.
Should any one bring forward the philosophers as exceptions, I answer,
that in them more especially there is presented a signal token of this
our *weakness.* For there will not be found one of them, that has not
from that first principle of knowledge, which I have mentioned,
straightway turned aside into wandering  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) and erroneous speculations, and for the
most part they betray a silliness worse than that of old wives. When he
says, that *those are saved that believe*, this corresponds with the
foregoing statement — that the gospel is *the power of God unto
salvation* Farther, by contrasting believers, whose number is small,
with a blind and senseless world, he teaches us that we err if we
stumble at the smallness of their number, inasmuch as they have been
divinely set apart to salvation.

<span id="viii.v-p22"></span><span id="viii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p23"></span>**22.** *For the Jews require a sign* This
is explanatory of the preceding statement — showing in what respects the
preaching of the gospel *is accounted foolishness* At the same time he
does not simply explain, but even goes a step farther, by saying that
the Jews do not merely despise the gospel, but even abhor it. “The
Jews,” says he, “desire through means of miracles to have before their
eyes an evidence of divine power: the Greeks are fond of what tends to
gratify human intellect by the applause of acuteness. We, on the other
hand, *preach Christ crucified*, wherein there appears at first view
nothing but weakness and folly. He is, therefore, *a stumblingblock to
the Jews,* when they see him as it were forsaken by God. To the Greeks
it appears like a fable, to be told of such a method of redemption.” By
the term *Greeks* here, in my opinion, he does not mean simply Gentiles,
but has in view those who had the polish of the liberal sciences, or
were distinguished by superior intelligence. At the same time by
*synecdoche*, all the others come in like manner to be included. Between
Jews and Greeks, however, he draws this distinction, that the former,
striking against Christ by an unreasonable zeal for the law, raged
against the gospel with unbounded fury, as hypocrites are wont to do,
when contending for their superstitions; while the Greeks, on the other
hand, puffed up with pride, regarded him with contempt as insipid.

<span id="viii.v-p24"></span>When he ascribes it to the Jews as a fault,
that they are eagerly desirous of signs, it is not on the ground of its
being wrong in itself to demand signs, but he exposes their baseness in
the following respects: — that by an incessant demand for miracles, they
in a manner sought to bind God to their laws — that, in accordance with
the dullness of their apprehension, they sought as it were to *feel him
out*  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) in manifest miracles — that
they were taken up with the miracles themselves, and looked upon them
with amazement — and, in fine, that no miracles satisfied them, but
instead of this, they every day gaped incessantly for new ones. Hezekiah
is not reproved for having of his own accord allowed himself to be
confirmed by a sign, (<span id="viii.v-p25.4"></span>[2Ki
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#029)<span id="viii.v-p25.4"></span>,
and <span id="viii.v-p25.5"></span>[2Ki
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008)<span id="viii.v-p25.5"></span>,)
nor even Gideon for asking a two-fold sign, (<span
id="viii.v-p25.6"></span>[Judg. 6:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#039)<span id="viii.v-p25.6"></span>.)
Nay, instead of this, Ahaz is condemned for refusing a sign that the
Prophet had offered him, (<span id="viii.v-p25.7"></span>[Isa
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#012)<span id="viii.v-p25.7"></span>.)
What fault, then, was there on the part of the Jews in asking miracles?
It lay in this, that they did not ask them for a good end, set no bounds
to their desire, and did not make a right use of them. For while faith
ought to be helped by miracles, their only concern was, how long they
might persevere in their unbelief. While it is unlawful to prescribe
laws to God, they wantoned with inordinate desire. While miracles should
conduct us to an acquaintance with Christ, and the spiritual grace of
God, they served as a hindrance in their way. On this account, too,
Christ upbraids them, (<span id="viii.v-p25.8"></span>[Mr
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#012)<span id="viii.v-p25.8"></span>.)

<span id="viii.v-p26"></span>A perverse generation seeketh after a sign.

<span id="viii.v-p27"></span>For there were no bounds to their curiosity
and inordinate desire, and for all that they had so often obtained
miracles, no advantage appeared to arise from them.

<span id="viii.v-p28"></span><span id="viii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p29"></span>**24.** *Both Greeks and Jews* He shows by
this contrast, that the fact that Christ was so unfavorably received,
was not owing to any fault on his part, nor to the natural disposition
of mankind generally, but arose from the depravity of those who were not
enlightened by God, inasmuch as the elect of God, whether Jews or
Gentiles, are not hindered by any *stumblingblock* from coming to
Christ, that they may find in him a sure salvation. He contrasts *power*
with the *stumblingblock*, that was occasioned by abasement, and
*wisdom* he contrasts with *folly* The sum, then, is this: — “I am aware
that nothing except signs has effect upon the obstinacy of the Jews, and
that nothing soothes down the haughtiness of the Greeks, except an empty
show of wisdom. We ought, however, to make no account of this; because,
however our Christ in connection with the abasement of his cross is a
*stumblingblock* to the Jews, and is derided by the Greeks, he is,
notwithstanding, to all the elect, of whatever nation they may be, at
once *the power of God unto salvation* for surmounting these
*stumblingblocks*, and the *wisdom of God* for throwing off that mask.”
 <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93)

<span id="viii.v-p31"></span><span id="viii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p32"></span>**25.** *For the foolishness of God* While
the Lord deals with us in such a way as to seem to act foolishly,
because he does not exhibit his wisdom, what appears *foolishness*
surpasses in *wisdom* all the ingenuity of men. Farther, while God
appears to act with weakness, in consequence of his concealing his
power, that *weakness*, as it is reckoned, is *stronger* than any power
of men. We must, however, always keep it in view, that there is a
concession, as I have noticed a little ago. For no one can but perceive,
that in strict propriety neither foolishness nor weakness can be
ascribed to God, but it was necessary, by such ironical expressions, to
beat down the mad presumption of the flesh, which does not scruple to
rob God of all his glory.

<span id="viii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p1"></span><span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 1:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026)<span
id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p2"></span>**26.** For ye see your calling, brethren,
how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble, *are called:*

<span id="viii.vi-p3"></span>**26.** Videte (vel, videtis) vocationem
vestram, fratres, quod non multi  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)
sapientes secundum carnem, non multi potentes, non multi nobiles:

<span id="viii.vi-p5"></span>**27.** But God hath chosen the foolish
things of the world, to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the things which are mighty;

<span id="viii.vi-p6"></span>**27.** Sed stulta mundi elegit Deus, ut
sapientes pudefaciat: et infirma mundi elegit Deus, ut patifaciat
fortia:

<span id="viii.vi-p7"></span>**28.** And base things of the world, and
things which are despised, hath God chosen, *yea,* and things which are
not, to bring to naught things that are:

<span id="viii.vi-p8"></span>**28.** Et ignobilia mundi et contempta
elegit Deus, et ea quae non erant, ut quae erant aboleret;

<span id="viii.vi-p9"></span>**29.** That no flesh should glory in his
presence.

<span id="viii.vi-p10"></span>**29.** Ne glorietur ulla caro coram Deo.

<span id="viii.vi-p11"></span>**30.** But of him are ye in Christ Jesus,
who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption:

<span id="viii.vi-p12"></span>**30.** Ex ipso vos estis  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) in Christo Jesu, qui factus est nobis
sapientia a Deo, et justitia, et sanctificatio, et redemptio.  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)

<span id="viii.vi-p15"></span>**31.** That, according as it is written,
He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.

<span id="viii.vi-p16"></span>**31.** Ut (quemadmodum scriptum est) Qui
gloriatur, in Domino glorietur (<span id="viii.vi-p16.1"></span>[Jer
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span id="viii.vi-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.vi-p17"></span> 

<span id="viii.vi-p18"></span><span id="viii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p19"></span>**26.** *Behold your calling.* As the mood
of the Greek verb (<span id="viii.vi-p19.1"></span>βλέπετε) is doubtful,
and the indicative suits the context equally as well as the imperative,
I leave it to the reader’s choice which of them he may prefer. The
meaning is manifestly the same in either case, for supposing it to be
the indicative (*ye see*,) he would in that case summon them as
witnesses — as of a thing that is manifest, and call them forward as it
were to a thing that is present. On the other hand, understanding it in
the imperative, he stirs them up, as it were, from their drowsiness to a
consideration of the matter itself. The term *calling* may be taken in a
collective sense to mean the multitude of those that are called — in
this sense: “Ye see what description of persons they are among you that
the Lord has called.” I am, however, rather inclined to think, that he
points out the manner of their calling, and it is a most forcible
argument, because it follows from this, that, if they despise the
abasement of the cross, they in a manner make void their calling, in
which God had acted in such a manner, as to take away all merit from
human wisdom, and power, and glory. Hence he tacitly accuses them of
ingratitude, because, forgetful alike of God’s grace and of themselves,
they regard the gospel of Christ with disdain.

<span id="viii.vi-p20"></span>Two things, however, must be observed here
— that he was desirous from the example of the Corinthians to confirm
the truth of what he had said: and farther, that he designed to admonish
them, that they must be entirely divested of pride, if they duly
considered the order of things that the Lord had observed in their
calling. *To put to shame*, says he, *the wise and noble,* and *to bring
to naught things that are* Both expressions are appropriate, for
fortitude and wisdom vanish when they are *put to shame*, but what has
an existence requires to be *brought to naught* By the choosing of the
poor, and the foolish, and the ignoble, he means, that God has preferred
them before the great, and the wise, and the noble. For it would not
have sufficed, for beating down the arrogance of the flesh, if God had
placed them all upon a level. Hence, those who appeared to excel he put
in the background, in order that he might thoroughly abase them. That
man, however, were an arrant fool, who would infer from this, that God
has in this manner abased the glory of the flesh, in order that the
great and noble might be shut out from the hope of salvation. There are
some foolish persons that make this a pretext for not merely triumphing
over the great, as if God had cast them off, but even despising them as
far beneath them. Let us, however, bear in mind, that this is said to
the Corinthians, who, though they had no great distinction in the world,
were nevertheless, even without any occasion, puffed up. God, therefore,
by confounding the mighty, and the wise, and the great, does not design
to elate with pride the weak, the illiterate, and the abject, but brings
down all of them together to one level. Let those, therefore, that are
contemptible in the eyes of the world, think thus with themselves: “What
modesty is called for on our part, when even those that have high honor
in the view of the world have nothing left them?”  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) If the effulgence of the sun is obscured,
what must become of the stars? If the light of the stars is
extinguished, what must become of opaque objects?” The design of these
observations is, that those who have been called by the Lord, while of
no estimation in the view of the world, may not abuse these words of
Paul by pluming their crests, but, on the contrary, keeping in mind the
exhortation —

<span id="viii.vi-p22"></span>Thou standest by faith, be not
high-minded, but fear,  
(<span id="viii.vi-p22.2"></span>[Ro
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span
id="viii.vi-p22.2"></span>,)

<span id="viii.vi-p23"></span>may walk thoughtfully in the sight of God
with fear and humility.

<span id="viii.vi-p24"></span>Paul, however, does not say here, that
there are *none* of the noble and mighty that have been called by God,
but that there are *few* *He* states the design of this — that the Lord
might bring down the glory of the flesh, by preferring the contemptible
before the great. God himself, however, by the mouth of David, exhorts
kings to embrace Christ,  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) (<span
id="viii.vi-p25.2"></span>[Ps
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)<span id="viii.vi-p25.2"></span>,)
and by the mouth of Paul, too, he declares, that *he will have all men
to be saved*, and that his Christ is offered alike to small and great,
alike to kings and their subjects, (<span id="viii.vi-p25.3"></span>[1Ti
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#001)<span
id="viii.vi-p25.3"></span>.) He has himself furnished a token of this.
Shepherds, in the first place, are called to Christ: then afterwards
come philosophers: illiterate and despised fishermen hold the highest
rank of honor; yet into their school there are received in process of
time kings and their counselors, senators and orators.

<span id="viii.vi-p26"></span><span id="viii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p27"></span>**28.** *Things that are not* He makes use
of similar terms in <span id="viii.vi-p27.1"></span>[Ro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span id="viii.vi-p27.1"></span>,
but in a different sense. For in that passage, when describing the
universal call of the pious, he says, that we are nothing previously to
our being called, which must be understood as referring to reality in
the sight of God, however we may appear to be something in the eyes of
men. Here, the *nothingness* (<span id="viii.vi-p27.2"></span>οὐδενεια)
of which he speaks must be viewed as referring to the opinion of men, as
is manifest from the corresponding clause, in which he says that this is
done in order *that the things that are may be brought to naught* For
there is nothing except in appearance, because in reality we are all
nothing. *Things that are*, therefore, you must explain to mean *things
that appear,* so that this passage corresponds with such statements as
these: —

<span id="viii.vi-p28"></span>He raiseth up the poor out of the
dunghill, (<span id="viii.vi-p28.1"></span>[Ps
113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)<span
id="viii.vi-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.vi-p29"></span>He raiseth up them that are cast down,
(<span id="viii.vi-p29.1"></span>[Ps
146:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#008)<span
id="viii.vi-p29.1"></span>,)

<span id="viii.vi-p30"></span>and the like. Hence we may clearly see how
great is the folly of those who imagine that there is in mankind some
degree of merit or worthiness, which would hold a place antecedent to
God’s choice.

<span id="viii.vi-p31"></span><span id="viii.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p32"></span>**29.** *That no flesh should glory*
Though the term *flesh* here, and in many passages of Scripture, denotes
all mankind, yet in this passage it carries with it a particular idea;
for the Spirit, by speaking of mankind in terms of contempt, beats down
their pride, as in <span id="viii.vi-p32.1"></span>[Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003)<span id="viii.vi-p32.1"></span> —
*The Egyptian is flesh and not spirit* It is a sentiment that is worthy
to be kept in remembrance — that there is nothing left us in which we
may justly glory. With this view he adds the expression *in God’s
presence* For *in the presence of the world* many delight themselves for
the moment in a false glorying, which, however, quickly vanishes like
smoke. At the same time, by this expression all mankind are put to
silence when they come into the presence of God; as Habakkuk says —

<span id="viii.vi-p33"></span>Let all flesh keep silence before God,
(<span id="viii.vi-p33.1"></span>[Hab
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020)<span id="viii.vi-p33.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.vi-p34"></span>Let every thing, therefore, that is at all
deserving of praise, be recognized as proceeding from God.

<span id="viii.vi-p35"></span><span id="viii.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p36"></span>**30.** *Of him are ye.* Lest they should
think that any of those things that he had said were inapplicable to
them, he now shows the application of those things to them, inasmuch as
*they are not* otherwise than *of God* For the words *ye are* are
emphatic, as though he had said — “You have your beginning from God, who
*calleth those things which are not*,” (<span
id="viii.vi-p36.1"></span>[Ro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span id="viii.vi-p36.1"></span>,)
passing by those things that appear to be; and your subsistence is
founded upon Christ, and thus you have no occasion to be proud. Nor is
it of creation merely that he speaks, but of that spiritual existence,
into which we are born again by the grace of God.

<span id="viii.vi-p37"></span>*Who of God is made unto us* As there are
many to be found who, while not avowedly inclined to draw back from God,
do nevertheless seek something apart from Christ, as if he alone did not
contain all things  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) in himself, he
reckons up in passing what and how great are the treasures with which
Christ is furnished, and in such a way as to intimate at the same time
what is the manner of subsistence in Christ. For when he calls Christ
our *righteousness*, a corresponding idea must be understood — that *in
us* there is nothing but *sin*; and so as to the other terms. Now he
ascribes here to Christ four commendatory titles, that include his
entire excellence, and every benefit that we receive from him.

<span id="viii.vi-p39"></span>In the *first* place, he says that *he is
made unto us wisdom*, by which he means, that we obtain in him an
absolute perfection of wisdom, inasmuch as the Father has fully revealed
himself to us in him, that we may not desire to know any thing besides
him. There is a similar passage in <span id="viii.vi-p39.1"></span>[Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="viii.vi-p39.1"></span> —

<span id="viii.vi-p40"></span>In whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge.

<span id="viii.vi-p41"></span>Of this we shall have occasion to speak
afterwards when we come to the next chapter.

<span id="viii.vi-p42"></span>*Secondly*, he says that he is *made unto
us righteousness*, by which he means that we are on his account
acceptable to God, inasmuch as he expiated our sins by his death, and
his obedience is imputed to us for righteousness. For as the
righteousness of faith consists in remission of sins and a gracious
acceptance, we obtain both through Christ.

<span id="viii.vi-p43"></span>*Thirdly*, he calls him our
*sanctification*, by which he means, that we who are otherwise unholy by
nature, are by his Spirit renewed unto holiness, that we may serve God.
From this, also, we infer, that we cannot be justified freely through
faith alone without at the same time living holily. For these fruits of
grace are connected together, as it were, by an indissoluble tie,  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) so that he who attempts to sever them
does in a manner tear Christ in pieces. Let therefore the man who seeks
to be justified through Christ, by God’s unmerited goodness, consider
that this cannot be attained without his taking him at the same time for
*sanctification*, or, in other words, being renewed to innocence and
purity of life. Those, however, that slander us, as if by preaching a
free justification through faith we called men off from good works, are
amply refuted from this passage, which intimates that faith apprehends
in Christ regeneration equally with forgiveness of sins.

<span id="viii.vi-p45"></span>Observe, on the other hand, that these two
offices of Christ are conjoined in such a manner as to be,
notwithstanding, distinguished from each other. What, therefore, Paul
here expressly distinguishes, it is not allowable mistakenly to
confound.

<span id="viii.vi-p46"></span>*Fourthly*, he teaches us that he is given
to us for *redemption*, by which he means, that through his goodness we
are delivered at once from all bondage to sin, and from all the misery
that flows from it. Thus *redemption* is the first gift of Christ that
is begun in us, and the last that is completed. For the commencement of
salvation consists in our being drawn out of the labyrinth of sin and
death; yet in the meantime, until the final day of the resurrection, *we
groan* with desire for *redemption*, (as we read in <span
id="viii.vi-p46.1"></span>[Ro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span id="viii.vi-p46.1"></span>.)
If it is asked in what way Christ is given to us *for redemption*, I
answer — “Because he made himself a ransom.”

<span id="viii.vi-p47"></span>In fine, of all the blessings that are
here enumerated we must seek in Christ not the half, or merely a part,
but the entire completion. For Paul does not say that he has been given
to us by way of filling up, or eking out righteousness, holiness,
wisdom, and redemption, but assigns to him exclusively the entire
accomplishment of the whole. Now as you will scarcely meet with another
passage of Scripture that more distinctly marks out all the offices of
Christ, you may also understand from it very clearly the nature and
efficacy of faith. For as Christ is the proper object of faith, every
one that knows what are the benefits that Christ confers upon us is at
the same time taught to understand what faith is.

<span id="viii.vi-p48"></span><span id="viii.vi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p49"></span>**31.** *He that glorieth let him glory in
the Lord* Mark the end that God has in view in bestowing all things upon
us in Christ — that we may not claim any merit to ourselves, but may
give him all the praise. For God does not despoil with the view of
leaving us bare, but forthwith clothes us with his glory — yet on this
condition, that whenever we would glory we must go out of ourselves. In
short, man, brought to nothing in his own estimation, and acknowledging
that there is nothing good anywhere but in God alone, must renounce all
desire for his own glory, and with all his might aspire and aim at the
glory of God exclusively. This is also more clearly apparent from the
context in the writings of the Prophet, from whom Paul has borrowed this
testimony; for in that passage the Lord, after stripping all mankind of
glory in respect of strength, wisdom, and riches, commands us to glory
only *in knowing him*, (<span id="viii.vi-p49.2"></span>[Jer.
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span id="viii.vi-p49.2"></span>.)
Now he would have us know him in such a way as to *know* that it is *he
that exercises judgment, righteousness, and mercy* For this knowledge
produces in us at once confidence in him and fear of him. If therefore a
man has his mind regulated in such a manner that, claiming no merit to
himself, he desires that God alone be exalted; if he rests with
satisfaction on his grace, and places his entire happiness in his
fatherly love, and, in fine, is satisfied with God alone, that man
*truly* “glories in the Lord.” I say *truly*, for even hypocrites on
false grounds glory in him, as Paul declares, (<span
id="viii.vi-p49.3"></span>[Ro
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017)<span id="viii.vi-p49.3"></span>,)
when being either puffed up with his gifts, or elated with a base
confidence in the flesh, or abusing his word, they nevertheless take his
name upon them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc39007.htm#fr_34) <span
id="viii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p6.1"></span>Le leur et
le nostre,” ou, “le Seigneur (di-ie) et de eux et de nous;” — “Both
theirs and ours,” or, “the Lord (I say) both of them and of us.”

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc39007.htm#fr_35) <span
id="viii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p12.1"></span>Constitue,
ordonne, et establi;” — “Appointed, ordained, and established.”

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc39007.htm#fr_36) <span
id="viii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p15.1"></span>Et aujour
d’huy, qu’est ce qu’entonnent a plene bouche les Romanisques, sinon cen
gros mots, Ordination de Dieu, La sainte et sacree succession depuis le
temps mesme des Apostres;” — “And at the present day, what do the
Romanists sound forth with open mouth, but those grand terms, Ordination
from God, — The holy and sacred succession from the very times of the
Apostles.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc39007.htm#fr_37) <span
id="viii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p16"></span> *Institutes*, volume 3.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc39007.htm#fr_38) <span
id="viii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p18"></span> <span id="viii.i-p18.1"></span>Αποστολος,
(an apostle) derived from <span id="viii.i-p18.2"></span>αποστελλειν,
(to send forth,) signifies literally a messenger. The term is employed
by classical writer to denote the commander of an expedition, or a
delegate, or ambassador. (See Herodotus, v. 38.) In the New Testament it
is in various instances employed in a general sense to denote a
messenger. (See <span id="viii.i-p18.3"></span>[Lu
11:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#049)<span id="viii.i-p18.3"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p18.4"></span>[Joh
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#016)<span id="viii.i-p18.4"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p18.5"></span>[Php
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025)<span id="viii.i-p18.5"></span>.)
In one instance it is applied to Christ himself, (<span
id="viii.i-p18.6"></span>[Heb 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i-p18.6"></span>.) Most frequently, however, it is applied to
those extraordinary messengers who were (to use the words of Leigh in
his Critics Sacra) Christ’s “<span id="viii.i-p18.7"></span>legates a
latere,” from his side. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc39007.htm#fr_39) <span
id="viii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p25"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p25.1"></span>Mais (dira
quelqu’un;)“ — “But (some one will say.)”

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc39007.htm#fr_40) <span
id="viii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p28"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p28.1"></span>Tu te
pourras bien entretenir en l’Eglise tellement quellement estant mesle
parmi les autres;” — “You may quite well have a standing in the Church
in some sort of way, being mixed up among others.”

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc39007.htm#fr_41) <span
id="viii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p32"></span> Synedoche, a figure of speech, by which
part is taken for the whole. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc39007.htm#fr_42) <span
id="viii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p34"></span> “<span id="viii.i-p34.1"></span>Nids et
cachettes;” — “Nests and lurking-holes.”

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc39007.htm#fr_43) <span
id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p6.1"></span>Parole,”
ou “eloquence;” — “Utterance,” or “eloquence.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc39007.htm#fr_44) <span
id="viii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p18"></span> The same view of Paul’s design here is
given by Theodoret: “<span id="viii.ii-p18.1"></span>Μέλλων κατηγορεῖν
προθεραπεύει την ἀκοὴν ὥστε δεκτὴν γενέσθαι τὴν ιατρείαν;” — “As he is
about to censure them, he soothes beforehand the organ of hearing, that
the remedy to be applied may be the more favorably receiv*ed*.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc39007.htm#fr_45) <span
id="viii.ii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p19"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p19.1"></span>Que
chacun ha en son endroit;” — “Which every one has severally.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc39007.htm#fr_46) <span
id="viii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p21"></span> A figure of speech, by which one term is
put for another — the cause for the effect, the effect for the cause,
etc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc39007.htm#fr_47) <span
id="viii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p26"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p26.1"></span>Quel est
ce tesmoignage;” — “What this testimony is.”

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc39007.htm#fr_48) <span
id="viii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p29"></span> The word is used in this sense in the
following passages: <span id="viii.ii-p29.1"></span>[Lu
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#014)<span id="viii.ii-p29.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.ii-p29.2"></span>[2Co
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#009)<span id="viii.ii-p29.2"></span>;
<span id="viii.ii-p29.3"></span>[Php
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)<span id="viii.ii-p29.3"></span>;
and <span id="viii.ii-p29.4"></span>[Heb
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037)<span id="viii.ii-p29.4"></span>.
The proper meaning is — to come too late for a thing, and so miss of it.
Xenophon uses it in this sense. <span
id="viii.ii-p29.5"></span>Αβροκόμας ὑστερησε τὢς μάχης: — “Abrocomas
came too late for the battle.” The word occurs in the same sense in
Hebews 4:1 and Hebews 12:15. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc39007.htm#fr_49) <span
id="viii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p37"></span> Calvin probably refers to the following
(among other) passagess: — <span id="viii.ii-p37.1"></span>[1Th
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#024)<span id="viii.ii-p37.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.ii-p37.2"></span>[2Th
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii-p37.2"></span>;
<span id="viii.ii-p37.3"></span>[Heb
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#023)<span id="viii.ii-p37.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc39007.htm#fr_50) <span
id="viii.ii-p37.5"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p38"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p38.1"></span>La
vocation done qu’il fait d’un chacun des siens, n’est point un jeu, et
en les appellant il ne se mocque point, ainsi il entretiendra et pour
suyura son ceuvre perpetuellement;” — “The calling, therefore, that he
makes of each of his own, is not mere play; and in calling them he does
not make sport, but will unceasingly maintain and prosecute his work.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc39007.htm#fr_51) <span
id="viii.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p41"></span> Calvin in his *Institutes*, (volume 2,)
after speaking of Christ’s being represented by Paul as “offered to us
in the gospel with all the abundance of heavenly blessings, with all his
merits, all his righteousness, wisdom, and grace, without exception,”
remarks — “And what is meant by the *fellowship* <span
id="viii.ii-p41.1"></span>κοινωνια of Christ, which, according to the
same apostle (<span id="viii.ii-p41.2"></span>[1Co
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009)<span id="viii.ii-p41.2"></span>)
is offered to us in the gospel, all believers know.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc39007.htm#fr_52) <span
id="viii.ii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p42"></span> “<span id="viii.ii-p42.1"></span>La mort
et perdition;” — “Death and perdition.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc39007.htm#fr_53) <span
id="viii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p4.1"></span>Et en
une mesme volonte,” ou “et mesme avis;” — “And in the same disposition,”
or “and the same judgement.”

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc39007.htm#fr_54) <span
id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p9.1"></span>Et ie de
ceci,” ou “Or ce que ie di *c*’*est* qu’un chacun;” — “And this I say,”
or “Now what I say *is this*, that every one.”

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc39007.htm#fr_55) <span
id="viii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>Et
assembles l’une h l’autre;” — “And associated with each other.”

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc39007.htm#fr_56) <span
id="viii.iii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span> The verb <span
id="viii.iii-p18.2"></span>καταρτιζω properly signifies, to *repair*, or
*refit*, or *restore* to its original condition what has been
disarranged or broken; and in this sense it is applied to the repairing
of nets, ships, walls, etc. (See <span id="viii.iii-p18.3"></span>[Mt
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#021)<span id="viii.iii-p18.3"></span>;
<span id="viii.iii-p18.4"></span>[Mr
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#019)<span
id="viii.iii-p18.4"></span>.) We might with perfect propriety understand
the Apostle as alluding here to the *repairing* of a ship that has been
broken or damaged, and as intimating that a Church, when shattered by
divisions, is (so to speak) not sea-worthy, and must be carefully
*repaired*, before she can be fit for purposes of commerce, by conveying
to the nations of the earth the “true riches.” The allusion, however,
most probably is, as Calvin thinks, to the members of the human body,
which are so admirably *adjusted* to each other. It deserves to be
noticed, that Paul makes use of a derivative from the same verb (<span
id="viii.iii-p18.5"></span>κατάρτισις) in <span
id="viii.iii-p18.6"></span>[2Co
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#009)<span id="viii.iii-p18.6"></span>,
on which Beza observes, “that the Apostle’s meaning is, that whereas the
members of the Church were all (as it were) dislocated and out of joint,
they should now again be joined together in love, and they should
endeavor to make perfect what was amiss amongst them either in faith or
manners.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc39007.htm#fr_57) <span
id="viii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p22"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p22.1"></span>La
sancte union qui doit estre entre les Chrestiens;” — “That holy unity
which ought to be among Christians.”

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc39007.htm#fr_58) <span
id="viii.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p23"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p23.1"></span>Bien
plus dangereuses;” — “Much more dangerous.”

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc39007.htm#fr_59) <span
id="viii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p24"></span> It is remarked by Beza that the verb
here employed, <span id="viii.iii-p24.1"></span>δηλοω, (to
*declare*,)has a stronger signification than <span
id="viii.iii-p24.2"></span>σημαινω (to *intimate*,) just as there is a
difference of meaning between the Latin words <span
id="viii.iii-p24.3"></span>*declarare* (to *declare*) and <span
id="viii.iii-p24.4"></span>*significare* (to *intimate*,) an example of
which is furnished in a letter of Cicero to Lucretius, “<span
id="viii.iii-p24.5"></span>tibi non *significandum* solum, sed etiam
*declarandum* arbitror, nihil mihi esse potuisse tuis literis gratius;”
“I think it ought to be not merely *intimated* to you but *declared*,
that nothing could be more agreeable to me than your letters.” The
emphatic word <span id="viii.iii-p24.6"></span>εδηλωθν (it has been
*declared*,) appears to have been made use of by the Apostle to convey
more fully to the mind of the Corhlthians, that he had not hastily given
heed to a mere *report*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc39007.htm#fr_60) <span
id="viii.iii-p24.7"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p25"></span> Some have thought that by <span
id="viii.iii-p25.1"></span>τῶς Χλόης,(those of Chloe,) the Apostle means
persons who were in a *flourishing* condition in religion; from <span
id="viii.iii-p25.2"></span>χλόη, green herbage, (Herodotus, 4:34,
Euripides, Hipp. 1124.) One writer supposes Paul to mean *seniores*,
(elders,) deriving the word <span id="viii.iii-p25.3"></span>χλόη from
<span id="viii.iii-p25.4"></span>כלח, old age. These conjectures,
however, are manifestly more ingenious than solid. It is certain that
the name <span id="viii.iii-p25.5"></span>Χλόν (Chloe,) was frequent
among the Greeks as the name of a female. It is most natural to
understand by <span id="viii.iii-p25.6"></span>των Χλονς those of Chloe,
as equivalent to <span id="viii.iii-p25.7"></span>των Χλονς σοικειως —
*those of the household of Chloe*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc39007.htm#fr_61) <span
id="viii.iii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p28"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p28.1"></span>Et n’y
a en chose quelconque debars si grans ni tant a craindre que sent
ceux-la;” — “And in no department are there disputes so great, or so
much to be dreaded as those:”

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc39007.htm#fr_62) <span
id="viii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p30"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p30.1"></span>Autrement veu que ces trois estoyent d’un
sainct accord ensemble en leur ministere, il n’est point vray-semblable,
qu’il y eust aucunes partialitez entre les Corinthiens pour se glorifier
en l’un plustost qu’en l’autre;” — “Otherwise, seeing that those three
were united in their ministry by a sacred agreement, it is not likely
that there were any parties among the Corinthians that were prepared to
glory in one of them rather than in another.”

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc39007.htm#fr_63) <span
id="viii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p34"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p34.1"></span>Mieux
avisez que les autres;” — “Better advised than the others.”

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc39007.htm#fr_64) <span
id="viii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p36"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p36.1"></span>Combien c’est vne chose insupportable;” —
“How insufferable a thing it is.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc39007.htm#fr_65) <span
id="viii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p41"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p41.1"></span>*Addicere* nos hominibus in servitutem“ —
“<span id="viii.iii-p41.2"></span>de nous assuiettir aux hommes en
seruitude;” — “To give ourselves up to men, so as to be in bondage to
them.” Calvin very probably had in his eye the celebrated sentiment of
Horace, (Epistle 1 50:14,) “<span id="viii.iii-p41.3"></span>Nullius
*addictus* jurare in verba magistri;” — “Bound to swear allegiance to no
master,” while enforcing the sentiment by a powerful consideration, to
which the heathen poet was an entire *stranger*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc39007.htm#fr_66) <span
id="viii.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p43"></span> “<span id="viii.iii-p43.1"></span>Du
sang de Christ, et des martyrs tous ensemble;” — “From the blood of
Christ, and of all the martyrs together.”

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc39007.htm#fr_67) <span
id="viii.iii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p44"></span> *Leo*, ad Palaestinos, Epistle 81. The
passage alluded to above is quoted at large in the *Institutes*. (Volume
2.) “Although the death of many saints was precious in the sight of the
Lord, (<span id="viii.iii-p44.2"></span>[Ps
116:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015)<span
id="viii.iii-p44.2"></span>,) yet no innocent man’s slaughter was the
propitiation of the world. The just *received* crowns, did not *give*
them; and the fortitude of believers produced *examples of patience*,
*not gifts of righteousness*; for their deaths were for themselves; and
none by his final end paid the debt of another, except Christ our Lord,
in whom alone all are crucified, all dead, buried, and raised up.”
*Leo*, from whose writings this admirable passage is extracted, was a
Roman bishop, who flourished in the fifth century, and was one of the
most distinguished men of his age. He was a most zealous defender of the
doctrines of grace, in opposition to Pelagianism and other heresies. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc39007.htm#fr_68) <span
id="viii.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p46"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p46.1"></span>Obligez par serment;” — “Bound by oath.”

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc39007.htm#fr_69) <span
id="viii.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p47"></span> “<span
id="viii.iii-p47.1"></span>*Syngrapha* (the term employed by Calvin) was
a contract or bond, formally entered into between two parties, signed
and sealed by both, and a copy given to each.” Cic. Verr. 1:36. Dio.
48:37. It is derived from a Greek term <span
id="viii.iii-p47.2"></span>συγγραφὴ (a legal instrument or obligation.)
Herodotus 1:48; and Demosthenes 268:13. <span
id="viii.iii-p47.3"></span>Π. στεφ. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc39007.htm#fr_70) <span
id="viii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p22"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p22.1"></span>Ironie,
c’est a dire, mocquerie;” — “Irony, that is to say, mockery.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc39007.htm#fr_71) <span
id="viii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p23"></span> “<span
id="viii.iv-p23.1"></span>Seulement en les arrousant d’eau: c’est a
dire, baptizant;” — “Simply by sprinkling them with water, that is to
say, baptizing.”

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc39007.htm#fr_72) <span
id="viii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p24.1"></span>Toute la
charge et la pesanteur du fardeau;” — “The whole charge and weight of
the burden.”

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc39007.htm#fr_73) <span
id="viii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p26"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p26.1"></span>Vn
Rhetoricien ou harangueur;” — “A Rhetorician, or declaimer.”

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc39007.htm#fr_74) <span
id="viii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p28.1"></span>Ces
vaillans docteurs;” — “Those valiant teachers.”

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc39007.htm#fr_75) <span
id="viii.iv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p29"></span> The term <span
id="viii.iv-p29.1"></span>λογοδαιδαλία properly denotes speech
ingeniously contrived. It is compounded of <span
id="viii.iv-p29.2"></span>λογος (speech) and <span
id="viii.iv-p29.3"></span>Δαιδαλος (Daedalus,) an ingenious artist of
Athens, celebrated for his skill in statuary and architecture. Hence
everything that was skilfully contrived was called Daedalean. See Lucr.
4. 555, and 5. 235; Virg. G. 4. 179; and Aen. 7. 282. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc39007.htm#fr_76) <span
id="viii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p32"></span> “<span
id="viii.iv-p32.1"></span>Eloquence et rhetorique;” — “Eloquence and
rhetoric.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc39007.htm#fr_77) <span
id="viii.iv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p33"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p33.1"></span>Vne
bonne erudition, et scauoir solide;” — “Good learning, and solid
wisdom.”

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc39007.htm#fr_78) <span
id="viii.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p35"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p35.1"></span>Les
Corinthiens auoyent les oreilles chatouilleuses, et estoyent transportez
d’vn fol appetit d’auoir des gens qui eussent vn beau parler;” — “The
Corinthians had *itching ears*, (<span id="viii.iv-p35.2"></span>[2Ti
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#003)<span id="viii.iv-p35.2"></span>,)
and were carried away with a silly eagerness to have persons that had a
good manner of address.”

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc39007.htm#fr_79) <span
id="viii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p37"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p37.1"></span>Les
humbles;” — “The humble.”

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc39007.htm#fr_80) <span
id="viii.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p39"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p39.1"></span>Ni a
offusquer de sa pompe la croix de Christ, comme qui mettroit vne nuee au
denant;” — “Nor to darken the cross of Christ with its empty show, as if
one were drawing a cloud over it.”

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc39007.htm#fr_81) <span
id="viii.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p40"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p40.1"></span>Brief, a
seruir comme de trompette;” — “In short, to serve as a trumpet.”

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc39007.htm#fr_82) <span
id="viii.iv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p47"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p47.1"></span>Combien
que j’aye vne raison encore plus valable, qui m’a induit a changer ceste
translation;” — “At the same time, I have a still more forcible reason,
which has induced me to alter this translation.”

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc39007.htm#fr_83) <span
id="viii.iv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p51"></span> The passage referred to in Isaiah is
happily rendered by Lowth:-*Thine heart shall reflect on the past
terror*: *Where is now the accomptant*? *where the weigher of tribute*?
*where is he that numbered the towers*? The last of these expressions
Lowth explains to mean, “the commander of the enemy’s forces, who
surveyed the fortifications of the city, and took an account of the
height, strength, and situation of the walls and towers, that he might
know where to make the assault with the greatest advantage.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc39007.htm#fr_84) <span
id="viii.iv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p52"></span> “The words of Paul, <span
id="viii.iv-p52.1"></span>[1Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020)<span id="viii.iv-p52.1"></span>,
<span id="viii.iv-p52.2"></span>ποῦ σοφός; ποῦ γραμματεύς; ποῦ συζητητὴς
κ.τ.λ., are not, as some have imagined, a quotation of the words of this
verse,” (<span id="viii.iv-p52.3"></span>[Isa
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#018)<span
id="viii.iv-p52.3"></span>;) “the only points of agreement between them
being merely the occurrence of <span
id="viii.iv-p52.4"></span>γραμματεὺς, and the repetition of the
interrogative <span id="viii.iv-p52.5"></span>τοῦ. It is not impossible,
however, that the structure of the one passage may have suggested the
*other*.” — *Henderson* on Isaiah. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc39007.htm#fr_85) <span
id="viii.iv-p53.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p54"></span> The Hebrew phrase referred to occurs in
<span id="viii.iv-p54.1"></span>[2Ki
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#010)<span id="viii.iv-p54.1"></span>
<span id="viii.iv-p54.2"></span>ספר המלך (the king’s scribe.) It is
rendered by the Septuagint, <span id="viii.iv-p54.3"></span>ὁ γραμματεύς
τοῦ βασιλέως The corresponding Greek term, <span
id="viii.iv-p54.4"></span>γραμματεις is employed by the classical
writers to denote a clerk or secretary, (Demosth. 269.19.) The <span
id="viii.iv-p54.5"></span>γραμματεις (notaries) “had the custody of the
laws and the public records, which it was their business to write, and
to repeat to the people and senate when so *required*.” — *Potter*’*s
Grecian Antiquities*, volume 1. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc39007.htm#fr_86) <span
id="viii.iv-p54.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p55"></span> Calvin, here has manifestly in his eye
the original meaning of <span id="viii.iv-p55.1"></span>συζητητης, which
is derived from <span id="viii.iv-p55.2"></span>συν and <span
id="viii.iv-p55.3"></span>ζητεω (*to inquire together*,) and comes very
naturally to mean one that indulges in arguments or disputes. The term
was applied to the subtle Sophists, or disputants in the Greek
academies. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc39007.htm#fr_87) <span
id="viii.iv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p58"></span> “<span id="viii.iv-p58.1"></span>La
prudence civile, c’est a dire la science des lois;” — “Civil prudence,
that is to say, the science of laws.”

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc39007.htm#fr_88) <span
id="viii.iv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p59"></span> See *Institutes*, volume 1. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc39007.htm#fr_89) <span
id="viii.v-p14.3"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p15"></span> The reader will find the same train of
thought as above in the *Institutes*, volume 1. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc39007.htm#fr_90) <span
id="viii.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p17"></span> “<span id="viii.v-p17.1"></span>Et
outrecuidance;” — “And presumption.”

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc39007.htm#fr_91) <span
id="viii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p21"></span> “<span
id="viii.v-p21.1"></span>Extrauagantes;” — “Extravagant.”

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc39007.htm#fr_92) <span
id="viii.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p25"></span> There can be no doubt that Calvin refers
here to an expression made use of by Paul in his discourse to the
Athenians, <span id="viii.v-p25.1"></span>[Ac
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027)<span id="viii.v-p25.1"></span>
<span id="viii.v-p25.2"></span>Εἰ ἄρα γε ψηλαφήσειαν αὐτὸν καὶ εὔροιεν
(if haply they may *feel him out* and find him.) The allusion is to a
blind man *feeling his way* The same word is employed by Plato, (Phoed.
*footnote* 47, edit. Forster.) <span id="viii.v-p25.3"></span>̔Ο δε μοι
φαινονται ψηλαφῶντες οἱ πολλοι ὣσπερ εν σκοτει, (In this respect the
many seem to me to be *feeling their way* as it were in the dark.) —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc39007.htm#fr_93) <span
id="viii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p30"></span> “<span id="viii.v-p30.1"></span>Pour oster
et faire esvanoir ceste vaine apparence, et masque de sagesse;” — “For
taking away and causing to vanish, that empty show and mask of wisdom.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc39007.htm#fr_94) <span
id="viii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p4"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p4.1"></span>Que vous
n’estes point beaucoup;” — “That you are not many.”

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc39007.htm#fr_95) <span
id="viii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p13"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p13.1"></span>Or c’est
de luy que vous estes;” — “Now it is of him that ye are.”

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc39007.htm#fr_96) <span
id="viii.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p14"></span> “<span
id="viii.vi-p14.1"></span>Redemption, *ou rancon*;” — “Redemption, *or
ransom*”

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc39007.htm#fr_97) <span
id="viii.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p21"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p21.1"></span>Dieu ne
permet de presumer d’eux mesmes;” — “God does not allow them to have
confidence in themselves.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc39007.htm#fr_98) <span
id="viii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p25"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p25.1"></span>A faire
hommage a Christ;” — “To do homage to Christ.”

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc39007.htm#fr_99) <span
id="viii.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p38"></span> “<span id="viii.vi-p38.1"></span>Toute
plenitude;” — “All fulness.” (<span id="viii.vi-p38.2"></span>[Col
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019)<span id="viii.vi-p38.2"></span>.)

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc39007.htm#fr_100) <span
id="viii.vi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p44"></span> The reader will find the same train of
thought as above in the *Institutes*, volume 2. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc39008)
