[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc39011)  [Next](cc39013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Corinthians
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Dare any of you, having a matter
against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints?

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Audet aliquis vestrum, negotium
habens cum altero, litigare sub iniustis, et non sub sanctis?

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Do ye not know that the saints shall
judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye
unworthy to judge the smallest matters?

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** An nescitis, quod sancti mundum
iudicabunt? quodsi in vobis iudicatur mundus, indigni estis minimis
iudiciis?

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Know ye not that we shall judge
angels? how much more things pertain to this life?

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** An nescitis, quod angelos
iudicabimus, nedum ad victum pertinentia?

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** If then ye have judgments of things
pertaining to this life, set them to judge who are least esteemed in the
church.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Iudicia ergo de rebus ad victum
pertinentibus si habueritis, qui contemptibiles sunt in Ecclesia,  <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313.md) eos constituite.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** I speak to your shame. Is it so,
that there is not a wise man among you? no, not one that shall be able
to judge between his brethren?

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>**5.** Ad erubescentiam vestram dico: adeo
non est inter vos sapiens, ne unus quidem, qui possit iudicare inter
fratres?

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>**6.** But brother goeth to law with
brother, and that before the unbelievers.

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>**6.** Sed frater cum fratre litigat, idque
sub infidelibus.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Now therefore there is utterly a
fault among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not
rather take wrong? why do ye not rather *suffer yourselves to* be
defrauded?

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>**7.** Jam quidera omnino delictum in vobis
est, quod iudicia habetis inter vos: cur non potius iniuriam sustinetis?
 <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>**8.** Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, and
that *your* brethren.

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>**8.** Sed vos infertis iniuriam, et
fraudatis, et quidem fratres.

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span><span id="xiii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span>Here, he begins to reprove another fault
among the Corinthians — an excessive fondness for litigation, which took
its rise from avarice. Now, this reproof consists of two parts. The
*first* is, that by bringing their disputes before the tribunals of the
wicked, they by this means made the gospel contemptible, and exposed it
to derision. The *second* is, that while Christians ought to endure
injuries with patience, they inflicted injury on others, rather than
allow themselves to be subjected to any inconvenience. Thus, the first
part is particular: the other is general.

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span>1. *Dare any of you* This is the first
statement — that, if any one has a controversy with a brother, it ought
to be decided before godly judges, and that it ought not to be before
those that are ungodly. If the reason is asked, I have already said,
that it is because disgrace is brought upon the gospel, and the name of
Christ is held up as it were to the scoffings of the ungodly. For the
ungodly, at the instigation of Satan, are always eagerly on the watch
 <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315.md) for opportunities of finding
occasion of calumny against the doctrine of godliness. Now believers,
when they make them parties in their disputes, seem as though they did
on set purpose furnish them with a handle for reviling. A *second*
reason may be added — that we treat our brethren disdainfully, when we
of our own accord subject them to the decisions of unbelievers.

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span>But here it may be objected: “As it belongs
to the office of the magistrate, and as it is peculiarly his province to
administer justice to all, and to decide upon matters in dispute, why
should not even unbelievers, who are in the office of magistrate, have
this authority, and, if they have it, why are we prevented from
maintaining our rights before their tribunals?” I answer, that Paul does
not here condemn those who from necessity have a cause before
unbelieving judges,  <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316.md) as when a
person is summoned to a court; but those who, of their own accord, bring
their brethren into this situation, and harass them, as it were, through
means of *unbelievers*, while it is in their power to employ another
remedy. It is wrong, therefore, to institute of one’s own accord a
law-suit against *brethren* before *unbelieving* judges. If, on the
other hand, you are summoned to a court, there is no harm in appearing
there and maintaining your cause.

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span><span id="xiii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span>**2.** *Know ye not that the saints.* Here
we have an argument from the less to the greater; for Paul, being
desirous to show that injury is done to the Church of God when judgments
on matters of dispute connected with earthly things are carried before
unbelievers, as if there were no one in the society of the godly that
was qualified to judge, reasons in this strain: “Since God has reckoned
the saints worthy of such honor, as to have appointed them to be judges
of the whole world, it is unreasonable that they should be shut out from
judging as to small matters, as persons not qualified for it.” Hence it
follows, that the Corinthians inflict injury upon themselves, in
resigning into the hands of unbelievers the honor  <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317.md) that has been conferred upon them by
God.

<span id="xiii.i-p30"></span>What is said here as to *judging the world*
ought to be viewed as referring to that declaration of Christ:

<span id="xiii.i-p31"></span>When the Son of Man shall come, ye shall
sit, etc.  
(<span id="xiii.i-p31.2"></span>[Mt
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="xiii.i-p31.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p32"></span>For all power of judgment has been
committed to the Son,  
(<span id="xiii.i-p32.2"></span>[Joh
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="xiii.i-p32.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p33"></span>in such a manner that he will receive his
*saints* into a participation with him in this honor, as assessors.
Apart from this, they *will judge the world*, as indeed they begin
already to do, because their piety, faith, fear of the Lord, good
conscience, and integrity of life, will make unbelievers altogether
inexcusable, as it is said of Noah, that *by his faith he condemned* all
the men of his age. (<span id="xiii.i-p33.1"></span>[Heb
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007)<span id="xiii.i-p33.1"></span>..md)
But the former signification accords better with the Apostle’s design,
for unless you take the *judging* here spoken of in its proper
acceptation, the reasoning will not hold.

<span id="xiii.i-p34"></span>But even in this sense  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318.md) it may seem not to have much weight,
for it is as if one should say’ “The saints are endowed with heavenly
wisdom, which immeasurably transcends all human doctrines: therefore
they can judge better as to the stars than astrologers.” Now this no one
will allow, and the ground of objection is obvious — because piety and
spiritual doctrine do not confer a knowledge of human arts. My answer
here is this, that between expertness in judging and other arts there is
this difference, that while the latter are acquired by acuteness of
intellect and by study, and are learned from masters,  <span
id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319.md) the former depends rather on equity
and conscientiousness.

<span id="xiii.i-p37"></span>But  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320.md) “lawyers will judge better and more
confidently than an illiterate Christian: otherwise the knowledge of law
is of no advantage.” I answer, that their advice is not here excluded,
for if the determination of any obscure question is to be sought from a
knowledge of the laws, the Apostle does not hinder Christians from
applying to lawyers.  <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321.md) What he
finds fault with in the Corinthians is simply this, that they carry
their disputes before unbelieving judges, as if they had none in the
Church that were qualified to pass judgment, and farther, he shows how
much superior is the judgment that God has assigned to his believing
people.

<span id="xiii.i-p40"></span>The words rendered *in you* mean here, in
my opinion, *among you*. For whenever believers meet in one place, under
the auspices of Christ,  <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322.md) there
is already in their assembly a sort of image of the future judgment,
which will be perfectly brought to light on the last day. Accordingly
Paul says, that the world is judged in the Church, because *there*
Christ’s tribunal is erected, from which he exercises his authority.
 <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p43"></span><span id="xiii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p44"></span>**3.** *Know ye not that we shall judge
angels*? This passage is taken in different ways. Chrysostom states that
some understood it as referring to priests,  <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324.md) but this is exceedingly far-fetched.
Others understand it of the angels in heaven, in this sense — that the
angels are subject to the judgment of God’s word, and may be judged by
us, if need be, by means of that word, as it is said in the Epistle to
the Galatians —

<span id="xiii.i-p46"></span>If an angel from heaven bring any other
gospel, let him be accursed.  
(<span id="xiii.i-p46.2"></span>[Ga
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span id="xiii.i-p46.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p47"></span>Nor does this exposition appear at first
view unsuitable to the thread of Paul’s discourse; for if all whom God
has enlightened by his word are endowed with such authority, that
through means of that word they judge not only men but angels too, how
much more will they be prepared to judge of small and trivial matters?
As, however, Paul speaks here in the future tense, as referring to the
last day, and as his words convey the idea of an actual judgment, (as
the common expression is,) it were preferable, in my opinion, to
understand him as speaking of apostate  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325.md) angels. For the argument will be not
less conclusive in this way: “Devils, who sprang from so illustrious an
origin, and even now, when they have fallen from their high estate, are
immortal creatures, and superior to this corruptible world, shall be
judged by us. What then? Shall those things that are subservient to the
belly be exempted from our judgment?

<span id="xiii.i-p49"></span><span id="xiii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p50"></span>**4.** *If you have judgments then as to
things pertaining to this life* We must always keep in view what causes
he is treating of; for public trials are beyond our province, and ought
not to be transferred to our disposal; but as to private matters it is
allowable to determine without the cognizance of the magistrate. As,
then, we do not detract in any degree from the authority of the
magistrate by having recourse to arbitration, it is not without good
reason that the Apostle enjoins it upon Christians to refrain from
resorting to profane, that is, unbelieving judges. And lest they should
allege that they were deprived of a better remedy, he directs them to
choose out of the Church arbiters, who may settle causes agreeably and
equitably. Farther, lest they should allege that they have not a
sufficient number of qualified persons, he says that the meanest is
competent to discharge this office. There is, therefore, no detracting
here from the dignity of the office of magistrates, when he gives orders
that their office be committed to contemptible persons, for this (as I
have already said) is stated by anticipation, as though he had said:
“Even the lowest and meanest among you will discharge this office better
than those unbelieving judges to whom you have recourse. So far are you
from necessity in this way.”

<span id="xiii.i-p51"></span>Chrysostom comes near this interpretation,
though he appends to it something additional; for he is of opinion, that
the Apostle meant to say, that, even though the Corinthians should find
no one among themselves who had sufficient wisdom for judging, they must
nevertheless make choice of some, of whatever stamp they were. Ambrose
touches neither heaven nor earth.  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326.md) I think I have faithfully brought out
the Apostle’s intention — that the lowest among believers was preferred
by him to unbelievers, as to capacity of judging. There are some that
strike out a quite different meaning, for they understand the word <span
id="xiii.i-p52.2"></span>καθιζετε to be in the present tense — *You set
them to judge*, and by *those that are least esteemed in the Church*
they understand profane persons.  <span
id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327.md) This, however, is more ingenious than
solid, for that were a poor designation of unbelievers.  <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328.md) Besides, the form of expression, *if
you have*, would not suit so well with a reproof, for the expression
would have required rather to be *while you have,* for that *condition*
takes away from the force of it. Hence I am the more inclined to think,
that a remedy for the evil is here prescribed.

<span id="xiii.i-p55"></span>That this statement, however, was taken up
wrong by the ancients, appears from a certain passage in Augustine. For
in his book — “On the Work of Monks,” where he makes mention of his
employments, he declares that among his numerous engagements, the most
disagreeable of all was, that he was under the necessity of devoting a
part of the day to secular affairs, but that he at the same time endured
it patiently, because the Apostle  <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329.md) had imposed upon him this necessity.
From this passage, and from a certain epistle, it appears that the
bishops were accustomed to sit at certain hours to settle disputes, as
if the Apostle had been referring to them here. As, however, matters
always become worse, there sprang from this error, in process of time,
that jurisdiction which the officials of the bishops assume to
themselves in money matters. In that ancient custom there are two things
that are deserving of reproof — that the bishops were involved in
matters that were foreign to their office; and that they wronged God in
making his authority and command a pretext for turning aside from their
proper calling. The evil, however, was in some degree excusable, but as
for the profane custom, which has come to prevail in the Papacy, it were
the height of baseness to excuse or defend it.

<span id="xiii.i-p57"></span><span id="xiii.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p58"></span>**5.** *I speak to your shame* The meaning
is — “If other considerations do not influence you, let it at least be
considered by you, how disgraceful it is to you that *there is not so
much as one among you* who is qualified to settle an affair amicably
among *brethren* — an honor which you assign to *unbelievers* Now this
passage is not inconsistent with the declaration which we met with
above, when he stated that he did not make mention of their faults with
the view of *shaming them*, (<span id="xiii.i-p58.1"></span>[1Co
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#014)<span id="xiii.i-p58.1"></span>,.md)
for instead of this, by putting them to *shame* in this manner, he calls
them back from disgrace,  <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330.md) and
shows that he is desirous to promote their honor. He does not wish them,
then, to form so unfavorable an opinion of their society, as to take
away from all their *brethren* an honor which they allow to
*unbelievers*

<span id="xiii.i-p60"></span><span id="xiii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p61"></span>**7.** *Now indeed there is utterly a
fault.* Here we have the *second* part of the reproof, which contains a
general doctrine; for he now reproves them, not on the ground of their
exposing the gospel to derision and disgrace, but on the ground of their
going to law with each other. This, he says, is a *fault* We must,
however, observe the propriety of the term which he employs. For <span
id="xiii.i-p61.1"></span>ἥττημα in Greek signifies weakness of mind, as
when one is easily broken down  <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331.md)
by injuries, and cannot bear anything it comes afterward to be applied
to vices of any kind, as they all arise from weakness and deficiency in
fortitude.  <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332.md) What Paul, then,
condemns in the Corinthians is this — that they harassed one another
with law-suits. He states the reason of it — that they were not prepared
to bear injuries patiently. And, assuredly, as the Lord commands us
(<span id="xiii.i-p63.4"></span>[Mt
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044.md)<span id="xiii.i-p63.4"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p63.5"></span>[Ro
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#021)<span id="xiii.i-p63.5"></span>.md)
not to be overcome by evils, but on the contrary to overcome injuries by
acts of kindness, it is certain, that those who cannot control
themselves so as to suffer injuries patiently, commit sin by their
impatience. If contention in law-suits among believers is a token of
that impatience, it follows that it is *faulty*

<span id="xiii.i-p64"></span>In this way, however, he seems to discard
entirely judgments as to the affairs of individuals. “Those are
altogether in the wrong who go to law. Hence it will not be allowable in
any one to maintain his rights by having recourse to a magistrate.”
There are some that answer this objection in this way — that the Apostle
declares that where there are law-suits there is utterly a fault,
because, of necessity, the one or the other has a bad cause. They do
not, however, escape by this sophistry, because he says that they are in
fault, not merely when they inflict injury, but also when they do not
patiently endure it. For my own part, my answer is simply this — having
a little before given permission to have recourse to arbiters, he has in
this shown, with sufficient clearness, that, Christians are not
prohibited from prosecuting their rights moderately, and without any
breach of love. Hence we may very readily infer, that his being so
severe was owing to his taking particularly into view the circumstances
of the case. And, undoubtedly, wherever there is frequent recourse to
law-suits, or where the parties contend with each other pertinaciously
with rigor of law,  <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md) it is in
that case abundantly plain, that their minds are immoderately inflamed
with wrong dispositions, and are not prepared for equity and endurance
of wrongs, according to the commandment of Christ. To speak more
plainly, the reason why Paul condemns law-suits is, that we ought to
suffer injuries with patience. Let us now see whether any one can carry
on a law-suit without impatience; for if it is so, to go to law will not
be wrong in all cases, but only <span id="xiii.i-p65.2"></span>ἐπὶ τὸ
πολύ — for the most part. I confess, however, that as men’s manners are
corrupt, impatience, or lack of patience (as they speak) is an almost
inseparable attendant on lawsuits. This, however, does not hinder your
distinguishing between the thing itself and the improper accompaniment.
Let us therefore bear in mind, that Paul does not condemn law-suits on
the ground of its being a wrong thing in itself to maintain a good cause
by having recourse to a magistrate, but because it is almost invariably
accompanied with corrupt dispositions; as, for example, violence, desire
of revenge, enmities, obstinacy, and the like.

<span id="xiii.i-p66"></span>It is surprising that this question has not
been more carefully handled by ecclesiastical writers. Augustine has
bestowed more pains upon it than the others, and has come nearer the
mark;  <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md) but even he is somewhat
obscure, though there is truth in what he states. Those who aim at
greater clearness in their statements tell us that we must distinguish
between public and private revenge; for while the magistrate’s vengeance
is appointed by God, those who have recourse to it do not rashly take
vengeance at their own hand, but have recourse to God as an Avenger.
 <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md) This, it is true, is said
judiciously and appropriately; but we must go a step farther; for if it
be not allowable even to desire vengeance from God, then, on the same
principle, it were not allowable to have recourse to the magistrate for
vengeance.

<span id="xiii.i-p69"></span>I acknowledge, then, that a Christian man
is altogether prohibited from revenge, so that he must not exercise it,
either by himself, or by means of the magistrate, nor even desire it.
If, therefore, a Christian man wishes to prosecute his rights at law, so
as not to offend God, he must, above all things, take heed that he does
not bring into court any desire of revenge, any corrupt affection of the
mind, or anger, or, in fine, any other poison. In this matter love will
be the best regulator.  <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p71"></span>If it is objected, that it very rarely
happens that any one carries on a law-suit entirely free and exempt from
every corrupt affection, I acknowledge that it is so, and I say farther,
that it is rare to find a single instance of an upright litigant; but it
is useful for many reasons to show that the thing is not evil in itself,
but is rendered corrupt by abuse: First, that it may not seem as if God
had to no purpose appointed courts of justice; Secondly, that the pious
may know how far their liberties extend, that they may not take anything
in hand against the dictates of conscience. For it is owing to this that
many rush on to open contempt of God, when they have once begun to
transgress those limits;  <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337.md)
Thirdly, that they may be admonished, that they must always keep within
bounds, so as not to pollute by their own misconduct the remedy which
the Lord has permitted them to employ; Lastly, that the audacity of the
wicked may be repressed by a pure and uncorrupted zeal, which could not
be effected, if we were not allowed to subject them to legal
punishments.

<span id="xiii.i-p73"></span><span id="xiii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p74"></span>**8.** *But ye do injury.* Hence we see for
what reason he has inveighed against them with so much bitterness —
because there prevailed among them such a base desire of gain, that they
did not even refrain from *injuring* one another. He premised a little
before, with the view of exposing the magnitude of the evil, that those
are not Christians who know not to endure injuries. There is, then, an
amplification here, founded on a comparison: for if it is wrong not to
*bear* injuries patiently, how much worse is it to *inflict* them?

<span id="xiii.i-p75"></span>*And that your brethren* Here is another
aggravation of the evil; for if those are doubly culpable who defraud
strangers, it is monstrous for *brother* to be cheated or despoiled by
*brother* Now all of us are brethren that call upon *one Father in
heaven* (<span id="xiii.i-p75.1"></span>[Mt
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#009)<span id="xiii.i-p75.1"></span>..md)
At the same time, if any one acts an unprincipled part towards
strangers, Paul does not palliate the crime; but he teaches that the
Corinthians were utterly blinded in making sacred brotherhood a matter
of no moment.

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 6:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009.md)<span
id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**9.** Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind,

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>**9.** An nescitis, quod iniusti regenum
Dei hereditate non obtinebunt? Ne erretis, neque scortatores, neque
idololatrae, neque moechi, neque molles, neque paederastse.

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span>**10.** Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of
God.

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>**10.** Neque fures, neque avari, neque
ebriosi, neque maledici, neque rapaces regnum Dei hereditate obtinebunt.

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>**11.** And such were some of you: but ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>**11.** Et haec fuistis,  <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338.md) sed abluti estis, sed sanctificati
estis, sed iustificati estis in nomine Domini Jesu, et in Spiritu Dei
nostri.

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>**9.** *Know ye not*, etc. By
*unrighteousness* here you may understand what is opposed to strict
integrity. The *unrighteous*, then, that is, those who inflict injury on
their brethren, who defraud or circumvent others, who, in short, are
intent upon their own advantage at the expense of injuring others, *will
not inherit the kingdom of God* That by the *unrighteous* here, as for
example *adulterers*, and *thieves* and *covetous*, and *revilers*, he
means those who do not repent of their sins, but obstinately persist in
them, is too manifest to require that it should be stated. The Apostle
himself, too, afterwards expresses this in the words employed by him,
when he says that the Corinthians formerly *were such* The wicked, then,
*do inherit the kingdom of God*, but it is only in the event of their
having been first converted to the Lord in true repentance, and having
in this way ceased to be wicked. For although conversion is not the
ground of pardon, yet we know that none are reconciled to God but those
who repent. The interrogation, however, is emphatic, for it intimates
that he states nothing but what they themselves know, and is matter of
common remark among all pious persons.

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>*Be not deceived* He takes occasion from
one vice to speak of many. I am of opinion, however, that he has pointed
out those vices chiefly which prevailed among the Corinthians. He makes
use of three terms for reproving those lascivious passions which, as all
historical accounts testify, reigned, nay raged, to an extraordinary
height in that city. For it was a city that abounded in wealth, (as has
been stated elsewhere.) It was a celebrated mart, which was frequented
by merchants from many nations. Wealth has luxury as its attendant — the
mother of unchastity and all kinds of lasciviousness. In addition to
this, a nation which was of itself prone to wantonness, was prompted to
it by many other corruptions.

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span>The difference between *fornicators* and
*adulterers* is sufficiently well known. By *effeminate* persons I
understand those who, although they do not openly abandon themselves to
impurity, discover, nevertheless, their unchastity by blandishments of
speech, by lightness of gesture and apparel, and other allurements. The
fourth description of crime is the most abominable of all — that
monstrous pollution which was but too prevalent in Greece.

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span>He employs three terms in reproving
injustice and injuries. He gives the name of *thieves* to those who take
the advantage of their brethren by any kind of fraud or secret artifice.
By *extortioners*, he means those that violently seize on another’s
wealth, or like harpies  <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339.md) drew to
themselves from every quarter, and devour. With the view of giving his
discourse a wider range, he afterwards adds all *covetous* persons too.
Under the term *drunkards* you are to understand him as including those
who go to excess in eating. He more particularly reproves *revilers*,
because, in all probability, that city was full of gossip and slanders.
In short, he makes mention chiefly of those vices to which, he saw, that
city was addicted.

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span>Farther, that his threatening may have
more weight, he says, *be not deceived*; by which expression he
admonishes them not to flatter themselves with a vain hope, as persons
are accustomed, by extenuating their offenses, to inure themselves to
contempt of God. No poison, therefore, is more dangerous than those
allurements which encourage us in our sins. Let us, therefore, shun, not
as the songs of the Sirens,  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md) but
as the deadly bites of Satan, the talk of profane persons, when turning
the judgment of God and reproofs of sins into matter of jest. Lastly, we
must also notice here the propriety of the word <span
id="xiii.ii-p17.2"></span>κληρονομειν — *to inherit*; which shows *that
the kingdom of heaven* is the *inheritance of sons*, and therefore comes
to us through the privilege of adoption.

<span id="xiii.ii-p18"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p19"></span>**11.** *And such were ye.* Some add a
term of speciality: *Such were some of you*, as in Greek the word <span
id="xiii.ii-p19.1"></span>τινὲς is added; but I am rather of opinion
that the Apostle speaks in a general way. I consider that term to be
redundant, in accordance with the practice of the Greeks, who frequently
make use of it for the sake of ornament, not by way of restriction. We
must not, however, understand him as putting all in one bundle, so as to
attribute all these vices to each of them, but he simply means to
intimate, that no one is altogether free from these vices, until he has
been renewed by the Spirit. For we must hold this, that man’s nature
universally contains the seed of all evils, but that some vices prevail
and discover themselves more in some than in others, according as the
Lord brings out to view the depravity of the flesh by its fruits.

<span id="xiii.ii-p20"></span>Thus Paul, in the first chapter of his
Epistle to the Romans, piles up many different kinds of vices and
crimes, which flow from ignorance of God, and that ingratitude, of which
he had shown all unbelievers to be guilty, (<span
id="xiii.ii-p20.1"></span>[Ro
1:21-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#021.md)<span
id="xiii.ii-p20.1"></span>) — not that every unbeliever is infected with
all these vices, but that all are liable to them, and no one is exempt
from them all. For he who is not an adulterer, sins in some other way.
So also in the third chapter he brings forward as applicable to the sons
of Adam universally those declarations —

<span id="xiii.ii-p21"></span>their throat is an open sepulcher: their
feet are swift to shed blood: their tongue is deceitful or poisonous,
(<span id="xiii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Ro
3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013.md)<span
id="xiii.ii-p21.1"></span>)

<span id="xiii.ii-p22"></span>— not that all are sanguinary and cruel,
or that all are treacherous or revilers; but that, previously to our
being formed anew by God, one is inclined to cruelty, another to
treachery, another to impurity, another to deceit; so that there is no
one in whom there does not exist some trace of the corruption common to
all; and we are all of us, to a man, by an internal and secret affection
of the mind, liable to all diseases, unless in so far as the Lord
inwardly restrains them from breaking forth openly.  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md) The simple meaning, therefore, is
this, that prior to their being regenerated by grace, some of the
Corinthians were *covetous*, others *adulterers*, others *extortioners*,
others *effeminate*, others *revilers*, but now, being made free by
Christ, they were such no longer.

<span id="xiii.ii-p24"></span>The design of the Apostle, however, is to
humble them, by calling to their remembrance their former condition;
and, farther, to stir them up to acknowledge the grace of God towards
them. For the greater the misery is acknowledged to be, from which we
have escaped through the Lord’s kindness, so much the more does the
magnitude of his grace shine forth. Now the commendation of grace is a
fountain  <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md) of exhortations,
because we ought to take diligent heed, that we may not make void the
kindness of God, which ought to be so highly esteemed. It is as though
he had said: “It is enough that God has drawn you out of that mire in
which you were formerly sunk;” as Peter also says,

<span id="xiii.ii-p26"></span>“The time past is sufficient to have
fulfilled the lusts  
of the Gentiles.” (<span id="xiii.ii-p26.2"></span>[1Pe
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003)<span id="xiii.ii-p26.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.ii-p27"></span>*But ye are washed* He makes use of three
terms to express one and the same thing, that he may the more
effectually deter them from rolling back into the condition from which
they had escaped. Hence, though these three terms have the same general
meaning, there is, nevertheless, great force in their very variety. For
there is an implied contrast between *washing* and defilement —
*sanctification* and pollution — *justification* and guilt. His meaning
is, that having been once *justified*, they must not draw down upon
themselves a new condemnation — that, having been *sanctified*, they
must not pollute themselves anew — that, having been *washed*, they must
not disgrace themselves with new defilements, but, on the contrary, aim
at purity, persevere in true holiness, and abominate their former
pollutions. And hence we infer what is the purpose for which God
reconciles us to himself by the free pardon of our sins. While I have
said that one thing is expressed by three terms, I do not mean that
there is no difference whatever in their import, for, properly speaking,
God justifies us when he frees us from condemnation, by not imputing to
us our sins; he cleanses us, when he blots out the remembrance of our
sins. Thus these two terms differ only in this respect, that the one is
simple, while the other is figurative; for the term *washing* is
metaphorical, Christ’s blood being likened to water. On the other hand,
he sanctifies by renewing our depraved nature by his Spirit. Thus
sanctification is connected with regeneration. In this passage, however,
the Apostle had simply in view to extol, with many commendations, the
grace of God, which has delivered us from the bondage of sin, that we
may learn from this how much it becomes us to hold in abhorrence
everything that stirs up against us God’s anger and vengeance.

<span id="xiii.ii-p28"></span>*In the name of the Lord Jesus*, *etc*
With propriety and elegance he distinguishes between different offices.
For the blood of Christ is the procuring cause of our cleansing:
righteousness and sanctification come to us through his death and
resurrection. But, as the cleansing effected by Christ, and the
attainment of righteousness, are of no avail except to those who have
been made partakers of those blessings by the influence of the Holy
Spirit, it is with propriety that he makes mention of the Spirit in
connection with Christ. Christ, then, is the source of all blessings to
us from him we obtain all things; but Christ himself, with all his
blessings, is communicated to us by the Spirit. For it is by faith that
we receive Christ, and have his graces applied to us. The Author of
faith is the Spirit.

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Corinthians 6:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>**12.** All things are lawful unto me, but
all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but I will
not be brought under the power of any.

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span>**12.** Omnium mihi est potestas, at non
omnia conducunt: omnium mihi est potestas, sed ego sub nullius  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) redigar potestatem.

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span>**13.** Meats for the belly, and the belly
for meats: but God shall destroy both it and them. Now the body *is* not
for fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body.

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span>**13.** Escae ventri, et venter escis:
Deus vero et has et ilium destruet. Corpus autem non scortationi, sed
Domino, et Dominus corpori.

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span>**14.** And God hath both raised up the
Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power.

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>**14.** Porro Deus et Dominum suscitavit,
et nos suscitabit per potentiam suam.

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>**15.** Know ye not that your bodies are
the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make
*them* the members of an harlot? God forbid.

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span>**15.** An nescitis, quod corpora vestra
membra sunt Christi? tolthen lens igiturmembra Christi, faclam membra
meretricis? Absit.

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>**16.** What? know ye not that he which
is joined to an harlot is one body? for two, saith he, shall be one
flesh.

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span>**16.** An nescitis, quod qui adhaeret
meretrici, unum corpus est? erunt enim, inquit, duo in carnem unam.

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span>**17.** But he that is joined unto the
Lord is one spirit.

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span>**17.** Qui antera Domino adhaeret,unus
spiritus est.

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span>**18.** Flee fornication. Every sin that
a man doeth is without the body; but he that committeth fornication
sinneth against his own body.

<span id="xiii.iii-p16"></span>**18.** Fugite scortationem. Omne
peccatum quod commiserit homo, extra corpus est: qui autem scortatur, in
proprium corpus peccat.

<span id="xiii.iii-p17"></span>**19.** What? know ye not that your body
is the temple of the Holy Ghost *which is* in you, which ye have of God,
and ye are not your own?

<span id="xiii.iii-p18"></span>**19.** An nescitis, quod corpus vestrum
templum est Spiritus sancti, qui in vobis est, quem habetis a Deo, et
non estis vestri?

<span id="xiii.iii-p19"></span>**20.** For ye are bought with a price:
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God’s.

<span id="xiii.iii-p20"></span>**20.** Empti enim estis pretio:
glorificate iam Deum in corpore vestro et in spiritu vestro, quae Dei
sunt.

<span id="xiii.iii-p21"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iii-p22"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p23"></span>**12.** *All things are lawful for me.*
Interpreters labor hard to make out the connection of these things,
 <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344.md) as they appear to be somewhat
foreign to the Apostle’s design. For my own part, without mentioning the
different interpretations, I shall state what, in my opinion, is the
most satisfactory. It is probable, that the Corinthians even up to that
time retained much of their former licentiousness, and had still a savor
of the morals of their city. Now when vices stalk abroad with impunity,
 <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345.md) custom is regarded as law, and
then afterwards vain pretexts are sought for by way of excuse; an
instance of which we have in their resorting to the pretext of Christian
liberty, so as to make almost everything allowable for themselves to do.
They reveled in excess of luxury. With this there was, as usual, much
pride mixed up. As it was an outward thing, they did not think that
there was any sin involved in it: nay more, it appears from Paul’s words
that they abused liberty so much as to extend it even to fornication.
Now therefore, most appropriately, after having spoken of their vices,
he discusses those base pretexts by which they flattered themselves in
outward sins.

<span id="xiii.iii-p26"></span>It is, indeed, certain, that he treats
here of outward things, which God has left to the free choice of
believers, but by making use of a term expressive of universality, he
either indirectly reproves their unbridled licentiousness, or extols
God’s boundless liberality, which is the best directress to us of
moderation. For it is a token of excessive licentiousness, when persons
do not, of their own accord, restrict themselves, and set bounds to
themselves, amidst such manifold abundance. And in the *first* place, he
limits liberty  <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346.md) by two
exceptions; and *secondly*, he warns them, that it does not by any means
extend to fornication. These words, *All things are lawful for me,* must
be understood as spoken in name of the Corinthians, <span
id="xiii.iii-p27.2"></span>κατ ᾿ ἀνθυποφορὰν, (by anticipation,) as
though he had said, I am aware of the reply which you are accustomed to
make, when desirous to avoid reproof for outward vices. You pretend that
*all things are lawful* for you, without any reserve or limitation.

<span id="xiii.iii-p28"></span>*But all things are not expedient* Here
we have the *first* exception, by which he restricts the use of liberty
— that they must not abandon themselves to licentiousness, because
respect must be had to edification.  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347.md) The meaning is, “It is not enough that
this or that is allowed us, to be made use of indiscriminately; for we
must consider what is profitable to our brethren, whose edification it
becomes us to study. For as he will afterwards point out at greater
length, (<span id="xiii.iii-p29.2"></span>[1 Cor.
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024)<span id="xiii.iii-p29.2"></span>,.md)
and as he has already shown in <span id="xiii.iii-p29.3"></span>[Ro
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#013.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p29.3"></span>, etc., every one has liberty inwardly  <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348.md) in the sight of God on this condition,
that all must restrict the use of their liberty with a view to mutual
edification.

<span id="xiii.iii-p31"></span>*I will not be brought under the power of
anything* Here we have a *second* restriction — that we are constituted
lords of all things, in such a way, that we ought not to bring ourselves
under bondage to anything; as those do who cannot control their
appetites. For I understand the word <span
id="xiii.iii-p31.1"></span>τινος (any) to be in the neuter gender, and I
take it as referring, not to persons, but to things, so that the meaning
is this: “We are lords of all things; only we must not abuse that
lordship in such a way as to drag out a most miserable bondage, being,
through intemperance and inordinate lusts, under subjection to outward
things, which ought to be under subjection to us.” And certainly, the
excessive moroseness of those who grudge to yield up anything for the
sake of their brethren, has this effect, that they unadvisedly put
halters of necessity around their own necks.

<span id="xiii.iii-p32"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p33"></span>**13.** *Meats for the belly, and the
belly for meats* Here he shows what use ought to be made of outward
things — for the necessity of the present life, which passes away
quickly as a shadow, agreeably to what, he says afterwards. (<span
id="xiii.iii-p33.1"></span>[1Co
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p33.1"></span>.) *We must use this world so as not to abuse
it* And hence, too, we infer, how improper it is for a Christian man to
contend for outward things.  <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349.md)
When a dispute, therefore, arises respecting corruptible things, a pious
mind will not anxiously dwell upon these things; for liberty is one
thing — the use of it is another. This statement accords with another —
that

<span id="xiii.iii-p35"></span>The kingdom of God is not meat and
drink.  
(<span id="xiii.iii-p35.2"></span>[Ro
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p35.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.iii-p36"></span>*Now the body is not for fornication*
Having mentioned the exceptions, he now states still farther, that our
liberty ought not by any means to be extended to *fornication* For it
was an evil that was so prevalent at that time, that it seemed in a
manner as though it had been permitted; as we may see also from the
decree of the Apostles, (<span id="xiii.iii-p36.1"></span>[Ac
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p36.1"></span>,) where, in prohibiting the Gentiles from
fornication, they place it among things indifferent; for there can be no
doubt that this was done, because it was very generally looked upon as a
lawful thing. Hence Paul says now, There is a difference between
*fornication* and *meats*, for the Lord has not ordained *the body for
fornication*, as he has *the belly for meats* And this he confirms from
things contrary or opposite, inasmuch as it is consecrated to Christ,
and it is impossible that Christ should be conjoined with fornication.
What he adds — *and the Lord for the body*, is not without weight, for
while God the Father has united us to his Son, what wickedness there
would be in tearing away our body from that sacred connection, and
giving it over to things unworthy of Christ.  <span
id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350.md)

<span id="xiii.iii-p38"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p39"></span>**14.** *And God hath also raised up the
Lord* He shows from Christ’s condition how unseemly fornication is for a
Christian man; for Christ having been *received* into the heavenly
glory, what has he in common with the pollutions of this world? *Two*
things, however, *are* contained in these words. The *first* is, that it
is unseemly and unlawful, that our body, which is consecrated to Christ,
should be profaned by fornication, inasmuch as Christ himself has been
raised up from the dead, that he might enter on the possession of the
heavenly glory. The *second* is, that it is a base thing to prostitute
our body  <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351.md) to earthly pollutions,
while it is destined to be a partaker  <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352.md) along with Christ of a blessed
immortality and of the heavenly glory. There is a similar statement in
<span id="xiii.iii-p41.2"></span>[Col
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.iii-p41.2"></span>,
*If we have risen with Christ*, etc., with this difference, that he
speaks here of the *last* resurrection only, while in that passage he
speaks of the *first* also, or in other words, of the grace of the Holy
Spirit, by which we are fashioned again to a new life. As, however, the
resurrection is a thing almost *incredible* (<span
id="xiii.iii-p41.3"></span>[Ac
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#008)<span id="xiii.iii-p41.3"></span>.md)
to the human mind, when the Scripture makes mention of it, it reminds us
of *the power of God*, with the view of confirming our faith in it.
(<span id="xiii.iii-p41.4"></span>[Mt
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p41.4"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.iii-p42"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p43"></span>**15.** *Know ye not that our bodies are
the members*, etc. Here we have an explanation, or, if you prefer it, an
amplification of the foregoing statement. For that expression, *the body
is for the Lord*, might, owing to its brevity, be somewhat obscure.
Hence he says, as if with the view of explaining it, that Christ is
joined with us and we with him in such a way, that we become one body
with him. Accordingly, if I have connection with an harlot, I tear
Christ in pieces, so far as it is in my power to do so; for it is
impossible for me to draw Him into fellowship with such pollution.
 <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353.md) Now as that must be held in
abhorrence,  <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354.md) he makes use of the
expression which he is accustomed to employ in reference to things that
are absurd — *God forbid*  <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355.md)
Observe, that the spiritual connection which we have with Christ belongs
not merely to the soul, but also to the body, so that we are *flesh of
his flesh*, *etc* (<span id="xiii.iii-p46.6"></span>[Eph
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p46.6"></span>.) Otherwise the hope of a resurrection were
weak, if our connection were not of that nature — full and complete.

<span id="xiii.iii-p47"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p48"></span>**16.** *Know ye not that he that is
joined to an harlot* He brings out more fully the greatness of the
injury that is done to Christ by the man that has intercourse with an
harlot; for he becomes *one body*, and hence he tears away a member from
Christ’s body. It is not certain in what sense he accommodates to his
design the quotation which he subjoins from <span
id="xiii.iii-p48.1"></span>[Ge
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024.md)<span id="xiii.iii-p48.1"></span>.
For if he quotes it to prove that two persons who commit fornication
together become *one flesh*, he turns it aside from its true meaning to
what is quite foreign to it. For Moses speaks there not of a base and
prohibited cohabitation of a man and a woman, but of the marriage
connection which God blesses. For he shows that that bond is so close
and indissoluble, that it surpasses the relationship which subsists
between a father and a son, which, assuredly, can have no reference to
fornication. This consideration has led me sometimes to think, that this
quotation is not brought forward to confirm the immediately preceding
statement, but one that is more remote, in this way — “Moses says, that
by the marriage connection husband and wife become *one flesh*, but *he
that is jointed to the Lord* becomes not merely one flesh, but *one
spirit* with him.”  <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356.md) And in this
way the whole of this passage would tend to magnify the efficacy and
dignity of the spiritual marriage which subsists between us and Christ.

<span id="xiii.iii-p50"></span>If, however, any one does not altogether
approve of this exposition, as being rather forced, I shall bring
forward another. For as fornication is the corruption of a divine
institution, it has some resemblance to it; and what is affirmed
respecting the former, may to some extent be applied to the latter; not
that it may be honored with the praises due to the former,  <span
id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357.md) but for the purpose of expressing the
more fully the heinousness of the sin. The expression, therefore, that
*they two become one flesh*, is applicable in the true and proper sense
to married persons only; but it is applied to fornicators, who are
joined in a polluted and impure fellowship, meaning that contagion
passes from the one to the other.  <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358.md) For there is no absurdity in saying
that fornication bears some resemblance to the sacred connection of
marriage, as being a corruption of it, as I have said; but the former
has a curse upon it, and the other a blessing. Such is the
correspondence between things that are contrasted in an antithesis. At
the same time, I would prefer to understand it, in the first instance,
of marriage, and then, in an improper sense,  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359.md) of fornication, in this way — “God
pronounces husband and wife to be *one flesh*, in order that neither of
them may have connection with another flesh; so that the adulterer and
adulteress do, also, become *one flesh*, and involve themselves in an
accursed connection. And certainly this is more simple, and agrees
better with the context.

<span id="xiii.iii-p54"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p55"></span>**17.** *He that is joined to the Lord.*
He has added this to show that our connection with Christ is closer than
that of a husband and wife, and that the former, accordingly, must be
greatly preferred before the latter, so that it must be maintained with
the utmost chastity and fidelity. For if he who is joined to a woman in
marriage ought not to have illicit connection with an harlot, much more
heinous were this crime in believers, who are not merely *one flesh*
with Christ, but also *one spirit* Thus there is a comparison between
greater and less.

<span id="xiii.iii-p56"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p57"></span>**18.** *Flee fornication* *Every sin*,
etc. Having set before us honorable conduct, he now shows how much we
ought to abhor *fornication*, setting before us the enormity of its
wickedness and baseness. Now he shows its greatness by comparison — that
this sin alone, of all sins, puts a brand of disgrace upon the body. The
body, it is true, is defiled also by theft, and murder, and drunkenness,
in accordance with those statements —

<span id="xiii.iii-p58"></span>Your hands are defiled with blood. (<span
id="xiii.iii-p58.1"></span>[Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p58.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.iii-p59"></span>You have yielded your members instruments
of iniquity unto sin,  
(<span id="xiii.iii-p59.2"></span>[Ro
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p59.2"></span>,)

<span id="xiii.iii-p60"></span>and the like. Hence some, in order to
avoid this inconsistency, understand the words rendered *against his own
body*, as meaning *against us*, *as being connected with Christ*; but
this appears to me to be more ingenious than solid. Besides, they do not
escape even in this way, because that same thing, too, might be affirmed
of idolatry equally with fornication. For he who prostrates himself
before an idol, sins against connection with Christ. Hence I explain it
in this way, that he does not altogether deny that there are other
vices, in like manner, by which our body is dishonored and disgraced,
but that his meaning is simply this — that defilement does not attach
itself to our body from other vices in the same way  <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360.md) as it does from *fornication* My hand,
it is true, is defiled by theft or murder, my tongue by evil speaking,
or perjury,  <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361.md) and the whole body
by drunkenness; but *fornication* leaves a stain impressed upon the
body, such as is not impressed upon it from other sins. According to
this comparison, or, in other words, in the sense of less and more,
other sins are said to be *without the body* — not, however, as though
they do not at all affect the body, viewing each one by itself.

<span id="xiii.iii-p63"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p64"></span>**19.** *Know ye not that your body* He
makes use of two additional arguments, in order to deter us from this
filthiness. *First*, That *our bodies are temples of the Spirit*; and,
*secondly*, that *the Lord has bought us to himself as his property.*
There is an emphasis implied in the term *temple*; for as the Spirit of
God cannot take up his abode in a place that is profane, we do not give
him a habitation otherwise than by consecrating ourselves to him as
*temples* It is a great honor that God confers upon us when he *desires
to dwell* in us. (<span id="xiii.iii-p64.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p64.1"></span>.) Hence we ought so much the more to fear,
lest he should depart from us, offended by our sacrilegious actings.
 <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362.md)

<span id="xiii.iii-p66"></span>*And ye are not your own.* Here we have a
*second* argument — that we are not at our own disposal, that we should
live according to our own pleasure. He proves this from the fact that
the Lord has purchased us for himself, by paying the price of our
redemption. There is a similar statement in <span
id="xiii.iii-p66.1"></span>[Ro
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009.md)<span id="xiii.iii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p67"></span>To this end Christ died and rose again,
that he might be Lord of the living and the dead.

<span id="xiii.iii-p68"></span>Now the word rendered *price* may be
taken in two ways; either simply, as we commonly say of anything that it
has cost a price,  <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363.md) when we mean
that it has not been got for nothing; or, as used instead of the adverb
<span id="xiii.iii-p69.2"></span>τιμίως *at a dear rate*, as we are
accustomed to say of things that have cost us much. This latter view
pleases me better. In the same way Peter says,

<span id="xiii.iii-p70"></span>Ye are redeemed, not with gold and
silver, but with the precious  <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364.md)
blood of the Lamb, without spot. (<span id="xiii.iii-p71.3"></span>[1
Pet. 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019)<span id="xiii.iii-p71.3"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.iii-p72"></span>The sum is this,  <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365.md) that redemption must hold us bound,
and with a bridle of obedience restrain the lasciviousness of our flesh.

<span id="xiii.iii-p74"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p75"></span>**20.** *Glorify God* From this
conclusion, it appears that the Corinthians took a liberty to themselves
in outward things, that it was necessary to restrain and bridle. The
reproof therefore is this he allows that the body is subject to God no
less than the soul, and that accordingly it is reasonable that both be
devoted to his glory. “As it is befitting that the mind of a believer
should be pure, so there must be a corresponding outward profession also
before men, inasmuch as the power of both is in the hands of God, who
has redeemed both.” With the same view he declared a little ago, that
not only our souls but our bodies also are *temples of the Holy Spirit*,
that we may not think that we discharge our duty to him aright, if we do
not devote ourselves wholly and entirely to his service, that he may by
his word regulate even the outward actions of our life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc39012.htm#fr_313.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p10.1"></span>De moindre
estime en l’Eglise, ou, de nulle estime, assauoir au pris des autres;” —
“Of least esteem in the Church, or of no esteem; that is, in comparison
with others.”

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc39012.htm#fr_314.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p17.1"></span>Pourquoy
plustost n’endurez-vous l’injure? Pourqaoy plustost ne receuez-vous
dommage?” — “Why, do you not rather suffer injury? Why do you not rather
submit to loss?

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc39012.htm#fr_315.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p24.1"></span>Espient
incessamment et d’vne affection ardente;” — “Watch incessantly and with
eager desire.”

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc39012.htm#fr_316.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p26.1"></span>Qui sont
necessairement contraints de maintenir et plaider leurs causes sous
iuges infideles;” — “Who are from necessity shut up to maintain and
defend their law-suits before unbelieving judges.”

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc39012.htm#fr_317.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p29"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p29.1"></span>L’honneur
et la prerogatiue;” — “The honor and the prerogative.”

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc39012.htm#fr_318.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p35"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p35.1"></span>Mais, dira
quelqu’vn, encore a le prendre ainsi;” — “But, some one will say, even
taking it in this way.”

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc39012.htm#fr_319.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p36"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p36.1"></span>Sous
precepteurs et maistres;” — “Under preceptors and masters.”

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc39012.htm#fr_320.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p38"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p38.1"></span>Mais, dira
quelqu’vn:” — “But, some one will say.”

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc39012.htm#fr_321.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p39"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p39.1"></span>Ne defend
point aux Chrestiens d’aller demander conseil aux Legistes;” — “Does not
hinder Christians from going to ask the advice of lawyers.”

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc39012.htm#fr_322.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p41"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p41.1"></span>Au nom de
Christ;” — “In the name of Christ.”

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc39012.htm#fr_323.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p42"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p42.1"></span>Auquel
estant comme assis, il exerce sa iurisdiction;” — “On which being as it
were seated, he exercises his authority.”

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc39012.htm#fr_324.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p45"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p45.1"></span>Des
prestres et ministres;” — “Of priests and ministers.”

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc39012.htm#fr_325.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p48"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p48.1"></span>Apostats
et rebelles;” — “Apostate and rebellious.”

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc39012.htm#fr_326.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p52"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p52.1"></span>Sainct
Ambrose ne touche ne ciel ne terre (cornroe on dit) en l’exposition de
ces mots;” — “St. Ambrose touches neither heaven nor earth (as the
expression is) in the exposition of these words.” — Our Author’s meaning
seems to be that Ambrose *hangs in suspense*, or *gives no decided
opinion*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc39012.htm#fr_327.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p52.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p53"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p53.1"></span>Les gens
profanes et infideles;” — “Profane and unbelieving persons.”

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc39012.htm#fr_328.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p54"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p54.1"></span>Car ce
seroit vne facon de parler bien maigre et de peu de grace, d’appeler
ainsi les infideles;” — “For it were a very meager and awkward way of
speaking, to describe unbelievers in this manner.”

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc39012.htm#fr_329.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p56"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p56.1"></span>Sainct
Paul;” — “Saint Paul.”

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc39012.htm#fr_330.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p59"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p59.1"></span>Il les
garde de tomber en reproche;” — “He guards them against falling into
reproach.”

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc39012.htm#fr_331.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p62"></span> “<span
id="xiii.i-p62.1"></span>*Aiseement* abbatu et irrite;” — “Easily hurt
and irritated.”

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc39012.htm#fr_332.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p63"></span> The Greek term <span
id="xiii.i-p63.1"></span>ἥττημα is supposed by some to be derived
originally from the Hebrew verb <span id="xiii.i-p63.2"></span>חתת to be
*broken*, (which is rendered by <span id="xiii.i-p63.3"></span>ἡτταομαι,
in various instances in the Septuagint.) Our author had probably an eye
to this when stating the original meaning of the term to be “weakness of
mind, as when one is easily *broken down* by injuries.” The term
properly denotes *defect* It is instructive to observe, that a
disposition to “*go* to law with brethren,” rather than “suffer wrong,”
is represented by the Apostle as indicative of a *defect*, that is, in
Christian meekness or brotherly love; while the opposite disposition,
recommended by the Apostle, would, according to the standard of the
world’s morality, discover *defect*, in respect of *want of spirit*. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc39012.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p65"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p65.1"></span>Et qu’ils
veulent veoir le bout du proces; (comme on dit;)“ — “And are desirous to
see the issue of the case, (as the expression is.)”

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc39012.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p67"></span> Our Author, when treating at some length
of the same subject in the *Institutes*, (volume 3, p. 543,) makes a
particular reference to Augustine. (<span id="xiii.i-p67.1"></span>[Ep.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.i-p67.1"></span>. ad
Marcell.) — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc39012.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p67.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p68"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p68.1"></span>Se
retirent a Dieu comme a celuy *a* *qui appartient la vengeance*;” —
“They have recourse to God, as *to him to whom vengeance belongeth*.”
(<span id="xiii.i-p68.2"></span>[Ps
94:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p68.2"></span>..md)

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc39012.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p70"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p70.1"></span>Pour estre
bien gouuerne en ceci, il faut estre gaeni d’vne vraye charite;” — “To
be properly regulated in this, we must be adorned with true love.”

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc39012.htm#fr_337.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p72"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p72.1"></span>Plusieurs
tombent en ceste malediction, de *mepriser Dieu* ouuertement;” — “Many
fall into that curse of openly *contemning God*.” (<span
id="xiii.i-p72.2"></span>[Ps
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#013)<span id="xiii.i-p72.2"></span>..md)

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc39012.htm#fr_338.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>Et telles
choses auez-vous este,” ou “este aucuns;” — “And such things were you,”
or “were some of you.”

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc39012.htm#fr_339.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p15.1"></span>Comme
bestes rauissantes;” — “Like ravenous beasts.” The harpies, it is well
known, were fabulous monsters, proverbial for rapacity. It deserves to
be noticed that their name <span id="xiii.ii-p15.2"></span>ἅρπυίαι, and
the term made use of by Paul to denote *extortioners*, (<span
id="xiii.ii-p15.3"></span>ἅρπαγες) are both of them derived from <span
id="xiii.ii-p15.4"></span>ἅρπάζω, to seize upon, or take by violence. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc39012.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p17"></span> The Sirens were a kind of marine
monsters, which were supposed to inhabit certain rocky islands on the
south-west coast of Italy, and decoyed, it was alleged, by their
enchanting music, mariners to their destruction. Homer in his Odyssey
(8. 45) speaks of their *melodious song* (<span
id="xiii.ii-p17.1"></span>λιγυρὢ ἀοιδὢ.) Our Author, it will be
observed, in the connection in which he alludes to “the songs of the
Sirens,” strongly expresses his belief of the *reality* of Satanic
influence, as contrasted with what is *merely fabulous*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc39012.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p23"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p23.1"></span>Suiets a
toutes sortes de vices, sinon entant que le Seigneur les reprime au
dedans, afin qu’ils ne sortent dehors, et vienent “a estre mis en
effet;” — “Liable to all kinds of vices, unless in so far as the Lord
inwardly restrains them, that they may not break forth outwardly, and
come to be put in practice.”

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc39012.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="xiii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p25.1"></span>Vne
fontnine abondante;” — “An abundant fountain.”

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc39012.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p4.1"></span>D’aucune
chose, ou d’aucm;” — “Of anything, or of any one.”

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc39012.htm#fr_344.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p24.1"></span>A le
conioindre avec ce qui a este dit auparauant;” — “To connect it with
what has been said before.”

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc39012.htm#fr_345.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p25"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p25.1"></span>Or ou
on peche a bride auallee, et la ou les vices ne sont point corrigez;” —
“Where persons sin with a loose bridle, and where vices are not
punished.”

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc39012.htm#fr_346.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p27.1"></span>La
liberte Chrestienne;” — “Christian liberty.”

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc39012.htm#fr_347.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p29"></span> “<span
id="xiii.iii-p29.1"></span>L’edification du prochain;” — “The
edification of their neighbor.”

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc39012.htm#fr_348.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p30"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p30.1"></span>En sa
conscience;” — “In his conscience.”

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc39012.htm#fr_349.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p34"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p34.1"></span>Il
s’en fant que l’homme Chrestien se doyue soncier ne debatre pour les
choses externes;” — “*A* Christian man ought not to be solicitous, or to
contend for outward things.”

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc39012.htm#fr_350.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p37"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p37.1"></span>Choses
du tout indignes de Christ;” — “Things altogether unworthy of Christ.”

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc39012.htm#fr_351.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p40"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p40.1"></span>C’est
vne meschancete d’abandonner nostre corps, et le prostituer;” — “It is
wickedness to surrender our body, and prostitute it.”

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc39012.htm#fr_352.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p41"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p41.1"></span>Estre
vn tour participant;” — “To be one day a participant.”

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc39012.htm#fr_353.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p44"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p44.1"></span>Vne
pollution si fade et infame;” — “A pollution so filthy and infamous.”

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc39012.htm#fr_354.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p45"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p45.1"></span>Pour
ce que ceci est vne chose abominable, et que nous deuons auoir en
horreur;” — “As that is an abominable thing, and we must hold it in
abhorrence.”

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc39012.htm#fr_355.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p46"></span> The original expression, <span
id="xiii.iii-p46.1"></span>Μή γέοιτο! *Away with it*! corresponds to the
Hebrew term <span id="xiii.iii-p46.2"></span>חללה, *far be it*! Thus in
<span id="xiii.iii-p46.3"></span>[Ge
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#025.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p46.3"></span>, <span id="xiii.iii-p46.4"></span>חללה לך
משת כדברהזה, *Far be it from thee to act in this manner*! Homer makes
use of a similar expression — <span id="xiii.iii-p46.5"></span>μὴ τοῦτο
θεος τελεσειεν, *forbid that heaven should accomplish that*! (Od. 20.
234.) — *Ed*

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc39012.htm#fr_356.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p49"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p49.1"></span>Mais
nous sommes faits non seulement vne mesme chair auec le Seigneur, auquel
nous adherons, mais aussi vn mesme esprit;” — “But we have become not
merely one flesh with the Lord, to whom we are joined, but also one
spirit.”

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc39012.htm#fr_357.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p51"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p51.1"></span>Non
que la paillardise soit digne de estre ornee des louanges qui
appartienent a l’ordonnance du marriage;” — “Not that fornication is
worthy to be honored with the praises that belong to the ordinance of
marriage.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc39012.htm#fr_358.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p52"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p52.1"></span>Pour
monstrer que la contagion et vilenie passe de l’vn a l’autre;” — “To
show that contagion and pollution pass from the one to the other.”

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc39012.htm#fr_359.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p53"></span> Our Author makes use of the adverb —
*abusive*, (improperly,) referring, it is probable, to the figure of
speech called by Quinctilian (8. 6) <span
id="xiii.iii-p53.1"></span>*abusio* — the same as <span
id="xiii.iii-p53.2"></span>*catachresis* (perversion.) — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc39012.htm#fr_360.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p61"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p61.1"></span>N’en
demeure point tellement imprimee en nostre corps;” — “Does not remain
impressed upon our body in the same way.”

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc39012.htm#fr_361.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p62"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p62.1"></span>Par
mesdisance, detraction, et periure;” — “By evil-speaking, detraction,
and perjury.”

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc39012.htm#fr_362.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p65"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p65.1"></span>Par
nos vilenies plenes de sacrilege;” — “By our defilements, full of
sacrilege.”

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc39012.htm#fr_363.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p69"></span> Thus, <span
id="xiii.iii-p69.1"></span>ἐξευρίσκειν, is employed by classical writers
to mean — getting a thing *at a price*, that is, at a high price. See
Herod. 7. 119. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc39012.htm#fr_364.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p71"></span> Our Author has very manifestly in his
eye the epithet <span id="xiii.iii-p71.1"></span>τιμίος, (precious,) as
made use of by the Apostle Peter, in reference to the blood of Christ —
<span id="xiii.iii-p71.2"></span>τιμίῳ αἱματι, ὡς ἀμνου ἀμώμου κ. τ. λ.
— “precious blood, as of a Lamb without blemish,” etc. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc39012.htm#fr_365.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p73"></span> “<span id="xiii.iii-p73.1"></span>Le
sommaire et la substance du propos revient la;” — “The sum and substance
of the discourse amount to this.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc39013.md)
