[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc39000)  [Next](cc39002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 39: Corinthians, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>The Sixteenth century was distinguished by a
large and valuable accession of Expositors of the Sacred Volume. Mosheim
reckons up not fewer than fifty-five writers, who, in the course of that
century, devoted their labors, to a greater or less extent, to the
interpretation or illustration of the inspired writings — a circumstance
which at once indicated the progress of the principles of the
Reformation, and contributed most materially to their diffusion. Nor
were expository treatises, in illustrations of the Sacred Scriptures,
simply increased in number; they were marked by a decided improvement in
point of intrinsic value. It is to the honor of a large proportion of
the Interpreters of that age, that, rejecting the practice so well
exposed by Bishop Horsley, of “drawing I know not what mystical
meanings, by a certain cabalistic alchemy, from the simplest expressions
of holy writ,” they made it their endeavor, in every case, to ascertain
the true meaning of the Spirit of God, by a careful examination of the
text and context.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>In unbending integrity of purpose in the
investigation of the Inspired Oracles — which must be regarded as one of
the primary excellences of an Expositor — John Calvin is surpassed by
none in his own, or indeed in any age. His readers, even where they may
not be prepared to adopt his interpretation of a passage, cannot fail to
perceive that it is his sincere desire and honest endeavor to ascertain
its true meaning. His uprightness of design is more especially
observable in connection with passages bearing on controverted points.
In such cases the candid reader will discover no disposition to wrest a
single expression for the purpose of enlisting it on the side of a
particular system of opinion; but, on the contrary, the utmost fairness
of interpretation is uniformly apparent.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>Every one that is acquainted with Calvin’s
history, and considers the trying scenes through which he was called to
pass, must feel astonished that he should have found leisure to prepare,
in addition to all his other writings, Commentaries on nearly the whole
of the Sacred Scriptures. That he wrote so much, and more especially as
an Expositor, appears to have been chiefly owing to the frequent and
urgent solicitations of his intimate and beloved Farel, who “not merely
entreated Calvin, but frequently urged him with great vehemence to write
one Commentary after another, from a conviction that he possessed the
gifts requisite for exposition in a very extraordinary manner, and that,
with the blessing of God, his works of this kind would be extensively
useful. ‘Being an inconsiderable man myself,’ said he, ‘I am wont to
require very much from those that possess the greatest excellence, and
often press them hard to labor beyond their strength.’ It was his
conviction that every one who had received superior talents was bound to
devote them to the advancement of the kingdom of God.”  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="ii-p6"></span>The Epistles of Paul to the Corinthians form a
most important part of the Sacred Writings. Though not so systematic as
the Epistle to the Romans, they contain many passages, bearing directly
on the fundamentally important doctrines of the Christian system, while
they are of the highest utility in connection with Practical Theology.
The disorders that had unhappily crept into the Church at Corinth, gave
occasion for the Apostle’s handling at greater length than in any of his
other Epistles various important points as to doctrine and worship;
while the relaxed state of discipline that had begun to prevail among
them rendered it necessary to exhibit more fully the principles which
ought to regulate the administration of the Christian Church. In this
the overruling hand of Him who brings good out of evil is strikingly
apparent.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>While in the selection of the particular places
into which the Gospel was first introduced, and in which Christian
Churches were first planted, there is a display of Divine sovereignty
which it is beyond our power for fathom, this at least is abundantly
manifest, that the places selected were not those in which the triumphs
of the Gospel were likely to be most easily affected, but quite the
reverse. As the skill of the workman appears so much the more
strikingly, when the tools employed by him are few and simple, and the
materials to be wrought upon are hard and unyielding; so the wonders
achieved in the first ages of the Church, through *the foolishness of
preaching*. (<span id="ii-p7.1"></span>[1Co
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021)<span id="ii-p7.1"></span>) excite
so much the more our astonishment, when we take into view the peculiarly
formidable obstacles that opposed its progress in the places that were
selected as the scenes of its triumphs. Of this the inspired narrative
furnished in the Acts of the Apostles presents numerous and striking
illustrations; and when we observe the particular Churches to which
Paul’s Epistles are addressed — in the order in which they are presented
to our view in the New Testament — it might almost seem as if the order
of arrangement had been designed for the very purpose of calling our
particular attention to the fact that the triumphs of the Gospel had
been most signal in those places in which its success might have
appeared most unlikely. It is a remarkable circumstance, and, assuredly,
it is not to be looked upon as merely accidental, that the Christian
Church to which the *first* of Paul’s Epistles — in the order in which
they stand — is addressed, is one that had been planted, not in some
city of secondary importance, but in Rome itself, the metropolis of the
then known world; while the *second* of the Churches to whom Paul’s
Epistles are addressed is that of Corinth, a city that was proverbial
among Heathens themselves for its extraordinary profligacy, and
consequently the most unlikely place of all to be the scene of the
triumphs of a religion that will allow of no compromise with iniquity.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>When Paul first visited Corinth, appearances
were most unpromising; but, having received special encouragement from
his Divine Master, he continued to labor at Corinth for *a year and six
months*, (<span id="ii-p8.1"></span>[Ac
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#011)<span id="ii-p8.1"></span>;) and
such was the success of his labors in that profligate city, that after
enumerating some of the worst descriptions of character, he says to the
Corinthian converts, — “*And such were some of you*,” (<span
id="ii-p8.2"></span>[1Co 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span
id="ii-p8.2"></span>). While, however, the notorious wickedness that
prevailed at Corinth was the occasion of illustrating so much the more
clearly the power of Christianity in subduing human depravity, that
extreme dissoluteness of manners to which the Corinthian Christians had
been addicted previously to their conversion, and which was daily
witnessed by them in the unconverted around them, was fitted to exert a
most injurious influence; and while the disorders that prevailed in the
Corinthians Church after Paul left them, were in part attributable to
the insidious efforts of false teachers, there seems every reason to
believe that they were, in a very considerable degree, owing to the
contagion of corrupt manners around them. It is to this that we must
trace their preference of the ornaments of speech to the plain unadorned
doctrine of the cross — their party jealousies — their vexatious
lawsuits — their unseemly fellowship with heathens in their idol-feasts;
and their philosophical speculations, leading them to question the
possibility of a resurrection from the dead; while the flagrant case of
incest, fallen into by one of their number, and connived at by the
others, must still more manifestly be ascribed, in part, to the
contagion of evil example. Yet even in this we have occasion still
farther to mark the overruling hand of God in making evil subservient to
good — the disordered state of the Corinthian Church having given
occasion for exhortations and reproofs that are fraught with invaluable
instruction to the Church of Christ in every successive age.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>Calvin’s Commentary on the First Epistle to the
Corinthians was *first published* in the year 1546, and his Commentary
on the Second Epistle was published in the course of the same year. It
was a year that was greatly “unfavorable to Calvin’s repose. He was
obliged to cheer the drooping spirits of the Genevese, whom the designs
of Charles V. against The Reformed Religion had alarmed. But, besides
the cares which the fear of all these evils occasioned him, he was
deeply afflicted at the state of Geneva, and the general and daring
profligacy of its inhabitants.”  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="ii-p11"></span>In the course of the same year (as is stated by
Beza) one of the members of the senate, “instigated, it is supposed, by
two ministers of the Consistory, both of them given to drunkenness, and
not less afraid than others of the rigor of the law, accused Calvin of
preaching false doctrine.” It may well appear surprising that in such
circumstances he should have found leisure for preparing this valuable
portion of his Expository Works. This, however, is not peculiar to this
portion of his Commentaries; for the greater part of them were prepared
amidst numerous engagements and harassing occurrences. Yet they do not
bear the marks of haste, but might seem to have been prepared in quiet
retirement.

<span id="ii-p12"></span>The reader will observe that The Dedication,
which is prefixed to the Commentary on the First Epistle to the
Corinthians in all the ordinary editions of Calvin’s works, bears date
in 1556. It is however stated, at the same time, by Calvin in the close
of the Dedication, that the Commentary to which it is prefixed had been
originally published by him ten years previously. It will farther be
observed that in the commencement of the Dedication, Calvin alludes to
an individual to whom he had originally dedicated the Commentary, but
whose name he had been under the painful necessity — contrary to his
usual manner — of erasing from his writings. The individual alluded to
is James of Burgundy. The original Dedication, which is exceedingly
rare, is contained in “<span id="ii-p12.1"></span>Lettres de Calvin a
Jaque de Bourgogne,” kindly allowed to the Translator by Mr. Laing,
Edinburgh, from the Library of Writers to the Signet. A translation of
*that* Dedication, as well as of the one that was subsequently prefixed
by Calvin to this part of his Commentaries, will be found below.

<span id="ii-p13"></span>The circumstances connected with the case of
James of Burgundy, are briefly stated by Bayle in his Dictionary, (Art.
*Philip of Burgundy*,) in the following terms: — “James of Burgundy,
Lord of Fallaix, grandson, I suppose, of Baldwin, another natural son of
Duke Philip, professed the Protestant religion, but being scandalized at
the disputes which arose at Geneva between Bolsec and Calvin in the year
1551, he and his wife turned aside from the doctrine of the Reformed. He
had carried it fair in the Church several years. Calvin dedicated to him
his Commentary on the First Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, but
afterwards he suppressed that Dedication, and prefixed another to The
Marquis of Vic.”

<span id="ii-p14"></span>Farther, Bayle, in the Art. *Calvin*, remarks,
when speaking of Beza’s Life of Calvin — “We do not find in the edition
of 1564, in 12mo, what I have transcribed from the folio edition of
1565, when I said that the grandson of a bastard of Philip, the good
Duke of Burgundy, forsook the Church of Rome.”

<span id="ii-p15"></span>The editor of “<span
id="ii-p15.1"></span>Lettres de Calvin,” states that, after much
fruitless search in many quarters for two documents referred to in
Calvin’s Letters, viz. the Dedication of Calvin’s Commentary on the
First Epistle to the Corinthians, and an Apology for the Masters of
Falais, presented to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and composed by
Calvin, he had at length obtained them from one of the librarians of
Geneva. The Dedication, he states, had been “transcribed from a copy
that is at present at Strasburg.” “These pieces,” he adds, “arrived just
in time for being printed in the last sheet of the Letters, to which I
have not failed to append them, as being absolutely necessary to render
them intelligible. I flatter myself that the public will receive them
with delight, as an authentic document,  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) hitherto wanting in the ecclesiastical
history of this country. Even those who have neither interest nor
inclination for knowing this history to the bottom, will admire the
beauty of Calvin’s genius, the insinuating turns of the Dedication, and
the liberty and modesty that reign equally in the Apology; and they will
agree with me in thinking, that Calvin was no less expert, in the art of
pleading, than he had been in the art of preaching.”

<span id="ii-p17"></span>James of Burgundy was the grandson of Baldwin,
a natural son of Philip, Duke of Burgundy, whom the Emperor Maximilian,
in 1501, put in possession of Falais, a “Manor of Brabant, situated on
the borders of the county of Namur, upon the river Mohaine, between the
towns of Huy and Henneguy.” He was “elevated to the court of the Emperor
Charles the Fifth. He embraced the views of the Protestants at the age
of fifteen. He afterwards married Jolande of Brederode, a descendant of
the ancient Counts of Holland, and aunt to Henry of Brederode.” “This
marriage increased the suspicions that he had conceived as to the
religions in which he was brought up, so that he adopted the resolution
of leaving his native country, where he reckoned his life no longer
safe. His withdrawment led to a law-suit, before the court of Malines,
for the confiscation of his lands. During his exile, the Master of
Falais changed his abode from time to time, having taken refuge first at
Cologne, afterwards at Strasbourg, and at Basle, and, last of all, at
Geneva. There is ground to believe that he was a person of merit, upon
the testimony of Calvin himself, who, after pronouncing upon him the
highest eulogiums in his Dedication to the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, carried on a familiar correspondence with him for nearly
ten years, and takes pleasure in subscribing himself very frequently his
friend unreservedly forever.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

<span id="ii-p19"></span>“It is true that this friendship did not always
continue, but, on the contrary, changed into irreconcilable aversion. It
may at first view be thought, that the fault was altogether on the side
of the Master of Falais, and that Calvin must have had sufficient
reasons for carrying matters so far. We must, however, beware of forming
a rash judgment. We often see the greatest animosities between the best
friends arise out of nothing. Frequently the two parties are equally in
the wrong; and in many cases the fault is found to have been on the side
of the one that had been least suspected.”... The reader who peruses
superficially the statement of Beza, quoted by Bayle, might imagine not
merely that the Master of Falais had approved of all that Bolsec had
done or said, but also that he entirely abandoned the side of the
Protestants, and entered again the communion of the Romish Church. He
might, therefore, fall into a mistake on all these points.

<span id="ii-p20"></span>“I do not believe that the Master of Falais
ever thought of approving of the conduct of Bolsec, who ventured in a
full church to contradict a minister, when preaching the doctrine of
predestination. Neither Calvin nor Beza say so. Besides, the Master of
Falais protests in his Apology, that he has no sympathy with those that
support their religion in a turbulent and seditious manner. Assuredly he
must have been a fanatic, to do what Bolsec did on that occasion; but to
say that he had done well, he must have been a downright madman.

<span id="ii-p21"></span>“Nor is there any better proof that the Master
of Falais was of Bolsec’s opinion on the subject of predestination.
Calvin, Beza, and Castalio himself, (who would not have failed to
mention it,) say no such thing. Besides this, the Confession of the
Master of Falais, such as he had published in his Apology, is quite in
unison with Calvin’s sentiments; and it may be presumed that he had not
renounced these views in three years afterwards, while experience tells
us, that they have once imbibed. What was then, properly, the ground of
quarrel between Calvin and the Master of Falais? In my opinion it was
this: After Bolsec had been put in prison, on the 16th October 1551, for
having contradicted the doctrine of Calvin, and given occasion of
offense in the Church, Calvin was disposed to punish him with all
possible severity. To accomplish his purpose in accordance with forms,
he asked the opinion of the Churches of Switzerland, hinting to them at
the same time what he desired from them.”

<span id="ii-p22"></span>“‘We are desirous,’ says he, ‘to clear our
Church from this pestilence in such a way that it will not, on being
expelled from it, do injury to the neighboring Churches.’ meaning,
plainly enough, that he must either be put to death, or suffered to
remain in prison during his whole life.”

<span id="ii-p23"></span>The Master of Falais was of another mind;
whether it was that he was influenced by a regard to his own interest,
and that, being sickly, he imagined that his life depended on that of
his physician; or whether it was that, from a principle of humanity and
Christianity forbearance, he reckoned that Bolsec’s imprudence did not
merit so severe a punishment, he wrote to the clergy of the Cantons, or
to his friends in that quarters, and thereby defeated the design of
Calvin, who received replies less full and distinct, and much more
moderate, than he had expected and desired. Calvin finding himself
thwarted by the Master of Falais, got into a passion, broke entirely
with him, and roused up against him so many enemies at Geneva, that he
was obliged to retire into the district of Vaud.

<span id="ii-p24"></span>“Judge, now, which of the two was in the right
— Calvin or the Master of Falais.” “I do not know what became of the
Master of Falais after this time, nor *when* he died, nor *where*, nor
*in what communion*. I cannot, however, subscribe to the views of Mr.
Bayle, who says that the Master of Falais turned aside from the doctrine
of the Reformed, and that he renounced the Reformed Church. I am of
opinion that Beza, on whose authority Mr. Bayle proceeds, means nothing
more than this, that the Master of Falais left the Church of Geneva, on
quarreling with Calvin. This does not mean that he renounced the
Reformed Church, or abandoned the Protestant party. For it was possible
to quarrel with Calvin, to reject his views on predestination and on
persecution, and spurn the discipline of the Church of Geneva, and yet,
after all, be as good a Protestant, and member of the Reformed Church,
as Calvin himself.”

<span id="ii-p25"></span>From the extracts furnished above form an
introductory notice by the editor  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) of
the work already referred to, (“<span id="ii-p26.2"></span>Lettres de
Calvin a Jaque de Bourgogne,”) it will abundantly appear that the writer
is desirous to present as favorable a view of James of Burgundy as the
circumstances of the case will at all admit of. His attempt to show that
James of Burgundy may have, after all, remained in connection with the
Reformed Church, appears to be more ingenious than solid, and seems
directly at variance with a statement by Calvin in his *second*
Dedication to this part of his Commentaries, to this effect, that the
individual to whom the former Dedication was addressed “has
intentionally made it his object, not merely to withdraw as much as
possible from me personally, but also *to have no connection with our
Church*.”  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) This expression naturally
conveys the idea that he had not simply left the Church of Geneva, but
had withdrawn entirely from the Reformed Church. But however matters may
have been as to this, the case, as a whole, was of such a nature as
could not fail to be painful in the extreme to the mind of Calvin. In
proportion, however, to the pain excited in his mind by this distressing
case, must have been the happiness afforded him by an occurrence of an
opposite nature, which took place about the same time.

<span id="ii-p28"></span>The Church of Geneva, which had suffered from
the defection of James of Burgundy, was strengthened by the accession of
an Italian nobleman, Galeazus Caracciolus, who, having been led to
espouse the Protestant faith, took up his residence at Geneva in the
year 1551, with a view to enjoy the society of Calvin, and have
opportunity of attending upon his ministry. The particulars of his
history, and more especially of his conversion from Popery, are
interestingly narrated in a work entitled — “The Italian Convert — Newes
From Italy of A Second Moses — The Life of Galeacius Caracciolus, The
noble Marquesse of Vico,” etc. London, 1635.

<span id="ii-p29"></span>This work was written originally in Italian,
“by Nicola Balbani, minister of the Italian Church in Geneva. It was
translated into Latin by Beza; into French by Minutoli and by Sieur de
Lestan; and into English by William Crashaw.”  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

<span id="ii-p31"></span>The writer of this work referred to presents,
in the dedicatory epistle, the following brief summary of the leading
facts of this interesting case: —

<span id="ii-p32"></span>“I present you with as strange a story as, out
of the holy stories, afore it be laid down at large? Thus it is: —
Galeacius Caracciolus, son and heir-apparent to Calantonius, Marquesse
of Vicum in Naples, bred, borne and brought up in Popery — a courtier to
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, nephew to the Pope, Paul the Fourth,
being married to the Duke of Nucerne’s daughter, and having by her six
goodly children, at a sermon of Peter Martyr’s was first untouched, —
after reading Scripture, and other good means, was fully converted —
labored with his lady, but could not persuade her; therefore, that he
might enjoy Christ and serve Him with a good conscience, he left his
lands, livings and honors of a Marquesdome, the comforts of his lady and
children, the pleasures of Italy, his credit with the Emperor, his
kindred with the Pope, and forsaking all for the love of Jesus Christ,
came to Geneva, and there lived a poor and mean, yet an honorable and a
holy life for forty years; and though his father, his lady, his kinsmen,
yea, the Emperor and Pope did all they could to reclaim him, yet
continued he constant to the end, and lived and died the blessed servant
of God, leaving behind him a rare example to all ages.”  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

<span id="ii-p34"></span>Caracciolus was born at Naples in January 1517.
His father’s name was Calantonius, who was descended from the ancient
and noble family of the Caracciolies in the district of Capua, and was
elevated by Charles the Fifth to the rank of Vico. His mother was
descended from the noble family of the Caraffi, and was sister to Pope
Paul the Fourth. His wife, Victoria, was daughter to the Duke of
Nuceria, one of the principal noblemen of Italy. She brought him a large
fortune. He had by her six children — four sons and two daughters. His
mind was first influenced in favor of the Protestant religion by
repeated conversations held by him with a nobleman nearly related to
him, who had, along with various persons of distinction in Italy, been
induced to renounce Popery, chiefly through the instrumentality of a
Spanish nobleman, who at that time resided at Naples — Joannes
Waldesius. The more immediate instrument, however, of his conversion,
was the celebrated Peter Martyr Vermilius. Caracciolus having from
curiousity gone to hear him, was savingly impressed by what he heard;
and it is to be noticed as an interesting coincidence, that the means of
his conversion was a discourse on a passage in the *First Epistle to the
Corinthians*.

<span id="ii-p35"></span>“At that time Peter Martyr was in hand with
Paul’s First Epistle to the Corinthians, and as he was showing the
weakness and deceitfulness of the judgment of man’s reason in spiritual
things, as likewise the power and efficacy of the Word of God in those
men in whom the Lord worketh by His Spirit — amongst other things he
used this simile or comparison: If a man, walking in a large place, see
afar off men and women dancing together, and hear no sound of
instrument, he will judge them mad, or at least foolish; but if he come
nearer them, and perceive their order and hear their music, and mark
their measures and their courses, he will then be of another mind, and
not only take delight in seeing them, but feel a desire in himself to
bear them company and dance with them. Even the same (said Martyr)
betides many men, who, when they behold in others a sudden and great
change of their looks, apparel, behavior, and whole course of life, at
the first sight they impute to melancholy, or some other foolish humor;
but if they look more narrowly into the matter, and begin to hear and
perceive the harmony and sweet consent of God’s Spirit, and His word in
them, by the joint power of which two this change was made and wrought,
(which afore they counted folly,) then they change their opinion of
them, and first of all begin to like them, and that change in them, and
afterwards feel in themselves a motion and desire to imitate them, and
to be of the number of such men, who, forsaking the world and his
vanities, do think that they ought to reform their lives by the rule of
the gospel, that so they may come to true and sound holiness. This
comparison, by the grace of God’s Spirit, wrought so wonderfully with
Galeacius, as himself hath often told more carefully to restrain his
affections from following the world and his pleasures, as before they
did, and to set his mind about seeking out the truths of religion and
the way to true happiness... And thus far, in this short time, had the
Lord wrought with him by that sermon: — as *first*, to consider with
himself seriously whether he were right or no: *secondly*, to take up an
exercise continual of reading Scripture: *thirdly*, to change his former
company and make choice of better. And this time was done in the year
1541, and in the four and twentieth year of his age.”

<span id="ii-p36"></span>Caracciolus having thus had his eyes opened to
the errors of Popery, and being fully satisfied that it was his duty to
embrace the Protestant faith, found himself placed in peculiarly trying
circumstances. Even those of his countrymen who were personally inclined
towards the Protestant cause could not be persuaded to hold meetings in
private for their mutual edification, but were prepared not merely to
conceal their real sentiments, but even to practice occasional
conformity to the rites of Popery. In these circumstances he was called
to consider whether he would be prepared to spend the remainder of his
life in daily violation of the dictates of conscience, or forsake all
for Christ.

<span id="ii-p37"></span>“The sacrifice of his secular dignities and
possessions did not cost him a sigh, but as often as he reflected on the
distress which his departure would inflict on his aged father, who, with
parental pride, regarded him as the heir of his titles and the stay of
his family, — or his wife whom he loved, and by whom he was loved
tenderly, and on the dear pledges of their union, he was thrown into a
state of unutterable anguish, and started back with horror from the
resolution to which conscience had brought him. At length, by an heroic
effort of zeal, which few can imitate and many will condemn, he came to
the determination of bursting the tenderest ties which perhaps ever
bound man to country and kindred.”  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8)

<span id="ii-p39"></span>The reader will observe that the author of the
work already referred to — “The Life of Galeacius Caracciolus,” etc.,
entitles it — “The Italian Convert — Newes from Italy of a Second Moses”
— and in accordance with this title the writer, in the dedicatory
epistle prefixed to the work, institutes a comparison between Moses and
the subjects of his narrative in a variety of interesting particulars.

<span id="ii-p40"></span>“I may say much rather than Jacob — Few and
evil have my days been; yet in these few days of mine something have I
seen, more have I read, more have I heard; yet never saw I, heard I, or
read I any example (all things laid together) more nearly seconding the
examples of Moses than this of the most renowned Marquesse Galeacius.
Moses was the adopted son of a king’s daughter; Galeacius the natural
son and heir apparent to a Marquesse; Moses a courtier in the court of
Pharoah, Galeacius in the court of the emperor Charles the Fifth; Moses
by adoption a kin to a Queen, Galeacius by marriage to a Duke, by blood
son to a Marquesse, nephew to a Pope; Moses in possibility of a kingdom,
he in possession of a Marquesdome; Moses in his youth brought up in the
heathenism of Egypt, Galeacius schooled in the superstition of Popery;
Moses at last saw the truth and embraced it, so did Galeacius; Moses
openly fell from the heathenism of Egypt, so did Galeacius from the
superstition of Popery. But all this is nothing to that which they both
suffered for their conscience. What Moses suffered Saint Paul tells us —
‘Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of
Pharoah’s daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversities with the
people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt.’ Nay, Moses had rather be a base brick maker amongst the
oppressed Israelites, being true Christians, than to be the son of a
king’s daughter in the court of Pharaoh amongst idolaters. In like case
noble Galeacius, when he was come to years and knowledge of Christ,
refused to be called son and heir to a Marquesse, cup-bearer to an
Emperor, nephew to a Pope, and chose rather to suffer affliction,
persecution, banishment, loss of lands, livings, wife, children, honors
and preferments, than to enjoy the sinful pleasures of Italy for a
season, esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches than the honors of
a Marquesdome without Christ, and therefore, seeing he must either want
Christ or want them, he despoiled himself of all these to gain Christ.
So excellent was the fact of Moses, and so heroical, that the Holy Ghost
vouchsafes it remembrance both in the Old and New Testament, that so the
Church in all ages might know it and admire it, and doth chronicle it in
the epistle to the Hebrews almost two thousand years after it was done.
If God himself did so to Moses, shall not God’s Church be careful to
commend to posterity this second Moses, whose love to Christ Jesus was
so zealous, and so inflamed by the heavenly fire of God’s Spirit, that
no earthly temptations could either quench or abate it; but to win
Christ, and to enjoy Him in the liberty of His Word and Sacraments, he
delicately contemned the honors and pleasures of the Marquesdome of
Vicum — Vicum, one of the paradises of Naples, Naples, the paradise of
Italy — Italy of Europe — Europe of the earth; yet all these paradises
were nothing to him in comparison of attaining the celestial paradise,
there to live with Jesus Christ.”

<span id="ii-p41"></span>“And for my part I freely and truly profess, I
have been often ravished with admiration of this noble example — to see
an Italian so excellent a Christian — one so near the Pope so near to
Jesus Christ, and such blessed fruit to blossom in the Pope’s own
garden; and to see a nobleman of Italy forsake that for Christ, for
which I fear many amongst us would forsake Christ Himself. And surely (I
confess truth) the serious consideration of this so late, so true, so
strange an example hath been a spur to my slowness, and whetted my dull
spirits, and made me to esteem more highly of religion than I did
before. I know it is an accusation of myself, and a disclosing of my own
shame to confess thus much; but it is a glory to God, an honor to
religion, a credit to the truth, and a praise to this noble Marquesse,
and therefore I will not hide it. And why should I shame to confess it,
when that famous and renowned man of God, holy Calvin, freely
confesseth,  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) as in the sequel of this
story you shall hear, that this nobleman’s example did greatly confirm
him in his religion, and did revive and strengthen his faith, and cheer
up all the holy graces of God in him.”

<span id="ii-p43"></span>Caracciolus had no sooner left Naples,
forsaking country and kindred for the sake of Christ and his gospel,
than every possible effort was employed by his family and relatives, and
all that were concerned for the credit of the religion that he had
abandoned, to induce him to return.

<span id="ii-p44"></span>On his refusing to do so, “sentence was passed
against him, and he was deprived of all the property which he inherited
from his mother.” “In the following year... an offer was made to him in
the name of his uncle now Pope Paul IV.,  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) that he should have a protection against
the Inquisition, provided he would take up his residence within the
Venetian States; a proposal to which neither his safety nor the dictates
of his conscience would permit him to accede.” He went repeatedly to
Italy, and had interviews with his aged father, but was refused the
privilege of seeing his wife and family, until about six years after he
had quitted Naples. His wife, Victoria, then wrote to him, earnestly
requesting an interview with him, and fixing the place of meeting. This
she did on two different occasions, but in both instances, on his
arrival at the appointed place, after a fatiguing and dangerous journey,
he had the disappointment of finding that she did not make her
appearance. At length, impatient of delay, he went once more to Italy,
and at his father’s house had an interview with Victoria, when he
entreated her to accompany him to Geneva, “promising that no restraint
should be laid on her conscience, and that she should be at liberty to
practice her religion under his roof. After many protestations of
affection, she finally replied, that she could not reside out of Italy,
nor in a place where any other religion than that of the Church of Rome
was professed, and farther, that she could not live with him as her
husband so long as he was infected with heresy.” The scene at their
final parting was peculiarly tender. “Bursting into tears, and embracing
her husband, Victoria besought him not to leave her a widow, and her
babies fatherless. The children joined in the entreaties of their
mother, and the eldest daughter, a fine girl of thirteen, grasping his
knees, refused to part with him. How he disengaged himself, he knew not;
for the first thing which brought him to recollection was the noise made
by the sailors on reaching the opposite shore of the Gulf.” (of Venice.)
“He used often to relate to his intimate friends, that the parting scene
continued long to haunt his mind; and that not only in dreams, but also
in reveries into which he fell during the day; he thought he heard the
angry voice of his father, saw Victoria in tears, and felt his daughter
dragging at his heels.”  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)

<span id="ii-p47"></span>Caracciolus spent the remainder of his days at
Geneva, with the exception of five years spent by him at Nion and
Lausanne, for the sake of economy in his living, and continued steadfast
in his attachment to the Protestant faith. He was on terms of intimate
friendship with Calvin, which continued unbroken until the death of the
Reformer in 1564 — thirteen years subsequent to the time when Carcciolus
went to reside at Geneva. *One* step taken by him during his exile must
be regarded as (to say the least) of greatly questionable propriety —
that of contracting a second marriage, about nine years after he went to
reside at Geneva. Calvin, on being consulted by him as to the propriety
of such a step, “felt great scruples as to the expediency” of it, but
“ultimately gave his approbation to it, after he had consulted the
divines of Switzerland and the Grisons.”  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) Accordingly, the courts of Geneva having
legally pronounced a sentence of divorce against Victoria, on the ground
of her obstinate refusal to live with her husband, he married Anne
Fremejere, the widow of a French refugee from Rouen, with whom he
continued to live happily in a state of dignified frugality.  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) He was held, deservedly, by the Church of
Geneva, and wherever he was known, in the greatest esteem, as one whose
piety was of a very high order. Matthew Henry, in one part of his
Writings,  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) makes mention of “a
noble saying of the Marquis of Vico, ‘Let their money perish with them,
who esteem all the wealth of this world worth one hour’s communion with
God in Jesus Christ,’” and assuredly the devotedness manifested by him
to the cause of Christ affords ample evidence that the sentiment was
deeply inwrought into his mind. He died at Geneva in 1568, in the
sixty-eighth year of his age.

<span id="ii-p51"></span>Calvin’s Commentary on Paul’s Epistles to the
Corinthians having, (in common with a large portion of his Commentaries
on other parts of the Scriptures) been translated by himself into French
for the benefit of his countrymen, the Latin original and French version
have been carefully collated, and any additional terms or clauses that
occur in the latter, tending to bring out more fully the Author’s
meaning, will be found given at the bottom of the page. “Calvin,” says
Pasquier (Biographia Evangelica) “was a good writer, both in Latin and
French, and our French tongue is highly obliged to him for enriching it
with so great a number of fine expressions.” D’Aubigne, when speaking of
Calvin’s early education, states that “he made great progress in Latin
literature. He became familiar with Cicero, and learned from this great
master to employ the language of the Romans with a facility, purity, and
ease that excite the admiration even of his enemies. But at the same
time, he found riches in this language which he afterwards transferred
to his own.” “CALVIN when called upon to discuss and to prove, enriched
his mother-tongue with modes of connection and dependence, with shadows,
transitions, and dialectic forms, that it did not as yet possess.”
 <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)

<span id="ii-p53"></span>The Old English Translation of this part of
Calvin’s Commentaries having been published in black letter in 1573,
about thirty years after the Commentary itself was first published by
Calvin, it is not to be wondered that it abounds with obsolete terms and
phrases, fitted to render it unpalatable to modern taste. In addition to
this, the Author’s meaning has, in not a few instances, been manifestly
misapprehended, and in almost all cases Calvin’s critical observations
are entirely omitted. The Translator, Mr. Thomas Timme, was the author
of various works, one of which more particularly — quaintly entitled “A
Silver Bell,” appears to have gained much celebrity. It has been thought
proper to subjoin to this Preface, a *fac-simile* of the title-page to
this old English version, with a copy of “The Epistle Dedicatorie” to
the Archbishop of Canterbury.

<span id="ii-p54"></span>In preparing the present Translation of this
part of Calvin’s Commentaries, care has been taken to bring out as fully
as possible the Author’s meaning, while the reader will find in a
variety of instances in the *Notes* some additional light thrown on some
important but difficult passages — derived chiefly from the labors of
interpreters that have appeared subsequently to the times of Calvin. The
Translator is fully persuaded that Calvin’s Commentaries on *both* of
Paul’s Epistles to the Corinthians will be found, in so far at least as
the Author’s meaning is properly brought out in the Translation, to
justify most amply the confident expectation of the Author himself, (as
expressed in his *first* Dedication to the Commentary on the *First*
Epistle) — that it would “furnish no ordinary assistance for thoroughly
understanding Paul’s mind.”

<span id="ii-p55"></span>J.P.  
Elgin, October 1848.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc39001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p5"></span> Kirch-hoffer’s Life of Farel, pp. 281, 282.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc39001.htm#fr_1) <span id="ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p10"></span> Mackenzie’s Life of Calvin, p. 63.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc39001.htm#fr_2) <span id="ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p16"></span> “<span id="ii-p16.1"></span>Un monument
authentique;” — “An authentic moment.”

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc39001.htm#fr_3) <span id="ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p18"></span> “<span id="ii-p18.1"></span>Entier amy a
jamais;” — “Thorough friend for ever.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc39001.htm#fr_4) <span id="ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p26"></span> “<span id="ii-p26.1"></span>Avertissement de
l’Editeur.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc39001.htm#fr_5) <span id="ii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="ii-p27"></span> “<span id="ii-p27.1"></span>Nihil haberet cum
Ecclesia nostria commune;” — “<span id="ii-p27.2"></span>De n’avoir rien
de commun avec nostre Eglise;” — Might have nothing in common with our
Church.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc39001.htm#fr_6) <span id="ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p30"></span> M’Crie’s History of the Reformation in Spain.
— *Note*.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc39001.htm#fr_7) <span id="ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p33"></span> *Baxter*, in his “Treatise of Conversion,”
makes the following interesting allusion to the case of Caracciolus: —
“As it was with Carraciolus, the Marquis of Vicum, when his conscience
bid him leave his land, and friends, and all for Christ, to forsake
Popery, and betake himself to these countries where he might enjoy the
gospel, his house and lands then came in his eyes: ‘What! must I leave
all these for mere conscience, and live I know not how.’ His wife hangs
upon him, his children with tears do cry after him, ‘O father! leave us
not.’ And many a sob and sigh it costs his heart before he could resolve
to get away.” — *Baxter*’*s Works*, volume 7. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc39001.htm#fr_8) <span id="ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p38"></span> M’Crie’s History of the Reformation in Spain.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc39001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p42"></span> The reader will find the statement referred to
in the second dedication prefixed by Calvin to his commentary on 1st
Corinthians — “<span id="ii-p42.1"></span>Caeterum quia et ego, quantum
ad fidei meae pietatisque confirmationem valeat tuum exemplum experior,”
etc.; — “As however I, for my part, know by experience the tendencies of
your example to strengthen my faith and piety,” etc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc39001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p45"></span> It is remarked by David Dundas Scott, Esq.,
Translator of Ranke’s History of the Popes of Rome, in connexion with
the case of certain relatives of Pope Paul IV. who had incurred his
sever displeasure, that “although Paul seems to have relaxed the stern
severity of the archinquisitor in regard to his Protestant nephew,
\[Galeacius Caracciolus,\] by permitting him to be dealt with in the way
of remonstrance and bribery, when another would have been arrested and
put to death, still the compulsory retirement of the latter, after
literally leaving ‘brethren and sisters, and father and mother, and wife
and children, and lands for Christ’s sake and the gospel’ to Geneva,
where he spent the evening of his days as a ruling-elder in the Italian
Reformed Church, presented a striking contrast to the brilliant fortunes
of his cousins the Caraffas, during their enjoyment of the Papal favor.
But when the Pope found these ungrateful, and when that favor was lost,
the Genevan exile \[Caracciolus\] must have felt peculiarly thankful for
the deliverance he had had from such tempations and reverses, and one
can hardly suppose but that the Pope himself must have been affected by
the contrast at all points between his many Roman Catholic and one
Reformed relative.” — Ranke’s History of the Romish Popes,. *Note*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc39001.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p46"></span> M’Crie’s History of the Reformation in Spain.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc39001.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p48"></span> The part which Calvin acted as to this matter
will be found to be in exact accordance with the views expressed by him,
when commenting on <span id="ii-p48.2"></span>[1 Corinthians
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015)<span id="ii-p48.2"></span> — a
passage on which opposite opinions have been entertained by eminent
interpreters. It may be noticed in connexion with this case, that the
United Brethren, when laboring in the West India Islands, near the close
of the last century, felt greatly at a loss as to the course proper to
be pursued in the case of converted negroes, whose husbands or wives had
(as very frequently happened) been purchased by proprietors from other
islands, and were, in consequence of this, parted from them for ever.
“For some time” they “prohibited the converts from contracting another
marriage, apprehending this to be inconsistent with the principles of
Christianity.” Afterwards, however, in particular cases, they judged it
better “not to hinder,” though they “did not advise, a regular marriage
with another person.” — Brown’s History of Misssions, volume 1.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc39001.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="ii-p49"></span> M’Crie’s History of the Reformation in Spain,

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc39001.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p50"></span> Communicant’s Companion.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc39001.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p52"></span> D’Aubigne’s History of the Reformation,
(Oliver and Boyd’s Edition,) volume 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Facsimile of Title Page to 1573 English Translation](cc39002)
