[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms01)  [Next](cms03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# CREATIVE MIND AND SUCCESS

### PART I.

### AN INQUIRY INTO THE TRUTH.

AN inquiry into Truth is an inquiry into the cause of things as the
human race sees and experiences them. The starting point of our thought
must always begin with our experiences. We all know that life *is*, else
we could not even think that we are. Since we can think, say and feel,
we must be. We live, we are conscious of life; therefore we must be and
life must be. If we are life and consciousness (self-knowing) then it
follows that we must have come from life and consciousness. Let us
start, then, with this simple fact: *Life is and life is conscious*.

But what is the nature of this life; is it physical, mental, material or
spiritual? A little careful thinking based upon logic, more than any
merely personal opinion, will do much in clearing up some of these
questions that at first seem to stagger us with their bigness.

How much of that which *is* may we call life? The answer would have to
be: Life is *all* that there is; it is the reason for all that we see,
hear, feel--all that we experience in any way. Now nothing from nothing
leaves nothing, and it is impossible for something to proceed from
nothing. Since something is, that from which it came must be all that
is. *Life, then, is all that there is*. Everything comes from it,
ourselves included.

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

The next question is, how do things come from life? How do the things
that we see come from the things that we do not see? The things that we
see must be real because we see them. To say they are not real will
never explain them nor answer any question about them. God's world is
not a world of illusion but one of divine realities. The truth must not
explain away things that we see. It must explain what they are. We are
living and experiencing varying degrees of consciousness and conditions.
Only when the why of this living and of our experiences is

Jesus understood will we know the least thing about the truth. did not
say that things are illusions. He said that we must not judge from the
standpoint of the seen but must judge righteously or with right
judgment; and He meant that we must get behind the appearance and find
out what caused it. So let us not in any way fool ourselves nor allow
ourselves to believe we have always been fooled. We are living in a
world of realities. Whatever we have experienced is a reality as far as
that experience is concerned, although if we had had a higher
understanding of life, the unpleasant experience might have been
avoided.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What Life Is](cms03.md)
