[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms07)  [Next](cms09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIRST STEPS.

THE first thing to realize is that since any thought manifests it
necessarily follows that all thought does the same, else how should we
know that the particular thought we were thinking would be the one that
would create? Mind must cast back all or none. Just as the creative
power of the soil receives all seeds put into it, and at once begins to
work upon them, so mind must receive all thought and at once begin to
operate upon it. Thus we find that all thought has some power in our
lives and over our conditions. We are making our environments by the
creative power of our thought. God has created us thus and we cannot
escape it. By conforming our lives and thought to a greater
understanding of law we shall be able to bring into our experience just
what we wish, letting go of all that we do not want to experience and
taking in the things we desire.

Every person is surrounded by a thought atmosphere.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This mental
atmosphere is the direct result of thought which in its turn becomes the
direct reason for the cause of that which comes into our lives. Through
this power we are either attracting or repelling. Like attracts like and
we attract to us just what we are in mind. It is also true that we
become attracted to something that is greater than our previous
experience by first embodying the atmosphere of our desire.

Every business, every place, every person, everything has a certain
mental atmosphere of its own. This atmosphere decides what is to be
drawn to it. For instance, you never saw a successful man who went
around with an atmosphere of failure. Successful people think about
success. A successful man is filled with that subtle something which
permeates everything that he does with an atmosphere of confidence and
strength. In the presence of some people we feel as though nothing were
too great to undertake; we are uplifted; we are inspired to do great
things, to accomplish; we feel strong, steady, sure. What a power we
feel in the presence of big souls, strong men, noble women!

Did you ever stop to inquire *why* it is that such persons have this
kind of an effect over you while others seem to depress, to drag you
down, and in their presence you feel as though life were a load to
carry? One type is positive, the other negative. In every physical
respect they are just alike, but one has a mental and spiritual power
which the other does not have, and without that power the individual can
hope to do but little.

Which of these two do we like the better? With which do we want to
associate? Certainly not with the one that

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

depresses us; we have enough of that already. But what about the man who
inspires us with our own worth? Ah, he is the man we will turn to every
time. Before ever we reach him, in our haste to be near, even to hear
his voice, do we not feel a strength coming to meet us? Do you think
that this man who has such a wonderful power of attraction will ever
want for friends? Will he ever have to look up a position? Already so
many positions are open to him that he is weighing in his mind which one
to take. He does not have to become a success; he already is a success.

Thoughts of failure, limitation or poverty are negative and must be
counted out of our lives for all time. Somebody will say, "But what of
the poor; what are you going to do with them; are they to be left
without help?" No; a thousand times no. The same power is in them that
is in all men. They will always be poor until they awake and realize
what life is. All the charity on earth has never done away with poverty,
and never will; if it could have done so it would have done so; it could
not, therefore it has not. It will do a man a thousand times more good
to show him how to succeed than it will to tell him he needs charity. We
need not listen to all the calamity howlers. Let them howl if it does
them any good. God has given us a power and we must use it. We can do
more toward saving the world by proving this law than all that charity
has ever given it.

Right here, in the manifold world to-day, there is more money and
provision than the world can use. Not even a fraction of the wealth of
the world is used. Inventors and discoverers are adding to this wealth
every day; they

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

are the real people. But in the midst of plenty, surrounded by all the
gifts of heaven, man sits and begs for his daily bread. He should be
taught to realize that he has brought these conditions upon himself;
that instead of blaming God, man or the devil for the circumstances by
which he is surrounded, he should learn to seek the truth, to let the
dead bury their dead. We should tell every man who will believe what his
real nature is; show him how to overcome all limitations; give him
courage; show him the way. If he will not believe, if he will not walk
in the way, it is not our fault, and having done all we can, we must go
our way. We may sympathize with *people* but never with trouble,
limitation or misery. If people still insist upon hugging their troubles
to themselves, all the charity in the world will not help them.

Remember that God is that silent power behind all things, always ready
to spring into expression when we have provided the proper channels,
which are receptive and positive faith in the evidence of things not
seen with the physical eye but eternal in the heavens.

*All is mind, and we must provide a receptive avenue for it as it passes
out through us into the outer expression of our affairs*. If we allow
the world's opinion to control our thinking, then that will be our
demonstration. If, on the other hand, we rise superior to the world, we
shall do a new thing.

Remember that all people are making demonstrations, only most of them
are making the ones they do not desire, but the only ones they can make
with their present powers of perception.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How To Attain Strength](cms09)
