[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms08)  [Next](cms10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### HOW TO ATTAIN STRENGTH.

LET us see that we use the right attitude of mind in all that we do,
filling ourselves with such courage and power of strength that all
thought of weakness flees before us. If any thought of weakness should
come, ask this question: Is life weak? If life is not weak and if God is
not discouraged, then you are not, never were, and never will be. I
should like to see the sickly, discouraged thought that could withstand
this attitude of mind.

No! Life is strong, and you are strong with the strength of the
Infinite; forget all else as you revel in this strength. You are strong
and can say I AM. You have been laboring under an illusion; now you are
disillusioned. Now you know, and knowing is using the law in a
constructive way. "I and my Father are One;" this is strength for the
weak, and life for all who believe.

We can so fill ourselves with the drawing power of attraction that it
will become irresistible. Nothing can hinder things from coming to the
man who knows that he is dealing with the same power that creates all
from itself, moves all within itself, and yet holds all things in their
places. I am one with the Infinite Mind. Let this ring through you many
times each day until you rise to that height that, looking, sees.

In order to be sure that we are creating the right kind of a mental
atmosphere and so attracting what we want, we must at first watch our
thinking, lest we create that which we should not like to see manifest.
In other words, *we must think only what we wish to experience*. All is

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

mind, and mind casts back at the thinker that only which he thinks.
Nothing ever happens by chance. Law governs all life, and all people
come under that law. But that law, so far as we are concerned, we
ourselves set in motion, and we do this through the power of our
thought.

Each person is living in a world of his own making, and he should speak
only such words and think only such thoughts as he wishes to see
manifested in his life. We must not hear, think, speak, read or listen
to limitation of any kind. There is no way under heaven whereby we can
think two kinds of thought and get only one result; it is impossible,
and the sooner we realize it the sooner we shall arrive. This does not
mean that we must be afraid to think lest we create the wrong image, but
it does mean that the way most people think can produce nothing but
failure; that is why so few succeed.

The person who is to succeed will never let his mind dwell on past
mistakes. He will forgive the past in his life and in the lives of other
people. If he makes a mistake he will at once forgive it. He will know
that so long as he desires any good, there is nowhere in the universe
anything that opposes him. God does not damn anyone or anything; man
damns everyone and everything.

God does not make things by comparing His power with some other power.
God knows that when He speaks it done; and if we partake of the divine
nature we must know the same thing in our lives that God knows in His.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>"I am the master of my fate,<br />
 I am the captain of my soul."</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What We Will Attract](cms10)
