[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms14)  [Next](cms16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### THE POWER OF WORDS.

MAN'S word, spoken forth into creative mind, is endowed with power of
expression. "By our words we are justified and by our words we are
condemned." Our word has the exact amount of power that we put into it.
This does not mean power through effort or strain but power through
absolute conviction, or faith. It is like a little messenger who knows
what he is doing and knows just how to do it. We speak into our words
the intelligence which we are, and backed by that greater intelligence
of the Universal Mind our word becomes a law unto the thing for which it
is spoken. Jesus understood this far better than we do. Indeed, He
absolutely believed it, for He said, "Heaven and earth shall pass away
but my words shall not pass away till all be fulfilled."

This makes our word inseparable from Absolute Intelligence and Power.
Now if any word has power it must follow that all words have power. Some
words may have a greater power than others, according to our conviction,
but all words have some power. How careful, then, we should be what kind
of words we are speaking.

All this goes to prove that we really are one with the Infinite Mind,
and that our words have the power of life within them; that the word is
always with us and never far off. The word is within our own mouth.
Every time we speak we are using power.

We are one in mind with the whole universe; we are all eternally united
in this mind with real power. It is our own fault if we do not use this
truth after we see it.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We should feel
ourselves surrounded by this mind, this great pulsating life, this
all-seeing and all-knowing reality. When we do feel this near presence,
this great power and life, then all we have to do is to speak forth into
it, speak with all the positive conviction of the soul that has found
its source, and above all else never fear but that it will be done unto
us even as we have believed.

What wonderful power, what a newness of life and of power of expression,
is waiting for those who really believe. What may the race not attain to
when men wake up to the real facts of being? As yet the race has not
begun to live, but the time is drawing near. Already thousands are using
this great power, and thousands are eagerly watching and waiting for the
new day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Why Belief is Necessary](cms16.md)
