[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms09)  [Next](cms11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

### WHAT WE WILL ATTRACT.

WE will always attract to us, in our lives and conditions, according to
our thought. Things are but outer manifestations of inner mental
concepts. Thought is not only power; it is also the form of all things.
The conditions that we attract will correspond exactly to our mental
pictures. It is quite necessary, then, that the successful business man
should keep his mind on thoughts of happiness, which produce
cheerfulness instead of depression; he should radiate joy, and should be
filled with faith, hope and expectancy. These cheerful, hopeful
attitudes of mind are indispensable to the one who really wants to do
things in life.

Put every negative thought out of your mind once and for all. Declare
your freedom. Know that no matter what others may say, think or do, *you
are a success*, now, and nothing can hinder you from accomplishing your
good.

All the power of the universe is with you; feel it, know it, and then
act as though it were true. This mental attitude alone will draw people
and things to you.

Begin to blot out, one by one, all false beliefs, all idea that man is
limited or poor or miserable. Use that wonderful power of will that God
has given to you. Refuse to think of failure or to doubt your own power.

See only what you wish to experience, and look at nothing else. No
matter how many times the old thought returns, destroy it by knowing
that it has no power over you; look it squarely in the face and tell it
to go; it does not belong to you, and you must know--and stick to
it--that you are now free.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

Rise up in all the faith of one who knows what he is dealing with, and
declare that you are one with Infinite Mind. Know that you cannot get
away from this One Mind; that wherever you may go, there, right beside
you, waiting to be used, is all the power there is in the whole
universe. When you realize this you will know that in union with this,
the only power, *you* are more than all else, you are more than anything
that can ever happen *to you*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: More About the Power of Attraction](cms11)
