[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms15)  [Next](cms17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WHY BELIEF IS NECESSARY.

ALWAYS when we pray we must believe. Our idea of prayer is not so much
asking God for things as it is believing that we already have the things
that we need. As we have said before, this *already-believing* is
necessary because all is mind, and until we have provided that full
acceptance we have not made a mold into which mind could pour itself and
through which it could manifest. This positive belief is absolutely
essential to real creative work; and if we do not at present have it,
then we must develop it.

All is law, and cause and effect obtain through all life. Mind is cause,
and what we term matter, or the visible, is effect. As water will freeze
into the form that it is poured, so mind will solidify only into the
forms that our thought takes. Thought is form. The individual provides

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the form; he never creates or even manifests,--that is, of himself;
there is something that does all this for him. His sole activity is the
use of this power. This power is always at hand ready to be spoken into
and at once ready to form the words into visible expression. But the
mold that most of us provide is a very poor one, and we change it so
quickly that it is more like a motion picture than anything else.

Already we have the power; it is the gift of the Most High in its Finite
Expression. But our ignorance of its use has caused us to create the
wrong form, which in its turn has caused mind to produce the form which
we have thought into it. From this law of cause and effect we may never
hope to escape; and while we may think of it as a hard thing, at first,
yet, when we understand, we shall see it as absolute justice without
which there could be no real self-acting, individual life at all.
Because of our divine individuality, even God may have to wait our
recognition of Him and His laws.

People in business will do well to remember this and so to form their
thought that they will be willing to receive what they send out. No
thought of discouragement or disorder should ever be created, but only
positive assurance, strong thoughts of success, of Divine activity, the
feeling that with God all things are possible, the belief that we are
One with that Great Mind. These are the thoughts that make for success.

The realization that we are dealing with one and not with two powers
enables us to think with clearness. We are not troubled about
competition or opposition or failure because there is nothing but life,
and this life is continually

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

giving to us all that we could ask for, wish, or think into it.

We can now see how essential it is that thought should be held
one-pointed; that we should think always and only upon what we want,
never letting our mind dwell on anything else. In this way the Spirit
works through us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Where So Many Fail](cms17)
