[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms22)  [Next](cms24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

### ACTION.

THE Universe is teeming with activity. There is motion everywhere.
Nothing ever stands still. All activity comes from mind. If we want to
be in line with things we must move. This doesn't mean that we must
strain or struggle, but we must be willing to do our part by letting the
Law work through us.

God can do for us only as we will allow Him to do through us.
Intelligence gives us ideas and in our turn we work on them. But our
work is no longer done in any sense of doubt or fear, for we know that
we are dealing with something that never makes a mistake. We proceed
with a calm confidence born of the inner trust in a Power that is
Infinite. Behind all of our movements, then, is a great purpose, to let
the Law work through us.

The Law of Activity must be complied with; we must be willing to take
the way of outer activity. Jesus went to the tomb of Lazarus. We may
have to go but there will accompany us something that never fails.

This law of activity we must use in our business. So many business
places that we go into have such an atmosphere of inactivity, produce
such a drowsy feeling, that we at once lose all interest in what is
going on. We don't feel like buying. We leave that place without any
apparent reason and go into another. Here we feel that all is life, all
is motion, all is activity. We feel confident that this is the place we
are looking for. We will buy here; we find just what we want; we are
satisfied with our purchase and go away cheerful.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Now to create this activity something more than thought is essential.
Not that it does not come first, but the one who has this thought of
activity will naturally manifest it in vigorous, energetic movement
which helps to produce a spirit of activity in his business and in
everything he undertakes. Wherever you see a man who does not move, then
you will find one whose thought is inactive; the two always go together.

A man in a store or place of business should always be moving his goods.
He should always be doing something. People will see this and getting
the thought of activity behind it will want to trade there. We are not
attracted to a store that always has the same things on the same shelf.
The world likes action, change. Action is Life.

Let a clerk in a store think activity and begin to manifest it, even
though he may not be waiting on customers, and in a short time he will
be waiting on them. Alertness is the word. Always be alert. *There must
be mental alertness before there can be physical activity*.

Act as though things were happening even though they may not appear to
be. Keep things moving and soon you will have to avoid the rush.
Activity is genius. Half the stores that you go into make you sleepy
before you get out, and you feel as though you can't get out fast
enough. The other half are alive and those are the ones who are doing
the business of the world.

The man who is active in his thought doesn't have to sit by himself to
think; he works while he thinks and so complies with the Law which has
to work through him. The thought of activity makes him move, and the
thought of confidence makes his movements sure, and the

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

thought of Supreme Guidance makes his work intelligent.

We must be careful and not get into ruts; always be doing something new
and different, and you will find life becomes a great game in which you
are taking the leading part.

Life will never become tiresome to the active mind and body. It is so
interesting that we wonder if we will ever get enough of it. Some people
get into such lazy mental habits that a new idea cannot find entrance.
Great things are done by people who think great thoughts and then go out
into the world to make their dreams come true.

If you can't find anything new to do, go home and change the bed around,
or the piano; put the cook stove in the parlor and eat on the back step
for a time. It will start something moving and changing in you that will
never stop. The wide awake person can find so many things to do that he
hasn't time even to begin in this life and he knows that Eternity is
necessary to carry out the ideals that he already has evolved.

Everything comes from Mind, but Mind acts on itself and we must act on
ourselves and on conditions; not as a slave but as a master. Be
interested in life, if you want life to be interested in you. Act in
Life and Life will act through you. So will you also become one of the
great people on earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ideas of the Infinite](cms24)
