[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms21)  [Next](cms23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

### MONEY A SPIRITUAL IDEA.

MANY people seem to think that money must be evil, although I have never
as yet seen any who did not want a lot of this evil in their lives.

If all is an expression of life, then *money* is an expression of life,
and as such, must be good. Without a certain amount of it in this life,
we would have a hard time. But how to get it; that is the race problem.
How shall we acquire wealth? Money didn't make itself, and not being
self-creative it must be an effect. Behind it must be the Cause that
projects it. That cause is never seen; no cause is ever seen.
Consciousness is cause and people who have a money consciousness have
the outward expression of it. People who have it as a sure reality in
their mind, have it as an expression in their pocket. People who don't
have this mental likeness don't have money in their pockets.

What we need to do is to acquire a money consciousness. This may seem
very material, but the true idea of money is not material--it is
spiritual. We need to make our unity with it. We can never do this while
we hold it away from us by thinking that we haven't it. Let us change
the method and begin to make our unity with supply by daily declaring
that all the Power in the Universe is daily bringing to us all that we
can use. Feel the presence of supply. Know that it is yours now.

Make yourself feel that you now have, and to you shall be given. Work
with yourself until there is nothing in you that doubts. Money can not
be kept away from the man who understands that all is Mind, and that
Divine Law governs his life.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

Daily give thanks for perfect supply. Feel it to be yours, that you have
entered into the full possession of it now.

Refuse to talk poverty or limitation. Stick to it that you are rich. Get
the million dollar consciousness. There is no other way, and this will
react into everything that you do.

See money coming to you from every source and from every direction. Know
that everything is working for your good.

Realize in your life the presence of an Omnipotent Power. Speak forth
into It, and feel that It responds to your approach.

Whenever you see anything or anybody whom you think has more than you,
at once affirm that you have the same thing. This doesn't mean that you
have what is his, but that you have as much. It means that all you need
is yours.

Whenever you think about anything big, at once say, "That means me." In
this way you learn to unify yourself, in the Law, with large concepts,
and according to the way that Law works, it will tend to produce that
thing for you.

Never let yourself doubt for even a minute. Always be positive about
yourself. Keep watch over the inner workings of your thought, and the
Law will do the rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Action](cms23.md)
