[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms24)  [Next](cms26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### DON'T BE A LEANER.

NEVER lean on other people. You have strength of your own that is great
enough to do all that is necessary. The Almighty has implanted genius
within the soul of everyone and what we need to do is to unearth that
inner genius and cause it to shine forth. We will never do this while we
look to others for guidance. "To thine own self repair, wait thou within
the silence dim, and thou shalt find Him there."

All the power and intelligence of the Universe is already within,
waiting to be utilized. The Divine Spark must be fanned into a blaze of
the living Fire of your own divinity.

Self-reliance is the word to dwell on. Listen to your own voice; it will
speak in terms that are unmistakable. Trust in your own self more than
in all else. All great men have learned to do this. Every person, within
his own soul, is in direct communication with the Infinite
Understanding. When we depend on other people we are simply taking their
light and trying to light our path with it. When we depend on ourselves
we are depending on that inner voice that is God, speaking in and
through man. "Man is the inlet and the outlet to all there is in God."
God has made us and brought us up to where we recognize our own
individuality; from now on we will have to let Him express through us.
If it were different we should not be individuals. "Behold I stand at
the door and wait." This is a statement of the near presence of power;
but we, the Individual, must open the door. This door is our thought and
we are the guardian of it, and when we do open the door we will find
that the Divine Presence is right

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

at hand, waiting, ready and willing to do for us all that we can
believe.

We are strong with the strength of the Infinite. We are not weak. We are
great and not mean. We are One with the Infinite Mind.

When you have a real thing to do, keep it to yourself. Don't talk about
it. Just know in your own mind what it is that you want and keep still
about it. Often when we think that we will do some big thing we begin to
talk about it and the first thing we know all the power seems to be
gone.

This is what happens. We are all sending out into Mind a constant stream
of thought; the clearer it is, the better will it manifest; if it
becomes doubtful it will not have so clear a manifestation. If it is
confused it will manifest only confusion. All this is according to the
Law of Cause and Effect, and we cannot change that Law. Too often, when
we tell our friends what we are going to do, they confuse our thought by
laughing about it, or by doubting our capacity to do so large a thing.
Of course this would not happen if we were always positive, but when we
become the least bit negative it will react and we will lose that power
of clearness which is absolutely necessary to good creative work.

When you want to do a big thing, get the mental pattern, make it
perfect, know just what it means, enlarge your thought, keep it to
yourself, pass it over to the creative power behind all things, wait and
listen, and when the impression comes, follow it with assurance. Don't
talk to anyone about it. Never listen to negative talk or pay any
attention to it and you will succeed where all others fail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Causes and Conditions](cms26.md)
