[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms25)  [Next](cms27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### CAUSES AND CONDITIONS.

WHEN we realize that life is not fundamentally physical, but mental and
spiritual, it will not be hard for us to see that by a certain mental
and spiritual process we can demonstrate what we want.

We are not dealing with conditions but with causes. Causes originate
only from the unseen side of life. This is not strange as the same might
be said of electricity, or even of life itself. We do not see life, we
only see what it does. This we call a condition. Of itself it is simply
an effect. We are living in the outer world of effects and in the inner
world of causes. These causes we set in motion by our thought, and,
through the power inherent within the cause, expresses the thought as a
condition. It follows that the cause must be equal to the effect and
that the effect always evaluates with the cause held in mind. Everything
comes from One Substance, and our thought qualifies that Substance and
determines what is to take place in our life.

The whole teaching of the *Bhagavad Gita* is that there is but One and
that it becomes to us just what we first believe into it. In other words
we manifest the unmanifested. This in no way takes away from the
omnipotence of God, but adds to it, for He has created something that is
able to do this. God still rules in the Universe, but we are given the
power to rule in our lives.

We must realize, then, absolutely that we are dealing with a Substance
that we have a right to deal with, and by learning its laws we will be
able to subject them to

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

our use, just as Edison does with electricity. Law is but we must use
it.

The substance that we deal with, in itself, is never limited, but we
often are, because we draw only what we believe.

Because we are limited is no reason why the Universe should have
limitation. Our limitation is only our unbelief; life can give us a big
thing or a little thing. When it gives us a little thing, it is not
limited, any more than life is limited when it makes a grain of sand,
because it could just as well have made a planet. But in the great
scheme of things all kinds of forms, small and large, are necessary,
which, combined, make a complete whole. The power and substance behind
everything remain Infinite.

Now this life can become to us only through us, and that becoming is the
passing of Spirit into expression in our lives through the form of the
thought that we give to it. In itself life is never limited; an ant has
just as much life as an elephant though smaller in size. The question is
not one of size but one of consciousness.

We are not limited by actual boundaries, but by false ideas about life
and by a failure to recognize that we are dealing with the Infinite.

Limitation is an experience of the race, but it is not the fault of God,
it is the fault of man's perception. And to prove that this is so, let
any man break the bonds of this false sense of life and he at once
begins to express less and less limitation. It is a matter of the growth
of the inner idea.

People often say when they are told this, "Do you think that I decided
to be poor and miserable; do you take me for a fool?" No, you are not a
fool, but it is quite possible

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

that you have been fooled, and most of us have been. I know of no one
who has escaped being fooled about life; you may not have had thoughts
of poverty but at the same time you may have had thoughts that have
produced it. Just watch the process of your thinking and see how many
times a day you think something that you would not want to happen. This
will satisfy you that you need to be watchful, that your thought needs
to be controlled.

What we need to do is to reverse the process of our thinking and see to
it that we think only positive, constructive thoughts. A calm
determination to think just what we want to think regardless of
conditions will do much to put us on the highway to a greater
realization of life.

Of course we will fall, of course the road is not easy, but we will be
growing. Daily we will be giving to the Creative Mind a newer and a
greater concept to be worked out into the life around us. Daily we will
be overcoming some negative tendency. We must stick to it until we gain
the mastery of all our thought and in that day we will rise never to
fall again.

We must be good-natured with ourselves, never becoming discouraged or
giving up until we overcome. Feel that you are always backed by an
Omnipotent power and a kind Father of Love and the way will become
easier.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mental Equivalents](cms27.md)
