[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms28)  [Next](cms30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### TRANSCENDING PREVIOUS CONDITIONS.

WHAT if at times we attract something that we do not want? What about
all the things that we have already attracted into our lives? Must we
still suffer until the last farthing be paid? Are we bound by Karma?
Yes, in a certain degree we are bound by what we have done; it is
impossible to set law in motion and not have it produce. What we sow we
must also reap, of that there is no doubt; but here is something to
think about; the Bible also says that if a man repents his "sins are
blotted out, and remembered no more forever." Here we have two
statements which at first seem not to agree. The first says that we must
suffer from what we have done, and the second that under certain
conditions we will not have to suffer. What are those conditions? A
changed attitude toward the Law. It means that we must stop thinking and
acting in the wrong way.

When we do this we are taken out of the old order and established in the
new. Someone will say: If that is true what about the law of cause and
effect? Is that broken? No, it is this way: The law is not broken, it
would still work out if we continued to use it in the wrong way; but
when we reverse the cause, that is, think and act in a different way,
then we have changed the flow of the Law.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is still the
same Law but we have changed its flow, so that, instead of limiting us
and punishing us, it frees and blesses. It is still the law but we have
changed our attitude toward it. We might throw a ball at the window, and
if nothing stopped it, it would break the glass. Here is law in motion.
But if someone catches the ball before it reaches the window, the glass
will not be broken. Neither the glass nor the law will be broken. The
flow of law will be changed, that is all. So can we, no matter what has
happened in the past, so transcend the old experience, that it will no
longer have any effect upon us. So if we have attracted something that
is not best to keep, we will remember that we do not have to keep it. It
was the best that we knew at the time, and so was good as far as it
went, but now we know more and can do better.

As law works without variation, so does the law of attraction work the
same way. All that we have to do is to drop the undesired thing from our
thought, forgive ourselves and start anew. We must never even think of
it again. Let go of it once and for all. Our various experiences will
teach us more and more to try to mold all of our thoughts and desires,
so that they will be in line with the fundamental purpose of the Great
Mind, the expression of that which is perfect. To fear to make conscious
use of the Law would be to paralyze all efforts of progress.

More and more will we come to see that a great cosmic plan is being
worked out, and that all we have to do is to lend ourselves to it, in
order that we may attain unto a real degree of life. As we do subject
our thought to the greater purposes we are correspondingly blest,
because

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

we are working more in line with the Father, who from the beginning knew
the end. We should never lose sight of the fact that we are each given
the individual right to use the law, and that we cannot escape from
using it.

Let us, then, go forward with the belief that a greater power is working
through us; that all law is a law of good; that we have planted our seed
of thought in the Mind of the Absolute; and that we can go our way
rejoicing in the Divine privilege of working with the Infinite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Understanding and Misunderstanding](cms30.md)
