[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms34)  [Next](cms36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### UNDERSTANDING AND GUIDANCE.

THE inner man is always in immediate connection with the Infinite of
understanding. We are immersed in a living intelligence; we are
surrounded by a Power that knows, for "In Him we live and move and have
our being."

If our outer thought were never confused, we should at all times draw
from this Infinite source of knowledge; we should be guided by It and
never make mistakes; our minds would be like the smooth surface of a
lake, unruffled by wind and storm.

But with most of us this is not the case; we become confused in the
outer so that the surface of the mind is in turmoil, no longer clear and
transparent, and we cannot get the clear vision, the real guidance, and
we get things wrong because we do not see clearly.

The development of the understanding is learning to draw from the
Infinite understanding; we can never do this while we are confused in
our thinking.

The first thing to do when we wish a greater understanding is to be
still and listen to the inner voice, to withdraw for a few moments into
the silence of the soul taking here

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

what we already know, and realizing that a greater intelligence is
enlarging it.

Here we indefinitely take the pattern of our thought, the thing that we
are working on, and ask for, and receive, new light; we hold this up in
Divine Light and try to believe that we are being guided; we state that
Supreme Intelligence and Absolute Power are acting upon our thought and
bringing it to pass; it is now guiding us and we shall make no mistake;
we hold ourselves in the Secret Place of the Most High, and abide under
the shadow of the Almighty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How To Know Just What To Do](cms36)
