[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms37)  [Next](cms39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SINGLE STREAM OF THOUGHT.

ATE are all in Mind and what we think into it is taken up and done unto
us.. This means that as we think it will be done. We cannot think one
way one day and change our thought the next and hope to get the desired
results. We must be very clear in our thought, sending out only such
thoughts as we wish to see manifested in our condition.

Here is something worth remembering. Unless we are working with people
who think as we do, we had better be working alone. One stream of
thought, even though it may not be very powerful, will do more for us
than many powerful streams that are at variance with each other. This
means that, unless we are sure that we are working with people who
harmonize, we would better work alone. Of course we cannot retire from
business simply because people do not agree with us, but what we can do
is to keep our thoughts to ourselves. We do not have to leave the world
in order to control our thought; but we do have to learn that we can
stay right in the world and still think just what we want to think,
regardless of what others are thinking.

One single stream of thought, daily sent out into Creative

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mind, will do
wonders. Within a year the person who will practice this will have
completely changed his conditions of life.

The way to practice this is daily to spend some time in thinking and in
mentally seeing just what is wanted; see the thing just as it is wished
and then affirm that this is now done. Try to feel that what has been
stated is the truth.

Words and affirmations simply give shape to thought; they are not
creative. Feeling is creative and the more feeling that is put into the
word the greater power it will have over conditions. In doing this we
think of the condition only as an effect, something that follows what we
think. It cannot help following our thought. This is the way that all
creation comes into expression.

It is a great help to realize mentally that at all times a great stream
of thought and power is operating through us; it is constantly going out
into Mind, where it is taken up and acted upon. Our business is to keep
that stream of thought just where we want it to be: to be ready at any
time to act when the impulse comes for action. Our action must never be
negative, it must always be affirmative, for we are dealing with
something that cannot fail. We may fail to realize, but the power in
itself is Infinite and cannot fail.

We are setting in motion in the Absolute a stream of thought that will
never cease until it accomplishes its purpose. Try to feel this, be
filled with a great joy as you feel that it is given to you to use this
great and only power.

Keep the thought clear and never worry about the way that things seem to
be going. Let go of all outer conditions

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

when working in Mind, for there is where things are made; there creation
is going on, and it is now making something for us. This must be
believed as never believed before; it must be known as the great
reality; it must be felt as the only Presence. There is no other way to
obtain.

Though all the Infinite may want to give, yet we must take, and, as far
as we are concerned, that taking is mental. Though people may laugh at
this, even that does not matter, "He laughs best who laughs last." We
know in "What we believe," and that will be sufficient.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Enlarging Our Thought](cms39.md)
