[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms38)  [Next](cms40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ENLARGING OUR THOUGHT.

WE can never stand still in our thought. Either we will be growing or
else we will be going back. As we can attract to ourselves only what we
first have a mental likeness of, it follows that if we wish to attract
larger things we must provide larger thoughts. This enlarging of
consciousness is so necessary that too much cannot be said about it.

Most people get only a short way and then stop: they cannot seem to get
beyond a certain point; they can do so much and no more. Why is it that
a person in business does just about so much each year? We see people in
all walks of life, getting so far, never going beyond a certain point.
There must be a reason for everything; nothing happens, if all is
governed by law, and we can come to no other conclusion.

When we look into the mental reason for things we find out why things
happen. The man who gets so far and never seems to go beyond that point
is still governed by

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

law; when he allows his thoughts to take him out into larger fields of
action, his conditions come up to his thought; when he stops enlarging
his thought he stops growing. If he would still keep on in thought,
realizing more and still more, he would find that in the outer form of
things he would be doing greater things.

There are many reasons why a man stops thinking larger things. One of
them is a lack of imagination. He cannot conceive of anything more to
follow than that which has already happened. Another thought works like
this: "This is as far as any one can go in my business." Right here he
signs his own death warrant. Often a person will say, "I am too old to
do bigger things." There he stops. Some one else will say, "Competition
is too great"; and here is where this man stops; he can go no further
than his thought will carry him.

All this is unnecessary when we realize that life is first of all
Consciousness, and then conditions follow. We see no reason why a man
should not go on and on, and never stop growing. No matter what age or
what circumstance, if life is thought, we can keep on thinking bigger
things. There is no reason why a man who is already doing well should
not be able mentally to conceive of a still better condition. What if we
are active? There is always a greater activity [possible](errata.htm#3.md).
We can still see a little beyond what has come before. This is just what
we should do, see, even though it be but a little beyond our former
thought. If we always practice this, we will find that every year we
shall be growing, every month we shall be advancing; and as time goes on
we shall become really great. As there is no stopping in that power
which is

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

Infinite, as the Limitless is without bounds, so should we keep on
trying to see more and greater possibilities in life.

We should definitely work every day for the expansion of thought. If we
have fifty customers a day we should endeavor to believe that we have
sixty. When we have sixty we should mentally see seventy. This should
never stop; there is no stopping place in mind.

Let go of everything else, drop everything else from your thought, and
mentally see more coming to you than has ever come before; believe that
Mind is establishing this unto you, and then go about your business in
the regular way. Never see the limitation; never dwell upon it, and
above all things else never talk limitation to any one; this is the only
way, and there is no other way to grow a larger thought. The man with
the big thought is always the man who does big things in life. Get hold
of the biggest thing that you can think of and claim it for your own;
mentally see it and hold it as a thing already done, and you will prove
to yourself that life is without bounds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Always Be Gathering](cms40.md)
