[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms33)  [Next](cms35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

# PART II.

### TREATMENTS.

THE way to give a treatment is first of all to absolutely believe that
you can; believe that your word goes forth into a real creative power,
which at once takes it up, and begins to operate upon it; feel that to
this power all things are possible. It knows nothing but its own power
to do that which it wishes to do. It receives the impress of your
thought and acts upon it.

It is never safe to treat for anything that you do not wish to happen.
This means that what you would want for another, you must first be
willing to receive for yourself.

Believe then that your word is to be acted upon by an Almighty Power;
feel its great reality, in and through all things you speak into it; and
declare just what you wish it to do for you, never doubting in your own
mind but that it will do just as you have directed.

All that a practitioner has to do is to convince himself, to know, to
believe, and that thing will happen to him which he states. One of the
first things, then, is to be definite; to have a mental likeness of the
thing that you desire; to know exactly what you want. This mental
likeness, this absolute acceptance of the fact that it now is, must
never be overlooked; without it you will not accomplish.

We sit down of our own souls, at peace with the world, at peace with
ourselves; we realize that we are dealing

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

with something that is a reality, something that cannot fail. We try to
get a clear concept of the thing; we rest in that realization, while the
Universal Creative Power takes it up and acts upon it.

We have stated just what we wanted done unto us; we have believed; we
have believed that we have received; never again will we contradict the
fact that we have stated. The person who can do this is sure of getting
results.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Understanding and Guidance](cms35.md)
