[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms29)  [Next](cms31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### UNDERSTANDING AND MISUNDERSTANDING.

THERE are many persons who are constantly unhappy because they seem
always to be misunderstood. They find it hard to use the law of
attraction in an affirmative way, and they keep on drawing to themselves
experiences which they would rather have avoided. The trouble with them
is that there is always an undercurrent of thought which either
neutralizes or destroys whatever helpful thoughts they have set in
motion in their moments of greater strength. Such persons are usually
very sensitive, and while this is a quality which is most creative when
under control, it is most destructive when uncontrolled, because it is
most chaotic. They should first come to know the law and see how it
works, and then treat themselves to overcome all sensitiveness. They
should realize that everyone in the world is a friend, and prove this by
never saying anything unkind to any one or about any one. They must
within themselves see all people as perfect beings made in the Divine
Image; and, seeing nothing else, they will in time be able to say that
this is also the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

way that all people see them. Holding this as the law of their lives
they will destroy all negative thought; and then, with that power which
is always in a sensitive person, but which is now under control, they
will find that life is theirs to do with as they please, the only
requirement being that as they sow so must they also reap. We all know
that anything that is unlike good is of short duration, but anything
that embodies the good is like God, ever present and Eternal. We free
ourselves through the same law under which we first bound ourselves.

The ordinary individual unknowingly does something that destroys any
possibility of getting good results in the demonstration of prosperity.
He affirms his good and makes his unity with it, and this is right, but
he does not stop looking at it in others, which is wrong and is the
cause of confusion. We cannot affirm a principle and deny it in the same
breath. We must become what we want and we will never be able to do that
while we still persist in seeing what we do not want, no matter where we
see it. We cannot believe that something is possible for us without also
believing the same for every individual.

One of the ways of attainment is, of a necessity, the way of universal
love: coming to see all as the true sons of God, one with the Infinite
Mind. This is no mere sentiment but the clear statement of a fundamental
law and that man who does not obey it, is opposing the very thing that
brought him into expression. It is true that through mental means alone
he may bring to himself things and he may hold them as long as the will
lasts. This is the ordinary way, but we want more than compelling things
to appear. What we want is that things should gravitate

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

to us because we are employing the same law that God uses. When we so
attain this attitude of mind then that which is brought into
manifestation will never be lost, for it will be as eternal as the law
of God and cannot be destroyed forever. It is a comfort to know that we
do not have to make things happen, but that the law of Divine love is
all that we will ever need; it will relieve the overworked brain and the
fagged muscle just to be still and know that we are One with the ALL in
ALL.

How can we enter in, if at one and the same time we are believing for
ourselves and beholding the beam in our brother's eye? Does that not
obstruct the view and pervert our own natures? We must see only the good
and let nothing else enter into our minds. Universal love to all people
and to all things is but returning love to the source of all love, to
Him who creates all in love and holds all in divine care. The sun shines
on all alike. Shall we separate and divide where God has so carefully
united? We are dividing our own things when we do this, and sooner or
later the Law of Absolute Justice that weighs out to each one his just
measure will balance the account, and then we shall be obliged to suffer
for the mistakes we have made. God does not bring this agony on us but
we have imposed it on ourselves. If from selfish motives alone, we must
love all things and look upon all things as good, made from the
substance of the Father.

We can only hope to bring to ourselves that which we draw through the
avenue of love. We must watch our thinking and if we have aught against
any soul, get rid of it as soon as possible. This is the only safe and
sure way. Did not Jesus at the supreme moment of sacrifice

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

ask that the Father forgive all the wrong that was being clone to Him?
Shall we suppose that 'we can do it in a better way? If we do not at the
present time love all people, then we must learn how to do it, and the
way will become easier, when all condemnation is gone forever and we
behold only good. God is good and God is Love; more than this we cannot
ask nor conceive.

Another thing that we must eliminate is talking about limitation; we
must not even think of it or read about it, or have any connection with
it in any of our thinking, for we get only that which we think, no more
and no less. This will be a hard thing to do. But if we remember that we
are working out the science of being, though it may seem long and hard
at times we sooner or later do it, and once done it is done forever.
Every step in advance is an Eternal step, and will never have to be
taken again. We are not building for a day or a year, but we are
building for all time and for Eternity. So we will build the more
stately mansion under the Supreme wisdom and the unfailing guidance of
the Spirit, and we will do unto all, even as we would have them do unto
us; there is no other way. The wise will listen, look and learn, then
follow what they know to be the only way that is in line with the Divine
will and purposes. So shall all see that God is good and in him is no
evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Unusual Experience](cms31.md)
