[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms40)  [Next](cms42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MENTAL LIKENESS.

WE can draw from the Infinite only as much as we first think into it. It
is at this point that so many fail, thinking that all they need to do is
to affirm what they want and it will follow. While it is true that
affirmations have real power, it is also true that they have only that
which we speak into them.

As we cannot speak a word that we do not know, so we cannot make an
affirmation that we do not understand. We really affirm only that which
we know to be true; we

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

know that to be true which we have experienced within
[ourselves](errata.htm#4). Although we may have heard or read that this
or that thing is true, it is only when there is something within our own
souls that corresponds or recognizes its truth, that it is true to us.
This ought never to be lost sight of: we can effectively affirm only
that which we know, and we know only that which we are. It is herein
that we see the necessity of providing within a greater concept of life;
a bigger idea of ourselves and a more expanded concept of the Universe
in which we live, move and have our being. This is a matter of inner
growth together with the enlarging of all lines of thought and activity.

If we want to do a thing that is really worth doing, we must mentally
grow until we are that thing, which we want to see made flesh. This may
take time, but we should be glad to use all the time necessary to our
own development.

But few people in limitation have a mental likeness of plenty. This
likeness must be provided. The thought mast be large enough to cover the
whole of the thing desired; a small thought will produce only a small
thing. The very fact that all is Mind proves this to be true. All *is*
mind and, because it is, we can draw from that mind only that which we
first think into it as a reality. We must become the thing we want. We
must see it, think it, realize it, before the creative power of Mind can
work it out for us. This is an inner process of the expansion of
consciousness. It is a thought, growing and realizing within. All can do
this who wish and who will take the time and trouble, but it will mean
work. The majority of people are too lazy to make the effort.

Daily we must train our thought to see that only which

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

we wish to experience, and since we are growing into what we are
mentally dwelling upon, we should put all small and insignificant
thoughts and ideals out of our thinking and see things in a larger way.
We must cultivate the habit of an enlarged mental horizon, daily seeing
farther and farther ahead, and so experiencing larger and greater things
in our daily life.

A good practice for the enlargement of thought is daily to see ourselves
in a little bigger place, filled with more of activity, surrounded with
increased influence and power; feel more and more that things are coming
to us; see that much more is just ahead, and so far as possible, know
that we now have all that we see and all that we feel. Affirm that you
are that larger thing; that you are now entered into that larger life;
feel that something within is drawing more to you; live with the idea
and let the concept grow, expecting only the biggest and the best to
happen. Never let small thoughts come into your mind, and you will soon
find that a larger and greater experience has come into your life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Keeping The Thing In Mind](cms42)
