[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms45)  [Next](cms47) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

### DEVELOPING INTUITION.

IF a person always lived near to mind he would never make any great
mistakes. Some seem to have the faculty of always knowing just what is
best to do; they always succeed because they avoid making errors. We can
all so train ourselves that we will be guided by the Supreme Mind of the
Universe; but we can never do this until we believe that we can receive
direct from the source of all knowledge. This is done by sitting in the
silence and knowing that the Spirit is inwardly directing us. We should
try to feel that our thought is being permeated by the thought of the
Spirit. We should expect it to direct but should never become
discouraged if at once a direct impression is not received. The work is
going on even if it is not seen or even felt. Thought is forming in our
mind and in time will come forth as an idea. When the idea does come
always trust in it even though it may not seem to be quite as we had
expected. The first impressions are usually the most direct and the
clearest; they are generally direct from the Mind of the Universe and
should be carefully worked out into expression.

We declare as we sit in the silence that the Spirit of all knowledge is
making known within us just what we should do; that it is telling us
just what to say or where to go. Have absolute reliance on this as it is
one of the most important things to do. We should always get that inner
assurance before undertaking any new enterprise; being sure that we have
really put the whole thing into the hands of life and that all that we
have to do is to work it out

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

in the outer. We shall learn to avoid mistakes when we learn to be
directed by that inner voice that never makes mistakes. We should
declare in the silence that intelligence is guiding us and it will do
so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Presence of Activity](cms47)
