[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms39)  [Next](cms41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ALWAYS BE GATHERING.

THERE is no reason why a person should ever stop.

This does not mean that we should be miserly, trying to accumulate more
and more to hold, but that our thought should so enlarge that it can not
help gathering more and more, even though, on the other hand, or with
the other hand, we are ever distributing that which we gather. Indeed,
the only reason for having is that we may give out of that which we
have.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

No matter what big thing happens to us we should still be expecting more
and more. Even when we think that we have at last arrived; right at the
moment when it seems as though life had given us all that we could
stand; right here let it be but a beginning for still greater things.

No matter how large the picture that you hold in mind, make it larger.
The reason why so many people come to the point where they stop is that
they come to a point where they stop growing in their own minds. They
come to a point where they can see no more, thinking that because they
have really done a big thing they should stop there. We must watch our
thought for signs of inactivity. Nothing in the universe ever stops.
Everything is built on a boundless basis, drawn from a limitless source,
come forth from an Infinite sea of unmanifest life We speak forth into
this life and draw back from it all that we first think into it. Life is
always limitless, and the only thing that limits us is our inability to
conceive mentally, and we should draw more and more from that limitless
source.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mental Likeness](cms41)
