[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms42)  [Next](cms44.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DESTROY ALL [THOUGHTS](errata.htm#5.md) THAT WE DO NOT WISH TO EXPERIENCE.

WE must resolutely set our faces to the rising consciousness of the Son
of Truth; seeing only the One Power we must destroy the adversary and
leave the field to God or Good. All that is in any way negative must be
wiped off the slate and we must daily come into the higher

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

thought, to be washed clean of the dust and chaos of the objective life.
In the silence of the soul's communion with the Great Cause of All
Being, into the stillness of the Absolute, into the secret place of the
Most High, back of the din and the ceaseless roar of life, we shall find
a resting place and a place of real spiritual power. Speak in this inner
silence and say, "I am one with the Almighty; I am one with all life,
with all power, with all presence. I AM, I AM, I AM." Listen to the
silence. From out of the seeming void the voice of peace will answer the
waiting soul, "All is well."

Here we make known all our needs and wants, and here we receive first
hand from the Infinite all that we shall ever need to make life healthy,
happy and harmonious. Few enter here, because of the belief that
conditions and circumstances control. Know that there is no law but
God's law; that the soul sets its own law in the Infinite and that our
slightest wish is honored of the Father Mind.

Daily practice the truth and daily die to all error-thought. Spend more
time receiving and realizing the, presence of the Most High and less
time worrying. Wonderful power will come to the one who believes and
trusts in that Power in which he has come to believe. Know that all good
and all God is with you; All Life and All Power; and never again say, "I
fear," but always, "I trust, because 'I know in whom I have believed.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Direct Practice For Prosperity](cms44.md)
