[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cms43)  [Next](cms45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874778662/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Creative Mind and Success, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1919\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

### DIRECT PRACTICE FOR PROSPERITY.

SUPPOSE that you are doing a mail order business and sending out cards
to the whole country. Take the cards into your hands, or simply think of
them and declare into the only Mind that they will accomplish that for
which they are sent out; know that every word written on them is truth
and carries its own conviction with it; see them each reaching that
place where it will be received with gladness and read with interest;
declare this to be so now; feel it to be the truth; mentally assert that
each card will find its way to the exact place where it will be wanted
and where it will benefit the receiver; feel that each card is cared for
by the Spirit; that it is a messenger of truth and power and that it
will carry conviction and realization with it. When the word is .spoken
always feel that Mind at once takes it up and never fails to act upon
it. Our place in the creative order is to know this and to be willing to
do all that we can without hurry or worry, and, above all else, to trust
absolutely in the Spirit to do the rest. He who sees most clearly and
believes most implicitly will make the greatest demonstration. This one
should be you, and will be you as soon as the false thought is gone and
the realization that there is but the one power and the one presence
comes. We are wrapped in an Infinite Love and Intelligence and we should
cover ourselves with it and claim its protection from all evil. Declare
that your word is the presence and the activity of the Power of all that
is and wait for the perfect concept to unfold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Race Consciousness](cms45)
