[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft096)  [Next](gft098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span id="an_37"></span>

# CHAPTER IV

# TRANSYLVANIAN-GYPSY STORIES

### No. 37.--The Creation of the Violin

IN a hut on a mountain, in a fair forest, lived a girl with her four
brothers, her father, and her mother. The sister loved a handsome rich
huntsman, who often ranged the forest, but who would never speak to the
pretty girl. Mara wept day and night, because the handsome man never
came near her. She often spoke to him, but he never answered, and went
on his way. She sang the song:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Dear man from a far country,  
Slip your hand into mine;  
Clasp me, an you will, in your arms;  
Lovingly will I kiss you.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> She sang it often
and often, but he paid no heed. Knowing now no other succour, she called
the devil. 'O devil, help me.' The devil came, holding a mirror in his
hand, and asked what she wanted. Mara told him her story and bemoaned to
him her sorrow. 'If that's all,' said the devil, 'I can help you. I'll
give you this. Show it to your beloved, and you'll entice him to you.'
Once again came the huntsman to the forest, and Mara had the mirror in
her hand and went to meet him. When the huntsman saw himself in the
mirror, he cried, 'Oh! that's the devil, that is the devil's doing; I
see myself.' And he ran away, and came no more to the forest.

Mara wept now again day and night, for the handsome man never came near
her.; Knowing now no other succour for her grief, she called again the
devil. 'O devil, help me.' The devil came and asked what she wanted.
Mara told how the huntsman had run away, when he saw himself in the
mirror. The devil laughed and said, 'Let him run, I

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

shall catch him; like you, he belongs to me. For you both have looked in
the mirror, and whoso looks in the mirror is mine. And now I will help
you, but you must give me your four brothers, or help you I cannot.' The
devil went away and came back at night, when the four brothers slept,
and made four strings of them, fiddle-strings--one thicker, then one
thinner, the third thinner still, and the thinnest the fourth. Then said
the devil, 'Give me also your father.' Mara said, 'Good, I give you my
father, only you must help me.' Of the father the devil made a box: that
was the fiddle. Then he said, 'Give me also your mother.' Mara answered,
'Good, I give you also my mother, only you must help me.' The devil
smiled, and made of the mother a stick, and horsehair of her hair: this
was the fiddle-stick. Then the devil played, and Mara rejoiced. But the
devil played on and on, and Mara wept. Now laughed the devil and said,
'When your beloved comes, play, and you will entice him to you.' Mara
played, and the huntsman heard her playing and came to her. In nine days
came the devil and said, 'Worship me, I am your lord.' They would not,
and the devil carried them off. The fiddle remained in the forest lying
on the ground, and a poor Gypsy came by and saw it. He played, and as he
played in thorp and town they laughed and wept just as he chose.

<span class="small">In the *Gypsy Lore Journal* for April 1890, pp.
65-66, Vladislav Kornel, Ritter von Zielinski, published a very close
Hungarian-Gypsy variant, told to him both at Guta and at Almas. One
cannot but be reminded of the ballad of 'Binnorie,' whose story is
current in Scotland, Sweden, the Faroë Islands, Iceland, Denmark,
Sicily, Poland, Esthonia, and Lithuania, and which Reinhold Köhler has
ably discussed in 'Die Ballade von der sprechenden Harfe' (*Aufsätze
über Märchen and Volkslieder*, pp. 79-98). Campbell's *Santal
Folk-tales*, pp. 54, 104, furnish two remarkable analogues. In the first
a drowned girl grows up as a bamboo, out of which a *jugi* makes a magic
fiddle; in the second a princess, devoured by a monkey, springs up after
his death as a gourd, of whose shell a *jugi* makes a wonderful banjo.
In both tales there is mention of Doms; and it is at least an odd
coincidence that, while the Gypsy word for devil is *beng*, in Santali a
spirit is called *bonga*. Selling one's self, or rather one's blood, to
the devil is a superstition still current amongst English Gypsies. I
myself knew an elderly East Anglian Gypsy woman, who was supposed to
have so sold her blood, and to have got in return a young, good-looking
husband, her own nephew, whom she 'kept like a gentleman.' *Cf*. also
pp. 297-9 of my *In Gypsy Tents*.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 38.--The Three Golden Hairs of the Sun-King](gft098)
