[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft071)  [Next](gft073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_12"></span>

### No. 12.--The Gypsy and the Priest

There was a very poor Gypsy, and he had many little children. And his
wife went to the town, begged herself a few potatoes and a little flour.
And she had no fat.

All right,' she thought; 'wait a bit. The priest has killed a pig; I'll
go and beg myself a bit of fat.'

When she got there, the priest came out, took his whip, thrashed her
soundly. She came home, said to her husband,' O my God, I did just get a
thrashing!'

And the Gypsy is at work. Straightway the hammer fell from his hand.
'Now, wait a bit till I show him a trick, and teach him a lesson.'

The Gypsy went to the church, and took a look at the door, how to make
the key to the tower. He came home, sat down at his anvil, set to work
at once on the key. When he had made it, he went back to try to open the
door. It opened it as though it had been made for it.

'Wait a bit, now,' he thinks to himself; 'what shall I need next?'

He went straight off to the shop, and bought himself some fine paper,
just like the fine clothes the priests wear for high mass. When he had
bought it, he went to the tailor, told him to make him clothes like an
angel's; he looked in them

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

just like a priest. He came home, told his son (he was twenty years
old), 'Hark’ee, mate, come along with me, and bring the pot. Catch about
a hundred crabs. Ha! they shall see what I'll do this night; the priest
won't escape with his life.'

All right!

Midnight came. The Gypsy went to the church, lit all the lights that
were in the church. The cook goes to look out. 'My God! what's the
matter? the whole church is lighted up.'

She goes to the priest, wakes him up. 'Get up! Let's go and see what it
is. The whole church is blazing inside. What ever is it?'

The priest was in a great fright. He pulled on his vestment, and went to
the church to see. The Gypsy chants like a priest performing service in
the great church where the greatest folks go to service. 'Oh!' the Gypsy
was chanting, 'O God, he who is a sinful man, for him am I come; him who
takes so much money with him will I fetch to Paradise, and there it
shall be well with him.'

When the gentleman heard that, he went home, and got all the money he
had in the house.

All right!

The priest came back to the church. The Gypsy chants to him to make
haste, for sooner or later the end of all things approaches. Straightway
the Gypsy opened the sack, and the priest got into it. The Gypsy took
all the priest's money, and hid it in his pocket.

'Good! now you are mine.'

When he closed the sack, the priest was in a great fright. 'My God! what
will become of me? I know not what sort of a being that is, whether God
Himself or an angel.'

The Gypsy straightway drags the priest down the steps. The priest cries
that it hurts him, that he should go gently with him, for he is all
broken already; that half an hour of that will kill him, for his bones
are all broken already.

Well, he dragged him along the nave of the church, and pitched him down
before the door; and he put a lot of thorns there to run into the
priest's flesh. He dragged him backwards and forwards through the
thorns, and the thorns stuck into him. When the Gypsy saw that the
priest was

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

more dead than alive, he opened the sack, and left him there.

The Gypsy went home, and threw off his disguise, and put it on the fire,
that no one might say he had done the deed. The Gypsy had more than
eight hundred silver pieces. So he and his wife and his children were
glad that they had such a lot of money; and if the Gypsy has not died
with his wife and his children, perhaps he is living still.

In the morning when the sexton comes to ring the bell, he sees a sack in
front of the church. The priest was quite dead. When he opened it and
saw the priest, he was in a great fright. 'What on earth took our priest
in there?' He runs into the town, made a great outcry, that so and so
has happened. The poor folks came and the gentry to see what was up: all
the candles in the church were burning. So they buried the parson
decently. If he is not rotten he is whole. May the devils still be
eating him. I was there, and heard everything that happened.

The briefest epitome will serve of our third Gypsy version, from
Hungary, Dr. Friedrich Müller's No. 1, which is very coarse and very
disconnected:--'Somewhere was, somewhere was not, lucky, Golden God!
somewhere was, somewhere was not, a poor Gypsy.' An old woman tells him,
'Go into yonder castle, and there is the lady; and take from her the
ring, and put it on thine own hand, and turn it thrice, then so much
meal and bread will be to thee that thou wilt not know what to do with
it.' . . . He wins twenty-four wagon-loads of money for seducing the
nobleman's wife, which he achieves by luring away the nobleman with a
corpse. The Gypsy then kills his children and his wife; cheats an old
woman of her money; cures and marries the king's daughter; leaves her,
because she will not go and sell the nails he manufactures; and finally
marries a Gypsy girl, who pleases him much better.

Our next version, 'Jack the Robber,' is from South Wales, told to Mr.
Sampson by Cornelius Price. It is as good as the last one is bad, but
like it somewhat Rabelaisian. The following is a summary of the first
half, the latter (our [No. 68](gft128.htm#an_68)) being a variant of
Dasent's 'Big Peter and Little Peter':--A poor widow has a son, Jack,
who 'took to smoking when he was twelve, and got to robbing the master's
plough-socks to take ’em to the blacksmith's to sell ’em to rise bacca.'
So the farmer makes the mother send Jack away from home; and Jack comes
to a big gentleman's hall. This gentleman is the head of eleven robbers,
and Jack, after cunningly relieving

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

one of them of £11, joins the band, and in six months 'got a cleverer
robber than what the master hisself was.' So, with the money he has
made, he sets off for his mother's, meets the farmer, tells him he has
been prentice to a robber, and, to test his skill, is set to steal two
sheep in succession. He does so by the familiar expedients of, first, a
boot here and a boot there, and, next, baaing like a lost sheep. Then
Jack is set to take the middlemost sheet from underneath the farmer and
his missus, and achieves it by 'loosing a dead body down the chimley,'
which the farmer shoots dead, as he fancies, and goes off to bury.

The fifth and last version, 'The Great Thief,' is from North Wales, told
by Matthew Wood, and is thus summarised by Mr. Sampson:--'Hard by a
parson lived a thief. The parson told the thief, "To-morrow my man goes
to the butcher with a sheep. Steal it, and you shall have such and such
money." Thief gets a pair of new boots, and places one on one stile, the
other on another further on. Man sees first boot and leaves it, finds
other, ties up sheep, and goes back for the first. Thief steals sheep.
The parson says again, "I want you to steal my wife's ring from her
finger and the sheet from under her. If you can't, I shall behead you."
Thief makes dummy man, and props it against wall. Parson shoots it,
comes out, and buries it in well. Meanwhile thief visits wife,
pretending to be parson, and takes her ring and sheet for safety. Parson
returns and discovers the trick.'

Though not, at least but very conjecturally, a Gypsy version, the
following version is still worth citing. It is from Henry Mayhew's
*London Labour and the London Poor*, vol. iii. (1861), pp. 388-390:--'An
intelligent-looking boy, aged 16, a native of Wisbech in Cambridgeshire;
at 13 apprenticed to a tailor; in three months' time ran away; went home
again for seven months, then ran away again, and since a vagrant. Had
read *Windsor Castle*, *Tower of London*, etc. He gives account of
amusements in casual wards:

'"We told stories sometimes, romantic tales some; others black-guard
kind of tales, about bad women; and others about thieving and roguery;
not so much about what they'd done themselves, as about some big thief
that was very clever and could trick anybody. Not stories such as Dick
Turpin or Jack Sheppard, or things that's in history, but inventions. I
used to say when I was telling a story--for I've told one story that I
invented till I learnt it. \[I give this story to show what are the
objects of admiration with these vagrants <span
id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56)\]:--

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

'"You see, mates, it was once upon a time, and a very good time it was,
a young man, and he runned away, and got along with a gang of thieves,
and he went to a gentleman's house, and got in because one of his mates
sweethearted the servant, and got her away, and she left the door open.
And the door being left open, the young man got in, and robbed the house
of a lot of money, £1000, and he took it to their gang at the cave. Next
day there was a reward out to find the robber. Nobody found him. So the
gentleman put two men and a horse in a field, and the men were hidden in
the field, and the gentleman put out a notice that anybody that could
catch the horse should have him for his cleverness, and a reward as
well; for he thought the man that got the £1000 was sure to try to catch
that there horse, because he was so bold and clever, and then the two
men hid would nab him. This here Jack (that's the young man) was
watching, and he saw the two men, and he went and caught two live hares.
Then he hid himself behind a hedge, and let one hare go, and one man
said to the other, 'There goes a hare,' and they both ran after it, not
thinking Jack's there. And while they were running he let go t’other
one, and they said, 'There's another hare,' and they ran different ways,
and so Jack went and got the horse, and took it to the man that offered
the reward, and got the reward; it was £100; and the gentleman said,
'D--- it, Jack's done me this time.' The gentleman then wanted to serve
out the parson, and he said to Jack, 'I'll give you another £100 if
you'll do something to the parson as bad as you've done to me.' Jack
said, 'Well, I will'; and Jack *went to the church and lighted up the
lamps* and rang the bells, and the parson he *got up to see what was
up*. Jack was standing in one of the pews *like an angel*; when the
parson got to the church, Jack said, 'Go and put your plate in a bag;
I'm an angel come to take you up to heaven.' And the parson did so, and
it was as much as he could drag to church from his house in a bag; for
he was very rich. And when he got to church Jack put the parson in one
bag, and the money stayed in the other; and he tied them both together,
and put them across his horse, and took them up hill and through water
to the gentleman's, and then he took the parson out of the bag, and the
parson was wringing wet. Jack fetched the gentleman, and the gentleman
gave the parson a horsewhipping, and the parson cut away, and Jack got
all the parson's money and the second £100, and gave it all to the poor.
And the parson brought an action against the gentleman for horsewhipping
him, and they were both ruined. That's the end of it. That's the sort of
story that's liked best, sir."

 

Dasent, 'The Master Thief' (*Tales from the Norse*, p. 255). He

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

takes service with robbers. Steals three oxen, the first one by a shoe
here and a shoe there, the third by imitating lost ox. He steals the
squire's roast, first catching three hares alive. He steals Father
Laurence in a sack, but *not* out of church, posing as an angel, and
bidding him lay out all his gold and silver. N.B. No crabs, no lighting
of candles.

Grimm, No. 192, 'The Master Thief' (ii. 324). He steals horse from under
rider. Steals sheet from under count's wife, first luring count away by
means of corpse. Disguised like monk, he steals parson and clerk out of
church in sack, bumping them against steps, and dragging them through
puddles--'mountains' and 'clouds.' No mention of plate or money. Neither
of these two versions can be the original of Mayhew's English vagrant
one.

Straparola (Venice, 1550), No. 2, 'The Knave.' First, he steals from the
provost the bed on which he is lying; next, horse on which stable-boy is
sitting; and thirdly, an ecclesiastical personage in sack.

De Gubernatis (*Zool. Myth.*, i. 204) alludes to the famous robber
Klimka, in Afanasief, v. 6, who, by means of a drum (in Indian tales a
trumpet) terrifies his accomplices, the robbers, and then steals from a
gentleman his horse, his jewel-casket, even his wife.

'Les Deux Voleurs' (Dozon's *Contes Albanais*, p. 169) has two thieves
with the same mistress, as in Barbu Constantinescu. One of them, posing
as the angel Gabriel, steals the cadi in a chest at the instigation of a
pasha whom the cadi has ridiculed.

Much more striking are the analogies offered by 'Voleur par Nature'
(Legrand's *Contes Grecs*, p. 205) from Cyprus. Here we get the stealing
of two sheep, first by a boot here and a boot there, and next by baaing
like a lost sheep. Then we have the stealing of one of a yoke of oxen,
the robbery of the king's treasure-house, the consulting a robber in
prison, a caldron of pitch, the headless robber, the exposure of his
corpse, and, lastly, the marriage of the surviving thief and the
princess.

For heroic form of 'The Master Thief' see Hahn's No. 3, 'Von dem Schönen
and vom Drakos.' Hero has to steal winged horse of the dragon, coverlet
of dragon's bed, and the dragon himself. He steals him in a box, and
marries the king's daughter. In Laura Gonzenbach's most curious Sicilian
story, No. 83, 'Die Geschichte von Caraseddu' (ii. 142-145), the hero
steals the horse of the 'dragu' (? dragon, rather than cannibal), next
his bed-cover, and lastly the 'dragu' himself; with which compare the
Bukowina-Gypsy story, 'Tropsyn,' No. 27. In Hahn, ii. p. 182, we have
mention of *sack*, in variant 4 of ring of the dragon. *Cf*. *infra*,
[p. 109](gft088.htm#page_109).

Finally, three little points connecting the Gypsies and the 'Master
Thief' may be noted. Mrs. Carlyle's 'mother's mother was a grand-niece
of Matthew Baillie,' a famous Scottish Gypsy, who, as she said, could
steal a horse from under the owner, if he liked, but left always the
saddle and bridle.' John Macdonald, travelling tinker, 'knew the story
of the "Shifty Lad," though not well enough to repeat it' (Campbell's
*Tales of the West Highlands*, i. 142, 356). An English Gypsy once said

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

to me, 'The folks hereabouts are a lot of *rátfalo* heathens; they all
think they're *going to heaven in a sack*.'

Dr. Barbu Constantinescu's 'Two Thieves' is so curious a combination of
the 'Rhampsinitus' story in Herodotus and of Grimm's 'Master Thief,'
that I am more than inclined to regard it as the lost original which,
according to Campbell of Islay, 'it were vain to look for in any modern
work or in any modern age.' The 'Rhampsinitus' story and the 'Master
Thief' have both been made special subjects of study--the former by
Reinhold Köhler in *Orient and Occident*, 1864, pp. 303-316, by Clouston
in his *Popular Tales and Fictions* (1887, ii. 115-165), and by Sir
George Cox in *Fraser's Magazine* (July 1880, pp. 96-111); the latter by
M. Cosquin in *Contes Populaires de Lorraine* (1887; ii. 271-281,
364-5). With their help and that of the above jottings, we can analyse
the Gypsy story of the 'Two Thieves' detail by detail, and see in how
many and how widely-separated non-Gypsy versions some of those details
have to be sought:--

\(1\) A town thief meets a country thief, and is challenged by him to
steal the eggs of a magpie without her noticing it.--Grimm, No. 129, and
Kashmir and Kabyle versions. (2) Whilst doing so, he is himself robbed
unawares of his breeches by the country thief. The stealing of the
labourer's *paijámas* in Kashmir version is analogous. (3) They enter
into partnership, and have one wife.--Albanian version. (4) They go to
the king's palace, and, making a hole in the roof, descend and steal
money. The king, discovering his loss, takes counsel with an old robber
in prison.--So in *Dolopathos*, modern Greek, and Cypriote versions. (5)
By his advice the king finds out hole by lighting a fire in the
treasure-house, and noticing where the smoke escapes.--*Dolopathos*,
*Pecorone*, old French, Breton, old Dutch, Danish, Kabyle. (6) Under the
hole he sets a cask of molasses.--Snare in 'Rhampsinitus,' Tyrolese,
Kabyle; pitch in old English, modern Greek, Cypriote, old French,
Gaelic, old Dutch, Danish. (7) The country thief is caught, and his
comrade cuts off his head.--'Rhampsinitus,' Pecorone, old English, old
French, Breton, Gaelic, Tyrolese, Danish, Kabyle, Tibetan, Cinghalese.
(8) The headless trunk is exposed, and the comrade steals it by
intoxicating the guards.--'Rhampsinitus,' Sicilian, Breton, Gaelic, old
Dutch, Russian. (9) He further cheats them of 400 groats as payment for
his horse, which he pretends the dead thief has stolen.--Wanting
elsewhere. (10) The king then puts a prohibitive price on all the meat
in the city, thinking the thief will betray himself by alone being able
to pay it; but the thief steals a joint.--Italian (*Pecorone*, 1378, ix.
1; and Prof Crane's *Italian Popular Tales*, p. 166). (11) The king
finally makes a proclamation, offering his daughter to the thief, who
plucks up courage and reveals himself.--'Rhampsinitus,' *Pecorone*,
Sicilian, modern Greek, Tyrolese, Kabyle. (12) To exhibit his skill, he
steals one of a yoke of oxen.--Russian (De Gubernatis, *Zoological
Mythology*, i. 186, from Afanasief). (13) As a further test he steals
the priest out of the church in a sack, out of which he has just let 300
crabs, each with a lighted taper fastened to its claw. According to
Cosquin, the complete crab episode occurs only in Grimm (he of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="small">course knows nothing of our Gypsy version). But
herein he for once is wrong, since we find it also in Krauss's Croatian
version of the 'Master Thief' (No. 55), which bears the title of 'The
Lad who was up to Gypsy Tricks'; its hero, indeed, is generally styled
'the Gypsy.' He is a Gypsy in Dr. Friedrich Müller's Gypsy variant, and
in Dr. von Sowa's. In the latter version, as in several non-Gypsy ones,
the hero, it will be noticed, catches crabs, but makes no use whatever
of them afterwards.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[49:1](gft072.htm#fr_56) Clearly Mr. Mayhew was
no folklorist. The boy's claim to have invented the story is worth
noting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 13.--The Watchmaker](gft073)
