[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft092)  [Next](gft094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span id="an_33"></span>

### No. 33.--The Jealous Husband

There was a merchant, great and wealthy, and he had a beautiful wife; he
did not let her go out. And he went in a ship on the Danube after
merchandise with another merchant. And they were coming home. They
hauled their ships to the bank, and moored them to the bank, to pass the
night. They fell into discourse. Said one, 'Has your wife got a lover at
home?'

And he said, 'My wife has not got a lover.'

'Come, what will you give me if I become her lover?'

'If you do, I will give you my estate, and my merchandise too, ship and
all.'

'How will you know that I am her lover?'

If you tell me her birth-mark, and if you take the gold ring from her
finger. But my wife will be like to thrash you, if you but hint such a
thing to her. I left a maid with her, to see that my wife does not go
out of doors.'

'I shall succeed, though.'

'Go home and try; I'll bring your ship.'

Home he went. What will he do? for he cannot come near her. He found an
old wife. 'Old wife, what am I to do to get the ring from the lady?'

'What will you give me if I contrive that you get it?'

'I will give you a hundred florins.'

'Get a big chest made, and a window in it, and get into it, and make a
bolt inside, and I will carry you to her.'

She carried him in the chest under the wall of her house, and went to
the lady. 'I beg you, lady, to take in my box of clothes, so that they
may not be stolen.'

'Carry it into the hall.'

She called the maid, and the maid helped her to carry him into the hall.

'I beg you, lady, to let me take it right into your house. I will come
in the morning to fetch it.'

'Well, put it in a corner.'

The old woman went off home. The lady at night took a bath, and laid the
ring on the table, and washed herself. And through the little window he
perceived a mole under her right breast. The lady slept all night in her
bed, and

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

forgot the ring on the table, and put out the candle. And he let himself
out, took the ring off the table, and got back into the chest, shut
himself in. The old woman came next morning at daybreak, and carried her
chest outside. He opened it, and came out, and took the chest, and
departed. He went to meet the husband, and found him on the way.

'Hast thou lain with my lady?'

I have.'

'What is her birth-mark?'

'She has a mole under her right breast. If you do not believe me, here
is the ring as well.'

'It's all right; take the ship and everything in it, and come home, and
I will give you also the estate.'

He went home, and said never a word to the lady; and he made a little
boat, and put her in it, and let it go on the Danube. 'Since you have
done this, away you go on the Danube.' He gave his whole estate, and
became poor, and carried water for the Jews.

A whole year she floated on the Danube; the year went like a day. An old
man caught her, and drew her to shore, and opened the boat, and took her
out, and brought her to his house. She abode with him three years, and
spun with her spindle, and made some money. And she bought herself
splendid man's clothes, and dressed herself, and cut her hair short, and
went back to her husband. She went and passed the night beneath a
lime-tree, and slept under the lime-tree. In that city the emperor was
blind. She saw a dream: in the lime-tree was a hole, and in the hole was
water; and if the emperor will anoint himself with that water he will
see. She arose in the morning, and searched around, and found the hole.
And she had a little pail, and she drew water in the pail, and put it in
her pocket, and went into that city to an inn, and drank three
kreutzers' worth of brandy. And she asked the Jew, 'What's the news with
you?'

'Our emperor is blind, and he will give his kingdom to him who shall
make him see.'

'I will do so.'

The Jew went to the emperor, and the emperor said to him, 'Hah! go and
bring him to me.'

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

They brought him to the emperor. 'Will you make me see? then I will give
you my daughter.'

She took water, and anointed his eyes, and he saw. The emperor set his
crown on her head. 'Do you be emperor. I want nothing but to stay beside
you.' The emperor clad her royally, called his army, beat the drum. 'For
there's a new emperor.'

And she saw her husband carrying water for the Jews. 'Come hither. Have
you always been poor?'

'No, I once was not poor, I was rich. I had an estate, and I was a great
merchant.'

'Then how did you lose your estate?'

'I lost it over a wager. My wife played the wanton with another, and I
gave up the estate, and sent her adrift on the Danube.'

Straightway she sent for the other, and they brought him. 'How did you
come by this man's estate?'

'Over a wager.'

'What was your wager?'

'That I would lie with her.'

'Then you did so?'

'I did.'

'And, pray, what were her birth-marks?'

'Under her right breast she had a mole.'

'Would you know that mole again?'

'I would.'

Then she drew out her breast. 'Did you lie with me?'

'I did not.'

'Then why those falsehoods? Here, take him, and cut him all to pieces.'

And she looked earnestly on her husband. 'You, why did you not ask me at
the time?'

'I was a fool, and I was angry.'

Here, take him outside, and give him five-and-twenty, to teach him
wisdom.'

She threw the robes off her, and put them on him. 'Do you be emperor,
and I empress.'

<span class="small">Were I a painter, I would paint a picture--the
Forest of Arden, a Gypsy encampment, with tents, dogs, donkeys, and
children, a Gypsy story-teller, and Shakespeare. But one knows, of
course, that Shakespeare derived the material of his *Cymbeline* from
the novel of Boccaccio</span>

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">(*Dec*. ii. 9), immediately in all likelihood, and not
through the second story in *Westward for Smelts*. Granted he did, the
question arises next, whence did Boccaccio get his material? Did he
invent it, and, if so, is this Gypsy story derived from Boccaccio, and
not it only, but Campbell's West Highland tale of 'The Chest' (No. 18),
Lanninie's 'Servant of Poverty' (*West Irish Folk-tales*, pp. 115-129),
and at least two other folk-tales cited by Köhler--one in Wolf's German
*Hausmärchen*, p. 355, and one from Roumania in *Ausland*, 1856, p.
1053? Campbell's story at any rate cannot have come from Boccaccio,
containing, as it does, the essence, not merely of *Cymbeline*, but also
of *The Merchant of Venice*. For its hero borrows £50 on condition that
if he does not repay it within a year and a day he is to lose a strip of
skin cut from his head to his foot; <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94)
'Yes,' says the heroine, but in cutting it, not one drop of blood must
be shed.' To go fully into this question would occupy pages and pages; I
must content myself with referring to *The Remarks of M. Karl Simrock on
the Plots of Shakespeare's Plays*, with notes by J. O. Halliwell
(Shakespeare Soc. 1850), pp. 64-75 and 45-63, and to Reinhold Köhler on
Campbell's tale in *Orient and Occident*, ii. 1864, pp. 313-316. But it
is just worth pointing out that Gypsies may have had a considerable
influence on the European drama. The Scottish Gypsies who, as recorded
in the Introduction, used yearly to gather in the stanks of Roslin
during the last half of the sixteenth century, acted there 'severall
plays.' We have not the dimmest notion what those plays may have been;
still, this would be quite an early item in any history of the stage in
Scotland. Sir William Ouseley in his *Travels in Persia* (1823), iii.
400-405, gives a long description of a Persian puppet-play, curiously
like our own Punch and Judy: the managers of these shows, and the
musicians who attended them, were said to be of the Karachi or Gypsy
tribe.' I myself at Göttingen, in 1873, several times calve across a
family of German Gypsies, very full-blooded ones, who were
marionette-showers; like a dull dog, I never went to see their shows.
*Gorger* (Rómani *gaújo*, Gentile or man) is current theatrical slang
for a manager; and Mayhew's *London Labour and the London Poor* (1851)
shows that the slang of our English show-folk contains a good many
Rómani words. The very Pandean pipes are suggestive of importation from
South-east Europe. Goethe's *Wilhelm Meister* offers something to the
purpose, so also do the Bunjara players in Mrs. F. A. Steel's *On the
Face of the Waters* (1896); and my own *In Gypsy Tents*, pp. 295-6,
gives a glance at an English travelling theatre whose performers spoke
fluent Rómani.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[124:1](gft093.htm#fr_94) *Cf*. note on the
Polish-Gypsy story of 'The Brigands and the Miller's Daughter,' [No
47](gft107.htm#an_47).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 34.--Made over to the Devil](gft094)
