[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft005)  [Next](gft007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### At Paris.

The Bourgeois of Paris, whose Journal records this visit with a
Pepys-like fidelity, describes how multitudes 'came from Paris, from
Sainct Denis, and from the neighbourhood of Paris to see them. And it is
true that the children, boys and girls, were as clever as could be. And
most or nearly all had both ears pierced, and in each ear a silver ring,
or two in each, and they said it was a sign of nobility in their own
country. *Item*, the men were very black, their hair was frizzled; the
women, the ugliest that could be seen, and the blackest. All had their
faces covered with wounds (*toutes avoient le visage deplaié*), hair
black as a horse's tail, for sole dress an old blanket, very coarse, and
fastened on the shoulder by a band of cloth or a cord, and underneath a
shift, for all covering. In short, they were the poorest creatures ever
seen in France in the memory of man. Yet, in spite of their poverty,
there were witches among them who looked into people's hands, and told
what had happened to them, or would happen, and sowed discord in several
marriages by saying to the husband, "Your wife has played you false," or
to the wife, "Your husband has played you false." And what was worse,
whilst they were speaking to folks, by magic or otherwise, or by

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

the Enemy in Hell, or by dexterity and skill, it was said they emptied
people's purses and transferred the coin to their own. But in truth I
went there three or four times to speak with them, yet never perceived
that I lost a penny, nor did I ever see them look into a hand. But
people said so everywhere, and it came to the ears of the Bishop of
Paris, who went there, and took with him a Minorite friar called Little
Jacobin. And he, by command of the bishop, made a fine preaching,
excommunicating all who had believed them and shown them their hands.
And they were obliged to depart, and departed on the day of Our Lady of
September, and went away towards Pontoise.'

Three weeks later, at Amiens, Thomas, Earl of Little Egypt, with forty
followers, received pious alms from the mayor and aldermen after
exhibition of the papal letters; and during the next seven years we find
similar scattered bands of Egyptians, Saracens from Egypt, or Heidens,
at Tournai, Utrecht, Arnheim, Bommel, Middelburg, Metz, Leyden,
Frankfort, etc. These, according to M. Bataillard, all belonged to the
original band, some four hundred strong, which split up or reunited as
occasion required, and which had probably started from the Balkan
peninsula. The thirty *tented* Cingari or Cigäwnär, who encamped near
Ratisbon in 1424 and 1426, seem on the other hand to have belonged to
Hungary. Their leader had also a safe-conduct granted him at Zips on
23rd April 1423 by the Emperor Sigismund, and styling him 'our faithful
Ladislas, Woiwode of the Cigani'; and they gave out quite a different
reason for their exile, that it was 'in remembrance of the flight of our
Lord into Egypt.' The four hundred would-be pioneers, then, sent forward
to spy out the lands of promise on behalf of vast hordes behind, who in
1438 began to pour over Germany, Italy, and France by thousands instead
of by hundreds, and headed this time by King Zindl. Spain the Gypsies
reached in 1447, Sweden by 1512, and Poland and Russia about 1501.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In England](gft007)
