[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft041)  [Next](gft043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Theory as to Gypsy Folk-tales.

So there the folklorists have all that is essential--or rather all that
I can give of the essential--for the right understanding of the
following seventy-six folk-tales. And there I should have been quite
content to leave them, did I not wish to disavow the theory imputed to
me mistakenly by my friend, Mr. Joseph Jacobs. In his *More English
Fairy Tales* (1894), p. 232, he speaks of 'Mr. Hindes Groome's
contention (in *Transactions Folk-Lore Congress*) for the diffusion of
all folk-tales by means of Gypsies as *colporteurs*.' The paper I read
before the Folklore Congress of 1891 was not on folk-tales at all, but
on English popular superstitions; I certainly never contended that their
diffusion was solely due to the Gypsies. Whilst as to Gypsy folk-tales,
the first thing I ever wrote about them was forty-three lines in the
*Encyclopædia Britannica* (vol. x. 1879, p. 615), which, with but forty
stories to go by, concluded: 'At present our information is far too
scanty to warrant any definite conclusion; but, could it once he shown
that the Asiatic possess the same stories as the European Gypsies, it
might be necessary to admit that Europe owes a portion of its folklore
to the Gypsies.' And the last thing I wrote on the subject was
twenty-seven lines in *Chambers's Encyclopædia* (vol. v. 1892, p. 489),
and they wound up:--'According to Benfey, Reinhold Köhler, Ralston,
Cosquin, Clouston, and other folklorists, most of the popular stories of
Europe are traceable to Indian sources. But how? by what channels? One
channel, perhaps, was the Gypsies.'

That seven years ago was my theory, if it may be dignified with so
high-sounding a title; and that is my theory still. And it seems to me
even now, that, though now we possess 160 Gypsy folk-tales,

<span id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span>

our store is still far too scanty to warrant any definite conclusion. We
want the unpublished materials of Paspati and Kopernicki; we want Dr.
von Sowa and Mr. Sampson to complete their collections; and we want,
too, the Gypsy folk-tales, if such there be, of Spain, Portugal, Brazil,
the Basque Country, Italy, Alsace, Germany, Scandinavia, Russia, and
Greece--above all, of Africa and Asia. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) If a word like *páni*, water, is found in
every Gypsy dialect from Persia to South America, from Finland to Egypt,
one reasonably regards it as a true Rómani word, as one that the Gypsies
have brought from their eastern home. Similarly, if a folk-tale could be
shown to have an equally wide distribution among the Gypsies, we might
reasonably believe that the Gypsies had brought it with them. But at
present we know of no such wide distribution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[lxiv:1](gft042.htm#fr_24) Kounavine apart, we
have but one hint of story-telling by Gypsies in Asia. In *Blackwood's*
for March 1891, pp. 388-9, the late Mr. Theodore Bent had an article on
an archæological tour in 'Cilicia Aspera,' a district lying on the
southern slopes of the Taurus Mountains, in which was this passage:
'Periodically a travelling tinker comes among them \[the mountain
tribes\], the great newsmonger of the mountain. He chooses a central
spot to pitch his tent, and the most wonderful collection of decrepit
copper utensils is soon brought from the neighbouring tents and piled
around. He usually brings with him a young assistant to look after the
mule and blow the bellows; and with nitre heated at his fire he mends
the damaged articles, gossiping the while, and filling the minds of the
simple Yourouks who stand around with wonderful tales, not always within
the bounds of veracity. When his work is done, he removes to another
central point, and after he has amassed as many fees as his mule can
carry, for they usually pay in cheese and butter, he returns to his
town, and realises a handsome profit.' I have not seen a small work on
the Yourouks by M. Tsakyroglou (Athens, 1891), giving their popular
songs, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gypsy variants](gft043)
