[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft098)  [Next](gft100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_39"></span>

### No. 39.--The Dog and the Maiden

There was once a poor Gypsy with a very beautiful daughter, whom he
guarded like the apple of his eye, for he wanted to marry her to a
chieftain. So he always kept her in the tent when the lads and lasses
sat of an evening by the fire and told stories, or beguiled the time
with play and dance. Only a dog was the constant companion of this poor
maiden. No one knew whom the dog belonged to, or where he came from. He
had joined the band once, and thenceforth continued the trusty companion
of the poor beautiful maiden.

It befell once that her father must go to a far city, to sell there his
besoms, baskets, spoons, and troughs. He left his daughter with the
other women in the tents on the heath, and set out with the men for the
city. This troubled the poor girl greatly, for no one would speak to
her, as all the women envied her for her beauty and avoided her; in a
word, they hated the sight of her. Only the dog remained true to her;
and once, as she sat sorrowfully in front of the tent, he said, 'Come,
let us go out on the heath; there I will tell you who I really am.' The
girl was terrified, for she had never heard of a dog being able to speak
like a man; but when the dog repeated his request, she got up and went
with him out on the heath. There the dog said, 'Kiss me, and I shall
become a man.' The girl kissed him,

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

and lo! before her stood a man of wondrous beauty. He sat down beside
her in the grass, and told how a fairy had turned him into a dog for
trying to steal her golden apples, and how he could resume his human
shape for but one night in the year, and only then if a girl had kissed
him first. Much more had the two to tell, and they toyed in the long
grass all the livelong night. When day dawned, the girl slipped back
with the dog to her tent; and the two henceforth were the very best of
friends.

The poor Gypsy came back from the city to the heath, merry because he
had made a good bit of money. When again he must go to the city to sell
his besoms and spoons, the girl remained behind with the dog in the
camp, and one night she brought forth a little white puppy. In her
terror and anguish she ran to the great river, and jumped into the
water. When the people sought to draw her out of the water, they could
not find her corpse; and the old Gypsy, her father, would have thrown
himself in too, when a handsome strange gentleman came up, and said,
'I'll soon get you the body.' He took a bit of bread, kissed it, and
threw it into the water. The dead girl straightway emerged from the
water. The people drew the corpse to land, and bore it back to the
tents, in three days' time to bury it. But the strange gentleman said,
'I will bring my sweetheart to life.' And he took the little white
puppy, the dead girl's son, and laid it on the bosom of the corpse. The
puppy began to suck, and when it had sucked its full, the dead girl
awoke, and, on seeing the handsome man, started up and flew into his
arms, for he was her lover who had lived with her as a white dog.

All greatly rejoiced when they heard this marvellous story, and nobody
thought of the little white puppy, the son of the beautiful Gypsy girl.
All of a sudden they heard a baby cry; and when they looked round, they
saw a little child lying in the grass. Then was the joy great indeed.
The little puppy had vanished and taken human shape. So they celebrated
marriage and baptism together, and lived in wealth and prosperity till
their happy end.

<span class="small">This finding a drowned body by casting one's bread
on the waters has been practised in England by non-Gypsies not so many
years ago. Gypsies *may* have brought the method with them from the
Continent.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 40.--Death the Sweetheart](gft100)
