[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft088)  [Next](gft090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span id="an_29"></span>

In my copy of this book several letters are missing from the right edge
of each line on page 110. I have silently reconstructed the effaced
text.--JBH

### No. 29.--Pretty-face

There was a widow lady, and she had an only son. An he stuck his ring in
the wall, and said, 'Mother, when blood flows from the ring, then I am
dead.'

And he was called Peter Pretty-face.

He took the road, and the dragon with six heads came, and he drew his
sword and killed him, and made three heaps of him, and planted a red
flag, and went further. And a dragon with twelve heads came, and he drew
his sword, and killed him also, and made twelve heaps, and planted a
black flag, and went further. And there came one with twenty-four heads,
and he killed him also, and made twenty-four heaps, and planted a white
flag.

Behold! the dragons carried off an emperor's daughter--there were twelve
dragons--and shut her up in their castle. And they went and fought from
morning even till noon; he who shall prove himself strongest, he shall
marry the maiden.

And his mother had said to him, 'If you will go, your death will not be
by a hero, but your death will be by cripple.'

So he went to that castle, and saw the maiden at the window, and he
asked her, 'What are you doing there?'

'The dragons carried me off, and shut me up here.'

'And where are they gone to?'

'They are gone to fight for me.'

'And when will they come home?'

'They will come at noon to dine. And they will hurl their club, and it
will strike the door, that I may have the food ready.'

He opened the door and went in to her. The dragon hurled the club, and
struck the door; and he took the club and hurled it back, and killed
them all.

'Now have no fear; they are dead.'

He married the emperor's daughter.

And the emperor heard that the dragons had carried off his daughter; and
the emperor said, 'He who shall free her from the dragons, he shall
marry her.' The emperor knew not that Peter Pretty-face had married her.
He thought that the dragons had carried her off.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

And there was one Chutilla the Handless, and he went to the emperor. 'I,
O emperor, will rescue your daughter from the dragons.'

'Well, if you do, she shall be yours.'

So he, Chutilla, went to Peter Pretty-face. And night came upon him, and
he had nowhere to sleep, and he crept into the hen-house. In the morning
Peter Pretty-face arose, and washed his face, and looked out of the
window, and Chutilla came forth from the hen-house.

And Peter Pretty-face saw him. ' By him is my death.' Chutilla came
indoors and said, 'Good-morning, Peter Pretty-face.'

'Thanks, Chutilla.'

'Come, Peter Pretty-face, give me the emperor's daughter.'

He said, 'I will not.'

Chutilla caught him by the throat, and placed his head on the
threshold. <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) 'Give me, Peter
Pretty-face, the maiden, else I will cut off your head.'

'Cut it off; I will not give her.'

Chutilla cut off his head, and took the girl and departed.

Blood began to flow from the ring. His mother saw it. 'Now my son is
dead.' She went after him, to seek for him, and came to the red flag.
His mother said, 'My son went this way.' She went further, and came to
the black flag. 'My son went this way.' She went further, and came to
the white flag. 'My son went this way.' She came to the castle, found
her son dead; and two serpents were licking the blood. And she struck
one serpent, and it died. And the other serpent brought a leaf in its
mouth, and went to the first serpent, and it also arose. And the lady
saw, and killed it also, and took the leaf, and placed her son's head
again on the trunk, and touched it with the leaf, and he arose.

'Mother, I was sleeping soundly.'

'You would have slept for ever if I had not come.'

'Mother, I will go to my lady.'

'Go not, mother's darling.'

'Bah! I will go, mother.'

'If go you will, God aid you.'

He went, and went straight to Chutilla, and seized Chutilla,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

and cut him all in little pieces, till he had cut him up, and cast him
to the dogs, and they devoured him. And he took the emperor's daughter,
and went with her to the emperor.

And the maiden said, 'Father, this is he that saved me from the
dragons.'

The emperor joined them in marriage, and made him king. And they live,
perhaps they are living even now.

<span class="small">I know no variant, Gypsy or Gentile, of this story,
though Chutilla recalls the 'Halber Mensch' of Hahn, ii. 274. The three
flags, red, black, and white, are seemingly unique. For casting the club
to announce one's coming, *cf. supra*, pp. [37](gft070.htm#page_37),
[40](gft070.htm#page_40); and Denton's *Serbian Folklore*, p. 124. For
snake-leaf in Hungarian-Gypsy tale, *cf*. *supra*, [p.
99](gft085.htm#page_99). And for 'Mother, I was sleeping soundly,' *cf*.
*supra*, [p. 33](gft069.htm#page_33). If the story of 'Peter
Pretty-face' is complete, his easy victory at the end may be due to
God's help, invoked by the mother.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[111:1](gft089.htm#fr_86) As a kind of block
evidently. I do not remember this elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 30.--The Rich and the Poor Brother](gft090)
