[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft014)  [Next](gft016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### In the Peloponnesus.

From a Venetian viceroy, moreover, Ottaviano Buono, the Acingani of
Nauplion in the Peloponnesus received about 1398 a confirmation of the
privileges granted them by his predecessors; and Hopf from two facts
infers that Gypsies must have been early settled in the peninsula--one,
the frequency of ruins called *Gyphtokastron* ('Gypsy fortress'); the
other, that in 1414 the Byzantine rhetorician Mazaris <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) reckoned Egyptians as one of the seven races
dwelling there. Nauplion is on the east coast, Modone on the west; and
at Modone the Cologne patrician, Arnold von Harff, who went on
pilgrimage 1496-99, found a whole suburb of 'poor naked people in little
reed-thatched houses, well on to three hundred families, called
Suyginer, the same as those whom we call Heiden (Heathen) from Egypt,
and who wander about in our lands. Here the race plies all sorts of
handiwork--shoemaking, cobbling, and also the smith's craft, which is
right curious to behold. The anvil stands on the ground, the man sat in
front of it, like a tailor with us; near him sat his wife, also on the
earth, and span. Between them was the fire. Near it were two little
leather bags, like a bagpipe's, half in the ground and pointing towards
the fire. So the wife, as she sat and span, sometimes lifted up one of
the bags and then pressed it down again; this sent wind through the
earth to the fire, so that the man could get on with his tinkering.'
Harff then says that the race originates from a

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

country called Gyppe, some forty miles distant from Modone 'Sixty years
ago' \[*i.e.* about 1436\] 'the Turkish emperor seized this territory,
whereupon some counts and lords, who would not submit to his authority,
fled to Rome to our spiritual father, and demanded his comfort and
succour. So he gave them commendatory letters to the Roman emperor and
to all princes of the empire, to render them conduct and assistance as
exiles for the Christian faith. But though they showed the letters to
all princes, they found, nowhere assistance. So they died in
wretchedness, but the letters passed to their servants and children, who
still wander about in our lands, and call themselves from Little Egypt.
But that is a lie, for their parents came from the territory of Gyppe,
called also Suginia, which is not so far from our city of Cologne as it
is from Egypt. But these vagabonds are rascals and spy out the lands.'
This passage, modernised from Harff's narrative by Hopf (pp. 14-17), is
of high interest, though there was no Turkish occupation of the Morea
about 1436, and though we know of no territory there called Gyppe or
Suginia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xx:1](gft015.htm#fr_4) E. A. Sophocles in the
Introduction to his *Greek Lexicon of the Roman and Byzantine Periods*
(Boston, U.S., 1870, p. 32) regards Mazaris as probably an imaginary
character of an anonymous writer of the *fourteenth* century, according
to whom 'Peloponnesus was at that time inhabited by a mongrel
population, the principal elements being Lacedæmonians, Italians,
Peloponnesians, Slays, Illyrians, Egyptians (Αἰγύπτιοι), and Jews.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In Roumania](gft016)
