[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft068)  [Next](gft070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_09"></span>

### No. 9.--The Mother's Chastisement

There was an emperor's son, and he went to hunt. And he departed from
the hunters by himself. And by a certain stack there was a maiden. He
passed near the stack, and heard her lamenting. He took that maiden, and
brought her home.

'See, mother, what I've found.'

His mother took her to the kitchen to the cook to bring her up. She
brought her up twelve years. The empress dressed her nicely, and put her
in the palace to lay the table. The prince loved her, for she was so
fair that in all the world there was none so fair as she. The prince
loved her three years, and the empress knew it not.

Once he said, 'I will take a wife, mother.'

'From what imperial family?'

'I wish to marry her who lays the table.'

'Not her, mother's darling!'

'If I don't take her, I shall die.'

'Take her.'

And he took her; he married her. And an order came for him to go to
battle. He left her big with child.

The empress called two servants. 'Take her into the forest and kill her,
and bring me her heart and little finger.'

They put her in the carriage, and drove her into the forest; after them
ran a whelp. And they brought her into the forest, and were going to
kill her, and she said, 'Kill me not, for I have used you well.'

'How are we to take her the heart, then?'

'Kill the whelp, for its heart is just like a human one, and cut off my
little finger.'

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

They killed the whelp, and cut off her little finger, and took out the
whelp's heart.

And she cried, 'Gather wood for me, and make me a fire; and strip off
bark for me, and build me a hut.'

They built her a hut, and made her a fire, and went away home, bringing
the heart and the little finger.

She brought forth a son. God and St. Peter came and baptized him; <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) and God gave him a gun that he should
become a hunter. Whatever he saw he would kill with the gun. And God
gave him the name Silvester. And God made a house of the hut, and the
fire no longer died. And God gave them a certain loaf; they were always
eating, and it was never finished.

The boy grew big, and he took his gun in his hand, and went into the
forest. And what he saw he killed, carried to his mother, and they ate.
Walking in the *forest*, he came upon the *dragons' palace*, and sat
before the door. At mid-day the dragons were coming home. He saw them
from afar, eleven (*sic*) in number; and *eleven* he shot with his gun,
and *one* he merely stunned. And he took them, and carried them into the
palace, and shut them up in a room; and he went to *his mother*, and
said, 'Come with me, mother.'

'Where am I to go to, mother's darling?'

'Come with me, where I take you to.'

He went with her to the palace. 'Take to thee, mother, twelve keys. *Go
into any room you choose, but into this room do not go*.'

He *went into the forest to hunt*.

She said, 'Why did my son tell me not to go in here? But I will go to
see what is there.'

She opened the door.

The dragon asked her, 'If thou art a virgin, be my sister; but if thou
art a wife, be my wife.'

'I am a wife.'

'Then be my wife.'

'I will; but will you do the right thing by me?'

'I will.'

'Swear, then.'

I swear.'

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

The dragon swore. The dragon said to her, 'Swear also thou.'

She also swore. They kissed one another on the mouth. She brought him to
her into the house; they drank and ate, and loved one another.

Her son came from the forest. She saw him. She said, 'My son is coming;
go back into the room.'

He went back, and she shut him in.

In the morning her son went again into the forest to hunt. She admitted
the dragon again to her. They drank and ate. He said to her, 'How shall
we kill your son? Then we'll live finely. *Make yourself ill, and say
that you have seen a dream, that he must bring* milk from the she-bear
for you to drink. Then you'll have nothing to trouble you, for the
she-bear will devour him.'

He came home from the forest. '*What's the matter with you, mother?*'

'*I shall die, but I saw a dream*. Bring me milk from the she-bear.'

'I'll bring it you, mother.'

He went into the forest, and found the she-bear. He was going to shoot
her.

She cried, 'Stop, man. What do you want?'

'You to give me milk.'

She said, 'I will give it you. Have you a pail?'

'I have.'

'Come and milk.'

He milked her, and brought it to his mother.

'Here, mother.'

She pretended to drink, but poured it forth.

In the morning he went again into the forest, and met the Moon. 'Who art
thou?'

'I am the Moon.'

'Be a sister to me.'

'But who art thou?'

'I am Silvester.'

'Then thou art God's godson, for God takes care of thee. I also am
God's.'

'Be a sister to me.'

'I will be a sister to thee.'

He went further; he met Friday. 'Who art thou?'

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

'I am Friday, but who art thou?'

'I am Silvester.'

'Thou art God's godson; I also am God's.'

'Be a sister to me.'

He went home. His mother saw him. 'My son is coming.'

'Send him to the wild *sow* to bring thee milk, for she will *devour*
him.'

'Always sick, mother?'

'I am. I have seen a dream. Bring me milk from the wild sow.'

I know not whether or no I shall bring it, but I will try.'

He went; he found the sow; he was going to shoot her with his gun. She
cried, 'Don't, don't shoot me. What do you want?'

'Give me milk.'

'Have you a pail? come and milk.'

He brought it to his mother. She pretended to drink, but poured it
forth. He went again into the forest.

She admitted the dragon to her. 'In vain, for the sow has not devoured
him.'

'Then send him to the *Mountains* of Blood, that butt at one another
like rams, to bring thee water, the water of life and the water of
healing. If he does not die there, he never will.'

'I have seen a dream, that you bring me water from the Mountains of
Blood, which butt at one another like rams, for then there will be
nothing the matter with me.'

He went to the Moon.

'Whither away, brother?'

'I am going to the mountains to fetch water for my mother.'

'Don't go, brother; you will die there.'

'Bah! I will go there.'

'*Take thee my horse* when thou goest, for my horse will carry thee
thither. And take thee a watch, for they butt at one another from
morning till noon, and at *noon* they rest for two hours. So when you
come there at the twelfth hour, draw water in two pails from the two
wells.'

He came thither at mid-day, and dismounted, and drew water in two pails,
the water of life and the water of healing. And he came back to the
Moon; and the Moon said, 'Lie down and sleep, and rest, for you are worn
out.'

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

She hid that water, and *poured in other*.

He arose. 'Come, sister, I will depart home.'

'Take my horse, and go riding. Take the saddle-bags.'

He went home to his mother. His mother saw him coming on horseback, and
said to the dragon, 'My son is coming on horseback.'

Tell him that you have seen a dream, that you bind his fingers behind
his back with a *silken cord*; and that if he can burst it he will
become a hero, and you will grow strong.'

'Bind away, mother.'

She made a thick silken cord, and bound his fingers behind his back. He
tugged, and grew red in the face; he tugged again, he grew blue; he
tugged the third time, he grew black.

And she cried, 'Come, dragon, and cut his throat.'

The dragon came to him. 'Well, what shall I do to you now?'

'Cut me all in bits, and put me in the saddle-bags, and place me on my
horse. Thither, whence he carried me living, let him carry me dead.'

He *cut him in pieces, put him in the saddle-bags, and placed him on the
horse*. 'Go, *whence thou didst carry him living, carry him dead*.'

The horse went straight to the Moon. The Moon came out, and saw him, and
took him in, and called Wednesday, and called Friday; and they laid him
in a big trough, and washed him bravely, and placed him on a table, and
put him all together, *bit by bit*; and they *took the water* of
healing, and sprinkled him, and *he became whole*; and they took the
water of life, and sprinkled him, and he came *to life*.

'Ah! I was sleeping soundly.' <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)

'You would have slept for ever if I had not come.'

'I will go, sister, to my mother.'

'Go not, brother.'

'Bah! I will.'

'Well, go, and God be with thee. Take thee my sword.'

He went to his mother. His mother was singing and dancing with the
dragon. He went in to the dragon. 'Good day to you both.'

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

'Thanks.'

'Come, what shall I do to you, dragon?'

'Cut me in little pieces, and put me in the saddle-bags, and place me on
my horse. Whence he carried me living, let him carry me also dead.'

He cut him in little pieces, put him in the saddle-bags, placed him on
his horse, and dug out the horse's eyes. 'Go whither thou wilt.'

Away went the horse, and kept knocking his head against the trees; and
the pieces of flesh kept falling from the saddle-bags. The crows kept
eating the flesh.

Silvester shot a hare, and skinned it, and spitted it, and roasted it at
the fire. And he said to his mother, 'Mother, look straight at me.'

His mother looked at him. He struck her in the eyes, and her eyes leapt
out of her head. And he took her by the hand, led her to a jar, said to
her, 'Mother, when thou hast filled this jar with tears, then God pardon
thee; and when thou hast eaten a bundle of hay, and filled the jar with
tears, then God pardon thee, and restore thee thine eyes.'

And he bound her there, and departed, and left her three years. In three
years she came back to his recollection. 'I will go to my mother, and
see what she is doing.'

Now she has filled the jar, and eaten the bundle of hay.

'Now may God pardon thee; now I also pardon thee. Depart, and God be
with thee.'

<span class="small">A third Gypsy version, from Hungary, the first half
of Friedrich Müller's No. 5, may be summarised thus:--Two children,
driven from home by mother, wander thirty-five years, and come to a
*forest* so dense the birds cannot fly through it. They come to a
*castle* so high they cannot see the top of it. *Twelve* robbers dwell
here. *Lad kills eleven as they come home, but only wounds the twelfth.
He goes forth to hunt*, spares lives of twelve wild animals, and brings
them home. The sister meanwhile has restored the twelve robbers to life.
She suggests that her brother shall have a warm bath (*cf*. De
Gubernatis' *Zool. Myth.* i. 213), saying that thereby their father had
been so healthy. In the bath she *binds his hands* and feet. She
*summons* twelve robbers. They permit him to play his father's air on
his pipe; it calls up the twelve animals. They rend the robbers, and
loose the lad, who packs his sister into the great empty *jar* (here
first mentioned), and leaves her to die of hunger.</span>

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

This last is a poorly-told story; still, not without its features of
interest. It will be noticed that in it, as in many non-Gypsy variants,
the dragons are rationalised into robbers (sometimes blackamoors). Of
the Roumanian and the Bukowina Gypsy versions the former seems to me the
better on the whole. The opening of the Bukowina version cannot properly
belong to the story, for it arouses an interest in the mother, who yet
turns out a bad lot. <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52) Its close,
however, is decidedly superior. What a picture is that of the mother and
the dragon singing and dancing, and what a one that of the blinded horse
and the crows! In both versions there is the same omission--the inquiry
into the seat of the hero's strength; and in the Bukowina one no use is
made of the milk from the she-bear and the wild sow, nor are we told of
the hero's first meeting with Wednesday. Plainly the Roumanian version
is not derived from the Bukowina one, nor the Bukowina one from the
Roumanian; but they point to an unknown, more perfect original. Even as
they stand, however, both are better than any of the non-Gypsy variants
known to me. These include five from Hahn's Greek collection (i. 176,
215; ii. 234, 279, 283); one in *Roumanian Fairy Tales*, by E. B. M.
(Loud. 1884, pp. 81-89), resembling the Hungarian-Gypsy version; three
German and one Lithuanian, cited by Hahn (ii. 236); one Russian,
summarised by Ralston (p. 235); the well-known 'Blue Belt' in Dasent's
*Tales from the Norse* (p. 178); and Laura Gonzenbach's No. 26, 'Vom
tapfern Königssohn' (*Sicil. Mär.* i. 158-167), where the hero is cut in
pieces by his supposed stepfather, the robber-chieftain, packed into a
saddle-bag, and carried by his ass to a hermit, who revives him, after
which the story drifts off into our [No. 45](gft105.htm#an_45).

I have annotated the Gypsy stories very fully; my notes cover several
pages. Here, however, it must suffice to indicate some of the more
striking parallels from non-Gypsy sources. In Hahn, i. 267, God gives a
house to a woman abandoned in a forest (*cf*. also i. 73; ii. 26). For
the heart and little finger, a very common incident, compare the
English-Gypsy story of 'Bobby Rag' (No. 51), and Hahn, i. 258 and ii.
231. In Grimm, No. 111, a hunter gives the hero a gun which never
misses. For the formula, 'If thou art a virgin,' etc., *cf*. Ralston,
pp. 75-76. For the mountains that butt together, *cf*. Ralston, p. 236;
Tylor's *Primitive Culture*, pp. 313-316; Hahn, ii. 46-47; and Grimm,
No. 97. For the water of healing and the water of life, *cf*. Ralston,
pp. 17, 91, 230, 255. For 'Ah! I was sleeping soundly,' *cf*. Ralston,
pp. 91-92; Hahn, ii. 274; and our [No. 29](gft099.htm#an_39). In
Campbell's *Santal Folk-tales*, p. 92, a father, restored to life, says,
'O my son, what a lengthened sleep

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">I have had!' For the sow biting off half of the horse's
tail, *cf*. Hahn, i. 312; Krauss, ii. 94; Ralston, p. 235; and Burns's
'Tam o’ Shanter.' For the leaves beginning to scream, *cf*. Hahn, i. 270
and ii. 171. In a variant from Afanasief, vi. 52, cited by De Gubernatis
(*Z.M.*, i. 215), the sister for punishment is placed near some hay and
some water, and a vessel which she is to fill with her tears. It is just
worth noting that Silvester is a common English-Gypsy name.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[30:1](gft069.htm#fr_50) See note on [No.
6](gft066.htm#an_06), 'God's Godson.'

<span id="fn_51"></span>[33:1](gft069.htm#fr_51) Baldpate makes the same
remark in [No. 2](gft062.htm#an_02), [p. 8](gft062.htm#page_8), but the
conventional answer is wanting there.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[35:1](gft069.htm#fr_52) So I had written; but I
have since read Maive Stokes' story of 'The Demon conquered by the
King's Son' (*Indian Fairy Tales*, No. 24, pp. 173 and 288). Here it is
the demon *step*-mother, who, pretending her eyes are bad, sends the
hero to fetch tigress's milk, an eagle's feather, night-growing rice and
water from the Glittering Well. He speaks, however, of her as his
'mother.' *e.g.* on p. 180. Compare 'The Son of Seven Mothers' in F. A.
Steel's *Indian Wide-awake Stories*, pp. 98-110, and Knowles'
*Folk-tales of Kashmir*, pp. 1 and 42.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 10.--The Three Princesses and the Unclean Spirit](gft070)
