[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Roma](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gft136)  [Next](gft138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3G88/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gypsy Folk Tales*, by Francis Hindes Groome, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

### APPENDIX

P. 249.--The following Negro folk-tale, first printed by me in the
*Athenæum* for 10th August 1887, p. 245, was taken down by an American
acquaintance, Mr. J. P. Suverkrop, C.E., in 1871, at Sand Mountain,
Alabama, from the recitation of his negro servant, Dick Brown, about
thirty years old, who was a native of Petersburg, Virginia, and there
had got it from his granny. It seems to be clearly a variant of 'The
Master Smith' (Clouston, ii. 409) and of Grimm's No. 147, 'The Old Man
made Young Again' (ii. 215, 444). If so, it must be a comparatively
recent transmission from one race (Aryan) to another (non-Aryan), yet it
is as thoroughly localised as folk-tale well could be.

### DE NEW HAN’.

Wunst dar wer a sawmill on de aige of a wood not a thousan mili from
heah, wid a branch a-runnin by a-turnin de wheel. An ole colored man, he
kep de mill an wer a very fine kine of man; but he son Sam, what help
him, didn’ take arter de ole man, but wer a triflin, no account sort o’
young man; an’ de ole man had to wuk right sharp to git along. One day
’long come a poor-lookin sort o’ man, sayin he wanted to larn de
saw-millin, an he wuk fur a yeah fur nuffin. De ole man wer glad to git
his help, an de young ’un ’lowed he could shif some o’ his wuk on to de
New Han’. So de New Han’ he went to totin boads and doin chores round de
mill. De ole man he like de New Han’ fus class, an allus gin he jes as
good as he git hisself; but de son he make hisself big to de New Han’
behind de ole man back, an order him roun to do dis an dat. De New Han’
he never say nuffin, but jes go ’long ’bout he own bisness. De ole man
he cotch Sam ’busin an a-bossin de New Han’ aroun, and he club he good
fur hit more’n a few times. One day an ole man come fur a load o’ plank,
and he war a-groanin wid de misery in de back, an a-wishin he were young
an spry like as he used to.

Den up speak de New Han’, an he say, 'Ef you all go in de woods ’ceptin
dis man an me, whar you can't see nuffin goin on, an wait till I holler,
I'll fix dis man right up good; but you all mus promis not to peek, for
suffin bad happen of yo do.'

So dey promis. An de ole man an he son go in de woods wher dey

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

can't see nuffin. An de New Han’ he say to de man wid de misery in he
back, 'Go lay down on de saw-frame.'

Den he up wid de saw, an cut he in two. Den he up wid de two pieces of
de man, an frow em into de branch, an de pieces jine togidder, an de ole
man wid de misery in he back come outer de branch a live an well man an
quite young like an frisky. Den he fell a-thankin de New Han’, but he
jest tole he to shet up. An den he hollerd. Sam and he fader come
a-runnin, an was mighty exprised when dey seen de young-lookin man in de
place of de ole limpin man. But de New Han’ wouldn't say nuffin ’bout
it. So dey jest shet up, an things carried on same as usual till de ole
man he got word his mudder very bad, an he must start right off fur to
see her. Befo he go he dun tole Sam not fur to ac obstropolus wid de New
Han’, case ef he did, so sho’ would he git a clubbin soon ez he got
back. But Sam he forgit jes so soon de ole man gone, an behave wery
overbearin an obstropolus.

Finally de New Han’ say to Sam, 'Ef you don’ quit behavin, I’se gwine to
leave when my yeah up, an dat's to-morrer.'

Den Sam ac real owdashus, an tole him, 'Go along now, yo fool.'

Sho’ enuff nex dey de New Han’ dun gone, an no one seed him go, an no
one pass he in de road or in de wood. Well, de wery nex day ’long come
de man what was made young an likely by de New Han’, an ’long wid him
come he ole woman totin a baskit wid a elegant fat possum an sweet
taters dat fairly made Sam mouf water. After passin de time o’ day an so
on, de man ax arter de New Han’, sayin he want him fix up de ole woman
same like he do him.

Sam say, 'O, he be back to-morrer. Jes leave de possum, an come agin.
I'll gin it to him when he come.'

But de man too smart fur dat, an wouldn’ leave hit.

So Sam ’fraid he gwine to lose de possum, so he say, 'De New Han’ dun
gone off fur to see he sic fader, an dun tole me fo’ he go for to ax you
an do same what he done to you.'

So den de man tole Sam, an Sam tell de man to go in de wood an shet he
eyes. Den Sam he saw de ole woman in two, an frow de pieces in de
branch; but dar dey stay. Den Sam git skeered, an go down to de branch,
an try to jine de pieces, but dey wont jine. An de ole ’oman's husban
come a-runnin and a-hollerin outer de wood case he see suffin wrong; an
de neighbers come, an dey take Sam an try he, an fin' he guilty.

An de judge he put on he black hat an say, 'Hang Sam by de neck ontil he
mus be quite ded, an de Lor hab mussy on pore Sam.'

Den Sam's ole fader come a-runnin, an he fall down, an beg for Sam; but
do’ he roll in de dus, an cry, de judge won’ let Sam go. Den dey all go
’way solemn like to de gallus. An de judge ax Sam, do he got anything to
say for hisself. An Sam see de New Han’ stan a-laffin in de crowd. An he
think how bad he dun treated de pore man.

So he say, 'Brudren an sistren, min’ what I gwine tell you. Don’ ac
highminded an biggity wid no one, case ef I hadn’ ac dat way to a man in
dis here very crowd, I'd a been heavin saw-logs instid o’ gwine to be
hung dis day.'

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

’Den all he frinds fall a-cryin an a-rollin, but de New Han’ jump up
longside Sam, an say quick like to he, 'Do you shore enuff sorry for you
acshuns?'

Den Sam say, 'Deed an deed I’s sorry, an I ax pardon an hope yo’ll
forgive me when I’s gone.'

Den de New Han’ speak out big an loud to de crowd, an say, 'How come yo
gwine to hang dis heah man when de ole ’oman he kill is a-standin right
dar?'

Sho' enuff dar was she standin long o’ her ole man. So dey let Sam down,
an dey had great jollification; but dey never see de New Han’ from dat
day to dis nowhar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Bunyan](gft138)
