[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Hindu](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](sak00) [Next](sak02)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

## ADVERTISEMENT.

   T<span class="small">HE</span> present work, both in its Sanskrit
portion and in its English, is an amended reprint of three volumes,<span
id="page_i_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_i_note_1) published in India, which
have already become very scarce. An abridged form of those volumes,<span
id="page_i_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_i_note_2) which subsequently <span
id="page_iv">p. iv</span> appeared, contains nothing of the Sanskrit
original but the Aphorisms.

   While, in the following pages, all the corrections obtainable from
the abridgment have been turned to account, an immense number of
improved readings have been taken from another source. Three several
times I carefully read Dr. Ballantyne's translation in as many different
copies of it; entering suggestions, in the second copy, without
reference to those which had been entered in the first, and similarly
making independent suggestions in my third copy. All these<span
id="page_iv_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_iv_note_1) were, on various
occasions, submitted to Dr. Ballantyne; and such of them as did not meet
his approval were crossed through. The residue, many more than a
thousand, have been embodied <span id="page_v">p. v</span> in the
ensuing sheets, but are not indicated,<span
id="page_v_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_v_note_1) as successively introduced.
The renderings proposed in the footnotes are, for the most part, from
among those which have recently occurred to me as eligible.

   That Dr. Ballantyne had any thought of reissuing, in whatever form,
the volumes mentioned at the beginning of this Advertisement, I was
unaware, till some years after he had made over the abridgment of them
to Professor Cowell, for publication.<span
id="page_v_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_v_note_2) Otherwise, I should have
placed at his disposal the materials towards improvement of his second
edition, which, at the cost of no slight drudgery, are here made
available.

   The Sánkhya Aphorisms, in all the known commentaries on them, are
exhibited word for word. The variants, now given, of the Aphorisms,
afforded by accessible productions of that character, have been drawn
from the works, of which only one has yet been printed, about to be
specified:<span id="page_v_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_v_note_3)

   I. The *Sánkhya-pravachana-bháshya*, by Vijnána Bhikshu. Revelant
particulars I have given elsewhere. My oldest MS. of it was transcribed
in 1654.

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

   II. The *Kápila-sánkhya-pravachana-sútra-vṛitti*, by Aniruddha. Of
this I have consulted, besides a MS. copied in 1818, formerly the
property of Dr. Ballantyne, one which I procured to be copied, in 1855,
from an old MS. without date.

   III. The *Laghhu-sánkhya-sútra-vṛitti*, by Nagesa. Of this I have two
MSS., both undated. One of them is entire; but the other is defective by
the three first Books.

   IV. The *Sánkhya-pravachana-sútra-vṛitti-sára*, by Vedánti Mahádeva.
Here, again, only one of two MSS. which I possess is complete. The
other, which breaks off in the midst of the comment on Book II., Aph.
15, is, in places, freely intetpolated from No. I. Neither of them has a
date.

   Nearly all my longer annotations, and some of the shorter, were
scrutinized, while in the rough, by the learned Professor Cowell, but
for whose searching criticisms, which cannot be valued too highly, they
would, in several instances, have been far less accurate than they now
are.

F. H.      

MARLESFORD, SUFFOLK,  
   *Aug*. 28, 1884.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](sak02)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_iii">p. iii</span>

<span id="page_i_note_1"></span>[1](#page_i_fr_1) Their titles here
follow:

"The Aphorisms of the Sánkhya Philosophy of Kapila, with Illustrative
Extracts from the Commentaries. \[Book I.\] Printed for the use of the
Benares College, by order of Govt. N. W. P. Allahabad: Printed at the
Presbyterian Mission Press. Rev. L. G. H<span class="small">AY</span>,
*Sup't*. 1852."

"The Aphorisms of the Sánkhya Philosophy, by Kapila, with Illustrative
Extracts from the Commentary. Books II., III., & IV. In Sanskrit and
English, Printed for the use of the Benares College, by order of Govt.
N. W. P. (1st Edition, 550 *Copies*:— *Price* 12 *annas*.) Allahabad:
Printed at the Presbyterian Mission Press. Rev. L. G. H<span
class="small">AY</span>, *Superintendent*. 1854."

"The Aphorisms of the Sánkhya Philosophy, by Kapila, with Illustrative
Extracts from the Commentary by Vijnána-Bhikshu. Books V. & VI. Sanskrit
and English. Translated by James R. Ballantyne, LL.D., Principal of the
Govt. College, Benares. Printed for the use of the Benares College, by
order of Govt. N. W. P . (1st Edition, 550 *Copies*:—Price 12 *annas*.)
Allahabad: Printed at the Presbyterian Mission Press. Rev. L. G. H<span
class="small">AY</span>, *Sup't*. 1856."

<span id="page_i_note_2"></span>[2](#page_i_fr_2) Occupying Fasciculi 32
and 81 of the New Series of the *Bibliotheca Indica*, issued in 1862 and
1865. The proof-sheets of only 32 pages of the whole, from the
beginning, were read by Dr. Ballantyne; the rest, by Professor Cowell.

The title of the abridged form runs: "The Sánkhya Aphorisms of Kapila,
with Extracts from Vijnána Bhiks\[h\]u's Commentary," &c. But this is a
misrepresentation, as regards Book I., which takes up 63 pages out of
the total of 175. The expository matter in that Book is derived, very
largely, from other commentators than Vijnána. <span
id="footnotes_page_iv">p. iv</span> Vedánti Mahádeva mainly supplies it
at the outset, and, towards the end, well nigh exclusively, Aniruddha.
Some share of it, however, will not be traced; it having been furnished
by one of Dr. Ballantyne's pandits, whom I have repeatedly seen in the
very act, as by his own acknowledgment, of preparing his elucidations.

<span id="page_iv_note_1"></span>[1](#page_iv_fr_1) Many of them,
especially in Books II.-VI., rest on readings of the original preferable
to those which had been accepted.

Though not fully published till 1856, my edition of the
*Sánkkya-pravachana-bháshya*, its preface alone excepted, was in print
as early as 1853; and Dr. Ballantyne had a copy of it. A few arbitrarily
chosen words apart, his text, after Book I., is borrowed from it
throughout, but with no mention of the fact. My advice was unheeded,
that he should profit by the copious emendations which I had amassed and
digested from better manuscripts than those to which I at first had
access. Greatly to his disservice, he would not be induced even to look
at them. It faring the same with my typographical corrections, he has,
here and there, reproduced errors, more or less gross, which might
easily have been avoided. See, for specimens. pp. 197, 288, 357, 373,
374, 381, 390.

<span id="footnotes_page_v">p. v</span>

<span id="page_v_note_1"></span>[1](#page_v_fr_1) Nor has attention been
topically directed to sundry blemishes of idiom which have been removed;
as, for example, by the substitution of 'unless' for 'without,' of 'in
time' for 'through time,' of 'presently' for 'just,' and of 'between the
two' for 'between both.'

<span id="page_v_note_2"></span>[2](#page_v_fr_2) "At the time of his
departure from India, in 1860, Dr. Ballantyne left with me the MS. of
his revised translation of the Sánkhya Aphorisms," "Notice," in the
Bibliotheca Indica, New Series, No, 81.

<span id="page_v_note_3"></span>[3](#page_v_fr_3) For details respecting
these commentaries and their authors, see my *Contribution towards an
Index to the Bibliography of the Indian Philosophical Systems*, or my
Preface to the *Sánkhya-sára*.

<span id="footnotes_page_vi">p. vi</span>

<span id="page_vi_note_1"></span>[1](#page_vi_fr_1) I once had a second
copy of this very rare work, bearing no date, but most venerable in
appearance. Like many of my manuscript treasures, it was lent, and never
found its way back to me.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
