[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lmf08)  [Next](lmf10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

Jesus says, "You, therefore, must be perfect, as your heavenly Father is
perfect" (Mt. 5:48). Paul says, "Your body is a temple of the Holy
Spirit within you, which you have from God . . . glorify God in your
body" (I Cor. 6:19-20). Unity says, "God in the midst of you is mighty
to quicken, to cleanse, to heal, to restore to wholeness, to prosper.
Look within yourself to the Christ Mind for the light that will flood
your soul and enable you to see yourself and your affairs in right
relation to God and your fellow human beings."

Seeing is the discerning capacity of the mind. By taking time for quiet
meditation, and by confidently claiming oneness with God-Mind, we keep
the avenues of our minds open to the divine plan for us. There is a
divine law of mind action that we may conform to, and that will always
bring satisfactory results. There is also a physical side to the
operation of this divine law. The body and its needs must have our
consideration. We must not drive the body or neglect its normal needs.

This body is the result of our use of God-given faculties and powers. We
have needed such a temple, and the soul has built it. Sometimes we fail
to remember that the temple is for the use of the Holy Spirit. Sometimes
the belief in lack or darkness or time comes

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

in to cause us to do things which are not good for the body temple. When
there is evidence of disobedience, we should not seek to whip the body
into submission and comfort by outer means or by mental treatment. We
should prayerfully seek the understanding of the soul's need and bring
ourselves into harmony with God-Mind.

Sometimes we become so intent upon some outer form of success that we
keep our eyes fixed upon the partial good. Sometimes that which we
undertake does not progress as we had dreamed, and we are tempted to see
walls of limitation or the darkness of opposition. Sometimes in the
effort to accomplish that which we feel we must do we are unfair to the
body, until it calls a halt.

Whatever the cause of the appearance of negation, turning the attention
Godward, with willingness to look into all phases of daily living and to
make such adjustments as are wise and loving toward the body, will
quickly relieve all strain and congestion and allow the free flow of
life to renew nerves and structures. The body responds to changes of
mind; and when this is accompanied by truly wise living habits, the
conformity to true ideas of life and power and love and substance and
intelligence will renew it and make it every whit whole.

We must see the life of God in our flesh. Any form of denial of God-life
and intelligence or of the physical

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

organism, any thought of the flesh other than as of God's pure
substance, congests and irritates the body. This is double-mindedness,
which consists in believing in evil as well as good, in perceiving and
thinking about evil, or undesirable conditions, or lack, or failure, or
calamity of any sort. Double-mindedness weakens the eyes and dims the
vision, and we do not clearly perceive that which is our perfection in
God-Mind.

To look about one and see evil and imperfection is sinful. That which we
mentally stamp a thing is registered in our own flesh.

The eye is the outer evidence of the ability of the mind to discern and
understand. A strong, unclouded, perceiving, and discerning mind attuned
to Truth is manifest in strong, healthy eyes and clearness of sight; for
one who perceives the Truth will live by the law of Truth.

"I am God . . . the Holy One in your midst" (Hos. 11:9).

God in the midst of us is mighty, and when we look toward God in faith,
God binds up, harmonizes, and strengthens whatever places need to be
adjusted and restored. God, the Holy One in the midst of us, is that
power which creates and is irresistible to renew and to make wholeness
manifest. When we are full of faith and cooperate with this restoring
principle of our being, God's work of restoration never ceases its
activity in us. God seeks always to restore harmony,

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

strength, life, wholeness in that which He has created. Our holding
thoughts like these and communing with the indwelling Presence in the
silence gives to the healing Christ within the best possible opportunity
to do His work quickly. We do not at a time of renewal overtax the body
and its energies, because we need to use the vigorous life of Spirit to
build up our body temple. Let us pour out upon our organism blessings of
praise for the good work it is doing in establishing wholeness. Let us
think of ourselves as already manifesting perfection in mind, soul, and
body, and give thanks that divine order is now established.

"I am God Almighty; walk before me, and be blameless" (Gen. 17:1).

The Father within is saying, "Be thou perfect"; and His word has
fulfilled its mission of restoring the body with His own vital
livingness.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Day and Night Experience](lmf10.md)
