[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lmf07)  [Next](lmf09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

You remember the spiritual inspiration that Paul had, an inspiration
that is also ours as we claim the light and power and love that are
God's expression through us:

"If the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he
who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will give life to your mortal
bodies also through his Spirit which dwells in you" (Rom. 7:11).

It isn't people at Unity who quicken and heal. It isn't the human desire
of the individual's heart that makes the life flow through his organism
more freely. It isn't the thing that we usually think of as Christianity
that brings one into the quickening, healing currents of Christ life. It
is the stirring in us of the same Spirit of Christ that was and is in
Jesus Christ--the Spirit of God, standing forth in individual
consciousness and expression--the stirring up in our minds of divine
ideas from the mind of Being. It is the soul's willingness and effort to
live in its daily thinking and acts in the Spirit of Christ--that same
Spirit which made Jesus forget Himself in doing the good and perfect
will of His Father. It is not churchgoing and praying and the observance
of moral laws, but vital, loving, powerful words and acts of helpfulness
to others. Jesus' consecration was a living, constant thing. He adored

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the Father and sought constantly to glorify Him in making the things of
His Spirit manifest in the lives of His children. Jesus was eagerly
discovering the real purpose of life and fulfilling it not for Himself
alone but for all of us. Jesus says, "Follow me" (Lk. 9:59). "If you
love me, you will keep my commandments" (Jn. 14:15). "He who believes in
me will also do the works that I do" (Jn. 14:12). "Feed my sheep" (Jn.
21:19). "Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons"
(Mt. 10:8).

To be truly healed and quickened by the life more abundant, one must
forget the past and the limitations of the past, and offer every
thought, every ounce of energy to Spirit, to be used in bringing God's
kingdom of light and love and order and beauty and health into the
earth, into the lives of all people. This giving is not to be done in
human consciousness and might, but in the realization that it is God
working through one's soul and body to increase one's life and strength
and substance, to fulfill His perfect plan. One's body is to be thought
of as the temple of the living God. One's arms and hands are to be
thought of, and used, as God's arms and hands, the expression of
God-Mind's ideas of power and loving service and splendid work. The
executive power of the mind, in its relation to things that we think of
as belonging in the three-dimensional world, is expressed through the
arms and hands. One should think of whatever one is led to do as being
God's work. One should know and rejoice in one's innate ability to
accomplish that work. One should

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

realize that one is free to decide wisely, and to do whatever will
benefit oneself and others. One should see others in this beautiful
spiritual world of activity and bless them.

God is in us as the very life and substance that we use, and our use of
God's gifts increases our ability to use and to direct them. God is
life; we make that life into living. God is love; we make divine love
into loving. God is substance; we take the substantial reality and bring
it through into the manifest world. God is wisdom; we claim oneness with
divine wisdom and it expresses through us as wise thoughts and decisions
and actions: the light of life that glows from heart and face, yes,
every cell of the body.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Understanding the Body](lmf09)
