[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lmf13)  [Next](lmf15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

Two of your statements prompt us to a little explanation, before giving
the outline for treatments: (1) "I am wondering if you will send me,
also my brother, some health vibrations." (2) "We are asking you to
relieve us through the Silent Unity healing." We are not sure that you
understand that you are to cooperate with us, by studying the Truth so
that you may come into the understanding of the divine laws of health
and life and prosperity, and by joining us daily in prayers.

We will not say that the work we do here has nothing to do with the
healing. But we do not promise results unless we have the faith and the
cooperation of those for whom we pray and to whom we give instruction.
After all it is not the physical and mental relief that means most to
the persons receiving treatment, and we are not so much concerned with
the results as we are with the growth in consciousness that will make
the results abiding.

This health law is threefold: spiritual, keeping a person assured of his
God-given freedom from all anxiety, worry, fear, and lack; mental,
giving him the intelligence that enables him to do that which promotes
health and success; physical, forming those habits which keep him making
the right use of his faculties, and powers, and the life energy and
substance.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

There is a tendency to disregard the harmonious combination of these
three elements, one person being very careful to observe the spiritual,
another to accomplish results through the physical. Our work is to unify
these three and to bring our students into the understanding application
of the Truth of being.

One who remembers and lives by the spiritual promises of the law of
health will not worry, or seek to manage other people's affairs, or
neglect to feed his or her soul with that which is necessary to keep it
unfolding Christward.

One who is aware of the mental side of his health seeks to keep himself
free from the limitations of the race mind, the opinions and demands of
others, the depressions and hurried attitudes that keep the Christ ideas
from finding perfect expression through his thoughts and acts.

One who is determined that his physical life will show forth the peace
and order of spiritual reality and divine intelligence is considerate of
his body, and careful in his demands upon it. He sees to it that he
understands the physical requirements and that he meets these every day.

So you see there is more to our Silent Unity ministry than a formula of
words to be said at intervals! We want to help you to live the Christ
life here and now, which means to live a life of understanding trust in
the good; of joyous activity, mental and physical; of freedom from fear
and worry; of loving contact with your fellows, without anxiety as to
their apparent

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

shortcomings or selfishness. So we ask you to consider prayerfully the
following explanation of your being, and to seek to incorporate an
understanding of it in your consciousness, using it in your daily
living.

Being threefold, spirit, soul, body, we find that our expression is
threefold, the harmonious and constructive unfoldments are threefold,
and the things that we term undesirable and imperfect and destructive
are threefold also. For example, joyous radiant health is the result of
the right spiritual viewpoint, the daily purposeful effort to unfold the
faculties and soul qualities, and the daily recognition of the body as
the temple of God and the structure that Spirit and soul are building,
all these prompting us to give careful attention to the needs of the
system. Weakness, or sickness, or inharmony, or imperfection in the
organism, is the result of failure to identify oneself with God, the
divine source, and understanding how to lay hold of and express one's
inheritance of spiritual powers; some limitation in the soul's
development of its riches; some ignorance of the body's requirements and
disregard of the divine law of life and health.

Study and training are required for righteous expression of our
threefold nature. The study and training should be more thorough than
are our first lessons in life, because we are dealing with advanced
stages of the same thing. Because of lack of understanding much must be
done over and changed. So if we would have the full, free use of our
senses and our organs, we must get at the causes of inharmonies, remove
them, and

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

establish a new and perfect pattern and plan of action. We do this by
remembering that we are God's children, that God has created us perfect,
and that there is a law established within us that will keep us
unfolding harmoniously if we will but recognize it.

We who have begun it find this study of the Truth of being and the
science of living much more fascinating than any school course.

To know how to hear with the mind, and to discern and discriminate
between the true and real and worthwhile and that which is mere
foolishness and the clatter of elements not yet organized under law; and
to realize that one may be obedient and receptive without giving up
one's right to freedom of choice and action, is real accomplishment.

To know how to see with the mind, to discern and to understand that
which the nerves and cells of the sight organs report without being
disturbed by the masses of manifest substance and the actions of those
about one, gives real joy and poise. And the eyes are kept strong and
steady and equal to the work for which they were formed.

To know how to detect that which is adverse and not for one's good and
to refuse to bother oneself about the seeming errors, so that the mind
may be free to think out and to register only good, and the nose (the
organ that the mind has built to help it in its work of taking in that
which is required and of leading the body into pleasant experiences
only) may be kept clean and open and keen to respond.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

To realize that one has God-given capacity for judging righteous
judgment and to understand that this judgment can and will keep one from
bitter experiences and enable one to discriminate in all things, is one
of the greatest blessings we have. The faculty of judgment has built the
sense of taste, and when we are giving the attention to this faculty
that we should, our taste helps mightily in the care of our bodies.

There are the other senses, which are equally fascinating and perhaps
more subtle. But this is enough to show what we mean by spiritual study,
which re-educates us and enables us to go on from where many of us have
stopped.

Daily declare that your spiritual life and world, your mental life and
world, your physical life and world are unified and that you are
expressing harmoniously the ideas of the Christ Mind on these three
planes. Know that your everyday physical life can and should be inspired
and happy and purposeful, yet not strained and tense, and that it is
never necessary to do that which is harmful or weakening to any of the
functions or organs in accomplishing what is right and just and
worthwhile and expedient. As you practice mentally seeing God's plan and
world in your life, you will find that you are more poised, that you
will do just the right thing, and that your body will be healthy.

The realm of mind is even more fascinating than the manifestation of its
ideas. One who strikes a balance

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

between the study of the mental side and the manifestations, and in
living in his threefold being is truly blessed. He is free, and joyous,
and can keep healthy and prosperous. The past does not worry him, the
future does not entice him; he knows that a full measure of good is his,
here and now. He profits by the past, glories in the now, and is
fearlessly looking toward the future!

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Developing Our Faculties](lmf15)
