[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lmf18)  [Next](lmf20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

In the true thought of life, years have no power to take from life that
which God has given it. Years have no power to take from life that which
God has ordained shall be endless, permanent, enduring, eternal life.
When we can conceive of life as eternal life, we shall see that since
God is eternal life and has made His Son like Himself, His Son must be
given eternal life.

Doesn't Jesus Christ tell us plainly, "He that believeth on the Son hath
eternal life?" "I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never
perish." "For as the Father hath life in himself, even so gave he to the
Son to have life in himself." "I came that they may have life, and may
have it abundantly."

Jesus Christ resurrected His body temple from the tomb, and He lives in
this spiritualized body now, although we cannot see Him with limited,
material vision. He promised that the things He did all His true
followers would do.

It is "Christ in you, the hope of glory." Christ is the life principle
within each of us, and we must recognize this to be our ever-increasing
life.

You know there is a great deal of overcoming to do that no one can do
for us if we expect to inherit this wonderful thing that Jesus intended
us to have: eternal life.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

We must overcome the bonds that the mortal mind has made for us. As we
study the ways of eternal life we put aside all bondage to years and
remain in the eternal consciousness of youth of mind and body that God
has given us to demonstrate His divine plan.

The race mind introduces into the consciousness the thought of age,
unless we rise out of it by an understanding of the unchanging life of
Christ within us. The age belief says that at a certain period the body
begins to grow a little sluggish, and to take on flesh, and to be less
alive. The cell structures respond to this error belief, and the person
becomes tired easily, and the body slows down or suffers from pains. All
this, you see, is mental. Then there is the physical cause of age. One
who does not understand that the body requires care day by day often
fails to do that which is truly best for the body. It is a common error
among us that we do not exercise, rest, work, eat, and drink as we
should. Food habits are perhaps the most direct in their effects on the
system. If you were in a happy state of mind and doing a reasonable
amount of work that you love and were eating the foods you should eat,
your limbs and feet would not trouble you. Swelling and stiffness and
soreness are evidence of accumulations in the blood and the tissues.
Healing will come through taking the right mental attitude, and getting
right down into the body and telling it the Truth; then following up
this treatment daily with sensible and scientific living habits. Supply
the foods that are needed, so that the bloodstream can be clean

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

and vital and enabled to do its work of washing out the accumulations
and rebuilding and perfecting the muscles, nerves, bones, and tissues.

We cannot advise you in the matter of operations; nor do we promise good
results from prayer when the individual is deliberately going contrary
to the spiritual law of life and health. Youth and the good looks of
youth are the fruits of young and eager and joyous and loving attitudes
of mind and heart. Obedience to the law of love and life results in
harmony and order in the organism. The flesh pictures forth fixed
attitudes of mind.

To resort to patchwork is to get temporary results without changing the
cause that produced the imperfection. Rejoice that you have the vision
to see the trend of your subconscious mind as pictured forth in your
flesh; and pray for light and for courage to walk in the light.

None of us really likes to see the results of the belief in age, and
inharmony, and sorrow, and lack of love, and the sense of human
weakness. But it does no good to call them "common" or to seek to patch
them up by methods that shock the nerves and make demands upon our
resources--without an appreciable improvement in our mental attitude.
The only real help is in raising ourselves into the Christ consciousness
and permitting this consciousness to work out into all the details of
our daily living.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

Know that the word of God is in your mouth and in your heart. Rejoice
that this is true, and speak words of Truth with joy, power, and love.
Expect your words spoken and sung to bring results. Weed out destructive
and negative thoughts and words and tones. Study your voice as an
eternal gift of God that has as its source the power and beauty and
harmony and substance of God ideas, that responds to your every emotion
and thought. Expect it to improve.

Let go of the mental attitude that causes a sense of burden--that belief
in age that weighs one down with "years." You live in God, not in years;
in deeds, not in figures upon a dial. Instead of thinking, "I'm getting
up in years," get into the youth spirit of joy in living and loving.

You will notice that we did not say a good "old" man, for you are not
old. You may have given way to some of the race beliefs in age and
failed to take care of yourself and to make full, free use of the
abundant life and substance of God. But you are not old.

Now we'll explain. You are a threefold being. No doubt you have learned
the facts from your Bible that the Spirit of God dwells in us and gives
us breath. And that we have a soul. And a physical body. But have you
studied these facts to understand them, so as to know how to use this
threefold nature in the way that God intends?

We have learned and are proving that the very presence and life and
intelligence of God are ever abiding in our being. The Spirit of God is
what gives you

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

intelligence and life. Spirit has developed for you that life which we
call the soul. And the soul has built the body and continues to renew
and rebuild it day by day.

Spirit has no age; it is eternal, as God is eternal and unchanging. The
soul is not old in the sense of its being full of years and decrepitude.
The soul is ever unfolding God's ideas, and these are unchangeable. The
development of soul qualities causes the individual to be more mature in
his judgment and his expression, and as the soul is ever keeping in
touch with that which is true of God and the Son of God, it is refreshed
and eager for life's experiences.

The body, which is made up of the action of thoughts of life and love
and substance and power and intelligence in everyone is never old. The
very substance that gives the body its form and that nourishes and
sustains it is ever new and responsive to the thoughts of life that are
impressed upon it.

We are proving that the body is entirely renewed in less than a year,
and that one can renew and rebuild it and change its appearance by
changing one's thoughts and living habits.

Now, aren't you beginning to take a new interest in life? Won't you stop
the next person who says that you are a good "old" man? Let him know
that you are being renewed and that God is finding you ready to
represent Him in your thoughts and acts.

Physiologists who keep careful watch of the ways of the body now declare
that we are renewed bodily in

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

less than a year. Why should flesh age when it is renewed so often?

It must be that the old molds of the mortal mind and the ideas that
belong to it need to be remodeled, and the remedy is, "Be transformed by
the renewal of your mind" (Rom. 12:2).

Keep on praying for faith, because it is through prayer that you develop
all your wonderful qualities of soul. It is not the drugs that do the
healing; they are just something tangible upon which to place your
attention while God in the midst of you is doing His work of
restoration. "I am the Lord, your healer" (Ex. 15:26).

So do not think of drugs as being "props," for they sometimes fill the
system with poisons that hinder the healing power of Spirit in its work.
If you need something visible to the human eye upon which to place your
faith, it might be better to study along the line of dietetics, and give
your body the right kinds of food. Right thinking and right eating go
hand in hand in keeping one healthy.

The more you think about God's presence of life, purity, love, strength,
and health in every fiber of your body temple, the stronger will become
your consciousness that your organism is the temple of "Christ in you."
God is already in every part of your being, so it is just a matter of
being conscious of oneness with Him. Your thoughts of Truth form this
consciousness.

We are glad to write your mother, to help her see

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

herself as God sees her and to make use of her God-given power to renew
and transform her mind and body through the application of Truth. But
we'll not help her to be "old, old, old in years." We'll help her to see
that the years only add their wealth of experience and development; that
the body never grows old, in fact every cell of the body (if we give it
a chance) is renewed and replaced in less than a year. So none of us is
a year old! The only reason for some folks' seeming to be old, and weak,
and inactive is their persistence in thinking the same old thoughts, and
getting into ruts, and failing to make use of the good things provided
for their needs. Often folks form the habit of taking foods that they do
not need and that burden the system year after year. After a time the
mechanism that at first handled these food burdens breaks down, and then
there are accumulations that begin to hinder perfect circulation and
renewal. Then so-called heart trouble, or high blood pressure, or
intestinal disorders, may show up. Those who do not understand begin to
say, "He is getting old." Not so; he's simply disobeying the health
rules!

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Our Work](lmf20.md)
