[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lmf14)  [Next](lmf16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

The only way to abide in cosmic consciousness is to develop Christ
consciousness, the abiding realization of oneness with God-Mind and of
its ideas as directing all the faculties in fulfilling the divine
purpose in being.

All true followers of Jesus Christ are required to discipline the human
self in the journey from the personal to the Christ consciousness. The
human part of us wants to cling to things visible and to other people,
but as the impersonal, spiritual Christ finds expression we gradually
cease to lean upon these material limitations. Our spiritual faculties
become so strong, vital, and substantial that we are able to contact the
great invisible through them. When these faculties are well developed,
the invisible reality becomes to us even more real and substantial and
enduring than material things are to the senses.

We study God as mind, and people as mind; and we find that in the
expression of divine ideas people have definite centers of
consciousness, which the soul has built through its effort to use divine
ideas or qualities of being. We have found that there are twelve central
or basic centers of consciousness, which are the result of the soul's
use of the God qualities of life, love, wisdom, power, and substance.
These centers of consciousness are centers of God-Mind; but they have

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

built the physical organism through which they express. We have twelve
locations in the body, where the soul expresses definite qualities,
which go to make up the Christ consciousness--at least we term it Christ
consciousness when the individual is expressing himself under divine
law. Developing these latent powers and capacities of the inner person
is the key that will open to us the kingdom and give us Christ mastery.
When we do this we shall succeed in whatever we undertake.

None of us are yet able at all times to keep our faculties expressing
perfectly. But we are finding out that we can discipline ourselves and
call upon the Spirit of God to act through us, which is the light that
is given to every one of us as we come into being and that gives us
whatever we need in the way of love, wisdom, faith, understanding, and
zeal, and the life and strength, the power and the will and the
imagination to carry out the divine pattern and in an orderly way to
eliminate or renounce all that has not been implanted in us by the
Father.

In the development of faculties and powers--talents--in self-expression
through them, and in the service to others that one must consider, in
order to be truly successful and satisfied one must go to God-Mind to
learn what is truly best for the soul at the time. Sometimes a soul will
get into a rut through the desire to excel in some particular line,
disregarding development along other lines.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

We need all our faculties awake and alert to discern the reality of
Being, and to see through the be-coming things to the underlying cause
and to eventual order and perfection. We find that a daily development
of all our faculties keeps us better balanced.

Faith and love are qualities of Divine Mind that bring us into close
communion with the Father and source of all light and blessings. Having
quickened faith and love, we may go a long way on life's path and solve
many problems. Eventually the very quickening of these two faculties of
the soul will call for a full-rounded development.

Faith and love will prompt a person to identify himself with the best he
knows in religious life. This brings him to a realization of the need to
develop the Christ powers; also the need to give up old race beliefs and
human fears and personal ambitions. All that does not measure up is left
behind as he follows Jesus Christ in calling and educating his disciples
or faculties.

Love without the cooperation of wisdom and good judgment and will would
not give us the well-rounded expression that we desire, yet purified
love will make it much easier to direct these other faculties into
accord with the Christ pattern.

You speak so often of love, and of the importance of love, and the
necessity of love in healing; and that you make many affirmations of
love and power. Well, now, wouldn't it be well to remember that there
are

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

a number of other qualities equally important, and that the development
of these is just as necessary as is the exercise of love? God is love,
but God is also life, power, strength, and substance.

Love is little more than affection and animal devotion, until other
faculties are developed to the point of enabling the individual to see
and understand in others that which is loved. Faith must be active;
discrimination or judgment must help one to see the real and to
understand that which appears perhaps unlovely; imagination must picture
the God qualities in one's fellows and in one's environment that are
lovable; understanding must keep the love from becoming negative or
selfish; will must hold one to a true course and to that which the good
judgment indicates as best; renunciation plays its part in that it helps
us to give up that which would hinder development. Strength must be
recognized as from within and be so established that it supports every
other faculty.

Sometimes in our zeal for the Lord's work as we feel called to do it we
emphasize the negative side of life and substance and love until we draw
about us the correspondences to those negations. For example, a great
desire for purity and for helping others to know and live pure lives may
cause us to throw so much of our thought energy and substance into the
fight against so-called impurity and waste and weakness that we fail to
have enough energy and substance to build up our

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

own lives and to create the loveliness that is God's plan for us.

When everyone seeks to live in perfect harmony with the divine law, they
will begin to see order in their lives, and discord, if there is any,
will be the unusual thing. In fact there will be nothing but order,
harmony, and perfect conditions when we learn to express our Christ
selves. First and last one must understand and appreciate life and lay
hold of the life faculty in such a way as to keep a vital interest in
living and in bringing the body to its highest point of development--not
necessarily to a given number of pounds nor to a given strength, nor to
the point where it heeds merely the demands of the personal will and
ambition--but to the goal of the radiant health and freedom that come of
living from within, in harmony with the inner intelligence and the
Christ pattern.

The light of Spirit, quickening the understanding, sets us free from all
mortal sense and the boundaries placed by intellect. In the light of
understanding we behold God's presence, and His kingdom, and His
children, and we see all these as one, and each in right relation to the
others. The faculty of discrimination enables us to know if we have
really awakened and developed the capacity for righteous judgment and
harmonious expression and Christlike attitude.

It is merely a matter of giving up the lesser to receive the greater. So
long as our mental hands and

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

our soul forces are holding us to limitations to the personal, there is
no room in them for the mighty blessings of Spirit that the development
of the faculties through selflessness will bring.

The human part of us goes through a "crucifixion," and our spiritual,
Christ self is resurrected. Whatever is good and true within us is not
crucified--it does not need to be. Whatever is good endures and becomes
one with the Christ in us.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Spiritual Control of the Body](lmf16.md)
