[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lmf12)  [Next](lmf14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

Most of us have had to meet and deal with some of the subconscious
holdings. Most of us have had so many years of arduous training in
mortal beliefs, in the convictions of the intellect and senses, that we
have very fixed subconscious states of mind, which have their
correspondences in the activities of the soul and in the physical
structures.

Wherever beliefs in materiality, in the power of disease, or in
adversity of any sort have been allowed to settle into mind and result
in formations of flesh or in functional activity, it takes great
illumination--and not only illumination but earnest, constant
identification of ourselves with Jesus Christ and His wonderful humility
and obedience, and with the spiritual knowledge of mastering the
physical elements--to dissolve these beliefs. But as long as there is in
our subconscious minds (our memory and habits of thinking) that which
does not chord with Truth (God, good, the only presence and power in all
and through all), we keep meeting it in some form or other, and we shall
be obliged to keep using Truth and the power God has given us to change
our minds if we are to cast out the old and establish a new order.

So long as we remember experiences that were unhappy, as we saw them
once and still see them and

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

speak of them, we will be unable to demonstrate joy and prosperity and
health in our lives. Because of lack of understanding, these seemingly
unkind things have made negative impressions upon our souls. Whatever
has been impressed upon our souls will work out in our bodies and
affairs. Because the activities of the mind in its contacts with Divine
Mind and also with the world of appearances and the minds of others,
build the soul, which in turn forms the body through which it carries
out its impressions and the urge from within; the soul's desires and
impressions also make the conditions under which we live.

Understanding this law of mind action will help us to see why we have
the experiences we have, and why we react to them, and why it is
important to go to God-Mind for more light and love and life and
substance. We have the power to change our soul's impressions, our
subconscious, through the indwelling Christ Mind, and so change our
bodies and their functioning and also the conditions about us.

It gives us renewed strength and confidence to realize that every
thought of Truth that enters our minds is taking up its abode in our
subconsciousness and is working itself out in our flesh as harmony and
radiant health. Our body temples are the fruit of our minds. The truths
that we hold in mind redeem and heal our flesh.

In Spirit and in Truth we are now and always every whit whole. By
getting false thoughts out of the way, and keeping the image and
likeness of wholeness ever

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

before our mind's eye, and trying to feel that we are healed, health
becomes irresistible and it is bound to manifest.

When a soul is encouraged to develop the mental faculties and to open
the heart to a great feeling of love for humanity, it opens up the
subconscious door that allows it to peer into the past. Before we are
free from the shortcomings and the ignorance of the race mind, we must
awaken to the fact that these things exist and that we are connected
with them, until through the Jesus Christ Mind we swing clear of them
and establish ourselves in a consciousness of life, light, freedom, and
love.

We do not attain this place of life, light, freedom, and love by
allowing the soul to dwell upon these shadowy things of the past or by
trying to recall the experiences through which we have come. Should we
dwell upon such things, we would sink back into them. We must begin at
once to rejoice in the light that is come to redeem our subconsciousness
from the shadows of error and fear and superstition and mistakes. The
race mind with which we are connected because of common experiences and
beliefs suggests that we know not whence we come, nor where we go, nor
yet how to direct our way along the path. Looking at life through this
limited thought, it does seem gray, and we appear to grope our way and
to leave much undone. But there is a new and wonderful way to view life;
Jesus Christ

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

lived so eagerly the light that came to Him day by day that life ceased
to be a gray mystery to Him. He saw Himself and others in a new light.
He understood why He had been born into the world. He knew where He was
going. In fact, He knew that He was not going anywhere, in the sense of
separation and distance. He knew that He was merging Himself with the
race mind so that He might abide with us and bring us into the same
wonderful light in which He dwells.

When we cease to think shadows and lack of knowledge and begin to call
to mind the teachings of Jesus Christ, the light will shine for us. We
will not care to peer into the past, nor to recall its experiences. We
will know that all that measures up to the mark of helpfulness will
abide with us. We will be content to realize that when our growth makes
it necessary for us to have something out of the subconscious, it will
come without disturbing us, without depressing us.

The sensitive soul sympathetically attuned to the mind and feeling of
humanity suffers greatly, when the mental vision opens, at exposing the
soul to contact with the experiences of humankind during the past. For
this very reason it is imperative that each Truth student should
prayerfully seek to enter into the Jesus Christ consciousness of the
omnipresence of God, the good. When we can look at life, present and
past, through eyes that see only God and good, we can keep our poise. We
see not frenzy of ignorance and anxiety, the mists of seeming failure,
the gray of lack of love and wasted life. Rather we see the warmth and
light

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of the great solar system that is of creative Mind's planning and that
keeps working the miracle of growth; we see the radiance of the Son of
God shining through the Son of man and men and women everywhere, perhaps
a little here, a little there, but shining surely to bring forth the
fruits of His planting.

We are the children of the Creator of this wonderful universe.

I do not believe that the lily feels the terrors of darkness down at the
bottom of the pond, nor does it allow the mud and water that shut out
much of the light to keep it from appropriating the good that is
provided for it, and pushing surely and intelligently upward to the
freedom and light that were there for it long before the bulb began to
swell and burst. I am sure that the lily is "conscious" only of the
foods in the earth and the warmth and helpfulness of the sun and air.

I am sure that if we allow the intelligence within us to appropriate
only the good and that which keeps us looking up, we too shall be
conscious of good only, and we will grow just as perfectly as the lily.

If we do as Jesus suggested, turn to the Holy Spirit (the whole Spirit
of God) and seek to know good only, we shall grow just as surely and as
perfectly into the Christ consciousness as Jesus did. I do not say that
we can take our frequently translated Scriptures and depend on them
entirely for instruction and guidance. But we may depend always on the
Holy Spirit of Jesus

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

Christ, which is ever here with us, to give us whatever we have need of.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Threefold Healing](lmf14)
