[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lmf19)  [Next](lmf21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

God has much to be done, and He will reveal the plan to those who seek
it, and will open the way of progress and success to those who are
willing to give up preconceived opinions and to grasp the Truth as the
Holy Spirit reveals it. Heretofore, people have worked for money,
labored "for a living." Now people are going to be forced to see that
work is for the purpose of expressing God-given faculties and powers and
loving service in the way that is truly beneficial. Wasted effort or
unwisely directed plans will be a thing of the past. Each thought and
each move will be divinely inspired, and results will be satisfying and
permanent.

We find that we must be not only good but good for something in this
world in which we live. Sometimes we get into a rut and need a change of
work, but first we must change our viewpoint.

It surely is not wisdom and good judgment to keep at a thing year after
year that brings no appreciable returns and that does not cause the soul
to grow and expand and radiate through the body as ever-renewing health
and youth. It is foolishness to devote oneself so wholly to a given line
of action that one's consciousness is neglected, so that one fails to
learn how to keep in health and strength and how to bring forth the
things needed for daily comfort and peace of mind.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

The work that God appoints us to never demands of us more than we can do
comfortably. And He never obliges us to neglect our unfoldment of the
Christ pattern within us. When we are doing as God would have us do, He
takes wonderful care of us, not by always bringing supplies and placing
them at our feet, but by showing us how to use our resources in a way to
convert them into whatever we need or would use. One who is living the
Christ life attracts blessings of all sorts, and he need never worry
about financial matters, though he will give enough thought and
attention to them to keep his part of the law.

Many individuals are going through a period of awakening and adjustment.
And many do not seem to know which way to turn. Employment of the past
seems taken away. Nothing that one has done before seems to offer
itself. Many times the reason for this is that the soul has been driving
itself along certain ruts for a long time, and for its own good needs a
change. It is not always best for a person to continue doing that which
he likes to do, or that for which he has been trained, or that for which
he is paid best. We need to round out, to develop, all our faculties and
powers to do that which brings us close to humanity and that which
increases what the world needs most. If we do not keep in touch with
Spirit and heed its promptings, our unconcious desires will take us out
of the ruts and leave us floundering on the rocks, until we wake up and
take hold of something that we shall find we like and that helps us and
others.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

We are declaring and giving thanks each day that Jesus Christ is
revealing to each needy one the Truth about supply and the righteous
expression of faculties and powers that invites the daily supplies as
they are required. It is God's will for all His children to have
abundance. And it is our privilege to think this Truth and declare it
and expect it to be proved in our lives. This is our method of prayer:
acknowledging our oneness with God, claiming the ability that this
gives, and expecting to have the things needed and conducive to
spiritual progress.

We are God's children. But we are also His brain power, and His hands,
and His voice: it is through us that God expresses His ideas, His
blessings, and brings forth the unmanifest good in the forms in which we
use it. Understanding this gives one a much better attitude toward work
and makes one confident that one can and will have plenty to do and will
receive compensation for it. As we realize that we are helping God to
bring forth His blessings and order, our work becomes interesting and
joy-filled. We no longer feel that we must overdo in order to realize as
much money as possible. We leave it to the divine law to bring to us our
own; and we soon see that the better work we do the more satisfaction
and supply we receive, because it is a law back of the personal
relations existing between people. God never sends a soul into the world
without providing for its needs. Until a person seeking to find his
right work gets the light and feels the urge

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

to be up and doing, he is to be still and wait upon the Lord and see His
salvation. Meanwhile instead of worrying about financial matters and the
money to pay expenses, he should keep going to God and confidently
making known his needs, giving thanks for the supply. He should give
thanks first of all for wisdom to know what needs to be done; then give
thanks that the needs are supplied out of the great storehouse of the
Father. He must bless and break and pass out what he has; and give
thanks and know there is more coming as he requires it.

There is an inexhaustible supply, and we are God's beloved children for
whom He is ever providing and to whom He has given His life and wisdom
and power and substance, the innate ability to do whatever is required
in bringing our souls to the Christ standard of living and serving
others.

In order truly to prosper in his work the individual must keep his mind
filled with real prosperity ideas in right relation. He must think
whether or not he is doing what he desires to do and must know by divine
intuition that it is helping to develop and to round out his
consciousness and keep his body strong and radiant. Also he must
understand whether or not he is serving others to the best of his
ability, and whether he is thinking of them and feeling toward them that
which invites from them their best and that which is just toward him. To
determine these things requires

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

spiritual discernment and the balanced development and use of all the
faculties of mind. There are those who arrive at a rather good
prosperity consciousness without being conscious of the science of
Truth. But we find that everyone may attain his right place if he
develops a health and prosperity consciousness by daily applying himself
to the practice of Truth.

This problem of keeping ourselves employed isn't what it seems. Once we
come into the understanding of the true purpose of life and service, we
shall not need to keep busy all the time doing things we are not
particularly interested in, for folks who have no interest in us. Work
has been held up to us, from the time we were born, as a means of
earning a living. We have been impressed with the thought that we should
be constantly employed and that we should seek to increase our earning
power.

Well, now we are coming to see this matter in a new light. Work is for
self-expression, the development of God-given faculties and powers, and
for helping those about us. Our life and sustenance are gifts from God
and are free for the taking, when we understand how to proceed of
course.

At present we do find it most helpful and convenient to have some
definite arrangement whereby we serve others and keep the channels of
supply open. As long as we expect to use for ourselves those things and
conveniences which require the efforts of others, we

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

should and must give of our own abilities in some sort of service in
return. Many of the most important and necessary things in life are free
gifts from God, and we may have them, constantly, without any thought of
doing anything in return for them: the air we breathe, the sunlight, the
beauty of nature, the out-of-doors for recreation and rest and
inspiration. For these we should be thankful to God, and we should be
appreciative enough to make the best use of them that we may the more
perfectly interpret His plan in us.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Our Methods](lmf21.md)
