[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](lmf22)  [Next](lmf24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index.md)  
*Letters of Myrtle Fillmore.*, by Myrtle Fillmore, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

Truly it is a blessed privilege to prepare for the coming into the
physical of a soul, who is coming to dwell among us to unfold more of
the consciousness of sonship. The parents who invite a soul into this
realization, and who consecrate themselves to doing their utmost to keep
in health and to provide an atmosphere of peace and joy and purity and
prosperity, are really blessed and initiated into something very much
like heaven.

There is so much that is holy and sweet and helpful in getting ready for
a baby. There is a communion of soul that lifts one up and brings one
out in new ways and holds to one's best.

You will find this experience invaluable in helping your other children
to see the reality of life, and to learn to express love and
unselfishness. It will be the most wonderful thing for them to hear from
you that you are to have a wee baby to love and to care for and to
train! Let them feel a personal interest in the baby's coming and in all
the preparations for him or her. It will be a splendid time to give them
needed lessons in physiology, and the care of the body, and the
relations of men and women.

Let your soul magnify the Lord, as did the mother

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

of Jesus. There is but one Presence and one Power, God, the good. God is
the Father of all, and since you are full of faith and are looking to
God for help in every need, God is preparing the way for your child to
come forth easily, joyously, in perfect safety. God's love surrounds,
enfolds, and protects you, and all is well.

Relax and free every muscle in your body from tenseness. Underneath are
the everlasting arms to uphold, to strengthen, and to sustain you, so
you can relax and rest in the assurance that you are being protected,
that you are being strengthened, and that the way is being made easy for
a safe confinement.

The vitalizing life of the Spirit fills you to overflowing with all the
strength, vigor, and vitality you need to sustain you. In His presence
is fullness of joy.

In "your oneness with God everything is now and will be in divine
order," and all is well.

You and the wee one beneath your heart are very near and dear to the
great heart of the Father, and since you are looking to Him in prayer
and in faith, you have opened the way for your babe to come into God's
beautiful world in a harmonious way.

God is the Father of your child, you know, so you can trust God to take
care of His own and to prepare the way for it to enter the world in
perfect safety for you and your babe as well.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

Let your soul magnify the Lord as Mary the mother of Jesus did, and let
your soul rejoice in God.

"God is love," and divine love harmonizes, strengthens, enfolds, heals,
and protects you. God in the midst of you is a tower of strength and
stability. God is the health of His people, and He is your strength and
health.

Let your heart rejoice that the divine Father-Mother is giving into your
keeping one of His little ones, on whom you may pour out your love, and
wisely direct and encourage in the development of all the faculties and
talents that each soul has and is eager to use. Praise your splendid
body for its marvelous construction and its perfect work in lending
itself to the needs of this other soul. Know that the Creator who has
planned such a mind and body is ever working to carry out His creation.

For every soul coming into the physical the Father-Mother makes ample
provision of everything required. This gives joyous assurance that all
is well and that another member in the family will bring his own
prosperity with him. Divine love will find ways in which to increase the
earning capacity, the inflow of supply, the happiness in using what
comes. Divine wisdom will direct, so that all things will work together
for good to all.

So instead of thinking of the babe who is on the way as an additional
expense, think of him as a blessing,

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

and a bringer of prosperity. Instead of thinking of the days of constant
care, think of the joyous lessons he is going to teach, and of the
individual contributions to the family's happiness. Each soul that is
welcomed into the world brings its own individual blessings and gifts to
the world!

The stomach, or that part of the solar plexus directly connected with
the stomach, is the substance center, and it is here that the mental
faculty of judgment finds its center of action. Directly below the
substance center, at the navel, is the center of order. Thoughts and
feelings and habits that have to do with keeping one's mind and body and
affairs in order register here at the lower part of the solar plexus and
the navel.

The perfect order of the law of life is established in you through your
permitting the creative ideas of life and love and substance and
intelligence to direct your thoughts and the functions of your body. The
omnipresent substance of God is appropriated and impressed with the
perfect patterns (for your own sustenance and for the formation and
sustenance of the new body temple for the soul who is coming to dwell
with you), as you keep mind and heart confident that God is taking care
of you and yours and that Spirit knows how to arrange for the
manifestations through you of that which is best, and for the inflow
from any source of all things needful.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

We are declaring that the Holy Spirit overshadowing you, working in you,
now frees you from all the impressions of past experience, and gives you
a new understanding of life and substance, and establishes in you a new
order, quickens a new judgment, floods you with a new light that directs
you in ways of peace and health and happiness.

This dear little babe is bringing everything it will require with it
from the Father's great store. The manifestations will come as there is
need, and as you and the dear daddy, and all whom the Father may direct,
are true to what He would have you do and to the light of spiritual
understanding and loving service.

Parents are but representing the divine Father-Mother in receiving and
caring for these new temples that souls are building for experience and
further development of their God-given faculties and powers. Remembering
this takes away the sense of anxiety and burden and gives a great peace
and joy and consciousness of power and love and prosperity.

When negative attitudes of mind and heart cause depression and physical
inharmony and a feeling of lack and worry, a quiet hour of study and
prayer will flood your soul with an entirely new light and peace. You
will begin to relax, and to allow the abundant life and the wonderful
love of God to flow freely through you, restoring order and health. You
will also see your affairs in a different light, and the inner assurance
that

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

God is providing, and directing, and prompting will give you great
peace. You will also invite and lay hold of your own individual
God-given resources. For in truth God provides for you, and your
blessings are not dependent upon others. You can use your own faculties
and powers, and bring forth that which you require--and you will be the
better for this purposeful living.

Just now, especially, you do not want to worry or be anxious for the
future. You want your mind and your body calm and peaceful and happy, so
that you will radiate only the best and most helpful things to your
unborn babe. Your attitude is imparting qualities to the soul of your
child.

Make up your mind that you are going to live in a little world all your
own, a world of beauty, peace, happiness, health, and simple pleasures.
To think lack, or possible failure, or that one's close companion may
not do the part he should in a splendid way, is to send irritating
currents over the nerves, and to use up one's store of energy, and to
impress the ever-present substance of God with the appearance of lack
and inharmony. You do not want this. You want the effect produced by
faith in God. Have your communion and identification with the divine
Father-Mother elements of being. For, truly, you are representing God,
the Father-Mother, in preparing to nurture and receive and help this
soul which is embodying through you. God is giving you the needed wisdom
and poise and love and sustenance to meet all the requirements. Your
part is to believe this, and to trust, and keep busy with the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

things that are yours to do, without anxiety or concern about what
others are doing. Trust God to prompt others to do their part. Praise
the God qualities in your husband; expect him to express them in
practical ways.

There is great responsibility, yes. But there is great satisfaction in
determining to meet it, to be fair to the soul you have invited, to make
a home in which that soul may develop its spiritual powers as well as
its physical temple. Not a great deal of money is required. The thing
that counts is that the money comes through your own and your husband's
own eager efforts.

Social position means nothing to the incoming soul--all the traditions
to the contrary notwithstanding. What the soul asks is opportunity to be
itself. Happy, peaceful, truly wise and practical parental companionship
means everything. You can have this to offer your child if you will to
do it.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Truth Teachers](lmf24.md)
