[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inca](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](rly02) [Next](rly2.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

## THE FABLES AND RITES OF THE YNCAS,

### BY CHRISTOVAL DE MOLINA,

*Priest of the Parish of Our Lady of Healing of the Hospital for  
Natives in the City of Cuzco*:<span
id="page_3_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_3_note_1.md)

Addressed to the Most Reverend L<span class="small">ORD</span> B<span
class="small">ISHOP</span> D<span class="small">ON</span> S<span
class="small">EBASTIAN DE</span>  
A<span class="small">RTAUN</span>,<span
id="page_3_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_3_note_2.md) of the Council of His
Majesty.

A<span class="small">S</span> in the account which I submitted to your
most illustrious Lordship of the origin, lives, and customs of the
Yncas, Lords of this land, of the names and number of their wives, of
the laws they gave and the wars they waged, and of the tribes and
nations they conquered; I also treated, in some places, of the
ceremonies and worship they established, though not very fully; I now
propose, chiefly by reason of the wish expressed by your reverend
Lordship, to take similar pains to describe the ceremonies, worship, and
idolatries of these Indians. For this purpose I assembled a number of
aged persons who had seen and participated in them in the days of Huayna
Ccapac, of Huascar Ynca, and of Manco Ynca, as well as some leaders and
priests of those days.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

 And first with regard to the origin of their idolatries, it is so that
these people had no knowledge of writing. But, in a house of the Sun
called Poquen Cancha, which is near Cuzco, they had the life of each one
of the Yncas, with the lands they conquered, painted with figures on
certain boards, and also their origin. Among these paintings the
following fable was represented.

 In the life of Manco Ccapac, who was the first Ynca, and from whom they
began to be called children of the Sun, and to worship the Sun, they had
a full account of the deluge. They say that all people and all created
things perished in it, insomuch that the water rose above all the
highest mountains in the world. No living things survived except a man
and a woman who remained in a box, and when the waters subsided, the
wind carried them to Huanaco,<span
id="page_4_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_4_note_3.md) which will be over seventy
leagues from Cuzco, a little more or less. The Creator of all things
commanded them to remain there as *mitimas*;<span
id="page_4_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_4_note_4.md) and there, in Tiahuanaco,
the Creator began to raise up the people and nations that are in that
region, making one of each nation of clay, and painting the dresses that
each one was to wear. Those that were to wear their hair, with hair; and
those that were to be shorn, with hair cut; and to each nation was given
the language that was to be spoken, and the songs to be sung, and the
seeds and food that they were to sow. When the Creator had finished
painting and making the said nations and figures of clay, he gave life
and soul to each one, as well men as women, and ordered that they should
pass under the earth. Thence each nation came up in the places to which
he ordered them to go. Thus they say that some came out of caves, others
issued from hills, others from fountains, others from the trunks of
trees. From this cause, and owing to having come forth and commenced to
multiply, <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> from those places, and to having
had the beginning of their lineage in them, they made *huacas* and
places of worship of them in memory of the origin of their lineage which
proceeded from them. Thus each nation uses the dress with which they
invest their *huaca*; and they say that the first that was born from
that place was there turned into stones, others say the first of their
lineages were turned into falcons, condors, and other animals and birds.
Hence the *huacas* they use and worship are in different shapes.

 There are other nations which say that when the deluge came, all people
were destroyed except a few who escaped on hills, in caves, or trees,
and that these were very few, but that they began to multiply, and that,
in memory of the first of their race who escaped in such places, they
made idols of stone, giving the name of him who had thus escaped to each
*huaca*. Thus each nation worshipped and offered sacrifices of such
things as they used. There were, however, some nations who had a
tradition of a Creator of all things. They made some sacrifices to him,
but not in such quantity, or with so much veneration as to their idols
or *huacas*. But to return to the fable. They say that the Creator was
in Tiahuanaco, and that there was his chief abode, hence the superb
edifices, worthy of admiration, in that place. On these edifices were
painted many dresses of Indians, and there were many stones in the shape
of men and women, who had been changed into stone for not obeying the
commands of the Creator. They say that it was dark, and that there he
made the sun, moon, and stars, and that he ordered the sun, moon, and
stars to go to the island of Titicaca, which is near at hand, and thence
to rise to heaven. They also declare that when the sun, in the form of a
man, was ascending into heaven, very brilliant, it called to the Yncas
and to Manco Ccapac, as their chief, and said:—"Thou and thy descendants
are to be Lords, and are to subjugate many nations. Look upon me as thy
father, and thou shalt be my <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> children, and
thou shalt worship me as thy father." And with these words it gave to
Manco Ccapac, for his insignia and arms, the *suntur-paucar*<span
id="page_6_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_6_note_5.md) and the *champi*,<span
id="page_6_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_6_note_6.md) and the other ensigns that
are used by the Yncas, like sceptres. And at that point the sun, moon,
and stars were commanded to ascend to heaven, and to fix themselves in
their places, and they did so. At the same instant Manco Ccapac and his
brothers and sisters, by command of the Creator, descended under the
earth and came out again in the cave of Paccari-tambo,<span
id="page_6_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_6_note_7.md) though they say that other
nations also came out of the same cave, at the point where the Sun rose
on the first day after the Creator had divided the night from the day.
Thus it was that they were called children of the Sun, and that the Sun
was worshipped and revered as a father.

 They also have another fable, in which they say that the Creator had
two sons, the one called Ymaymana Viracocha, and the other Tocapo
Viracocha. Having completed the tribes and nations, and assigned dresses
and languages to them, the Creator sent the sun up to heaven, with the
moon and stars, each one in its place. The Creator, who in the language
of the Indians is called Pachayachachi<span
id="page_6_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_6_note_8.md) and Tecsiviracocha, which
means the incomprehensible God, then went by the road of the mountains,
from Tiahuanaco, visiting and beholding all the nations, and examining
how they had begun to multiply, and how to comply with his commands. He
found that some nations had rebelled and had not obeyed his commands; so
he turned a large number of them into stones of the shape of men and
women, with the same dress that they had worn. These conversions into
stone were made at the following places: in Tiahuanaco, and in Pucara,
and Xauxa, where they say that he turned <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>
the *huaca* called Huarivilca into stone, and in Pachacamac and
Cajarmarca, and in other parts. In truth there are great blocks of stone
in those places, some of which are nearly the size of giants. They must
have been made by human hands in very ancient times; and, by reason of
the loss of memory, and the absence of writing, they invented this
fable, saying that people had been turned into stones for their
disobedience, by command of the Creator. They also relate that in
Pucara, which is forty leagues from the city of Cuzco on the Collao
road, fire came down from heaven and destroyed a great part of the
people, while those who were taking to flight were turned into stones.

 The Creator, who is said to be the father of Ymaymana Viracocha, and of
Tocapo<span id="page_7_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_7_note_9.md) Viracocha,
commanded that the elder, named Ymaymana Viracocha, in whose power all
things were placed, should set out from this point, and go by the way of
the mountains and forests through all the land, giving names to the
large and small trees, and to the flowers and fruits that they bear, and
teaching the people which were good for food or for medicine, and which
should be avoided. He also gave names to all the herbs, and explained
which had healing virtues and which were poisonous. The other son, named
Tocapo Viracocha, which means in their language "the maker," was ordered
to go by the way of the plains, visiting the people, and giving names to
the rivers and trees, and instruction respecting the fruits and flowers.
Thus they went until they reached the sea, whence they ascended to
heaven, after having accomplished all they had to do in this world.

 They also relate, in this same fable, that at Tiahuanaco, where all
mankind was created, all the different kinds of birds were made, male
and female, and that each was given the songs they were to sing; those
that were to live in the <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> forest being sent
there, and each kind to its respective place. In like manner all the
different beasts were created, male and female, and all the serpents and
lizards that are met with in the land; and the people were taught the
names and qualities of each of these birds, beasts, and reptiles.

 These Indians believed for a certainty that neither the Creator nor his
sons were born of woman, that they were unchangeable and eternal. The
tribes have many other fables teaching their origin, insomuch that if
all were to be told, there would be no end. I will, therefore, only
insert some of these fables.

 In the kingdom of Quito, there is a province called Cañaribamba, and
the Cañaris Indians are so named from their province.<span
id="page_8_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_8_note_1.md) These Cañaris say that, at
the time of the deluge, two brothers escaped to a very high mountain
called Huaca-yñan. As the waters rose the hill also increased in height,
so that the waters never reached them. After the flood had subsided,
their store of provisions being ended, they came forth and sought for
food in the hills and valleys. They built a very small house in which
they dwelt, living on herbs and roots, and suffering much from hunger
and fatigue. One day, after going out in search of food, they returned
to their little house, and found food to eat and *chicha* to drink,
without knowing who could have prepared or brought it. This happened for
ten days, at the end of which time they consulted how they should see
and know the being who did them so much good in their great need. So the
elder of the two agreed to remain concealed. Presently he saw two birds,
of the kind called *agua*, and by another name *torito*. In our language
they are called *guacamayos*.<span
id="page_8_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_8_note_2.md) They came dressed as
Cañaris, with hair on their heads fastened in front as they now wear it.
The concealed <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> Indian saw them begin to
prepare the food they brought with them, as soon as they came to the
house, the larger one taking off the *lliclla* or mantle worn by the
Indians. When the concealed man saw that they were beautiful, and that
they had the faces of women, he came forth; but as soon as they saw him,
they were enraged and flew away without leaving anything to eat on that
day. When the younger brother came home from searching for food, and
found nothing cooked and ready as on former days, he asked his brother
the reason, who told him, and they were very angry. On the next day the
younger brother resolved to remain in concealment, and to watch whether
the birds returned. At the end of three days the two *guacamayos* came
back, and began to prepare the food. The men watched for an opportune
time when they had finished cooking, and shutting the door, enclosed
them inside. The birds showed great anger; but while they were holding
the smaller one, the larger went away. Then they had carnal knowledge of
the smaller one, and had by it six sons and daughters. It lived with
them for a long time on that hill, and they subsisted on the seeds they
sowed, which were brought by the *guacamayo*. And they say that from
these brothers and sisters, children of the *guacamayo*, an the Cañaris
proceed. Hence they look upon the hill *Huaca yñan* as a *huaca*, and
they hold the *guacamayos* in great veneration, and value their feathers
very highly, for use at their festivals.

 In the province of Ancasmarca, which is five leagues from Cuzco, in the
Anti-suyu division, the Indians have the following fable.

 They say that a month before the flood came, their sheep displayed much
sadness, eating no food in the day-time, and watching the stars at
night. At last the shepherd, who had charge of them, asked what ailed
them, and they said that the conjunction of stars showed that the world
would be <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> destroyed by water. When he
heard this, the shepherd consulted with his six children, and they
agreed to collect all the food and sheep they could, and to go to the
top of a very high mountain, called Ancasmarca. They say that as the
waters rose, the hill grew higher, so that it was never covered by the
flood; and when the waters subsided, the hill also grew smaller. Thus,
the six children of that shepherd returned to people the province. These
and other tales are told, which I do not insert, to avoid prolixity. The
chief cause of the invention of these fables, was the ignorance of God,
and the abandonment of these people to idolatries and vices. If they had
known the use of writing they would not have been so dull and blind.
Nevertheless, they had a very cunning method of counting by strings of
wool and knots, the wool being of different colours. They call them
*quipus*, and they are able to understand so much by their means, that
they can give an account of all the events that have happened in their
land for more than five hundred years. They had expert Indians who were
masters in the art of reading the *quipus*, and the knowledge was handed
down from generation to generation, so that the smallest thing was not
forgotten. By the *quipus*, which are like these strings that old women
use for praying in Spain, only with ends hanging from them, they keep
such an account of the years and months, that no error is committed in
the record. The system became more complete under the Ynca Yupanqui, who
first began to conquer this land, for before his time the Yncas had not
advanced beyond the vicinity of Cuzco, as appears from the account now
in the hands of your Reverence. This Ynca appears to have been the first
to order and settle ceremonies and religions. He it was who established
the twelve months of the year, giving a name to each, and ordaining the
ceremomes that were to be observed in each. For although his ancestors
used months and years counted by the *quipus*, yet they were never
previously <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> regulated in such order until
the time of this Lord. He was of such clear understanding, that he
reflected upon the respect and reverence shown by his ancestors to the
Sun, who worshipped it as God. He observed that it never had any rest,
and that it daily journeyed round the earth; and he said to those of his
council that it was not possible that the Sun could be the God who
created all things, for if he was he would not permit a small cloud to
obscure his splendour; and that if he was creator of all things he would
sometimes rest, and light up the whole world from one spot. Thus, it
cannot be otherwise but that there is someone who directs him, and this
is the Pacha-Yachachi or creator. Influenced by this reasoning and
knowledge, he ordered the houses and temple of Quisuar-cancha<span
id="page_11_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_11_note_3.md) to be made, which are
above the houses of Diego Ortiz de Guzman,<span
id="page_11_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_11_note_4.md) coming towards the great
square of Cuzco, where Hernan Lopez de Segovia now lives. Here he raised
a statue of gold to the creator, of the size of a boy of ten years of
age. It was in the shape of a man standing up, the right arm raised and
the hand almost closed, the fingers and thumb raised as one who was
giving an order. Although the Yncas had a knowledge of a creator of all
things from the first, whom they reverenced and to whom they offered
sacrifices; yet he never was held in such great veneration as from the
time of this Ynca, who gave orders to the heads of provinces throughout
his dominions that temples should be erected to him, and that he should
have flocks, servants, farms, and estates, out of which the sacrifices
should be provided. This also was the Ynca who so sumptuously erected
the house of the Sun at Cuzco: for <span id="page_12">p. 12</span>
before his time it was very small and poor. The cause of this is related
in the following fable.

 They say that, before he succeeded, he went one day to visit his father
Viracocha Ynca, who was in Sacsahuana, five leagues from Cuzco. As he
came up to a fountain called Susur-puquio,<span
id="page_12_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_12_note_5.md) he saw a piece of crystal
fall into it, within which he beheld the figure of an Indian in the
following shape. Out of the back of his head there issued three very
brilliant rays like those of the Sun. Serpents were twined round his
arms, and on his head there was a *llautu*<span
id="page_12_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_12_note_6.md) like that of the Yuca. His
ears were bored, and ear-pieces, like those used by the Yncas, were
inserted. He was also dressed like the Ynca. The head of a lion came out
from between his legs, and on his shoulders there was another lion whose
legs appeared to join over the shoulders of the man; while a sort of
serpent also twined over the shoulders. On seeing this figure the Ynca
Yupanqui fled, but the figure of the apparition called him by his name
from within the fountain, saying:—"Come hither, my son, and fear not,
for I am the Sun thy father. Thou shalt conquer many nations: therefore
be careful to pay great reverence to me, and remember me in thy
sacrifices." The apparition then vanished, while the piece of crystal
remained. The Ynca took care of it, and they say that he afterwards saw
everything he wanted in it. As soon as he was Lord, he ordered a statue
of the Sun to be made, as nearly as possible resembling the figure he
had seen in the crystal. He gave orders to the heads of the provinces in
all the lands he had conquered, that they should make grand temples
richly endowed, and he commanded all his subjects to adore and reverence
the new Deity, as they had heretofore worshipped the Creator. In the
narrative of his life, which your Lordship has, it is related that all
his conquests <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> were made in the name of
the Sun his Father, and of the Creator. It was this Ynca, also, who
commanded all the nations he conquered to hold their *huacas* in great
veneration, and to propitiate them by sacrifices, saying that thus they
would not be enraged at not receiving their due quantity of reverence
and worship. He also caused worship to be offered to the thunder, and he
had a statue of a man erected in gold, in a temple in the city of Cuzco.
This *huaca* also had a temple, near that of the Sun, in all the
provinces, with estates, flocks, and servants for the celebration of
sacrifices. But as my intention is to touch upon worship and ceremonies,
and not to treat of laws and customs, I will pass on to the other points
of my present treatise.

 They also had, in some nations, many huacas and temples where the devil
gave answers; and in the city of Cuzco there was the huaca of
Huanacauri.<span id="page_13_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_13_note_7.md) There
were many kinds of wizards in the provinces, with names and attributes
differing one from the other. The names and offices were as follows:—

 *Calparicu*, which means those who bring luck and success, and were
expected to obtain the things that were desired. With this object they
killed birds, lambs, and sheep, and, inflating the lungs, through a
certain vein, they discerned certain signs, by which they declared what
was about to happen.

 There were others called *Virapiricuc*, who burnt the breasts of sheep
and coca in the fire, and foretold what would occur from certain signs
at the time the things were burning. Those who consulted them said that
they were the least to be relied on, because they always lied.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

 Others were called *Achicoc*, who were the sorcerers that told fortunes
by maize and the dung of sheep. They gave their replies to those who
consulted them, according as the things came out in odd or even numbers.

 Others were called *Camascas*, who declared that their grace and virtue
was derived from the thunder; saying that, when a thunder-bolt fell, and
one of them was struck with terror, after he came to himself he
proclaimed how the thunder had revealed to him the art of curing by
herbs, and how to give replies to those who consulted them. In like
manner, when one escaped from some great danger, they said that the
devil had appeared; and those who wished to be cured by herbs were also
said to be instructed. Hence many Indians are great herbalists. Others
were shown the poisonous herbs, and these were called *Camascas*.

 Others were called *Yacarcaes*, and these were natives of Huaro. They
had mighty pacts with the devil, as appears from the ceremony they
performed, which was as follows:—They took certain tubes of copper mixed
with silver, about the length of an ordinary arquebus; and some brass
vessels in which they light fires with charcoal, which they blew and
made to blaze up by means of the tubes. It was in these fires that the
devils delivered their replies, and the sorcerers said that it was
concerning the soul of such a man or woman that they were making
inquiry, who might be in Quito or in any other part of the empire which
the Yncas had conquered. The principal questions they asked were whether
such an one was against the Sun his father, or whether such others were
thieves, murderers, or adulterers. By means of this invocation the Ynca
knew all that passed in his dominions, with the help of the devil. These
*Yacarcaes* were much feared, as well by the Ynca as by the people, and
he took them with him wherever he went.

 There were other sorcerers who had charge of the huacas, among whom
there were some who conferred with the devil, <span id="page_15">p.
15</span> and received his replies, telling the people what they wished
to know, but they very seldom gave correct answers. According to the
accounts they give, all the people of the land confessed to the
sorcerers who had charge of the huacas; and these confessions were made
publicly. In order to test the truth of the confessions, the sorcerers
tried them by consulting signs, and in this way, with the aid of the
devil, they discovered who had confessed falsely, and upon these they
inflicted severe punishments. Those who had grave crimes to confess,
which merited death, confessed them in secret to the sorcerer.

 The Yncas, and the people of Cuzco, always made their confessions in
secret, and generally they confessed to those Indian sorcerers of Huaro
who were employed for this office. In their confessions they accused
themselves of not having reverenced the sun, the moon, and the huacas,
with not having celebrated the feasts of the Raymis, which are those in
each month of the year, with all their hearts; with having committed
fornication against the law of the Ynca not to touch a strange woman or
to seduce a virgin unless given by the Ynca, and not because fornication
was a sin. For they did not understand this. They also accused
themselves of any murder or theft, which we hold to be grave sins, as
also were murmurs, especially if they had been against the Ynca or
against the Sun.

 They also confess, O most reverend Sir, that the people before the
flood were made, with all other things, by the Creator; but they are
ignorant of the order in which they were made, nor how, beyond what has
already been said concerning Tiahuanaco. This is what I have been able
to learn, touching their fables and their origin, from an the old men
with whom I have conversed on this subject. The form of the worship and
sacrifices that they established for each month, was as follows:—

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

 

M<span class="small">AY</span>.

 They commenced to count the year in the middle of May, a few days more
or less, on the first day of the moon; which month, being the first of
their year, was called *Hauca* and *Llusque*, and in it they performed
the following ceremonies, called *Yutip-Raymi*, or the festivals of the
Sun. In this month they sacrificed to the Sun a great quantity of sheep
of all colours. Those called *huacar-paña* were white and woolly. Others
were called *huanacos*; and others, also white and woolly, were called
*pacos-cuyllos*. Others, which were females with a reddish woolly
fleece, were called *paucar-paco*. Other pacos were called *uqui-paco*.
Other large sheep were called *chumpi*, which was their colour, being
almost that of a lion's coat. Other sheep were called *llanca-llama*,
which were black and woolly. At this season they also sacrificed lambs
of the same colours. The sacrifices were performed in the following
order:—

 They went to Curicancha<span
id="page_16_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_16_note_8.md) in the morning, at noon,
and at night, bringing the sheep that were to be sacrificed on that day,
which they carried round the idols and huacas called *Punchao
Ynca*,<span id="page_16_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_16_note_9.md) which means
the Sun; and *Pachayachachi*,<span
id="page_16_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_16_note_1.md) another idol in the shape
of a man. The word means a Creator; and *Chuqui yllayllapa*,<span
id="page_16_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_16_note_2.md) which was the huaca of
lightning and thunder, and thunderbolt. It also was in the form of a
person, though the face could not be seen, and it had a *llautu* of
gold, and ear-rings of gold, and medals of gold called *canipo*. These
huacas were placed on a bench, and the live sheep were taken round them,
while the Priests said:—

 "O Creator, and Sun, and Thunder, be for ever young! do not grow old.
Let all things be at peace! let the people <span id="page_17">p.
17</span> multiply, and their food, and let all other things continue to
increase."

 These sayings were addressed to the Creator, and to the Sun they prayed
that he might always be young and continue to give light and splendour.
They did not know the Sun as their Creator, but as created by the
Creator. To the thunder and lightning they prayed that it might rain, in
order that they might have food. They also knew that the rain came with
thunder and lightning, by command of the Creator.

 Then, in the morning, they sent a sheep to Huanacauri, which is their
principal huaca, where it was killed and burnt by the *tarpuntaes*,<span
id="page_17_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_17_note_3.md) who were those that had
the duty of supplying food to the huacas. While the sacrifice was
burning, at the rising of the Sun, many Yncas and Caciques came, and,
pulling the wool off the sacrifice before it was consumed, walked round
it with the wool in their hands, crying out and saying:—

 "O Creator, O Sun, and O Thunder, be for ever young, multiply the
people, and let them always be at peace."

 At noon, in the same order, they burnt another in the court of the
Coricancha or house of the Sun, which is now the cloister of the Friars
of the Lord St. Domingo: and in the evening they took another to the
hill called *Achpiran*, because there the Sun sets, which they
sacrificed with the same ceremonies. They also offered up to the same
huacas, certain *cestos*<span
id="page_17_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_17_note_4.md) of coca, called
*paucar-runcu*, and others called *paucar-quintu* like coca, and some
toasted maize, and red and yellow sea shells called *mullu*, in the
shape of maize. In addition to these ceremonies, on every other day of
this month, they went to burn sheep and the other offerings at the
following places: on a hill called *Succanca*, on another called
*Omoto-yanacauri*, on another called *Ccapac-uilca*, which <span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> is three leagues from Huanacauri, and on
others called *Queros-huanacauri*, *Rontoca* which is in the
Quehuares,<span id="page_18_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_18_note_5.md)
*Collapata* in Pumacancha, fourteen leagues from the city, on a plain
called *Yana-yana*, on another hill called *Cuti* in the *puna* of
Pumacancha, and continuing along the same road they came on the next day
to Vilcañota, which is twenty-six leagues from Cuzco. The reason for
taking this direction in this month is because they say that the Sun was
born in that part,<span id="page_18_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_18_note_6.md)
and thus they went on that road, performing the sacrifices. On a plain
near Rurucache they made the same offering, as well as on another hill
called *Suntu*, near to *Sihuana* in Cacha, in another hill called
*Cacha-Uiracocha*, in another called *Yacalla-huaca*, and in another
called *Rurama*, on the plain of Quiquijana.<span
id="page_18_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_18_note_7.md) The same was done in
*Mullipampa*, in *Urcos*, on a hill called *Urcos Uiracocha*, on a plain
called *Anta-huaylla*,<span
id="page_18_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_18_note_8.md) on another plain near
Anta-huayla, called *Pati*, on another called *Acahuara*, on a hill in
*Quispicancha*, and on another called *Sulcanca*. The Tarpuntaes went by
one road and came back by another. The Ynca, with all his lords, went to
Mantucalla, and there remained to drink and enjoy himself in revelry and
*taquis*.<span id="page_18_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_18_note_9.md) They called
this taqui *Huallina*,<span
id="page_18_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_18_note_1.md) and it was a dance with
singing, which was performed four times in the day. The Yncas alone
celebrated this feast; and the mama-cunas, women of the Sun, gave drink
to those who performed it; their own wives did not enter the place where
the Yncas were, but remained outside in a court. All the vases and
utensils from which they ate and drank, and with which they cooked the
food were of gold. Thus they performed the <span id="page_19">p.
19</span> taqui called *Huayllina*, and in it they worshipped the
Creator. At this festival they brought out the two female figures called
*Pallasillu* and *Ynca uillu*, covered with very rich clothes and small
plates of gold, called *llancapata*, *colcapata* and *paucaruncu*. In
front they bore the *suntur-paucar* and certain great figures of the
size of sheep, two of gold and two of silver, with cloths placed over
the loins in the fashion of horse cloths. They were carried on litters,
and this was done in memory of the sheep which, they say, came forth
from the tambo with them. The Indians who carried them were principal
lords, dressed in very rich clothes, and they call the figures of gold
and silver sheep *corinapa collquenapa*.<span
id="page_19_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_19_note_2.md) The Ynca remained at
Mantucalla until the end of the month, and when that time arrived he
went to the square in front of the church of Cuzco, called *uacay-pata*,
the path by which he came being strewn with plumes of bird's feathers of
all colours. There he drank during the remainder of the day, and at
night he went to his house. Thus this month was ended.

 

J<span class="small">UNE</span>.

 The month of June was called *Canay*, and by another name
*Chahuarhuay*. The people were entirely occupied in irrigating their
fields, and in arranging the distribution of water from the channels.

 

J<span class="small">ULY</span>.

 They called the month of July *Moronpassa tarpuiquilla*,<span
id="page_19_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_19_note_3.md) and in it they celebrated
the festivals called *yahuayra*, when they besought the Creator to grant
them a full harvest in that year, for this was the month for sowing the
seeds. The following ceremonies were then performed.

 The *Tarpuntaes*, who are a sort of priests, were careful <span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> to fast from the time the maize was sown until
it was a finger's length out of the ground. Their wives and children
also fasted, eating nothing during that time but boiled maize and herbs.
They drank no chicha, but only muddy stuff called *concho*, and they
chewed no coca. In this season they carried a little row of maize in
their *chuspas*, which they put in their mouths. All the common people
celebrated a feast called *yahuayra*, from the name of the song they
chaunted in which they besought the Creator to grant them a prosperous
year. They sang it dressed in red shirts reaching to the feet, and no
mantles. Then they came out to sing and dance in the place now called by
the Spaniards Limapampa,<span
id="page_20_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_20_note_4.md) which is beyond the square
of San Domingo. Here the Priests of the Creator sacrificed a white
sheep, maize, coca, plumes of coloured feathers, and sea shells called
*mullu*, in the morning; beseeching the Creator to grant a prosperous
year, and that, as He had made all things out of nothing and given them
being, so he would be pleased to comply with their prayer. The Priests
of the Sun, called *Tarpuntaes*, and the Priests of the Thunder also
offered up sacrifices, praying the Sun to give warmth that so their food
might be produced, and the Thunder, called *Chuqui Yllapa*, to send its
waters to assist in the production, and not to bring down hail. As soon
as the sacrifices were completed, the labourers went to their work, and
the nobles to the house of the lord Ynca, until the month, which in
their language was called *quispe*,<span
id="page_20_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_20_note_5.md) was ended.

 

A<span class="small">UGUST</span>.

 The month of August was called *Coya-raymi*; and in it they celebrated
the *Situa*. In order to perform the ceremonies of this festival, they
brought the figures of their huacas from all parts of the land, from
Quito to Chile, and placed them in the houses they had in Cuzco, for the
purpose <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> which we shall presently
explain. The reason for celebrating the feast called *Situa*, in this
month, was, because the rains commenced, and with the first rains there
was generally much sickness. They besought the Creator that, during the
year, he would be pleased to shield them from sickness, as well in
Cuzco, as throughout the territory conquered by the Yncas. On the day of
the conjunction of the moon, at noon the Ynca, with all the chiefs of
his council, and the other principal lords who were in Cuzco, went to
the Ccuricancha, which is the house and temple of the Sun, where they
agreed together on the way in which the festival should be celebrated;
for in one year they added, and in another they reduced the number of
ceremonies, according to circumstances.

 All things having been arranged, the High Priest addressed the
assembly, and said that the ceremonies of the *Situa* should be
performed, that the Creator might drive all the diseases and evils from
the land. A great number of armed men, accoutred for war, with their
lances, then came to the square in front of the temple. The figures
called *Chuquilla*<span id="page_21_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_21_note_6.md)
and *Uiracocha*<span id="page_21_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_21_note_7.md) were
brought to the temple of the Sun from their own special temples in
*Puca-marca* and *Quihuar-cancha*, which are now the houses of Doña
Ysabel de Bobadilla. The priests of these huacas joined the assembly,
and, with the concurrence of all present, the priest of the Sun
proclaimed the feast. First, all strangers, all whose ears were broken,
and all deformed persons were sent out of the city, it being said that
they should take no part in the ceremony, because they were in that
state as a punishment for some fault. Unfortunate people ought not to be
present, it was believed, because their ill-luck might drive away some
piece of good fortune. They also drove out the dogs, that they might not
howl. Then the people, who were armed as if for war, went to the square
of Cuzco, <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> crying out: "O sicknesses,
disasters, misfortunes, and dangers, go forth from the land." In the
middle of the square, where stood the urn of gold which was like a
fountain, that was used at the sacrifice of *chicha*, four hundred men
of war assembled. One hundred faced towards Colla-suyu, which is the
direction of the Sun-rising. One hundred faced to the westward, which is
the direction of Chinchasuyu. Another hundred looked towards Antisuyu,
which is the north, and the last hundred turned towards the south. They
had with them all the arms that are used in their wars. As soon as those
who came from the temple of the Sun arrived in the square, they cried
out and said: "Go forth all evils." Then all the four parties went forth
to their appointed places. Those for Collasuyu set out with great speed,
and ran to Augostura de Acoya-puncu, which is two short leagues from
Cuzco, crying out as they ran "Go forth all evils." The people of
Huvin-Cuzco carried these cries, and there they delivered them over to
the mitimaes of Huayparya, who in their turn passed them to the mitimaes
of Antahuaylla, and thus they were passed to the mitimaes of
Huaray-pacha, who continued them as far as the river at Quiquisana,
where they bathed themselves and their arms. Thus was the shouting ended
in that direction. The Indians who passed the shouting along the
Colla-suyu road from Cuzco, were of the lineage of Usca Mayta
Ayllu,<span id="page_22_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_22_note_8.md) Yapomayu
Ayllu, Yahuaymin Ayllu Sutic, and Marasaylla Cuynissa Ayllu.

 Those who went out to the west, which is towards Chinchasuyu, shouting
in the same manner, were of the lineage of Ccapac Ayllu,<span
id="page_22_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_22_note_9.md) and Hatun Ayllu,
Vicaquirau<span id="page_22_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_22_note_1.md) and
Chamin-Cuzco Ayllu, and Yaraycu Ayllu. These went shouting as far as
Satpina, which will be a little more than a league <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> from Cuzco. There they passed the cries on to the mitimaes of
Jaquijahuana,<span id="page_23_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_23_note_2.md) and
these delivered them to the mitimaes of Tilca, which is above
Marca-huasi, about ten leagues from Cuzco, who carried them on to the
river Apurimac, where they bathed and washed their clothes and arms.

 Those who carried the cries in the direction of Anti-suyu were of the
following lineages, Usca-panaca Ayllu, Aucaylli Ayllu, Tarpuntay Ayllu,
and Sañu Ayllu. They ran as far as Chita, which is a league and a half
from Cuzco, and handed them to the mitimaes of Pisac, who are those of
the Coya and Paullu,<span id="page_23_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_23_note_3.md)
and these carried them forward to the river at Pisac, and there bathed
and washed their arms.

 Those who went towards Cunti-suyu were of the following lineages.
Yaura-panaca<span id="page_23_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_23_note_4.md) Ayllu,
and China-panaca Ayllu, and Masca-panaca Ayllu, and Quesco Ayllu. They
ran as far as Churicalla, which is two leagues from Cuzco, and there
they delivered them to the mitimaes of Yaurisquis, which will be about
three leagues from Cuzco. These passed them on to those of Tautar, which
is four leagues from Cuzco, who carried them on to the river of
Cusipampa, where the Friars of La Merced have a vineyard. This is seven
leagues from Cuzco, and there they bathed and washed their arms.<span
id="page_23_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_23_note_5.md)

 Such was the ceremony for driving the sicknesses out of Cuzco. Their
reason for bathing in these rivers was because they were rivers of great
volume, and were supposed to empty themselves into the sea, and to carry
the evils with them. When the ceremony commenced in Cuzco, all the
people, great and small, came to their doors, crying out, <span
id="page_24">p. 24</span> shaking their mantles and *llicllas*, and
shouting, "Let the evils be gone. How greatly desired has this festival
been by us. O Creator of all things, permit us to reach another year,
that we may see another feast like this." They all danced, including the
Ynca, and in the morning twilight they went to the rivers and fountains
to bathe, saying that their maladies would come out of them. Having
finished bathing, they took great torches of straw, bound round with
cords, which they lighted and continued to play with them, passing them
from one to the other. They called these torches of straw *pancurcu*. At
the end of their feast they returned to their houses, and by that time a
pudding of coarsely ground maize had been prepared, called *sancu* and
*elba*. This they applied to their faces, to the lintels of their doors,
and to the places where they kept their food and clothes. Then they took
the *sancu* to the fountains, and threw it in, saying, "May we be free
from sickness, and may no maladies enter this house." They also sent
this *sancu* to their relations and friends for the same purpose, and
they put it on the bodies of their dead that they also might enjoy the
benefits of the feast. Afterwards the women ate and drank their food
with much enjoyment; and on this day each person, how poor soever he
might be, was to eat and drink, for they said that on this day they
should enjoy themselves, if they had to pass all the rest of the year in
labour and sorrow. On this day no man scolded his neighbour, nor did any
word pass in anger, nor did anyone claim what was owing to him from
another. They said that there would be trouble and strife throughout the
year, if any was commenced on the day of the festival.

 In the night, the statues of the Sun, of the Creator, and of the
Thunder, were brought out, and the priests of each of these statues
warmed it with the before mentioned *sancu*. In the morning they brought
the best food they could prepare to present at the temples of the
Creator, of the Sun, <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> and of the Thunder;
which the priests of those *huacas* received and consumed. They also
brought out the bodies of the dead lords and ladies which were embalmed,
each one being brought out by the person of the same lineage who had
charge of it. During the night these bodies were washed in the baths
which belonged to them when they were alive. They were then brought back
to their houses, and warmed with the same coarse pudding called *çancu*;
and the food they had been most fond of when they were alive was placed
before them, and afterwards the persons who were in charge of the bodies
consumed the food.

 The persons who had charge of the huaca called *Guana-caucique*,<span
id="page_25_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_25_note_6.md) which is a great figure of
a man, washed it and warmed it with the *sancu*; and the principal Ynca
lord and his wife, after they had finished their bath, put the same
*sancu* in their house, and on their hands. Afterwards, they placed
certain plumes on their heads, of a bird called *pialco*, which are of a
changing colour. The same was done with the figure of the Creator, and
those who had charge of it called this ceremony *Pilcoyacu*. At about
eight or nine in the morning the principal lord Ynca, with his wife, and
the lords of the council who were in his house, came forth into the
great square of Cuzco, richly dressed. They also brought out the image
of the Sun called *Apupunchau*,<span
id="page_25_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_25_note_7.md) which was the principal
image among those in the temple. They were accompanied by all the
priests of the Sun, who brought the two figures of gold, and their women
called Ynca-Ocllo and Palla-Ocllo. There also came forth the woman
called Coya-facssa, who was dedicated to the Sun. She was either the
sister or the daughter of the ruler. The priests carried the image of
the Sun, and placed it on a bench prepared for it in the square. The
priests of the Creator likewise brought forth his image, and deposited
it in its place. So also did the priests of the Thunder, called <span
id="page_26">p. 26</span> Chuqui-ylla, bring forth his image. Each had
its bench of gold, and before them were borne *yauris*, which were made
like sceptres of gold. The priests of these *huacas* came in very rich
dresses, to celebrate this feast. Those who had charge of the huaca
called Huanacauri, also brought its figure into the square. They say
that a woman was never assigned to the *huaca* of the Creator. It was
believed that the Creator did not need women, because, as he created
them, they all belonged to him. In all their sacrifices, the first was
offered to the Creator. At this feast they brought out all the embalmed
bodies of their lords and ladies, very richly adorned. The bodies were
carried by the descendants of the respective lineages, and were
deposited in the square on seats of gold, according to the order in
which they lived.

 All the people of Cuzco came out, according to their tribes and
lineages, as richly dressed as their means would allow; and, having made
reverences to the Creator, the Sun, and the lord Ynca, they sat down on
their benches, each man according to the rank he held, the Hanan-Cuzcos
being on one side, and the Hurin-Cuzcos<span
id="page_26_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_26_note_8.md) on the other. They passed
the day in eating and drinking, and enjoying themselves; and they
performed the *tauqi* called *alançitua saqui*, in red shirts down to
their feet, and garlands called *pilco-casa* on their heads; accompanied
with large or small tubes of canes, which made a kind of music called
*tica-tica*. They gave thanks to the Creator for having spared them to
see that day, and prayed that they might pass another year without
sickness; and they did the same to the Sun and to the Thunder. The Ynca
came with them, having the Sun before him. He had a great vase of gold
containing chicha. It was received by the priest, who emptied it into
the urn, which, as has been said, is like a stone fountain plated with
gold. This urn had a hole made in such a way, that the chicha could
enter a pipe or sewer passing under the ground <span id="page_27">p.
27</span> to the houses of the Sun,<span
id="page_27_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_27_note_9.md) the Thunder, and the
Creator. The priests came in procession, and the families of Hurin and
Hanan Cuzco, each with the embalmed bodies of their ancestors. They
passed that day in the manner already described, and in the evening they
took back the Sun and the other *huacas* to their temples, and the
embalmed bodies to their houses. The Yncas, and the rest of the people
also returned to their homes.

 The next day they all came to the great square in the same order,
placing the *huacas* on their benches as before. The Ynca and the people
brought with them a very great quantity of flocks from all the four
quarters of Colla-suyu, Chinchay-suyu, Antis-suyu, and Cunti-suyu. The
number of animals was so great, according to those who made this
declaration, that they amounted to more than one hundred thousand, and
it was necessary that all should be without spot or blemish, and with
fleeces that had never been shorn. Presently the priest of the Sun
selected four of the most perfect, and sacrificed them in the following
order: one was offered to the Creator, another to the Thunder, another
to the Sun, and another to Huanacauri. When this sacrifice was offered
up, the priest had the *sancu* on great plates of gold, and he sprinkled
it with the blood of the sheep. The white fleece-bearing sheep were
called *cuyllu*; and the plates containing *sanco* were in front of the
bench of the Sun. The high priest then said in a loud voice so that all
might hear: "Take heed how you eat this *sancu*; for he who eats it in
sin, and with a double will and heart, is seen by our father, the Sun,
who will punish him with grievous troubles. But he who with a single
heart partakes of it, to him the Sun and the Thunder will show favour,
and will grant children and happy years, and abundance, and all that he
requires." Then they all rose up to partake, first making a solemn vow
before eating the *yahuar-sancu*,<span
id="page_27_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_27_note_1.md) in which they promised
never to <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> murmur against the Creator, the
Sun, or the Thunder; never to be traitors to their lord the Ynca, on
pain of receiving condemnation and trouble. The priest of the Sun then
took what he could hold on three fingers, put it into his mouth, and
returned to his seat. In this order, and in this manner of taking the
oath, all the tribes rose up, and thus all partook down to the little
children. They all kept some of the *yahuar-sancu* for those who were
absent, and sent some to those who were confined to their beds by
sickness; for they believed it to be very unlucky for any one not to
partake of the *yahuar-sancu* on that day. They took it with such care
that no particle was allowed to fall to the ground, this being looked
upon as a great sin. When they killed the sacrificial sheep, they took
out the lungs and inflated them, and the priests judged, from certain
signs on them, whether all things would turn out prosperously in the
coming year or not. Afterwards, they burnt them before the Creator, the
Sun, and the Thunder. The bodies of the sheep were divided and
distributed, as very sacred things, a very small piece to each person.
The rest was given to the people of Cuzco to eat, and each man, as he
entered the square, pulled off a piece of the wool, with which he
sacrificed to the Sun. When they distributed the sheep, the priests
offered up the following prayers.

 

*Prayer to the Creator.*

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  Aticsi-Uiracochan\[caylla\] caylla-Uiracochan tocapo ac nupo viracochan camachurac caricachun huarmicachun ñis pallurac rurac camas cayqui churascaiqui casilla quespilla canca musac maipimcanqui ahuapichu ucupichu pusupichu llantupichu huyarihuay hayniquay yuihuay ymaypachacama haycaypachacama |  O Creator! \[O conquering Uirachocha! Everpresent Uiracocha!\] Thou who art without equal unto the ends of the earth! Thou who givest life and strength to mankind, saying, let this be a man and let this be a woman: And as thou sayest, so thou givest life, and vouchsafest that men shall |
| <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| canca chihuay marcarihuay hatallihuay caycustayri chasquihuay may piscapapas Uiracochaya.                                                                                                                                                                                                               | live in health and peace, and free from danger:—Thou who dwellest in the heights of heaven, in the thunder, and in the stormclouds, hear us! and grant us eternal life. Have us in thy keeping, and receive this our offering, as it shall please thee, O Creator!                              |

 

*Another Prayer for Fruitful Flocks.*

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  Uiracochan apacochan titu-Uiracochan hualpai huana-Uiracochan topapo acnupo Uiracochan runayachachachuchun hucerma-yachachachun mirachun llacta-pachacasilla quispillacachun camas-cayqui taquacaycha yatalliymay Pachacama haycay Pachacama. |  O Creator! who doest wonders and marvels. O most merciful and almighty Creator! multiply our flocks and cause them to bring forth young, let the land continue in peace and free from danger, and these whom thou hast made, hold them in thy hand. |

 

*To the Huacas.*

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  Coy \[caylla\] Uiracochan ticçi Uiracochan hapacochan hualpai huana Uiracochan chanca-Uiracochan acsa-Uiracochan atun-Uiracochan caylla-Uiracochan tacan-cuna hunichic llaularuna y acha-cuc ccapac hahuay pihucupi Puris papas. |  O Creator, thou who art coeval with the world! O Chanca-Uiracocha! O Atun-Uiracocha! grant our prayer, that thou wilt, with the Creator, give health and prosperity to the people. |

 Chanca-Uiracocha was a *huaca* in Chuqui-chaca, where was Manco Ynca.
Atun-Uiracocha is in the *huaca* of Urcos; where there was an eagle and
a falcon carved in stone at the entrance of the *huaca* and an image of
a man with a white robe reaching to his feet, and coming down to his
waist. Apotin-Uiracocha is in Amaybamba, beyond Tampu.
Urusayua-Uiracocha is in the same place. Chuqui-chanca-Uiracocha is in
Huaypau.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

 

*Another Prayer.*

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  O Uiracochan cusiussapochay lipo-Uiracochaya runacay amay-cay miruna yana huaccha quis-aruna yquicauras cayquichuras cayquicasiquis-pilla camachun huarmay huanchurin huanchin canta amaquaquinta huarya yaichichuruay huasa causachun mana alleas pamana pitispa mucumuchun. Upia muchun. |  O most fortunate and propitious Creator, have pity and mercy upon all men whom thou hast made. Keep thy poor servants in health. Make them and their children to walk in a straight road, without thinking any evil. Grant that they may have a long life, and not die in their youth, and that they may live and feed in peace. |

 

*Another Prayer.*

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  O Uiracochay \[atic\]a ticçi-Uiracochaya hualparillac camac-churac cay hurin pacha pimicu-chun upiachun ñispachurascay quictacamascay quita micuynin yachachun papacara ymaymana micuncancachun ñis cayqui ta-camachic michachic mana mu-chuncunpac mana muchuspa-can yñincampac amacaçachun-chu amachupichupichichunchu casilla huacaychamuy. |  O Creator! Lord of the ends of the earth! O most merciful! Thou who givest life to all things, and hast made men that they may live, and eat, and multiply. Multiply also the fruits of the earth, the *papas* and other food that thou hast made, that men may not suffer from hunger and misery. O preserve the fruits of the earth from frost, and keep us in peace and safety. |

 

*Prayer to the Sun.*

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="top"> Uiracocha yapunchau cachun-to tacachun ñispac nicpacarichun yllarichun ñispac nicpunchao-churi yquicta casillacta quis-pillacta purichic runarunascay quicta cauchay uncancampac Uiracochaya casilla quispilla punchau yncarunayanani uhis-cayquita quillari canchari ama-huncochispa amananu chispa cacicta quispicha huacus-chaspa.</td>
<td width="50%" data-valign="top"> O Creator! Thou who gavest being to the Sun, and afterwards said let there be day and night. Raise it and cause it to shine, and preserve that which thou hast created, that it may give light to men. Grant this, O Creator!<br />
 O Sun! Thou who art in peace and safety, shine upon us, keep us from sickness, and keep us in health and safety.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

 

*Prayer for the Ynca.*

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  A-Uiracochan ticçi-Uiracochan hualpa y huana-Uiracochan atun-Uiracochan Tarapaca-Uiracochan capaccachun Ynca-cachun nispachucapac churas-pac quicta Ynca camascayquita casillacta quispullacta Huacay-chamuy runan yananya cha-chuchun accari punari usachun ymaypacha cama ama allca-chispa churinta mitanta quanpas huacay chay chaycaçillacta uiracu-chaya. |  O pious Creator, who ordered and saw fit that there should be a Lord Ynca, grant to the Ynca that he may be kept in peace, with his servants and vassals, that he may obtain the victory over his enemies and always be a conqueror. Cut not short his days, nor the days of his children, and give them peace, O Creator! |

 

*Another Prayer.*

 Uiracochaya qualpay huana-Uiracochaya ninacta casi quis-pillacta capac
Ynca-churi yqui-guarmayqui pacamascayqui huacay chamuchun hatallimuchun
pachachacara runa llama micuy paycaptin yacachun ccapac Ynca
camascayquita Uiracochaya ayni huni marcari hatalli ymaypacha-cama.

 O Creator! Vouchsafe that the subjects of the Ynca may have peace while
thy son the Ynca lives, to whom thou hast said: Be thou Lord! Grant that
they may multiply. Keep them in peace, let their days be prosperous, let
their farms yield increase; and keep this Lord Ynca in thy hand for
ever, O Creator!

 

 

*Another Prayer.*

|                                                                               |                                                                                 |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  Pachacama casillacta quispillacta Ccapac Ynca huahuay quicta marcari atalli. |  O Creator of the world, keep thy child the Ynca in peace and security upon it. |

 

*Prayer for all the Yncas.*

|                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                           |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  Apunchau Ynca Yutiryayay Cuzco tampu cachun aticoclla saccoccachun ñispa churac camac muchas-cay quicusiquispu cachun amatisca amalla sasca |  O Sun! Thou who hast said, let there be Cuzcos and Tampus, grant that these thy children may conquer all other people. We beseech thee that thy children |
| <span id="page_32">p. 32</span>                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                           |
| cachunchu aticuc paclla sacapac camascayqui churascayqui.                                                                                    | the Yncas may be conquerors always, for this hast thou created them.                                                                                      |

 

*Prayer for all the Huacas.*

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  O pachachulla Uiracochan ucuhulla Uiracochan huaca-vilcacachun nispacamacatu napahuay pihuana tayna allastu Uiracochaya hurinpacha anacpacha cachun nispa nicocupa chapipuca umacta churachay nihuay hunihuay quispicasica musac Uiracochaya micuy niocmin cacyoc curayoc llamayoc ymayna yochaycaymayoc amacacharihuay cuchuy maymana aycay mana chiquimanta catuiman manta nacasca hustusca amusca manta. |  O sacred Huacas, ancestors, grandsires, and parents! O Hatun-apu! O Hualpa-huana-tayua! O Apu Allastu! bring us near to the Creator, us thy sons, and our children, that they may be fortunate and near the Creator, as thou art. |

 

 When they had distributed the flocks, the sheep were killed in great
numbers, to be eaten on that day. Then a vast quantity of chicha was
brought into the square, from the store houses where it was kept. It was
made of boiled white maize, in the valley of Cuzco. The flocks that were
used at this festival, were the property of the Creator, the Sun, and
the Thunder, from their estates set apart in all the provinces of Peru.
Having finished eating with much rejoicing, they performed their
*taquis*, and drank in the same order as on the day before. This
continued for four days. The first day of the festival was called
*Citua*, and it was then that they ate the *sancu* called
*yahuar-sancu*. The second day was dedicated to the Creator, the Sun,
and the Thunder, when they performed sacrifices, and a prayer was
offered up for the Ynca. The fourth day was for the Moon and the Earth,
when the accustomed sacrifices and prayers were offered up. On a
subsequent day people of all the <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>
nations, that had been subdued by the Yncas, came with their *huacas*
and in the richest costumes, peculiar to their respective countries,
that they could procure. The priests, who had charge of the *huacas*,
carried them on litters. When they entered the square, coming from the
direction of the four *Suyus* already mentioned, they made reverences to
the Creator, the Sun, and the Thunder, and to the Huanacauri, a *huaca*
of the Yncas, and then they did the same to the Ynca, who was in the
square on that occasion. Having made these obeisances, they proceeded to
the places, assigned to them, and, in order to make more room, the
families of Hanan-Cuzco and Hurin-Cuzco formed themselves into one, and
thus left more space in the square. As soon as all the people were in
their places, the High Priest of the Sun sprinkled a large quautity of
*sancu* with blood, and the Caciques rose up in their order, and
repeated the following:—

 

*Prayer to the Creator.*

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  Aticçi Uiracochan caylla Uiracochan tocapu acnupu Uiracochan camac churac carica chuyu-armicachun nispallutac rurac camascay quichuras cayquica-silla quispilla causamus ay may-pincanqui ahuapichu ucupichu llantupichu uyarihua ayrihuay ynihuay ymay pachacamac cançachihuay marcallihuay attollihuay caycoscay tarichasquihuay may picaspapas Uiracochaya. |  O Creator! ?\[O conquering Viracocha! Ever present (*caylla*) Viracocha!\] Thou who art in the ends of the earth without equal! Thou who gavest life and valour to men, saying, Let this be a man! and to women, saying, Let this be a woman! Thou who madest them and gave them being! Watch over them that they may live in health and peace. Thou who art in the high heavens, and among the clouds of the tempest, grant this with long life, and accept this sacrifice, O Creator! |

 Then the Priest of the Sun distributed the *sancu*, and afterwards the
people ate the flesh of the sheep which had been sacrificed to the
Creator, the Sun, and the Thunder. <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> Each
nation passed the rest of the day in performing the *taqui* and in
singing and dancing, according to the custom of their respective
countries before they were subdued by the Yncas. On this day all the
deformed persons, who had previously been expelled from Cuzco, were
allowed to join the feast. This part of the feast lasted for two days,
and at its conclusion, in the evening, they burnt in sacrifice a sheep,
and a vast quantity of clothes of many colours. Then those who had to
return to their homes, sought permission from the Creator, the Sun, the
Thunder, and the Ynca, which was granted, and they left at Cuzco the
*huacas* they had brought there in that year. They returned to their
homes with the *huacas* they had brought for the festival of the
previous year, and, as a recompense for their trouble in having come
from such great distances, their chiefs were given gold and silver and
clothes and servants, and permission to travel in litters. Their
*huacas* were also granted estates and attendants to wait on them, and
so they returned to their homes.

 The inventor of this feast was Ynca Yupanqui, at least he established
the above ceremonies, for though it was celebrated from the time that
there ever were Yncas, it was not performed in the order described
above. The rest of the month was passed as each man found it convenient,
or as suited him best. The same feast, called *Situa*, was celebrated at
the chief places in all the provinces, by the Ynca governors, wherever
they might be: and, although the ceremonies were less grand, and the
sacrifices fewer, no part of the festival was omitted.

 

S<span class="small">EPTEMBER</span>.

 They call the month of September *Uma-Raymi*, because the Indians of
Uma, which is two' leagues from Cuzco, celebrated the feast of
*Hurachillo*.<span id="page_34_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_34_note_2.md) This
was the occasion <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> when the youths were
admitted to knighthood, and when their ears were pierced, as we shall
mention in its place. The women of Cuzco, whose sons were to have their
ears bored, and to perform the huarachicu, employed their time in sewing
the cloths in which their sons were to be dressed on the day of the
feast of the huarachicu. Several relations assembled to help them to
sew, and to rejoice and drink for some days in their houses: and so the
month ended.

 

O<span class="small">CTOBER</span>.

 They called the month of October *Aya Marca Raymi*, because the Indians
of the village of Ayamarca performed the feasts of huarachicu, and the
youths of that tribe had their ears bored, and were admitted to
knighthood, with the ceremonies we shall presently describe. In Cuzco,
the people were employed in preparing a great quantity of chicha, for
the feast called *Ccapac Raymi*. This way of making chicha was called
*cantoray*. The youths who were about to receive their arms, went to the
huaca called *Huanacauri*, to offer sacrifice, and to ask permission to
receive knighthood. For this was their principal *huaca*, the brother,
as was said, of Manco Ccapac, whence they descend. But, to avoid
prolixity, I will not here give the tradition respecting this huaca,
referring for an account of it, to the history of the Yncas which I have
written. The youths who were to be armed as knights, passed that night
on the hill of *Huanacauri*, where the huaca was kept, in memory of the
journey which their ancestors commenced from that spot. On the next day
they returned in the afternoon, bringing with them loads of straw, on
which their parents and relations might sit. On this day the youths
fasted; and the month was passed in preparing many kinds of chicha for
the festival. At this time, and indeed throughout the year, the priests
of the Creator, of the Sun, and of Thunder, and those who had charge of
the *huaca* of <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> Huanacauri, made three
daily sacrifices; offering up three sheep, one in the morning, one at
noon, and a third at night, with other food that was dedicated to these
deities. The *huacas* were supposed to consume it where they were; but
they carried the food to the hills in the feast of Yntic-raymi. The
persons also, who had charge of the embalmed bodies, never came forth to
offer up the food, and pour out the chicha that was dedicated to them,
such as they used when they were alive. These they consumed, because
they held for very truth, the doctrine of the immortality of the soul,
and they said that wherever the soul might be, it would receive the food
and eat as when alive. Thus ended this month.

 

N<span class="small">OVEMBER</span>.

 The month of November was called Ccapac Raymi, which means the Feast of
the Lord Ynca. It was one of the three principal feasts of the year. In
this month they gave arms to the youths, pierced their ears, and gave
them breeches, which in their language are called *huara*. For the said
feast, and for the arming of the knights, during the eight first days of
the month, all the parents and relations of those who were to receive
knighthood were engaged in the preparation of the *usutas*, which were
their shoes made of very fine reeds, almost of the colour of gold; and
of the *huaracas* from the sinews of sheep; and in broidering the
trimmings of the shirts in which they were to appear, when they went to
the huaca called Huanacauri Chumpicasico. The shirts were made of fine
yellow wool, with the borders of fine black wool like silk, a little
more than a *palmo* and a half in width. They also wore mantles called
*supayacolla*, which were of white wool, long and narrow, not being more
thau two *palmos* in width, but reaching to the knees. They were
fastened round the neck by a knot, whence hung a woollen cord, at the
end of which there was a red tassel. The *llautus*, that were put on
them on that day, were black.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

 On the ninth day they all proceeded to the square in the morning, as
well the parents of those who were to receive knighthood, as the
relations. The parents and relations were attired in certain dresses
called *collca-uncu*. There was a special dress for each festival. On
this occasion the mantles were yellow, and the plumes on their heads
were black, being taken from a bird called *guito*. Hence the plumes
were called *quito-tica*. Those who were to be armed as knights were
shorn, and after the shearing they were clothed in the dress already
described. Many maidens, who were selected to give their services at
this feast, then came to the square, dressed in a costume called *Cuzco
asu ycochilli-quilla*. Their ages were from eleven to twelve or fourteen
years, and they were of the best families. They were called
*Ñusta-calli-sapa*.<span id="page_37_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_37_note_3.md)
Their duty was to carry small vases of chicha, as we shall relate
further on. Being all clothed in these costumes, they proceeded to the
house of the Sun and of the Thunder, and brought the images to the
square. Then the Ynca came forth, and took his place near the statue of
the Sun. The youths, who were to receive knighthood, rose up in their
order, and made their *mucha*,<span
id="page_37_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_37_note_4.md) which was their manner of
worshipping the huacas. They also brought out the figure of a woman,
which was the huaca of the moon, and was called *Passa*<span
id="page_37_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_37_note_5.md)*-mama*. It was in charge
of women; and when it was brought from the house of the Sun, where it
had a special place on the site of the *mirador* of Santo Domingo, they
carried it on their shoulders. The reason for giving it in charge to
women was that they said it was a woman, and the figure resembled one.

 After making their reverence, the youths waited until the hour of noon,
when they again made reverences to the <span id="page_38">p. 38</span>
huacas; and sought permission from the Ynca to make their sacrifices,
which were offered up in the following way.

 Each of the youths who were about to be armed had a sheep prepared for
sacrifice. They all went, with their relations, to the hill called
Huanacauri. That night they slept at the foot of the hill, at a place
called Matahua, and at sunrise of the tenth day, all fasting, for they
had fasted on the previous day, they ascended the hill until they came
to the huaca *Huanacauri*. They left the sheep for sacrifice at the foot
of the hill in Matahua, the Tarpuntays pulling out a small handful of
wool from each. These Tarpuntays are the priests who make the
sacrifices. When they reached the top of the hill, the Tarpuntays took
five lambs and sacrificed them before the huaca. They then divided the
wool they held in their hands among the youths who were about to be made
knights, and the chiefs who came with them. The youths and chiefs then
blew the wool into the air, while the sacrifices were being consumed,
with these words "O Huanacauri! our father, may the Creator, the Sun,
and the Thunder ever remain young, and never become old. May thy son the
Ynca always retain his youth, and grant that he may prosper in all he
undertakes. And to us, thy sons and descendants who now celebrate this
festival, grant that we may ever be in the hands of the Creator, of the
Sun, of the Thunder, and in thy hands." After the sacrifices, at the
ninth hour of the day, they put *huaracas*,<span
id="page_38_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_38_note_6.md) and bags called *chuspas*
into the hands of the youths, and on presenting them with the
*huaracas*, they said: "Now that our father *Huanacauri* has given the
*huaracas* as a sign of valour, live henceforth as brave men." The High
Priest of the huaca used these words when the *huaracas* were given to
the youths. They were made of aloe fibre and the sinews of sheep, the
aloe fibre being like flax. It was said that their ancestors, when they
came forth from Paccari-tampu, <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> wore
them. They then walked on, until they came to a ravine called
Quiras-manta, where they were met by the uncles and parents, and by the
chiefs, who whipped them on the arms and legs, saying, "Be brave as I
have been, and receive these gifts that you may imitate me." Then they
chaunted a song called *Huari*, the armed knights standing up with the
handfuls of straw in their hands, and all the rest of the people being
seated. As soon as the *taqui* was ended, they rose up and went to
Cuzco, whence a shepherd came, who was one of those in charge of the
flock called *Raymi-napa*, which was dedicated for this feast. They
brought a sheep called *napa*, which was covered with a red cloth having
ear holes of gold. Those who came with it, blew upon sea shells bored
through, called *hayllayquipac*. An Indian also brought the
*suntur-paucar*, which is one of the insignia of the Lord. When they
arrived at the *plaza* where the people were assembled, they performed a
dance, and then led the sheep and the *suntur-paucar* in front of them.
The people returned to Cuzco, marching according, to their families and
tribes, those who had received knighthood carrying the *huaracas* on
their heads, and the bundles of straw in their hands. When they reached
the square they worshipped the *huacas*. The fathers, uncles, and
relations then whipped them on the arms and legs, and afterwards all the
people made the music (*taqui*) called *huari*, and the youths gave
drinks to the fathers, uncles, and relations who had flogged them. By
that time it was nearly night, and they went to their houses and ate the
sacrificial sheep. The Priests took the *huacas* back to their temples.

 In the subsequent days the people remained in their houses, and the
youths who had received knighthood rested from their labours. But on the
14th day of the month they all came forth into the square of Cuzco,
called *Huacay-pata*. Each came with his father and relations; and it
must be known that all the youths who received arms <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> were obliged to be descendants and relations
of the Lord Yncas by direct line, for no others were admitted. In the
same month the Ynca Governors of Provinces who had sons of the proper
age, performed the ceremonies in the provinces, boring the ears of the
boys, and arming them as knights.

 On the 14th day they brought into the square the huacas of the Creator,
of the Sun, of the Moon, and of the Thunder, which were placed together
near the Ynca, the Priests being stationed near their huacas. Dresses
were given to the youths who had been armed as knights, called
*umisca-uncu*, which were shirts striped red and white, and a white
mantle with a blue cord and red tassel. All the people of the land had
to make these dresses, as a tribute; and the relations provided the
*usutas*, made of a straw which was highly prized among them, called
*ychu*. The Priest of the Sun, whose duty it was to give these dresses
in the name of the Sun, caused all the maidens to be brought before him,
and to each he gave a dress, which was red and white, and called
*uncallu*; the *lliclla* being the same; together with a cloth in the
shape of a bag, with both ends open, of the same colour. Then they put
staves into the hands of the youths, to the upper part of which a knife
was attached, which they called *yauri*. Then the breeches were given,
called *huaraca*, made of sinews and red cloth, with a little
*chahuar*.<span id="page_40_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_40_note_7.md) After
receiving the clothes they went, in their order, to worship the images
of the Creator, the Sun, the Moon, and the Thunder, and they bowed
reverently to the Ynca. Before this the uncles and relations had flogged
them on the arms and legs, exhorting them to be valiant, and ever to pay
attention to the worship of the Huacas and the Ynca. At the end of these
ceremonies they went out of the square, in the order of their tribes,
each one with those of his family; <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> and
went to sleep in a desert called *Rauranu*, which is about a league from
Cuzco.

 Each of those who had been armed as knights brought a tent in which to
sleep, for himself and his relations. There went with them an the
maidens who had received the dresses which the Sun had given. They were
called *Ñusta-callisapa*. They brought with them small jars of chicha,
to give drink to the relations of the knights, and to offer as
sacrifice, as well as to give drink to the youths who were armed as
knights. On this day they brought with them the sheep called
*tupa-huanacu* or *raymi-napa*;<span
id="page_41_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_41_note_8.md) with a red shirt placed
over it, having golden ears, as before described. They also carried the
*suntur-paucar* or insignia of royalty. When the people had all departed
from the square, they carried each huaca back to its temple, and the
Ynca returned to his palace. Next day they rose up and went to a ravine
in a mountain called *Quilli-yacolca*; which is not more than half a
league from the place where they slept. Here they had breakfast, and
after their meal they fastened a little white wool to the ends of their
staves, and to the handles of the said *topa-yauri* they secured some
*ychu*. Then they continued to advance until they came to a hill called
Ana-huarqui, which is two leagues from Cuzco, to the huaca of the same
name on the top of the hill, which was the huaca of the Indians of the
villages of Choco and Cachona. The reason why they went to this huaca to
perform a sacrifice was that, on this day, they had to run a race, to
try which was the best runner. The tradition had been handed down, from
the time of the deluge, that this huaca ran like a lion. On coming
before the huaca, the youths offered a little wool which they held in
their hands. The priests of the Sun (not the High Priest) and those of
the other huacas, called *Tarpuntays*, then sacrificed five lambs,
burning them in the name of the Creator, the Sun, the Moon, and the
Thunder. <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> Then the relations once more
flogged the youths who were now knighted, urging them to set great store
by the valour and endurance of their persons. After this the people sat
down and performed the *taqui* called *haurita*<span
id="page_42_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_42_note_9.md) with the *huayllaquipas*
and shells; the knights remaining on their feet, holding in their hands
the staves called *yauri*. Some were headed with gold, others with
copper, each according to the means of the owner. At the end of the
*taqui* all the maidens called *Ñusta calli-sapa* rose up, and each ran
as fast as she could to the place where they had slept; and there waited
for those who had been armed as knights, with the chicha to give them to
drink. The girls cried out, and said:—"Come quickly, youths, for here we
are waiting for you." Then the youthful knights stood in a row before
the huaca of Anahuarqui, and behind them there was a second row of men,
who served as arm bearers. These carried the *yauris* and sticks in
their hands; and in their rear was yet a third row, whose duty it was to
aid those who fell. In front of all these was an Indian, very gaily
dressed, who gave the word. On hearing it they all began to run at full
speed and with all their force. Those who fell or fainted, were assisted
by the men in the rear, but some died of the falls. Those who reached
the goal received drink from the maidens, and they drank as they ran.
The object of this race was to prove who was the best of those who had
received knighthood.

 On each occasion they armed eight hundred knights and upwards. When
they were all assembled on the hill called *Raurana*, they again
performed the *taqui* called *huari*; after which they took the
*huaracas* and the *yauris*, and again began to flog the knights upon
the arms and legs. By this time it was the hour of vespers, and they all
rose up in their order, to return to Cuzco, bearing in front the
*suntur-paucar* and the sheep called *raymi-napa*. They marched to the
<span id="page_43">p. 43</span> square called *Huacay-pata* in Cuzco,
where were the statues of the Creator, the Sun, the Thunder, and the
Moon; and where the Ynca was seated near the statue of the Sun, with his
courtiers. As they entered they performed *mucha* to the huacas and the
Ynca. The tribes of Hanan Cuzco and Hurin Cuzco then sat down in the
places assigned to them, while the youths remained standing for a short
time. They again performed the *taqui* called *huari*, and once more
flogged the youths. Afterwards the Ynca and his court went to his house,
and the youths, with their fathers and relations, went to the hill
called *Raurana*. They passed the night at the foot of the hill, in a
place called *Huaman-cancha*.<span
id="page_43_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_43_note_1.md) At dawn they arose and
ascended the hill *Raurana*, which is half a league from Cuzco. The Lord
Ynca came here on this day, to grant favours to those who had been armed
as knights, giving them ear-pieces of gold, red mantles, with blue
tassels, and other marks of distinction. The huaca of *Raurana*
consisted of two falcons in stone, placed upon an altar on the summit of
the hill. It was instituted by Pachacutec Ynca Yupanqui, as the place
where they should receive the breeches which they call *huara*. This
huaca was at first the idol of the Indians of Maras, and Huascar Ynca
caused the falcons to be brought here, to beautify it. The sacrifice
that was performed on this occasion was to burn five lambs, and to pour
out chicha, beseeching the Creator, the Sun, the Moon, and the Thunder,
that the youths who had been armed, might become valiant and
enterprising warriors, that all they put their hands to might prosper,
and that they might never suffer defeat. The sacrifice was performed by
the Priest of the huaca *Raurana*; who also besought the huaca that the
youths might be fortunate. As soon as the sacrifices were consumed, the
*Huaca-camayoc*, who was the Priest, gave to each of the youths a pair
of breeches called *huarayarus*, and <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> a
red shirt with a blue binding, which clothes were brought by order of
the Ynca, as the tribute paid throughout the land on this occasion. The
youths were given ear-pieces of gold, which were then fastened in their
ears, and diadems with plumes called *pilcocassa*, and small pieces of
gold and silver to hang round their necks. After those things had been
distributed, they had breakfast, and performed the *taqui* called
*huari* for the space of an hour. Then the fathers and parents again
flogged the youths, reminding them of the prayers just offered up,
urging them to emulate the deeds of their ancestors, and to be valiant
warriors, never turning their backs on the foe.

 With reference to the *taqui* so often repeated in the ceremony, they
say that, in the time of Manco Ccapac, the first Ynca from whom they are
all descended, when he came forth from the Cave of Tampu, it was given
to him by the Creator with a command that it should be sung at this
festival, and at no other.

 After the *taqui*, they drank in their order, and marched back to
Cuzco, the *suntur-paucar* being borne before them as a banner, and the
sheep dressed as on former occasions. Manco Ccapac instituted this
feast, and caused these ceremonies to be observed in the case of his son
Sinchi Rocca, as we have related in the history of the Yncas.<span
id="page_44_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_44_note_2.md) On reaching the square of
Cuzco, they performed the *mucha* or adoration before the Huacas which
the Priests had brought out, and they also made obeisances to all the
embalmed bodies of the dead Lord and Ladies which had been brought into
the square by those who had charge of them; to drink with them as if
they had been alive, and that the young knights might beseech them to
make their descendants as fortunate and brave as they had been
themselves.

 Then all the people sat down, those of Hanan and Hurin <span
id="page_45">p. 45</span> Cuzco in their respective places. The skins of
lions, with the heads, had been prepared, with gold ear-pieces in the
ears, and golden teeth in place of the real teeth which had been pulled
out. In the paws were certain *ajorcas* of gold, called *chipanas*. They
called these lions *hillacunya chuquicunya*. Those who dressed in the
skins, put on the head and neck of the lion so as to cover their own,
and the skin of the body of the lion hung from the shoulders. Those who
had to take part in the *taqui* wore red shirts, with red and white
fringes, reaching to the feet. They called these shirts
*puca-caychu-uncu*. The *taqui* was called *coyo*. It was first
introduced by the Ynca Pachacutec Yupanqui, and was performed with
drums, two from Hanan Cuzco, and two from Hurin Cuzco. They performed
this *taqui* twice a day for six days, and during these six days each
person offered sacrifices to the Creator, the Sun, the Moon, and the
Thunder; for the Ynca and for those who had been armed as knights. These
sacrifices consisted of a quantity of sheep, cloth, gold, silver, and
other things. It was offered up that those who were armed as knights
might be fortunate in war, and in everything they undertook.

 On the 21st day of this month all the youths who had been armed as
knights, went to bathe in a fountain called Calli-puquio, in a ravine
about a quarter of a league to the rear of the fortress of Cuzco. They
then took off the clothes in which they had been armed as knights, and
dressed themselves in others called *nanaclla*, coloured black and
yellow, and in the centre a red cross. Thence they returned to the
square, where they found all the huacas. They made the usual obeisances.
They were placed according to the families to which they belonged; and
the principal uncle presented each knight with a shield, a sling, and a
club with a metal knob at the end, with which to go to the wars. The
other relations and chiefs then offered up cloth, sheep, gold, silver,
and other things, with a prayer that the youths might <span
id="page_46">p. 46</span> always be rich and fortunate. Each relation
that offered sacrifice, flogged a youth and delivered a discourse to
him, exhorting him to be valiant and never to be a traitor to the Sun
and the Ynca, but to be diligent in devotion to the huacas, and to
imitate the bravery and prowess of his ancestors. When the principal
Lord Ynca was armed as a knight, all the chiefs and great lords, who
were present from all parts of the land, made great offerings in
addition to those usually supplied. At the end of the sacrifices, the
Priests of the Sun and of the Creator brought a great quantity of fuel
tied together in handfuls, and dressed in the clothes of a man and a
woman. The faggots, thus dressed up, were offered to the Creator, the
Sun, and the Ynca, and were burnt in their clothes, together with a
sheep. They also burnt certain birds called *pilcopichio*<span
id="page_46_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_46_note_3.md) and *caman-tera-pichio*;
and this sacrifice was performed for the youths who had been armed as
knights; with a prayer that they might always be fortunate in war.

 On the 22nd of the month the knights were taken to the houses of their
relations, and their ears were pierced, which was the last ceremony in
arming the knights. Among these people they thought so much of this
boring the ears, that, if the orifice was broken through by any
accident, the man to whom it happened was looked upon as unfortunate.
They stuff pieces of cotton into the orifice of the ear, and each day
they put in more in order to enlarge it. On the same day the priests of
the Creator and the Sun, of Thunder and the Moon, and the shepherds of
the Ynca counted the flocks of the huacas and of the Ynca. Then
commenced the feasts that were celebrated for the flocks of the huacas,
that they might multiply; for which sacrifices were made throughout the
kingdom. The shepherds whose flocks increased most rapidly were
rewarded, and those whose flocks failed to multiply were punished.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

 On the 23rd day of the month they carried the statue of the Sun called
*Huayna punchao*, to the houses of the Sun called *Puquinque*, which are
on a high hill, a little more than three arquebus shots from Cuzco. Here
they sacrificed to the Creator, the Sun, the Thunder, and the Moon, for
all nations, that they might prosper and multiply. The statue of the Sun
was then brought back, preceded by the *suntur-paucar* and two sheep,
one of gold and the other of silver, called *cullque-napa ccuri-napa*;
which were the insignia borne before the statue of the Sun, wheresoever
it was taken. Thus ended this festival and month called *Ccapac-raymi*.

 

D<span class="small">ECEMBER</span>.

 The name they gave to the month of December was *Camay-quilla*. On the
first day of the month, those who had been armed as knights, as well
those of the lineage of Hanan Cuzco as of Hurin Cuzco, came out into the
square, with slings in their hands called *huaraca*, and the youths of
Hanan Cuzco hurled against those of Hurin Cuzco; their missiles were
called *coco*, which are found on certain thistles. At times they came
to close quarters, to prove the muscles of their arms; until the Ynca,
who was present, rose up and restored order. They called this
*chocanaco*, and it was a trial of strength, to see who were the
strongest and bravest. Afterwards, they all sat down according to their
lineages, the new knights being dressed in black shirts, and mantles of
a lion colour. They also wore plumes of white feathers on their heads,
from a bird called *tocto*.<span
id="page_47_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_47_note_4.md) On this day the new
knights began to eat salt and other luxuries, for during the ceremonies
they fasted, and were not allowed to touch either salt or *aji*. The
youths ate their first meal after the fast with great relish. For this
feast they brought all the huacas into the square, as well as the bodies
of the dead Yncas, to drink with them; placing those who had belonged
<span id="page_48">p. 48</span> to the Hanan Cuzco on the side where
that lineage was stationed, and the same with those of Hurin Cuzco. Then
they brought food and drink to the dead bodies, as if they were alive,
saying: "When you were alive you used to eat and drink of this; may your
soul now receive it and feed on it, wheresoever you may be." For they
believed and held it for certain that souls did not die, but that those
of good men went to rest with the Creator. When they died they declared
this belief, and charged their families and relations to perform all
that they had left them to do, and that they would see them from heaven.
They also believed that there was a place of punishment for bad men,
where they were tormented by demons called Supay. They said that those
who went there, suffered much hunger and thirst, and that their food was
charcoal, snakes, toads, and other things of that kind. Those who went
to heaven, on the other hand, eat and drank the best that the Creator
had, and they also received the food and liquor which their relations
offered up.

 Thus all with great joy passed this day, on which they began to dance
and sing. Afterwards, they all went forth to plough their fields, which
they called *chacra*. This lasted for twelve days. On the 15th day of
the month, at the full of the moon, all returned from their estates to
Cuzco; and on that night they performed the dance and *taqui*, called
*yahuayra*, through all the streets and squares of the city, from
nightfall until dawn. In the morning the priests brought out the huacas
of the Creator, the Sun, the Moon, and the Thunder, and the dead bodies,
and placed them in the square. The Ynca also came forth, and took his
place near the Sun. The rest of the people had gone to a house called
*Moro-urco*, near the houses of the Sun, to take out a very long cable
which was kept there, woven in four colours, black, white, red, and
yellow, at the end of which there was a stout ball of red wool. Every
one took hold of it, the men on one side, and the women on the other,
performing the *taqui* called <span id="page_49">p. 49</span>
*yaqauyra*. When they came to the square, after making reverences to the
huacas and the Ynca, they kept going round and round until they were the
shape of a spiral shell. Then they dropped the *huascar* on the ground,
and left it coiled up like a snake. They called this cable *Moro-urco*.
The people returned to their places, and those who had charge of the
cable took it back to its house. When they celebrated this feast, they
were dressed in clothes called *pucay-urco*; a black shirt with a white
band, and white fringes at the edges. They also wore white plumes from a
bird called *tocto*. Presently, they brought a lamb to be sacrificed for
the cable, and for rain, and the winter time, saying to the winter: "Why
hast thou rained?"

 From noon to sunset was passed in rejoicings, and in drinking with the
huacas and dead bodies. As, in my account of the *Yntic-Raymi*, which is
the month of May, I described the manner of their drinking to the Sun,
and to the other huacas, pouring the chicha down certain pipes, I will
not repeat the description here. In all the festivals the manner of
drinking to the huacas was the same. Half an hour before sunset they
took the huacas back to their temples, and the Ynca returned to his
house. The performing of this *taqui*, with the sacrifices and drinking,
lasted for two days. On the 18th of the said month, they came out in the
square, clothed in very gay dresses called *sanca-sonco-quila pionco*;
and in small mantles, and with plumes called *cupaticas* on their heads,
being the tails of macaws and pilos called *gualanpapi*, made of
feathers. On reaching the square they made their obeisances to the
huacas in the usual order, and took their places. A priest then rose up
and burnt a lamb as a sacrifice, praying to the winter ever to send its
waters so that, through its means, they might eat and drink.

 They preserved the cinders and ashes, not only of this sacrifice, but
of all others that were made throughout the year, in order to throw them
into the river.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

 On this day they performed the *taqui chapay quenalo*, which, with all
the other ceremonies that were performed in the course of the year, was
invented by Pachacutec Ynca Yupanqui; excepting those of the
*huarachico* when they armed the knights, and those of *quicochico* and
*rutuchico yayascay*, which are festivals invented by the first Ynca, as
will presently be mentioned.

 On the following day, which was the 19th of the said month, they went
to the square of Cuzco, called *Huacay-pata*, both the Ynca and all the
people, and they brought out the huacas and the embalmed bodies of the
dead. Having made the usual obeisances, they began to offer up the
sacrifice called *mojocati*, in the following order.

 A small river flows through the centre of Cuzco called Capi-mayu and
Huaca-puncu-mayu. It comes down from some ravines in the heights above
the town. In these ravines they constructed dams to confine the water,
although it was winter, in order that it might bear away the sacrifices
that were about to be offered in it, with greater force. On this day
they collected all kinds and sorts of food, all the different sorts of
*ajis*, great quantities of bags of coca, all kinds of cloths of
different colours and shoes, *llautus* and plumes worn as head dresses,
sheep, flowers, gold and silver, and every other sort of thing that they
used, as well as all the ashes and cinders of all the sacrifices, that
had been preserved throughout the year.

 All these things were thrown into the river, the first dam was thrown
down, and the water rushed out with such fury that it carried the other
dams away with it, and all the sacrifices. A lamb had been sacrificed on
this day, and its ashes, with the cinders, were thrown into the river
with the rest.

 Many people were assembled on both sides of the river, outside the city
of Cuzco, at a place called *Pumap-chupa*, where the sacrifices were
offered up. They were made at a <span id="page_51">p. 51</span> little
less than an hour before sunset, and the Indians who were on both sides
of the river, were commanded by the Lord Ynca, who was present, to go
with the sacrifices to Ollantay-tampu. By the round they had to make the
distance was ten leagues from Cuzco. Indians of the villages by which
they had to pass, were stationed at intervals, with torches, in order to
give light during the night, and no part of the sacrifices was allowed
to remain in the river. When they reached the bridge of Ollantay-tampu,
which is over a great river flowing to the North Sea, they threw two
bags of coca, called *pilculuncu paucar unau*, from the bridge, as the
sacrifices flowed past, and afterwards they were allowed to pass on by
themselves.

 During that day and the next, those who had passed on the sacrifices
were dancing and rejoicing, and performing the *taqui chupay huayllu*.
The reason for throwing these sacrifices into the river was as follows.
They said that, as the Creator of all things had granted them a good
year, it seemed well that, out of the things that he had given them,
they should offer these sacrifices, that they might not appear
ungrateful, beseeching him to receive them, wheresoever he might please
to be. At the end of two days, those who had followed the sacrifices as
far as the bridge, returned to Cuzco. Those who had gone furthest,
carried in their hands lances and falcons made of salt; while those who
lagged behind had toads made of salt, as a sign that they had gone
slowly, which made the people laugh at them. During the rest of the
month every man attended to his farm.

 

T<span class="small">HE</span> M<span class="small">ONTH OF</span>
J<span class="small">ANUARY</span>.

 They called the month of January *Atun-pucuy*, and they had no special
festival in it, the people merely attending to their work.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

 

F<span class="small">EBRUARY</span>.

 The name for the month of February was *Pacha pucuy*, and neither in
this month did they do anything but attend to their farms.

 

M<span class="small">ARCH</span>.

 The month of March was called *Paucar-huara*. No festival was
celebrated of any kind in this month.

 

A<span class="small">PRIL</span>.

 The month of April was called *Ayrihuay*. In it they reaped the crops
and got in the harvests, and hence they call it *Ayrihuay*. Those who
had received arms as knights, went to the farm of *Sausiru*, to fetch
the maize that had been reaped there; which is beneath the *citadel*. It
is here they say that Mama-huaca, the sister of Manco Ccapac, sowed the
first maize. They cultivated this farm every year, for the body of this
Mama-huaua, making from the crop the chicha that was necessary for the
service of the body, and delivering this chicha to those who had charge
of the body, which was embalmed. Then, in their order, they brought the
maize of the harvests of the Creator, the Sun, the Moon, the Thunder,
the Ynca, and Huanacauri, and of all the dead lords. They brought it in
small baskets, singing a chaunt called *yaravi*, and dressed in gay
clothes. All the rest of the people of Cuzco went to bring in this
maize, except on the first day, when it was brought by the youths who
had received knighthood. The priests, called *Tarpuntays*, offered up a
lamb in sacrifice, beseeching the Creator ever to grant them good
harvests. This lasted for four days, after which they went back to their
farms; and so the year ended, and the month of May returned.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

 Besides the ceremonies peculiar to each of these months, they performed
others called *ayuscay rutu-chica-quicu-chicu*. The *ayuscay* was when a
women conceived. On the fourth day they put the babies into a cradle
called *quirau*, and they invited the uncles and other relations to see
it; but no other ceremony of any kind was performed in consequence of
this event.

 The *rutuchico* is when the child attains the age of one year. Then,
whether it be a boy or a girl, they give it the name that it is to have
until it is of age. In the case of a boy, this is when he is armed as a
knight, and receives the *huaraca*. He is then given the name that he is
to bear until death. In the case of a girl it is when she attains the
age of puberty, when she also receives the name she is to bear until
death. The child was then shorn, and to perform the ceremony, the eldest
uncle was called, who cut the first hair. Then the other relations did
the same, and afterwards the friends of the parents. They all drank, and
the principal uncle gave the child the name it was to bear until it came
of age.

 The *quicuchica* is when girls reach the age of puberty: from the first
day until the last, which was three days more or less. They fasted
during the two first days, without eating anything at all, and on the
third day they were given a little raw maize, that they might not die of
hunger. They were confined in a place within the house, and on the
fourth day they were washed, and dressed in clothes called *ancalluasu*,
with shoes of white wool. Their hair was plaited, and a sort of bag was
placed on their heads. On this day the principal relations came, and the
girl came forth to set food before them, and to give them to drink. This
lasted for two days, and the principal relation gave her the name she
was to bear from thenceforth, and taught her how she should behave, and
how she should obey her parents. They then offered gifts according to
their means, without <span id="page_54">p. 54</span> any idolatrous
practice whatever; and this custom was ordained by Ynca Yupanqui.

 When the Ynca gave women as wives, they were received because it was
the command of the Ynca. The man went to the house of the girl's father,
not to say that the Ynca had given her, but that he desired to serve for
her, and so the relations of the girl were assembled, and their consent
was obtained. The youth remained in the house of his father and
mother-in-law for a space of four or five days, and carried in fuel and
straw for them. Thus the agreement was made, and he took the girl for
his wife; and because the Ynca had given her, it was considered that she
was taken until death, and she was received on this understanding, and
never deserted.

 The *Ccapac-cocha* was instituted by Pachacutec Ynca Yupanqui, and was
as follows. The provinces of Colla-suyu, Chincha-suyu, Anti-suyu, and
Cunti-suyu brought to this city, from each lineage or tribe, one or two
male and female children aged about ten years. They also brought cloth
and flocks, gold and silver. Then the Ynca seated himself in the
Huacay-pata, or great square of Cuzco. The children and the other
sacrifices walked round the statues of the Creator, the Sun, the
Thunder, and the Moon, which were placed in the square, taking two
turns. The Ynca then called to the Priests of the provinces, and
commanded them to divide the sacrifices into four parts, in token of the
four provinces, Colla-suyu, Chincha-suyu, Anti-suyu, and Cunti-suyu,
which are the four divisions into which the land is divided. He told
them, "Take, each one of you, his part of these offerings and
sacrifices, and offer them to your principal *huacas*." So the children
were strangled and buried with the silver figures of sheep, and the gold
and silver figures of men and sheep, and they burnt the cloth, with some
bags of coca. The people of Cuzco carried these sacrifices as far as
Sacalpiña, about a league from Cuzco, <span id="page_55">p. 55</span>
where they were received by the Indians of Anta, and in this way they
were passed on until they were delivered at the places where they were
to be offered up. In the same way, they were passed on to the other
provinces. The Lord Ynca offered these sacrifices when he began to
reign, that the *huacas* might give him health, and preserve his
dominions in peace. No *huaca* or place of worship, how small soever,
was left out in the distribution of the sacrifices, for the things that
were to be sacrificed at each place were all set apart. The reason why
all the *huacas*, whether they were sacred trees, fountains, or hills,
or lakes, received part of the sacrifice, was because it was held to be
an evil omen if any were left out, and because it was feared that if any
were omitted they would be enraged, and would punish the Ynca. If any of
the hills were very steep and could not be ascended, the sacrifices were
hurled to the summits from slings. Thus, at all the principal *huacas*
throughout the provinces, these sacrifices were offered up; and
afterwards at all the smaller sacred places. At each place was offered
up the portion that was assigned for it at Cuzco; for in Cuzco there was
the *Quipucamayu*, or accountant, who took an account of each portion of
the sacrifice, and of the province to which each was to be sent.

 They began to make the sacrifices in Cuzco, in the following order. The
first was offered to the Creator, and was received by the priest who had
charge of its image, and they prayed for long life and health, and for
victory against the enemies of the Yncas, also that while this Ynca was
Lord all the provinces might remain at peace, and be prosperous. After
this prayer they strangled the children, first giving them to eat and
drink, that they might not enter the presence of the Creator
discontented and hungry. From others they took out the hearts while yet
alive, and offered them to the *huacas* while yet palpitating. They
anointed the *huaca* with the blood from ear to ear, and they called
<span id="page_56">p. 56</span> this *pirac*. To others they gave the
body with the blood, and finally they interred the bodies with the other
sacrifices, in a place called Chuquicancha, which is a small hill above
San Sebastian, about half a league from the town. Then the Priests of
the Sun, in the same order, received what was assigned to their Deity,
and in the same place they performed the sacrifice to the Sun, with the
following prayer:—

 

*Prayer for the Sun.*

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  Uiracochaya punchau cachan tutacachannas pacnicpacarichun yllarichun nispac nicpunchac churi yquicta carillacta quispillacta purichuruna rurascay-quictacancharin yampac quilla-rincanpac Uiracochaya casilla quispilla punchau Ynca runay-anani chisca yquicta quillari canchari ama un cochispa ama-nanachispa caçista quispicta huacaychaspa. |  O Creator! Thou who saidest, let there be night and day, dawn and twilight, grant to thy child the Sun that when be rises be may come forth in peace. Preserve him that be may give light to men whom thou hast created. O Creator! O Sun! thou who art in peace and safety, shine down upon these people, and keep them in health and peace. |

 In like manner, the priests of the Thunder, which was called
*Chuqui-ylla*, received the children and other sacrifices which were
assigned to it, and buried them in the same place, called
*Chuqui-cancha*; and the same order was observed with the sacrifices to
the Moon; prayers being offered up on each occasion that the Ynca might
always be granted health and prosperity; and that he might always be
victorious over his enemies. Afterwards the whole of the priests
together offered to Heaven the sacrifices that were set apart for that
purpose, and also to the earth; repeating the following prayer:—

|                                                                                          |                                                                                              |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|  Pachacmama! cuyrumama casillacta quispillacta Ccapac Ynca huahuay yquctamacari hatalli. |  O mother earth! preserve the Lord Ynca, thy son, who stands upon thee, in peace and safety. |

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

 All the above sacrifices were placed in the *Chuqui-cancha*. Then the
priests who had charge of the huaca *Yanacauri* offered their sacrifice.
This huaca was of Ayar-cachi,<span
id="page_57_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_57_note_5.md) one of the four brothers
who were said to have come out of the cave at Tampu; but, as I have
treated of this fable in the beginning of the history which your most
illustrious Lordship possesses, I will not dwell upon it here. As this
was the principal *huaca*, besides those already mentioned, the priest
who had charge of it, with his comrades, received the children and other
things that were dedicated to it, and sacrificed them on the hill called
Huanacauri, which is two leagues and a half from Cuzco, a little more or
less. They offered up a prayer at the time of making the sacrifice,
beseeching the huaca that the Ynca, its descendant, might ever be
youthful and victorious, and that ever, during the life of the reigning
Ynca, the country might be at peace. Afterwards sacrifices were
performed at all the fountains, hills, and other places in Cuzco that
were held to be sacred; but no child was killed for these sacrifices.
These places were so numerous in Cuzco, that it would be tedious to
enumerate them here, and I will not do so because they are given in the
account of the *huacas* which I have presented to your most reverend
Lordship. As soon as they had concluded the sacrificial ceremonies in
Cuzco, the Priests brought out those which had to be sent to other
parts, in the way that has already been described. The order of marching
with the sacrifices was that all the people who went with the
*Ccapac-cocha* (also called *Cachahuaca*) took ways apart from each
other. They did not follow the royal road, but traversed the ravines and
hills in a straight line, until each reached the places where the
sacrifices were to be made. They ran, and as they went they raised cries
and shouts which were commenced by an Indian who was deputed to perform
this duty. Having given the word, all the others <span id="page_58">p.
58</span> continued the same cries. The cries were to beseech the
Creator that the Ynca might ever be victorious, and be granted health
and peace. They carried on their shoulders the sacrifices and the lumps
of gold and silver, and the other things destined to be offered up. The
children that could walk went on foot, and others were carried in their
mothers' arms. When they reached their destinations, the *Huacacamayoc*,
who had charge of the *huacas*, received those that were intended for
their *huacas*, and sacrificed them, bringing the gold and silver and
other things; and the children, having first been strangled, were burnt
in sacrifice, with the sheep, lambs, and cloth.

 It is worthy of remark that children were not sacrificed at all the
*huacas*, but only at the chief *huaca* of each lineage or province. In
this way they travelled over all the dominions of the Ynca, with these
sacrifices, until each one reached the extreme point of the empire, in
the direction in which he travelled. The journeys were so well ordered
and arranged, and they were so well equipped when they started from
Cuzco that, although the sacrifices and the places at which they were to
be delivered were numerous, they never made a mistake. For this service
the Ynca had Indians in Cuzco, who were natives of the four *Suyus* or
provinces. Each one had a knowledge of all the *huacas*, how small
soever they might be, that were in the province over which he was
*Quipucamayoc* or Accountant. They were called *Vilcacamayoc*. Each
Indian had charge of nearly five hundred leagues of country, and he had
an account of the things that were to be sacrificed at every huaca
within his district. Those who had to set out from Cuzco received their
destined sacrifices from the *Vilca-camayocs*, with instructions as to
whom they were to deliver them. In the chief places of each province
there were also Indians with the same duties, who kept an account of the
sacrifices; nevertheless, as the sacrifices were increased or augmented
according to the will <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> of the Ynca, the
instructions were sent from Cuzco as regarded what was to be done at
each place.

 They held this sacrifice, called *Ccapacocha* or *Cachahuaca*, in such
veneration that, when those who were making journeys over uninhabited
tracts with the sacrifices met other travellers, they did not raise
their eyes to look at them, and the travellers prostrated themselves on
the ground until the sacrifice-bearers had passed. When those bearing
sacrifices passed through a village, the inhabitants did not come out of
their houses, but remained, with deep humility and reverence, until the
said *Ccapac-cocha* had passed onwards.

 They also had a custom, when they conquered and subjugated any nations,
of selecting some of the handsomest of the conquered people and sending
them to Cuzco, where they were sacrificed to the Sun who, as they said,
had given them the victory.

 It was also their custom that, whenever anything excelled all the rest
of its kind in beauty, they worshipped it, and made it *huaca* or
sacred.

 They worshipped the sumrnits of all peaks and mountain passes, and
offered maize and other things; for they said that, when they ascended
any pass and reached the top, they could there rest from the labour of
the ascent. This, they called *chupasitas*.

 About ten years ago there was a joke among the Indians. They had a kind
of song called *taqui uncu*; and, as one Luis de Olivera, a Priest in
the province of Parinacochas, in the bishopric of Cuzco, was the first
who described this idolatrous pleasantry, I will here insert his account
of it.

 In the province of Parinacochas, in the diocese of Cuzco, the said Luis
de Olivera learnt, that not only in that province, but in all the other
provinces and cities of Chuquisaca, La Paz, Cuzco, Guamanga, and even
Lima and Arequipa, most of the Indians had fallen into the greatest
apostasy, departing <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> from the Catholic
Faith, which they had received, and returning to the idolatries which
they practised in the time of their infidelity. It was not understood
how this had come to pass; but it was suspected that the wizards, whom
the Yncas kept in Uiscacabamba, were at the bottom of it. For in the
year 1560, and not before, it was held and believed by the Indians, that
an ointment from the bodies of the Indians had been sent for from Spain
to cure a disease for which there was no medicine there. Hence it was
that the Indians, at that time, were very shy of the Spaniards, and they
would not bring fuel or grass or anything else to the house of a
Spaniard, lest they should be taken in and killed, in order to extract
this ointment. All this had originated from that villainy, with the
object of causing enmity between the Indians and Spaniards. The Indians
of the land had much respect for the things of the Ynca, until the Lord
Viceroy, Don Francisco de Toledo, abolished and put an end to them, in
which he greatly served God our Lord. The deception by which the Devil
deceived these poor people was the belief that all the huacas which the
Christians had burnt and destroyed had been brought to life again; and
that they had been divided into two parts, one of which was united with
the huaca *Pachacama*, and the other with the huaca *Titicaca*. The
story went on that they had formed in the air, in order of battle
against God, and that they had conquered Him. But when the Marquis<span
id="page_60_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_60_note_6.md) entered this land, it was
held that God had conquered the huacas, as the Spaniards had overcome
the Indians. Now, however, it was believed that things were changed,
that God and the Spaniards were conquered, all the Spaniards killed, and
their cities destroyed, and that the sea would rise to drink them up,
that they might be remembered no more. In this apostacy they believed
that God our Lord had made the Spaniards, and Castille, and <span
id="page_61">p. 61</span> the animals and provisions of Castille; but
that the huacas had made the Indians, and this land, and all the things
they possessed before the Spaniards came. Thus they stripped our Lord of
his omnipotence. Many preachers went forth from among the Indians, who
preached as well in the desert places as in the villages, declaring the
resurrection of the huacas, and saying that they now wandered in the
air, thirsty and dying of hunger, because the Indians no longer
sacrificed nor poured out chicha to them. They declared that many fields
were sown with worms, to be planted in the hearts of the Spaniards, and
of the Spanish sheep, and of the horses, and also in the hearts of those
Indians who remained Christians. The huacas, it was announced, were
enraged with all those who had been baptized, and it was declared that
they would all be killed unless they returned to the old belief and
renounced the Christian faith. Those who sought the friendship and grace
of the huacas would, it was urged, pass a life of prosperity and health.
Those who would return to the love of the huacas and live, were to fast
for some days, not eating salt nor *aji*, nor coloured maize, nor any
Spanish thing, nor entering churches, nor obeying the call of the
priests, nor using their christian names. Henceforth the times of the
Yncas would be restored, and the huacas would not enter into stones or
fountains to speak, but would be incorporated in men whom they would
cause to speak: therefore the people were to have their houses prepared
and ready, in case any huaca should desire to lodge in one of them. Thus
it was that many Indians trembled and fell to the ground, and others
tore themselves as if they were possessed, making faces; and when they
presently became quiet, they said, when they were asked what they had
felt, that such and such a huaca had entered into their bodies. Then the
people took such an one in their arms, and carried him to a chosen spot,
and there they made a lodging with straw and cloaks; and began to
worship the huaca, offering <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> sheep,
*colla-chicha*, *llipta*, *mollo*, and other things. Then they made a
festival for two or three days, dancing and drinking, and invoking the
huaca that was represented by the possessed man. Such persons, from time
to time, preached to the people, threatening them, and telling them not
to serve God, but the huacas; and to renounce all christianity, with all
christian names, and the shirts, hats, and shoes of Christians. These
possessed persons asked the people if they had any relics of the burnt
huacas, and when they brought some piece of stone they covered their
heads with a mantle before the people, and poured chicha, and the flour
of white maize on the fragment. Then the possessed shouted and invoked
the huaca; and rose up with the fragment in his hands, thus addressing
the people. "You see here your support. You see here that which can give
you health, and children, and food. Put it in its place, where it was in
the days of the Yncas;" and this was done with many sacrifices. The
wizards who in those times were detected and punished, had freely
performed their offices, returning to them, and not leaving the Indians
who were possessed by huacas, but receiving the sheep and *coys* offered
as sacrifices.

 This evil was so widely credited that not only the Indians on the
*Repartimientos* but those who lived in the cities, among Spaniards,
believed and performed the prescribed fasts. At last the said priest,
Luis de Olivera, began to punish the people of that province and of
Acari, and reported the matter to the Royal Audience of Lima and to the
Lord Archbishop, and the Bishop of Charcas, and to Friar Pedro de Toro,
the steward of the Bishop of Cuzco. At last the apostacy began to wane,
but altogether it lasted for seven years.

 As they believed that God and the Spaniards were conquered, the Indians
began to rise, as happened in the year 1565, when the Licentiate Castro
was Governor of these <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> kingdoms, who
received reports from the Corregidors of Cuzco, Guamanga, and Huanuco.
These cities were prepared for war during some time.

 There were several forms of apostacy in the different provinces. Some
danced and gave out that they had the huaca in their bodies. Others
trembled for the same reason. Others shut themselves up in their houses
and shouted. Others flung themselves from rocks and were killed. Others
jumped into the rivers, thus offering themselves to the huacas. At last
our Lord, in his mercy, was pleased to enlighten these miserable people;
and those who were left were led to see the nonsense that they had
believed, that the Ynca was dead or at Vilcapampa, and that nothing of
what had been predicted had taken place, but the very opposite.

 By reason of this devilish teaching, there are still some Indian
sorcerers and witches, though their number is small. When any Indian is
sick, these witches are called in to cure him, and to say whether he
will live or die. Having pronounced upon the case, they order the sick
man to take white maize called *colli sara*, red and yellow maize called
*cuma-sara*, yellow maize called *paro-sara*, sea shells called *mullu
mullu*, of all the colours they can collect, which they call *ymaymana
mullu*. When these things are collected, the wizard grinds the maize
with the shell, and gives it ground to the sick man that, breathing on
it, he may offer it to the *huacas* and *vilcas*; with these words:—"O
all the *huacas* and *vilcas* of the four provinces of the land, my
grandfathers and ancestors, receive this sacrifice, wheresoever you may
be, and give me health." They also make him breathe on a little coca,
and offer it to the Sun, praying for health; and the same to the Moon
and Stars. Then, with a little gold and silver of little value in his
hand, the sick man offers sacrifice to the Creator. Then the wizard
commands him to give food to the dead, placing it on their tombs, and
<span id="page_64">p. 64</span> pouring out chicha; if he is in the part
of the country where this can be done, and if not in a corner of his
house. For the wizard gives the patient to understand that he is visited
with this sickness because the dead are starving. If he is able to go on
foot to some junction of two rivers, the wizard makes him go there and
wash his body with water and flour of white maize, saying that he will
there leave his illness. At the end of this ceremony the wizard tells
him that, if he would free himself from his sickness, he must confess
all his sins, without concealing any. They call this *hichoco*. These
Indians are so simple that some of them readily, and with little
persuasion, fall into this apostacy and error, though some afterwards
repent and confess their sins.

 There are also a very great number of Indian men and women who,
understanding the offence against our Lord that they commit in doing
this, will not permit any such acts, but rather accuse those who do them
before the Cura, that they may be punished. If some exemplary punishment
was inflicted on the wizards, I believe that this great evil would soon
disappear, although, as I have said, there are now few wizards.

 In this land there are different nations and provinces, and each one
had its own rites and ceremonies, before it was conquered by the Yncas.
The Yncas abolished some of the rites, and introduced others. Thus it is
no less desirable to know the rites and ceremonies which existed in each
of the provinces, other than those of the Yncas, of which I have here
written. The means will be acquired, by this knowledge, of rooting out
these idolatries and follies; and mean while, with the help of our Lord,
the visit I have made through the parishes and valley of this city
called Cuzco, is now concluded.

 

(<span class="small">THE MANUSCRIPT HERE ENDS ABRUPTLY.</span>)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](rly2.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_3">p. 3</span>

<span id="page_3_note_1"></span>[1](#page_3_fr_1.md) For an account of the
origin of this hospital, see my translation of *G. de la Vega*, ii, p.
258.

<span id="page_3_note_2"></span>[2](#page_3_fr_2.md) *Bishops of Cuzco*—  
 1534. Fray Vicente de Valverde.  
 1543. Fray Juan Solauo, to 1550.  
 1570. S<span class="small">EBASTIAN DE</span> A<span
class="small">RTAUN</span>. Died at Lima 1584, at a Provincial
Council.  
 1584-93. Fray Gregorio de Montalvo.

<span id="footnotes_page_4">p. 4</span>

<span id="page_4_note_3"></span>[3](#page_4_fr_3.md) Tia-huanacu.

<span id="page_4_note_4"></span>[4](#page_4_fr_4.md) Mitimac, a colonist or
settler.—See *G. de la Vega*, <span class="small">I</span>, lib. iii,
cap. 19.

<span id="footnotes_page_6">p. 6</span>

<span id="page_6_note_5"></span>[5](#page_6_fr_5.md) One name for the
Ynca's head-dress. The "brilliant circle".

<span id="page_6_note_6"></span>[6](#page_6_fr_6.md) The battle-axe used
with one hand.—*G. de la Vega*, <span class="small">I</span>, lib. 9,
cap. 31.

<span id="page_6_note_7"></span>[7](#page_6_fr_7.md) Near Cuzco. From
*Paccari*, the dawn, and *tompu*, an inn.

<span id="page_6_note_8"></span>[8](#page_6_fr_8.md) "Teacher of the
World."

<span id="footnotes_page_7">p. 7</span>

<span id="page_7_note_9"></span>[9](#page_7_fr_9.md) The "Tocay" of the
tradition given by *G. de la Vega*, <span class="small">I</span>, lib.
i, cap. 18.

<span id="footnotes_page_8">p. 8</span>

<span id="page_8_note_1"></span>[1](#page_8_fr_1.md) See my translation of
*G. de la Vega*, ii, pp. 241, 335, 527.

<span id="page_8_note_2"></span>[2](#page_8_fr_2.md) A macaw.

<span id="footnotes_page_11">p. 11</span>

<span id="page_11_note_3"></span>[3](#page_11_fr_3.md) *Quisuar* is the
name of a tree (*Buddleia Incana*). *Cancha*, a place.

<span id="page_11_note_4"></span>[4](#page_11_fr_4.md) See *G. de la Vega*,
i, p. 295, and ii, p. 243, of my translation; and the plan of Cuzco.
There is still an ancient wall, with serpents carved on it, at this
spot.

<span id="footnotes_page_12">p. 12</span>

<span id="page_12_note_5"></span>[5](#page_12_fr_5.md) *Puquio*, a spring
or source.

<span id="page_12_note_6"></span>[6](#page_12_fr_6.md) The royal fringe,
worn across the forehead.

<span id="footnotes_page_13">p. 13</span>

<span id="page_13_note_7"></span>[7](#page_13_fr_7.md) Mentioned four times
by *Garcilasso de la Vega*, i, pp. 65, 66, and ii, pp. 169 and 230. He
says that the first settlement, made in the valley of Cuzco, was on the
hill called Huanacauri, and that a temple was built there. It was looked
upon as very sacrcd, and was the spot whence races were run.

<span id="footnotes_page_16">p. 16</span>

<span id="page_16_note_8"></span>[8](#page_16_fr_8.md) "Place of gold." The
temple of the Sun at Cuzco.

<span id="page_16_note_9"></span>[9](#page_16_fr_9.md) *Punchau*, "day". A
name for the Sun.

<span id="page_16_note_1"></span>[1](#page_16_fr_1.md) "Teacher of the
World."

<span id="page_16_note_2"></span>[2](#page_16_fr_2.md) Thunder and
lightning.

<span id="footnotes_page_17">p. 17</span>

<span id="page_17_note_3"></span>[3](#page_17_fr_3.md) Priests. The word
does not occur in Garcilasso de la Vega. *Tarpuni* is the verb "to sow".

<span id="page_17_note_4"></span>[4](#page_17_fr_4.md) Baskets.

<span id="footnotes_page_18">p. 18</span>

<span id="page_18_note_5"></span>[5](#page_18_fr_5.md) A tribe south of
Cuzco.

<span id="page_18_note_6"></span>[6](#page_18_fr_6.md) On leaving Cuzco,
this road is nearly east.

<span id="page_18_note_7"></span>[7](#page_18_fr_7.md) All these places are
in the vale of Vilca-mayu, up which the road passes from Cuzco to lake
Titicaca.

<span id="page_18_note_8"></span>[8](#page_18_fr_8.md) Not Andahuaylas, but
a village near Cuzco, now called Andahuaylillas.

<span id="page_18_note_9"></span>[9](#page_18_fr_9.md) Music.

<span id="page_18_note_1"></span>[1](#page_18_fr_1.md) More correctly
*Huayllina*, a song.

<span id="footnotes_page_19">p. 19</span>

<span id="page_19_note_2"></span>[2](#page_19_fr_2.md) *Ccuri*, gold;
*Collque*, silver; *Napa*, salutation.

<span id="page_19_note_3"></span>[3](#page_19_fr_3.md) *Tarpuy-quilla*, the
sowing month.

<span id="footnotes_page_20">p. 20</span>

<span id="page_20_note_4"></span>[4](#page_20_fr_4.md) Rimac-pampa.—*G. de
la Vega*, ii, p. 239.

<span id="page_20_note_5"></span>[5](#page_20_fr_5.md) *Quespi*, crystal.

<span id="footnotes_page_21">p. 21</span>

<span id="page_21_note_6"></span>[6](#page_21_fr_6.md) Thunder.

<span id="page_21_note_7"></span>[7](#page_21_fr_7.md) The Creator.

<span id="footnotes_page_22">p. 22</span>

<span id="page_22_note_8"></span>[8](#page_22_fr_8.md) Descendants of Ynca
Mayta Ccapac.

<span id="page_22_note_9"></span>[9](#page_22_fr_9.md) Descendants of Tupac
Ynca Yupanqui.

<span id="page_22_note_1"></span>[1](#page_22_fr_1.md) Vicaquirau.
Descendants of Ynca Rocca.

<span id="footnotes_page_23">p. 23</span>

<span id="page_23_note_2"></span>[2](#page_23_fr_2.md) Sacsahuana or
Xaquixaquana.

<span id="page_23_note_3"></span>[3](#page_23_fr_3.md) Ccoya, the Princess,
and Paullu, a son of the Ynca Huayna Ccapac. They were the lords of the
Pisac vassals when Molina was writing.

<span id="page_23_note_4"></span>[4](#page_23_fr_4.md) *Panaca* is a term
for lineage.—See *G. de la Vega*, ii, p. 531. Perhaps from *Pana*,
sister of a brother.

<span id="page_23_note_5"></span>[5](#page_23_fr_5.md) See the account of
the ceremonies in *G. de la Vega*, ii.

<span id="footnotes_page_25">p. 25</span>

<span id="page_25_note_6"></span>[6](#page_25_fr_6.md) *Huanacauri*.

<span id="page_25_note_7"></span>[7](#page_25_fr_7.md) *Apu-ppunchau*. The
lord of day.

<span id="footnotes_page_26">p. 26</span>

<span id="page_26_note_8"></span>[8](#page_26_fr_8.md) Upper and Lower
Cuzco.

<span id="footnotes_page_27">p. 27</span>

<span id="page_27_note_9"></span>[9](#page_27_fr_9.md) See also G. de la
Vega.

<span id="page_27_note_1"></span>[1](#page_27_fr_1.md) *Yahuar*, blood;
*Sancu*, pudding.

<span id="footnotes_page_34">p. 34</span>

<span id="page_34_note_2"></span>[2](#page_34_fr_2.md) Huarachicu.

<span id="footnotes_page_37">p. 37</span>

<span id="page_37_note_3"></span>[3](#page_37_fr_3.md) *Ñusta*, princess;
*Calli*, valorous; *Sapa*, alone, unrivalled.

<span id="page_37_note_4"></span>[4](#page_37_fr_4.md) *Muchani*, the verb
to adore, to kiss.

<span id="page_37_note_5"></span>[5](#page_37_fr_5.md) *Pacsa* is the word
for the moon, in the Collao dialects. In the Ynca language it is
*Quilla*.

<span id="footnotes_page_38">p. 38</span>

<span id="page_38_note_6"></span>[6](#page_38_fr_6.md) Slings.

<span id="footnotes_page_40">p. 40</span>

<span id="page_40_note_7"></span>[7](#page_40_fr_7.md) Aloe fibre.

<span id="footnotes_page_41">p. 41</span>

<span id="page_41_note_8"></span>[8](#page_41_fr_8.md) Raymi-napa.

<span id="footnotes_page_42">p. 42</span>

<span id="page_42_note_9"></span>[9](#page_42_fr_9.md) *Huari*.

<span id="footnotes_page_43">p. 43</span>

<span id="page_43_note_1"></span>[1](#page_43_fr_1.md) *Huaman*, a falcon;
*Cancha*, place.

<span id="footnotes_page_44">p. 44</span>

<span id="page_44_note_2"></span>[2](#page_44_fr_2.md) G. de la Vega says
that the lineage of the Ynca Sinchi Rocca was called *Raurana Panaca*.

<span id="footnotes_page_46">p. 46</span>

<span id="page_46_note_3"></span>[3](#page_46_fr_3.md) *Pichio* for
*piscu*, a bird.

<span id="footnotes_page_47">p. 47</span>

<span id="page_47_note_4"></span>[4](#page_47_fr_4.md) *Toctu* is honey.

<span id="footnotes_page_57">p. 57</span>

<span id="page_57_note_5"></span>[5](#page_57_fr_5.md) See *G. de la Vega*,
i, p. 73.

<span id="footnotes_page_60">p. 60</span>

<span id="page_60_note_6"></span>[6](#page_60_fr_6.md) Pizarro.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
