[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inca](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](rly3.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

## <span class="small">REPORT</span> BY POLO DE ONDEGARDO.

<span class="small">Written in a memorandum book, apparently as a rough
Draft, among the papers of the Licenciate Polo de Ondegardo.</span>

<span class="small">(*Manuscript in the National Library at Madrid*.
4to, on parchment, B. 135.)</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

OF THE LINEAGE OF THE YNCAS, AND HOW THEY EXTENDED THEIR CONQUESTS.

I<span class="small">T</span> must be understood, in the first place,
that the lineage of these Yncas was divided into two branches, the one
called Hanan Cuzco, and the other Hurin Cuzco. From this it may be
concluded (and there is no memory of anything to the contrary) that they
were natives of the valley of Cuzco, although some pretend that they
came from other parts to settle there. But no credit should be given to
them, for they also say that this happened before the flood. From what
can be gathered and conjectured in considering the traditions of the
present time, it is not more than three hundred and fifty to four
hundred years since the Yncas only possessed and ruled over the valley
of Cuzco as far as Urcos, a distance of six leagues, and to the valley
of Yucay, which is not more than five leagues.

 Touching the Lords that the people can remember, their recollection
does not carry them back beyond the time already stated. They preserve
the memory of these Lords by their *quipus*, but if we judge by the time
that each is said to have lived, the historical period cannot be placed
further back than four hundred years at the earliest.

 It must have been at about that period that they began to dominate and
conquer in the districts round Cuzco, <span id="page_152">p. 152</span>
and, as would appear from their records, they were sometimes defeated.
For, although Andahuaylas, in the province of the Chancas, is only
thirty leagues from Cuzco, they did not bring it under their sway until
the time of Pachacutec Yupanqui Ynca, who defeated those Chancas. The
history of this event is given in the record of the *Pururunas*, or
*huacas*, which originated and resulted from this battle with the
Chancas, the commencement of all the Ynca victories.<span
id="page_152_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_152_note_1.md) On the other side of
Cuzco is the road of Colla-suyu; and they also retain a recollection of
the time when the Canas and Canches, whose country is even nearer, were
paid to go with the Yncas to the wars, and not as vassals following
their lords; and this was in the same battle in which Pachacutec Ynca
fought against *Usco-vilca*,<span
id="page_152_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_152_note_2.md) Lord of the Chancas.
They also recollect the time when they extended their dominion along
this road to the lake of Villca-ñota, the point where the Collao begins.
Two powerful rivers flow out of this lake, one going to the north sea,
and the other to the south. The lake was worshipped by the natives, and
looked upon as a noted *huaca*. A long interval of time elapsed before
the Yncas advanced beyond this point. It was the successor of that lord
who conquered the Chancas who began to advance beyond this point, and
those provinces had no peace until the time of Tupac Ynca, father of
Huayna Ccapac. We found these wars recorded in the registers of the
Yncas, but each province also had its registers of wars, so that, if it
were necessary, we might very easily fix the time when each province was
subjugated by the Yncas.

 But it is enough to understand that these Yncas at first extended their
conquests by violence and war. There was no general opposition to their
advance, for each province <span id="page_153">p. 153</span> merely
defended its land without aid from any other; so that the only
difficulty encountered by the Yncas was in the annexation of the
districts round Cuzco. Afterwards all the conquered people joined them,
so that they always had a vastly superior force as well as more cunning
in the art of war. Thus it was seldom that they were completely
defeated, although sometimes they were obliged to retreat, and desist
from a war during a year.

 No province ever attempted to disturb them in their own land, only
seeking to be left in quiet possession of their territories, and this
seems to me to have been a great advantage to the Yncas. There is no
memory of such an attempt in their registers; but, after the districts
were reduced to obedience, the great natural strength of this region
conduced to its security. The four roads which diverge from Cuzco are
all crossed by rivers that cannot be forded at any time in the year,
while the land is very rugged and strong. There cannot, therefore, be a
doubt that in this, and in possessing better discipline and more
knowledge, lay the advantage they had over all the other nations of this
region. This superiority is shown in their edifices, bridges, farms,
systems of irrigation, and in their higher moral lives. If other nations
have anything good, it has all been taught them by the Yncas. The Yncas
also had a different system of warfare, and were better led, so that
they could not fail to become lords over the rest. Thus they continued
to extend their dominions and to subjugate their neighbours.

 The second thing that may be taken for granted is that having resolved
to conquer and subjugate other nations, the Yncas sought some colour and
pretext for prosecuting their objects. The first story that these Yncas
put forward, though it was not the title which they finally asserted,
was an idea that, after the deluge, seven men and women had come out of
a cave which they call *Paccari-tampu*, five leagues from Cuzco, where a
window was carved in masonry in most <span id="page_154">p. 154</span>
ancient times; that these persons multiplied and spread over the world.
Hence every province had a like place of worship where people came forth
after the universal destruction; and these places were pointed out by
their old men and wizards, who taught them why and how the Yncas
venerated the cave of *Paccari-tampu*. Thus in every province these
places of worship are to be found, each one with a different tale
attached to it.

 With this title the Yncas were for a long time unable to conquer more
than the provinces bordering on Cuzco until the time of Pachacuti Ynca
Yupanqui. His father had been defeated by the Chancas, and retreated to
Cuzco, leaving his troops in a *Pucara* or fortress. Then the son formed
an army out of the fugitives, and out of the garrison of Cuzco, and out
of the men of Canes and Canches, and turned back to attack the Chancas.
Before he set out his mother had a dream that the reason of the victory
of the Chancas was that more veneration was shown for the Sun than
*Pachayachachic*, who was the universal Creator. Henceforward a promise
was made that more sacrifices and prayers should be offered to that
statue. Then the son was promised a victory over the Chancas, and that
men should be sent from Heaven to reinforce him. With this title he went
forth and conquered, and thence arose that idea of the *Pururaucas*,
which was one which was most important for the Yncas as a title in
extending their conquests . . . . . sacrifices of many kinds were
continually invented, and all who were subjugated were taught that Cuzco
was the abode and home of the gods. Throughout that city there was not a
fountain, nor a well, nor a wall, which they did not say contained some
mystery, as appears in the report on the places of worship in that city,
where more than four hundred such places are enumerated. All this
continued until the arrival of the Spaniards; and even now all the
people venerate the *huacas* given them by the Yncas.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

 The third thing to be understood is that as soon as the Yncas had made
themselves lords of a province, they caused the natives, who had
previously been widely scattered, to live in communities, with an
officer over every ten, another over every hundred, another over every
thousand, another over every ten thousand, and an Ynca governor over
all, who reported upon the administration every year, recording the
births and the deaths that had occurred among men and flocks, the yield
of the crops, and all other details, with great minuteness. They left
Cuzco every year, and returned in February to make their report, before
the festival of Raymi began, bringing with them the tribute of the whole
empire. This system was advantageous and good, and it was most important
in maintaining the authority of the Yncas. Every governor, how great
lord soever he might be, entered Cuzco with a burden on his back. This
was a ceremony that was never dispensed with, and it gave great
authority to the Yncas.

 The fourth thing is that in every place where a settlement or village
community was formed, the land was divided in the following manner: one
portion was set apart for the support of religion, being divided between
the Sun and the *Pachayachachic*, and the thunder, which they called
*Chuquilla*, and the *Pacha-mama* and their ministers, and other
*huacas* and places of worship, both general and such as were peculiar
to each village. It would take long to enumerate them, for they were so
numerous that, if they had had nothing else to do, the sacrifices alone
would have given them occupation. For each town was divided in the same
way as Cuzco, and every notable thing was made an object of worship,
such as springs, fountains, streams, stones, valleys, and hill summits,
which they called *apachetas*. Each of these things had its people whose
duty it was to perform the sacrifices, and who were taught when to
sacrifice and what kind of things to offer up. Although in no part were
there so many objects <span id="page_156">p. 156</span> of worship as in
Cuzco, yet the order and manner of worshipping was the same.

 A knowledge of the *huacas* and places of worship is very important for
the work of conversion. I have a knowledge of them in more than a
hundred villages; and when the Lord Bishop of Charcas doubted whether
the custom was so universal, at a time when we were in a joint
commission by order of his Majesty, I showed him the truth of it in
Cuzco. And although the discovery of these things has taken time, yet it
has been necessary as regards the question of tribute and contributions.
For a very large portion of the harvests was set apart for this service,
and stored in places prepared for the purpose. Part was expended on the
sacrifices of the villages, and a larger share was taken to Cuzco from
all parts. The portions thus set apart were from a third to a fourth,
varying in different districts. In many villages all belonged to the
Sun, such as in *Arapa* and others. In these the greater part was
devoted to sacrifices, in others (belonging to the Ynca) not so much.

 Another share of the produce was reserved for the Ynca. This was stored
in the granaries or sent to Cuzco, according to the necessities of the
Government. For it was not always disposed of in the same way. The Ynca
supplied with food all his garrisons, his servants, his relations, and
the chiefs who attended upon him, out of this share of the tribute,
which was brought to Cuzco from all parts of the country. In time of war
the provisions from some parts were sent to others, in addition to the
ordinary consumption, and there was such order in these arrangements
that no mistake ever occurred. Sometimes the stores were sent from the
magazines in the mountains to the coast, at others from the coast to the
interior, according to the exigencies of each case, and this was done
with never-failing speed and exactness. When there was no demand the
stores remained <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> in the magazines, and
occasionally there was an accumulation sufficient for ten years.

 There can be no doubt that this share of the Ynca was well managed. I
visited many of the store-houses in different parts, and they were,
without comparison, larger and better than those set apart for the
service of religion.

 The lands set apart for the tribute of the Ynca and of religion were
sown and reaped in the same order; but it must be understood that when
the people worked upon them, they ate and drank at the cost of the Ynca
and of the Sun. This work was not performed by gangs, nor were the men
told off for it, but all the inhabitants went forth except the aged and
infirm, dressed in their best clothes, and singing songs appropriate for
the occasion. In these two kinds of tribute there were two things that
seem worthy of note. One is that the aged, infirm, and widows did not
join in it. The other is, that although the crops and other produce of
these lands were devoted to the tribute, the land itself belonged to the
people themselves. Hence a thing will be apparent which has not hitherto
been properly understood. When any one<span
id="page_157_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_157_note_3.md) wants land, it is
considered sufficient if it can be shown that it belonged to the Ynca or
to the Sun. But in this the Indians are treated with great injustice.
For in those days they paid the tribute, and the land was theirs; but
now, if it is found convenient to tax them in some other way, it is
clear that they will pay double tribute—in one way by being deprived of
their land, and in another by having to pay the tax in the form that may
be now fixed. If any one, as is often done, sets up a claim by saying
the Ynca had power to appropriate the land, the injustice and wrong is
all the greater; because if such was the right, his Majesty succeeds to
it; and, as regards *encomiendas* for a life or lives, it is clear that
it is not the intention to grant them, nor is it just as regards the
estate <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> of the Ynca. Such tribute or
tax was levied by the Ynca as King and Lord, and not as a private
person. Hence arose a notable mistake. It was declared that all the
farms of coca belonged to the Ynca, which was true, and therefore they
appertain to his Majesty. He could grant them in *encomienda*, and
resume them at the end of the term, if he so pleased, as is the case
with the *alcabalas* of Valladolid. The Fiscal exerted himself to prove
that the farms belonged to the Ynca, and that the *encomienda* only
extended to the Indians, and this was through not comprehending the
nature of the tribute that was given to the Ynca. In effect the Ynca
took the produce of all the coca farms throughout the Andes for his own
use, except a few small patches granted to chiefs and *camayus*.<span
id="page_158_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_158_note_4.md) All the rest was taken
to Cuzco, but there was not then so much as there is now, nor one
fiftieth part; for in this too the reports were deceptive, as I have
more particularly shown in my report on the coca.

 The Ynca did the same with all the males in the flocks, which were
appropriated for the service of himself and of religion, being left,
however, in the same district where they were bred, and merely counted.
No female was included in the tribute. The pastures and hunting-grounds
were demarcated, that the flocks might not be passed from one province
to another; but that each might have its assigned limits. This rule has
also given rise to pretensions on the part of some, to the flocks, on
the ground that they belonged to the Sun or the Ynca; and, before order
was established, a great quantity was seized on this pretext. It is very
certain that if his Majesty took the tribute of the flocks, he would not
wish that it should be given out of what the Indians held as their own,
and enjoyed as such; but only from that which belonged to him, from
having been given by them to the Ynca and to religion.

 After I had become thoroughly acquainted with the subject, <span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> I severely censured some who took a quantity
of flocks from the *Aymaraes* and other parts, on this pretext. But, on
an appeal to the Audiencia, it was permitted on the ground that his
Majesty succeeded to the right.

 It was not all the flocks that were treated in this way; for a portion,
though a small one, was left to the district, and another to the chief,
who afterwards granted some to his servants. Those belonging to religion
and to the Ynca were called *Ccapac-llama*, and the others
*Huachay-llama*; which means rich and poor beasts. A division was
prohibited, and to this day they are all enjoyed in common.

 In the matter of the flocks they made many rules, some of which were so
conducive to their preservation that it would be well if they were still
observed. It may be said that, in a great part of the kingdom, the
people are maintained by the flocks. They flourish in the coldest
regions, and there also the Indians are settled, as in all parts of the
Collao, and on the sides towards Arequipa and the coast, as well as
throughout *Carancas*, *Aullagas*, *Quilluas*, and *Collahuas*. All
those districts, if it were not for the flocks, might be looked upon as
uninhabitable; for though they yield *papas*, *quinuas*, and *ocas*, it
is an usual thing for three out of five years to be without harvests,
and there is no other kind of produce. But, by reason of the flocks,
they are richer and can dress better than those who live in fertile
districts. They are very healthy, and their villages are more populous
than those in the warm lands, and the latter are even more frequently
without their own products, than those who possess flocks. For the
flocks are sent down with wool, and return laden with maize, *aji*, and
pulses. This is the reason that, in the rules, a hundred Indians of the
barren land, though they be far from the mines, give more than two
hundred from the fertile land. Then Indians who take their flocks to
Potosi gain more in a month than any other ten in a year, and they
return with their flocks improved.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

 There was a rule that females should never be killed, and thus the
flocks multiplied exceedingly, for neither were those of the Ynca or of
religion killed except for sacrifices. If any beast was attacked with
*carache*,<span id="page_160_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_160_note_5.md) which is
the disease by which so many have been lost in our times, the rule was
that they should not be fed or cured, but buried at once, deep in the
ground, as the disease was infectious.

 The flock of the community was shorn at the proper season, and the wool
was divided amongst the people, each regetting the quantity he required
for himself, his wife, and children; so that all were clothed. A portion
of the flocks of the Ynca and of religion were also shorn, and cloth was
made out of the wool and taken to Cuzco, for the use of the Ynca, and
for the sacrifices. It was also used for clothing the attendants of the
Ynca, or was stored in the magazines. Thus in each village they had
workmen, called *cumpicos*, to weave the rich cloth which they made in
great quantities. The store-houses were quite full of cloth when the
Spaniards came, as well as with all other things necessary to sustain
life and for war.

 One thing should here be noted, which is that when they distributed the
cloth to each man according to the quantity required for clothing his
family, no account was taken of what such a person might have of his
own, because he was supposed to enjoy this without prejudice to his
enjoying his share with the rest, even if a family possessed a large
quantity. It is important to decide how this tribute may now be taken,
with due regard to justice, from the estates of religion, of the Ynca,
and of the community. For in the event of there being sufficient for the
payment of this class of contribution, and of that which results from it
and is made from the wool, but a deficiency under some other class, it
would not be reasonable to make up such deficiency by an exaction from
every head, which is the way that it is <span id="page_161">p.
161</span> now made up. For if one Indian only has a single head of
flock it will be taken for the tribute, while if another possesses a
hundred head no more than one will be taken. This consideration gave
rise to their own custom that no man should pay tribute from his own
personal property, but only from the work of his hands, all working as a
community. It is clear that the tribute of religion and the Ynca was
levied from the whole community for the public service, while the
private property of each man was held by favour from the Ynca, and,
according to their laws, they had no other title to it. From this
private property no tribute of any kind was exacted, even when it was
considerable in amount. But all were obliged to do their part in
producing the tribute demanded from the community. It is not right,
therefore, that they should now be taxed by the head, but rather
according to their estates. If there are a thousand Indians in a
*Repartimiento*, among whom there are five hundred *mitimaes*<span
id="page_161_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_161_note_6.md) who never possess any
sheep, and if the tribute amounts to five hundred head, it is impossible
to raise it. Consequently when, by reason of the flocks, the tribute is
to be paid in sheep, it is necessary to ascertain to whom the sheep
belong, and to assess the *mitimaes* and the natives separately. Thus
the difficulty will be overcome, and the injustice will be avoided. The
community is composed of rich and poor, and the tribute of sheep should
be distributed among those who breed them, without including any poor
man who happens to have acquired a single sheep. For this immunity
should be granted, and the matter is of sufficient importance to justify
this digression.

 The same remark applies to the tax which is exacted throughout the
Collao and the province of Charcas where they have flocks. This consists
in having to convey to Potosi a quantity of provisions in proportion to
the number of sheep in the flock. This class of tribute was well known
<span id="page_162">p. 162</span> in the time of the Yncas, because they
carried tribute to Cuzco on the sheep of the Sun and of the Ynca in
great quantities. But in assessing this burden the *mitimaes* were
treated with great injustice; for, as they were all taxed together, the
natives received their share, and the *mitimaes* theirs, so that the
natives conveyed their provisions on their beasts, while the *mitimaes*
had to carry them on their own backs, for a distance of forty leagues
and more. It is a serious matter for an Indian to have to carry three
*arrobas* on his back, which is the weight of a *fanega* of flour,
besides his own food, and the loss of time.

 The ancient tribute was to sow the crops for the Ynca and for religion,
and to reap them and carry the harvests to the store-houses, where there
was always a superfluity.

 Another mistake that has been made in levying taxes, especially in the
Collao, through which the Indians have been much oppressed, is through
their being ordered to pay a quantity of provisions according to the
extent of the land they possess for sowing with *papas*, from which they
make *chuñus*. For out of five years, there is but a small yield in
three, so that the Indians have to pay all they possess. Thus the men
and their families suffer throughout the year by reason of the tribute.

 On the death of an owner of land, the heirs and descendants possessed
it in common, without the power of dividing it; but the person who
represented the *Ayllu* had the charge, and all the rest enjoyed the
fruits in common, which were divided among them in the following manner:
If a son of the first possessor had six sons, and another son had two,
each one had equal shares, and there were as many shares as persons. At
the time of sowing they all had to be present to divide the crop; and at
the harvest if any one, even though a descendant, had not been at the
sowing, he could neither take his share nor give it to another. Yet even
if he was absent ten years, he did not lose his right, if he <span
id="page_163">p. 163</span> chose to be at the sowing; and even when
there were so many descendants as that there was scarcely a mazorca of
maize for each, the rule was still observed; and it is still kept up in
the district of Cuzco, where the lands are held in this manner.

 This custom of each descendant having a right to a share, should be
known when any business connected with the levying of taxes is to be
arranged. Thus the lands belonged to the whole village, and he who did
not work at the sowing had no share in the harvest.

 The reason may now be understood why, in so many lawsuits that are
submitted to the Corregidores and Audiencias, scarcely any are between
an Indian and another of the same village, but between one village and
another.

 After the Spaniards came, the Indians continued for a long time to till
the lands of the Ynca and of religion, and to store up the harvests
according to the old custom, and to burn a portion in sacrifice,
believing that a time would come when they would have to give an account
to the Ynca. When the President Gasca marched through the valley of
Xauxa against Gonzalo Pizarro, I remember that he rested there for seven
weeks, and they found stores of maize there for several years, upwards
of fifteen thousand *fanegas* near the road. When they understood that
these reserved lands might be sown for their own profit, the people of
different villages began to sow them, and hence arose many lawsuits.

 When people went to work on land out of their own district, it was also
for the Ynca and religion, and the land set apart for this was called
*suyus*. But there were also some Indians left to irrigate and guard
these *suyus*, who, though in a land beyond their own district, were
always subject to their chiefs, and not to the chiefs in the land where
they resided. These are a different class of men from the *mitimaes*,
who were removed from the jurisdiction of the chiefs under whom they
were born.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

 It should be understood how those lands which were tilled belonged to
the sowers. In the Collao, where no maize can be raised, the people had
lands on the coast, and sent men down to till them, near Arequipa for
instance. In the time of the Marquis of Cañete, who was Viceroy of these
kingdoms,<span id="page_164_fr_7"></span>[7](#page_164_note_7.md) owing to
information which I supplied, these *suyus* were returned as belonging
to the province of Chucuito, but all the others suffer by reason of this
custom not being understood.

 The order which, up to this time, has been adopted for the conversion
of the Indians, is for the priests to visit each village, with a book
showing who are baptized, who are married, who have more than one wife.
Thus the shepherd knows his sheep and is known by them. The ancient
custom by which no man moved from his district, was a marvellous aid.

 The rules of New Spain, where the country is very populous, are not
applicable to this land. This was well understood by that prudent and
illustrious worthy Don Antonio de Mendoza,<span
id="page_164_fr_8"></span>[8](#page_164_note_8.md) whose memory will long
be cherished, and whose loss will be felt more every day by his Majesty
and by the people of the Indies. At the end of a year, during which he
had studied the affairs of this land, though he was suffering from
illness, he said that before issuing any orders it was necessary to do
three things—first, to see the country; second, to know the capacity of
the Indians; and third, to understand their customs, rules, manner of
living, and ancient system of taxation. For all this it was necessary
that he should have had better health and fewer years.

 The order established by the Ynca in matters relating to the chase, was
that none should hunt beyond the limits of his own province; and the
object of this was that the game, while proper use was made of it,
should be preserved. After <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> the tribute
of the Ynca and of religion had been paid, leave was given to supply the
requirements of the people. Yet the game multiplied by reason of the
regulations for its conservation, far more rapidly than it was taken, as
is shown by the registers they kept, although the quantity required for
the service of the Ynca and of religion was enormous. A regular account
was kept of all the hunts, a thing which it would be difficult for me to
believe if I had not seen it.

 The Ynca made similar regulations with regard to the forests, in the
districts where they were of any importance. They were assigned for the
use of the regions where there was a want of fuel, and these forests
were called *moyas* of the Ynca, though they were also for the use of
the districts in the neighbourhood of which they grew. It was ordained
that they should be cut in due order and licence, according to the
requirements. It should therefore be understood that the pastures, the
hunts, and the forests were used in common under fixed regulations; and
the greatest benefit that his Majesty could confer on these Indians,
next to their conversion, would be to confirm the same order established
by the Yncas, for to frame new rules would be an infinite labour.

 There was another kind of contribution in the time of the Yncas, which
was as heavy and onerous as all the others. In every province they had a
house called *Aclla-huasi*, which means "the house of the chosen ones,"
where the following order was kept: There was a governor in each
province whose sole duty was to attend to the business of these houses,
whose title was *Apu-panaca*. His jurisdiction extended over one *hunu*,
which means ten thousand Indians, and he had power to select all the
girls who appeared to him to be of promising dispositions, at the ages
of eight or nine years, without any limit as to the number chosen. They
were put into this house in company with a hundred *Mama-cunas*, who
resided there, where they were taught all the accomplishments <span
id="page_166">p. 166</span> proper for women, such as to sew, to weave,
to make the drinks used by the Indians; and their work, in the month of
February, at the feast of Raymi, was taken to the city of Cuzco. They
were strictly watched until they reached the age of thirteen or fourteen
years and upwards, so that they might be virgins when they should arrive
at Cuzco, where they assembled in great numbers from all the provinces
in the middle of March. The order of distribution was as follows:—

 Women were taken for the service of the Sun, and placed in the temples,
where they were kept as virgins. In the same order women were given to
the service of Pacha-mama, and of other things in their religion. Then
others were selected for the sacrifices that were offered in the course
of the year, which were numerous. On these occasions they killed the
girls, and it was necessary that they should be virgins; besides
offering them up at special seasons, such as for the health of the Ynca,
for his success in war, for a total eclipse of the sun, on earthquakes,
and on many other occasions suggested by the Devil. Others were set
apart for the service of the Ynca, and for other persons to whom he
showed favour. When any man had received a woman as his legitimate wife
or *mamanchu*, he could not take another except through the favour of
the Ynca, which was shown for various reasons, either to one who had
special skill in any art, or to one who had shown valour in war, or had
pleased the Ynca in any other way. The number of women who were set
apart for these uses was very great, and they were selected without any
regard to whom they belonged, but merely because they were so chosen by
the *Apu-panaca*, and the parents could not excuse or redeem them under
any circumstances. Estates were set apart for the support of the houses
of the chosen ones, and this tribute would have been felt more than any
other if it had not been for the belief that the souls of the girls that
were <span id="page_167">p. 167</span> sacrificed went to enjoy infinite
rest, which was the reason that sometimes they voluntarily offered
themselves for sacrifice.

 One of the chief articles of tribute was the cloth that was given for
the service of the Ynca and of religion. Great quantities of this cloth
were distributed by the Ynca among the soldiers, and were given to his
relations and attendants. The rest was deposited in the store-houses,
and was found there in enormous quantities when the Spaniards arrived in
these kingdoms. This cloth was of many textures, according to the uses
to be made of it. Large quantities were made of the very rich *cumpi*,
woven with two fronts. A more common kind was made for the sacrifices,
for in all the festivals much cloth was offered up. For these supplies
the beasts of the Ynca were shorn at the proper time, worked up, and
sent to Cuzco, with the other tribute, in the month of February, besides
what was stored in the magazines, in accordance with the instructions
issued in each year.

 The beasts required for Cuzco were sent in the same month, in the
quantity that had been ordered, all being males, for females were never
wasted either for sacrifices or for food. The *Pachayachachic*, whom
they held to be the universal Creator, the Sun, the thunder called
*Chuquilla*, the *Pachamama*, and an infinite number of other objects of
worship, all had their flocks set apart, and the wool from them was
distributed in the city of Cuzco for the sacrifices, and to clothe the
people who served the *huacas*. A quantity of cloth was also used for
the service of the houses where the embalmed bodies of the Lords Yncas
were kept. Here also were taken all kinds of food, such as maize,
*chuñu*, aji, and every other kind of provision that was raised in the
farms. All these things were arranged with such order, that it is
difficult to understand how the accounts and registers can have been so
well kept.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

 An immense quantity of personal service from an the provinces was also
required in the city of Cuzco, for the Ynca and his court. Every
province that was conquered had to send its principal idol to the city
of Cuzco, and the same province continued to provide for its service and
sacrifices in the same order as when it was in the province.

 Another very heavy burden consisted in the supply of men for war, as
there were frequent rebellions in various parts of the empire, and it
was necessary to guard all the frontiers, especially along the river of
Maule in Chile, and on the Bracamoras in the province of Quito, and
towards that of Marcas, and in the province of the Chirihuanas,
bordering on Charcas, and towards the forests of the Chunchus and Mosus.
On all these frontiers we still meet with *pucaras* or fortresses where
the garrisons were assembled, with roads leading to them. *Mitimaes*
also were sent, from different provinces, to live on these frontiers.

 Those who performed special services were exempted from other classes
of tribute. There is an example of this in the province of Lucanas,
where the people were trained to carry the litter of the Ynca, and had
the art of going with a very even and equal pace. In Chumpivilcas the
people excelled in dancing, and many were exempted on that account. In
the province of Chilcas there is a red wood of excellent quality for
carving, and the Chilcas brought it thence to Cuzco, a distance of two
hundred leagues, in very great quantities, with many representations
carved and painted on it. The wood was burnt for sacrifices in fires
kindled in the great square, in presence of the Ynca and of the embalmed
bodies of the dead lords. Thus the best product of each province was
brought to Cuzco.

 In the arrangement of tribute, men were also set apart for the
construction of public works, such as bridges and roads. In an the royal
roads from Quito to Chile, and still <span id="page_169">p. 169</span>
further on to the borders of the government of Benalcazar,<span
id="page_169_fr_9"></span>[9](#page_169_note_9.md) and the branch road to
Bracamoras, there were *chasquis* stationed at the end of every *tupu*,
both on the road of the coast and of the mountains. A *tupu* measures
the same as a league and a half. At these points there were small houses
adapted to hold two Indians, who served as postmen, and were relieved
once a month, and they were there night and day. Their duty was to pass
on the messages of the Ynca from Cuzco to any other point, and to bring
back those of the governors, so that all the transactions and events of
the empire were known. When the Ynca wished to send anything to a
governor, he said it to the first *chasqui*, who ran at full speed for a
league and a half without stopping, and passed the message to the next
as soon as he was within hearing, so that when he reached the post the
other man had already started. They say that from Cuzco to Quito, a
distance of five hundred leagues, a message was sent and another
returned in twenty days. I can believe this, for in our wars we have
sometimes used these *chasquis*, and as it was an ancient custom, they
readily made the arrangement. In this way letters have been brought from
Cuzco to Lima in three days, a distance of a hundred and thirty leagues,
over a very bad road. The Yncas also used these *chasquis* to bring up
fresh fish from the sea; and they were brought up, in two days, a
distance of a hundred leagues. They have records in their *quipus* of
the fish having sometimes been brought from Tumbez, a distance of more
than three hundred leagues. The food of the *chasquis* was provided from
the store-houses of the Ynca; for those who worked for the Ynca'a
service, or for religion, never ate at their own expense.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

 

E<span class="small">DIFICES AND</span> F<span
class="small">ORTRESSES</span>.

 One other contribution and tribute in the time of the Yncas imposed
heavy labour, and this was the demand for Indians to work at the
edifices of Cuzco. This work was very toilsome, for all their buildings
were of masonry, and they had no tools of iron or steel, either to hew
the stones out of the quarries or to shape them afterwards. All this was
done with other stones, which was a labour of extreme difficulty. They
did not use lime and sand, but adjusted one stone to another with such
precision that the point of junction is scarcely visible. If we consider
the number of times they must have fitted and taken off one stone before
this accuracy was attained, an idea may be formed of the toil and of the
number of workmen that was required. To this labour was added the
conveyance of stones from great distances by force of men's arms. Any
one who has seen their edifices, will not doubt their statements that
thirty thousand men were employed. For not only are these works above
the ground, such as those in the city and fortress, but there is also
much well-cut masonry underground, as well hewn as any that can be found
in Spain. As they had nothing but stone tools, it seems to me that a
hundred Indians could not work and shape a single stone in a month, and
any one who likes to look at them will certainly think the same. These
edifices are not only in Cuzco, but in many other parts where the work
must have been much more heavy and difficult, by reason of the stones
being more distant. For at Cuzco, from Santa Ana, which is in Carmenca,
where the city commences, to Angostura, there is a distance of three
leagues, a little more or less; and within this space all kinds of stone
for building are to be found, black and white, hard and soft; and all
the stones of the neighbouring hills are excellent for lime and plaster.
I have examined the quarries, and have seen their ingenious
contrivances, in company <span id="page_171">p. 171</span> with
dexterous artificers from Spain, and they assured me they had never seen
so many kinds of excellent stone within so small a space. He who has
seen the work which the Yncas commenced in Tiahuanacu, near
Chuqui-apu,<span id="page_171_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_171_note_1.md) and
considers that the stone is not met with within a hundred leagues of the
spot, will understand the advantage enjoyed by Cuzco.

 This service was exacted throughout the kingdom; it being arranged in
Cuzco in each year, as regards the number of men to be employed and the
work to be done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 <span class="small">N<span class="small">OTE</span>.—This report is
incomplete at the end, and the copy at Madrid has been made by a very
ignorant clerk who left blank spaces when he did not understand a word
or passage.</span>

 

<span class="small">THE END.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inca](../index) [Index](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_152">p. 152</span>

<span id="page_152_note_1"></span>[1](#page_152_fr_1.md) See *G. de la
Vega*, ii, p. 57; and the present volume, [p. 92](rly2.htm#page_92.md).

<span id="page_152_note_2"></span>[2](#page_152_fr_2.md) Should be
Ancohualla, or Hanco-hualla. See *G. de la Vega*, ii, 58, 82, 329.

<span id="footnotes_page_157">p. 157</span>

<span id="page_157_note_3"></span>[3](#page_157_fr_3.md) That is, any
Spanish settler.

<span id="footnotes_page_158">p. 158</span>

<span id="page_158_note_4"></span>[4](#page_158_fr_4.md) Officials.

<span id="footnotes_page_160">p. 160</span>

<span id="page_160_note_5"></span>[5](#page_160_fr_5.md) See *G. de la
Vega*, ii, p. 378.

<span id="footnotes_page_161">p. 161</span>

<span id="page_161_note_6"></span>[6](#page_161_fr_6.md) Colonists.

<span id="footnotes_page_164">p. 164</span>

<span id="page_164_note_7"></span>[7](#page_164_fr_7.md) From 1555 to 1561.

<span id="page_164_note_8"></span>[8](#page_164_fr_8.md) Viceroy of Peru
from 1551 to 1555.

<span id="footnotes_page_169">p. 169</span>

<span id="page_169_note_9"></span>[9](#page_169_fr_9.md) Sebastian de
Benalcazar, one of the first conquerors of Peru, and Governor of
Popayan.

<span id="footnotes_page_171">p. 171</span>

<span id="page_171_note_1"></span>[1](#page_171_fr_1.md) The modern city of
La Paz.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
