[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte0-0) [Next](tte0-2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

## PREFACE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE author of this work has partly resided, partly been travelling
about, on the shores of Davis Strait, from the southernmost point of
Greenland up to 73° north latitude, for sixteen winters and twenty-two
summers; first as a scientific explorer, afterwards as Royal Inspector
or Governor of the Southern Danish establishments in Greenland. The
first series of tales was published by him in 1866; but as this field of
ethnological investigation was at that time almost uncultivated, much
new material came to hand after that publication, and, moreover, the
author had then only acquired such a degree of familiarity with the
language, as made it possible for him to understand his native
informants sufficiently well to write down their verbal communications.
In 1871 he determined to publish a new series of tales as a supplement
to the former, in which he has also described the general habits,
religion, and other peculiarities of the Eskimo, having by that time
been enabled to give a more comprehensive account of these subjects, and
to make some farther improvements on the first publication.

Besides the translation into English, a twofold object has been aimed at
in this edition: first, that of incorporating the two parts into one;
and second, of partly abbreviating their contents. The principal aim of
this <span id="page_vi">p. vi</span> abridgment has been to make these
accounts more available to readers engaged in archæological studies, or
investigations of the earliest history of mankind by comparison of the
traditional tales, languages, and religious opinions of the more
primitive nations, in which respect the Eskimo, and specially the
Greenlanders, have been studied more minutely, perhaps, than any other
similar people. Keeping this object in view, some of the tales, as well
as a certain part of the original work, seemed to be of special interest
only to the Danish colonies, and have therefore been wholly omitted, or
only given in an abridged form, in the present publication.

The wholly modern study of "prehistoric man," which in our time is
making such progress, has hitherto almost exclusively been founded upon
the study of the ornaments, weapons, and other remains of primitive
peoples, which for this purpose have become greatly valued, and are
searched for in the bowels of the earth, and drawn forth to light in
nearly every part of the globe. But the time will certainly come when
any relics of spiritual life brought down to us from prehistoric
mankind, which may still be found in the folk-lore of the more isolated
and primitive nations, will be valued as highly as those material
remains. In this respect the Eskimo may be considered among the most
interesting, both as having been almost entirely cut off from other
nations and very little influenced by foreign intercourse, and also as
representing a kind of link between the aboriginals of the New and the
Old World.

Some illustrations, designed as well as drawn and engraved on wood by
natives of Greenland, are given, the author having supplied the original
blocks to be used in this edition for this purpose.

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

As to the spelling of Greenland words and names, we have to draw a
distinction between those which are more properly used as representing
the foreign expressions themselves, and those which have been wholly
embodied in the Danish or English language of the text, and thereby
subject to the orthography of these languages. In the first instance,
the words distinguished by a different type, are spelt in exact
accordance with the orthography now adopted in the native schools of
Greenland. In the preliminary sketch, where this orthography is
explained, it will be seen that all the sounds may be expressed by our
usual Latin characters, with the exception only of a deep guttural *k*,
for which the character **ĸ** has been formed; the other more peculiar
sounds having been substituted by double consonants or expressed by
accents. The other letters are pronounced almost identically with those
of the German and Scandinavian languages. In the second instance we
have, as far as possible, accommodated the mode of spelling to the
English pronunciation of the letters, in some instances using *y* for
**j**, *gh* for **g**, *k*, or in some more peculiar cases, *k’* for
**ĸ**, &c.; as, for instance, *anghiak* (**ângiaĸ**), *kayak*
(**ĸajaĸ**), *k’ivigtok* (**ĸivigtoĸ**).

The personal and geographical names are given with fewer alterations of
the kind mentioned, and nearly agree with the Danish orthography.

To prevent, as far as possible, misunderstanding and farther corruption
of the original Greenland words, we have added, wherever it appeared
necessary, in parentheses, how the word is most nearly to be pronounced
(pron. . . .), in other instances how it is to be correctly spelt in
Greenlandish (cor. sp. . . .); as, for instance *Kulange* (pron.
*Koolanghee*), *angakok* (cor. sp. **angákoĸ**). <span id="page_viii">p.
viii</span> The following general rules may be laid down: The letter *e*
at the end or a word is never mute, but always to be pronounced; *ai* is
pronounced like *y* in *by;* *i*, like *i* in *it;* *g*, like *g* in
*good;* *u*, like *oo*.

In some instances we have used the Greenland plural, formed by
substituting a *t* at the end or the word, such as *angakut* instead of
*angakoks*.

As to uncommon words or expressions in general, those peculiar to Eskimo
life will be round explained in the preliminary sketch. But in order to
make the stories more readable, as well as better understood, we have,
without paying particular attention to this, inserted the most necessary
explanations in parentheses or in notes, in different places or the text
itself, where it appeared most useful; especially in the earlier pages,
where the expressions are first met with.

Dr Robert Brown, who at the author's request has been good enough to
revise the manuscript and make such corrections or emendations in the
style and construction or the collection as in his judgment were
advisable, has had in his travels in the northern regions of America, as
well as in Greenland and on the western shores of Davis Strait and
Baffin Bay, an opportunity of visiting the aborigines or these countries
in their own homes; and these advantages, coupled with his long personal
acquaintance with the author, and his experience as a writer on
Ethnology, have rendered him peculiarly fitted for this friendly
editorial task.

H. R. 

 K<span class="small">ONGL,</span> G<span
class="small">RÖNDLANDSKE</span> H<span class="small">ANDEL,</span>  
 C<span class="small">OPENHAGEN,</span> *Sept*. 1875.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte0-2)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
