[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-022) [Next](tte2-024)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### 23. SITLIARNAT.

<span class="small">\[This tale having much resemblance to Nos.
[16](tte2-016) and [19](tte2-019), the text is here somewhat
abridged.\]</span>

THERE were three brothers, the eldest of whom was named Sitliarnat. One
day they all went out hunting on the frozen sea, accompanied by a person
who was in no way related to them. All of a sudden a south-east storm
arose, the ice creaked and gave way beneath their feet, and nothing
remained to them but to mount an iceberg. Having got there, they drifted
far away out on the great ocean. They were nearly starving with hunger
when they at length touched upon an unknown shore and landed there. They
now went roaming about the country in search of people, and passed an
isthmus on which they observed a little hut with only one window.
Sitliarnat then spoke, "Let them make me their first prize;" and he went
on and crossed the threshold in front of his companions. Inside the
house they only found an old couple, who seemed to be its sole
inhabitants. The four strangers seated themselves on the ledge; but
finding that nobody spoke, the old man began to eye them more closely,
and having breathed upon them, asked them, "Whence do you come?"
Sitliarnat answered him, "Some time ago we set off from the land on the
other side of the ocean, and went out on the ice to catch seals; but a
gale from the south-east came on, breaking up the ice and drifting us
across to your country. So here we are; three of us are brothers, and
the fourth is a companion of ours." Turning to his wife the old man
observed, "After travelling so far people are apt to get hungry," upon
which they added some words which the people did not understand. The
wife fetched some <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> blubber in a pan,
put it on to boil, and gave it them served up in a wooden dish; but
though they were almost fainting with hunger, they only tasted a very
little of it. Soon after, however, a proper meal was set before them,
and then the old man said to them, "Our only provider is staying away a
long time; we have been expecting him back this last month. He left us
to go out hunting, and has not yet returned; we are much afraid he may
have encountered some wicked people and have come to grief." While he
was thus speaking, the guests began to think, "What sort of people may
these be?" Meanwhile the visitors stayed on, and for some time the old
man provided food for them. One morning, when they were all sitting
together, they heard a voice calling from without, "I want to get in; do
let me get in!" whereat the old man rose from his seat and went outside,
but soon returned holding his son by the hand, who was looking very pale
and haggard. After supper he lay down on the side ledge, and remained
thus for several days, until one morning when he rose up very early. He
had now recovered his health and strength as well as his appetite, and
had regained his former aspect also, and again took up his task as
provider of the household; but strange to say, he was never seen to
carry any weapons. The visitors meanwhile prolonged their stay for
several years; and one evening the old man, addressing the eldest
brother, questioned him, "What did they give thee for thy amulet when
thou wert born?" Sitliarnat replied, "In my infancy I got a
carrion-gull, one of those that always seek the carrion farthest out to
sea." On hearing this the old man responded, "So thou mayst be sure of
returning to thy own country at some time or other." One of the brothers
now put in, "All of us have got the same bird for our amulets;" but when
the stranger was asked, he told them that his was a raven, a bird that
always seeks his prey landward; <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> on
which the old man replied, "I doubt if thou wilt ever see thy country
again, if it is so." The old man used to rise the earliest of them all,
and when the others at length came out, he was always seen to be on some
mountain-top, marking the state of the air and the weather. He one day
entered with this remark, "When the wind goes down and the weather gets
settled, I shall take you across." But they wondered, and said, "How
will he manage to carry us yonder, as there is no ice at present, and
neither boats nor kayaks are to be seen hereabouts, and we don't even
know in what direction our country is situated?" One morning when they
were still fast asleep, he cried, "It is no time for sleeping now. Make
haste and get up, if ye really long for your homes; I shall see you
along myself:" and they now rose as quickly as possible, and followed
him down to the steep shore, where they had landed years ago. Here the
old man said, "Now watch me!" Then taking a run, he leapt into the sea,
dived down, and reappeared in the shape of a bear, saying, "If
Sitliarnat really has a gull for his amulet, it will soon appear to him.
Do as I have done, and throw thyself into the water." Sitliarnat,
however, still lingered a little; but the bear went on, "If thou dost
not follow me into the ocean, thou wilt never get home." Sitliarnat now
ran on and took the leap; and as soon as he had plunged down, he again
rose and merely touched the surface with his feet, gliding along as if
he were on solid ice, instead of being on the waves of the sea. At the
same time the gull also made its appearance, and a large iceberg was
seen which he climbed, both his brothers following him. The old man now
turned to the fourth, saying, "Thou, too, wouldst like to return, I
know; now try thy wings!" He, too, plunged into the sea, trying to fly,
but went right down instead, and would have lost breath but for the
bear, who put him on shore, saying, "No, thou wilt never get home,
because thou <span id="page_196">p. 196</span> hast got a raven for thy
amulet; thou canst return to my house as before." The bear now spoke to
the three, "Shut your eyes and sit close together. If ye open your eyes,
ye will never get home. I shall now put my shoulder to the iceberg, and
push you away." Presently their place of refuge began to shake beneath
them, and they had started on their journey. Thus they moved onwards
until they at last felt a quake as if they were touching something hard.
Here the bear ordered them to open their eyes, and they beheld a country
spreading before them, and recognised it as their own. They had landed
just a little south of what had been their former habitation. They asked
the bear to enter, that they might recompense him in some way or other;
but he said, "No, I don't care for being paid—I merely intended to do
you a good turn; but when in winter-time ye should happen to see a bear
with a bald head, and your companions prepare to hunt him down, then try
to make them desist, and put some food before him." After these words he
plunged into the sea, and instantly disappeared. The brothers now went
up to their former house, and knew it to be inhabited because of some
little boys who were seen at play outside. These children had been named
after them by their parents, in remembrance of their lost friends. Their
wives had all married again; but their other relatives rejoiced greatly
at receiving those whom they had given up for lost a long time ago.
Inquiries were also made about their companion, but they answered that
they had left him "on the opposite shore." Perceiving that the husbands
of their own former wives feared them, they reassured them, saying, "We
don't intend any harm towards you. Many thanks to you that ye have
provided so well for our relatives." But the wives, nevertheless, were
given back to them. During the winter the bear was almost forgotten,
till one evening, when they were all at home, some of the men exclaimed,
"A bear is making for the <span id="page_197">p. 197</span> shore!" When
they were collecting their arms, the brothers interfered, crying, "Just
wait a little; we must first have a look at him." They instantly
recognised their own bear, and said to the others, "Without his good aid
we should never have reached home again. Don't hunt that bear; make
haste and give him a feast." When the bear had got on shore, he went
right up to the house, sat down on his haunches before the entrance, his
head turned towards it. The people put several entire seals before him,
and beckoned him to eat; and all the men gathered round him. When the
meal was ended, the bear lay down to sleep, while the children played
round him. After a while he awoke, and having eaten a little more, he
arose, and following his own traces back to the beach, leapt into the
sea, and was never seen any more. It is said that the descendants of
Sitliarnat were very prosperous and multiplied greatly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-024)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
