[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-009) [Next](tte2-011)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10. KUNUK THE ORPHAN BOY.

<span class="small">\[This tale seems to have its origin in historical
facts, worked into a tale at a later period. Some parts of it allude to
the struggles with the Indians, and the sudden attacks made by them on
the Eskimo. Others most probably refer to the wars between the Eskimo
tribes themselves, and to their distant migrations, by which they have
peopled their wide territories. Several passages of this story are still
frequently mixed up in different ways with other tales. The text has
been constructed from three copies, in most particulars agreeing with
each other.\]</span>

SEVERAL men had their permanent winter-quarters near the entrance to a
fiord, and with them lived two boys, who were very officious and
obliging. In the morning, when the men prepared to go out hunting, the
boys helped to turn and rub their gloves, and made them ready for use,
and likewise arranged the kayak implements and tools, and fetched the
water for their morning drink. When the men had left, the boys exercised
themselves in archery, and never entered the house the whole day long,
until the men had returned, and they had assisted them in carrying their
things from the beach. They did not even think of entering and partaking
of their first meal till the last of the men had gone in, and they had
once more fetched water. One evening in winter, by moonlight, when they
had <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> gone out to draw water, the
youngest said, "I think I see a lot of faces down in the water;" and
Kunuk, the elder brother, replied, "Is it not the reflection of the
moon?" "No, come and look for thyself;" and Kunuk looked into the water,
and said, "Thou art right, they are getting at us;" and presently he
observed in the water (viz., by way of clairvoyance) a host of armed men
advancing towards them. The boys now ran as fast as possible and told
everything to the people at home, but they only answered, "It must have
been the moon that deceived you. Never mind, but run away and fetch us
some water; the tub is empty." Off they went, but saw the same things
over again, and went back to report it; but still they were not
believed. But when they saw the armed men the third time advancing
quickly towards them, they deliberated what to do with their little
sister; and when they had determined to go and hide her, they entered
the house and brought her outside; and seeing a heap of chips close to
the window, they put her down, and covered her well up with them. Having
done this, they went back and climbed the rafters beneath the roof of
the house-passage; and in helping his brother to get up, Kunuk warned
him not to get tired though he might find it an inconvenient place of
refuge: they were keeping hold of one beam with their hands, and
supported their feet against the next, and thus lay at full length, with
their faces turned downwards. Presently a large man with a spear made
his way through the entrance; after him another one appeared; and all
told, they counted seven, who came rushing into the house. But as soon
as they got inside a fearful cry was heard from those who were put to
death by them. While they were still lingering inside Kunuk's brother
was losing strength, and was nearly giving way, when the aggressors came
storming out, fighting about, right and left, and flinging their spears
everywhere, and likewise into the heap of chips, where <span
id="page_134">p. 134</span> their little sister was lying. When the last
of them had disappeared the younger boy fell to the ground, and Kunuk
after him. When they came to look for their sister they found her struck
right through the body with a lance, and with her entrails protruding;
and on entering the house the floor was all covered with blood, every
one of the inmates having been killed, besides one of the assailants.
Being quite alone in the dreary house they would not stay, but left the
place that very night, carrying their wounded sister by turns, and
taking care that the entrails did not come out of their proper place.
They wandered on for a long while in this manner, and at length they
arrived at a firth, which was quite frozen over. There they went down on
the ice, but on turning round a steep promontory their little sister
died, and they buried her in a cave among the rocks. From the

![](134.jpg)

beginning of their flight they exercised themselves in boxing and in
lifting large stones to strengthen their limbs; and they grew on, and
had become strong and vigorous men ere they again met with other people.
After a great lapse of time they one day noticed a man standing on the
ice beside a huge piece of wood, which he <span id="page_135">p.
135</span> had made use of in hunting the small seals. When they
approached and told him what had befallen them, he said he would like to
adopt them as his sons, and they followed him to a house where he and
his wife lived all by themselves. Their foster-parents encouraged them
never to forget their enemies, but always to be exercising themselves in
order to strengthen their limbs. One night the brothers came home laden
with ptarmigan and foxes, which they had caught without any weapons at
all, only by throwing large stones at them, which made the old people
rejoice very much, commending their dexterity and perseverance. To
increase their strength still farther, they lifted very large stones
with their hands only. They also practised boxing and wrestling; and no
matter how hard the one might be pressing on the other, they made a
point of never falling, but rolling together along the ground. At last,
with constant practice, they had grown so dexterous that they could even
kill a bear without any weapon. At first they gave him a blow, and when
he turned upon them they took no more notice of him than if he had been
a hare, but merely took hold of him by the legs and smashed him to
pieces. When these results had been gained, they began to think of
seeking out other people. Where? That was a matter of indifference. They
now took a northerly direction, and wandered on a long way without
falling in with any human being. At length they came to a great inlet of
the sea, where a number of kayakers were out seal-hunting, but only one
of them seemed to be provided with weapons. This one was their chief, or
the "strong man" among them. He always wanted to harpoon the animals
himself which had been hunted by the others—these had only to chase and
frighten them; and if anybody dared to wound them, he was sure to be
punished by the chief in person; but as soon as the "strong man" had
pierced them with his arrow, the others all helped to kill them. Kunuk
and <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> his brother were too modest to go
down at once, and awaited the approach of evening. Meanwhile they
witnessed the cutting up of a walrus, and saw it being divided—each
person getting a huge piece for himself, excepting an old man, who lived
in the poorest tent, who got nothing but the entrails, which his two
daughters helped him to carry home from the beach. The brothers agreed
that they would go to the old man when it had grown dark, because they
had taken pity on him on account of his patience. Having arrived at the
tent, Kunuk had to enter by himself, his brother being too bashful to
follow him. The old man now inquired of him, "Art thou alone?" "No, my
little brother is standing outside; he is ashamed to enter." On hearing
this, the old man cried, "Come in, thou who art standing outside;" and
when he entered, he was astonished to see his strong limbs, he being
even bigger than his brother. When the meal was over the old man said he
would like to have them for his sons-in-law, and that they might go and
take his daughters for their wives. Kunuk chose the youngest of them,
and his brother got the eldest; and thus they got married. It is said
that while going down to the place, they first went to have a look at
the boats, and examined them closely; and that on seeing the weapons of
the "strong man," they had taken his javelin (or arrow to be flung only
by hand) away, with the intention of hiding it, so that the others might
get something to look for. They brought it away to a spring, and a
little way off they stuck it down into the earth, but pulled it out
again, trying another place, where the turf was dry and hard. There
Kunuk fixed it so deep in the ground that only so much of it as could be
seized with two fingers was to be seen. While they were lying down
inside the tent, they heard some one come running along, and partly lift
the curtain, but instantly drop it and go off again. It was an old
gossip, and mother to the "strong man," who had <span id="page_137">p.
137</span> been doing this; and a moment later a multitude of people
gathered round the entrance of the tent, to get a peep at the strangers.
In the morning they heard the chief crying out, "This is a fine day for
a walrus-hunt;" upon which he was silent a while, and then said, "My
javelin has been taken away," which was repeated again and again by many
others. When Kunuk emerged from the tent he saw several of the men
coming out rubbing their eyes, and saying, "I must surely have slept too
long!" However, it was only out of reverence for the "strong man" that
they spoke thus. While they were shouting, they heard the old gossip,
who had been away to fetch water, exclaim, "Look, yonder is the
javelin!" and at the same time she pointed to the rock leading to the
spring. All of them now rushed to the spot, in order to pull it out of
the earth, but nobody succeeded in doing it. The brothers were now
called, and were asked to draw it out. They had all been pulling and
biting it with their teeth to get it loose, so that the end had been
quite wasted. But Kunuk just took it between his two fingers, and
disengaged it as if it were a very small matter. On their way down to
the shore their father-in-law addressed them, and said, "Down there,
underneath the great boat, are the two kayaks of my dead son. They are
perfectly fitted up, and furnished with weapons, and are quite easy to
get at." These things he now wanted to make over to his sons-in-law, and
he told them that the "strong man" had murdered his son because he
envied him his still greater strength; for this reason he was now the
enemy of his daughters. Hitherto, however, they had not been able to get
their revenge. After a short interval the cry was heard, "Let the
strangers come on for a boxing and fighting match on the great plain up
yonder;" upon which all the men made thither to behold the spectacle.
The brothers followed them; and arriving at the place, they saw a pole
set up on end, and beside it the leader standing with a <span
id="page_138">p. 138</span> whip made of walrus-skin, with a knot on the
end. There was also a stuffed white hare, and whenever anybody set foot
on it, he quickly lashed them with the whip. Kunuk was the first who
advanced towards the hare, and the chief tried to hit him, but did not
succeed in reaching

![](138.jpg)

him. Soon after, Kunuk courageously put his foot on the hare; but the
very moment the "strong man" lifted up his whip Kunuk stooped down and
*hardened* his limbs (by charm), and when the other smote him the whip
gave a loud crack. The "strong man" now believed that he had killed
Kunuk, who nevertheless came away unhurt. When the crack of the thong
was heard, the "strong man" ordered the younger brother to step forward.
He, however, cared less than Kunuk: and after the first attempt the
chief proposed that he should take the whip for a change; and giving it
to him, he went himself and put his foot on the hare. Kunuk's brother
now cried, "Look out and harden thy body!" but at the same time smote
him, so that he <span id="page_139">p. 139</span> fell down dead on the
spot. All his inferiors now rejoiced greatly, and called out to the
brothers, "Henceforth ye shall be our leaders!" but they rejoined, "In
future ye shall have no masters, but hunt at liberty and at your own
will." The brothers now practised all manner of feats belonging to
kayaking and seal-hunting, and procured themselves *bladder-arrows*<span
id="page_139_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_139_note_1)—the bladders being made
out of one entire blown-up seal-skin. One day they joined some other
kayakers, and went in pursuit of a very large she-walrus. Kunuk lanced
it four times at a greater distance than usual, and his arrow went right
through the animal, which, panting for breath, after a minute or two was
quite dead. When the others came on to give it the finishing stroke,
they found that the arrow had penetrated to the very vent-holes of the
bladder; and they all rejoiced at his great dexterity, and praised it
highly. Ordinary seals even grew quite stiff when his spear merely
grazed them. He once heard a report of a very giant, who lived
southward, and was named Ungilagtake.<span
id="page_139_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_139_note_2) He had a huge sword, and
nobody was ever known to escape him; even the most valiant of men were
vanquished and put to death by him. On hearing this, the brothers
immediately supposed him to have been among the strong armed men who
attacked their housemates at home, when they themselves were still
little children; and they at once determined to go and find him out,
knowing that they were now more capable of revenging themselves than
they had been at that time. They left the place in two boats, one of
which belonged to the youngest; in this the mother of the "strong man"
who had been killed accompanied him. The other boat was Kunuk's, and
many kayaks went along with them to make war against Ungilagtake. A
pretty strong breeze from <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> the north
had sprung up, and the boats hoisted their sails, and the kayak-men
amused themselves with throwing their harpoons alongside the boats. It
so happened that Kunuk, in flinging the harpoon, hit the prow of the
boat, so that it rebounded into the water with a great splash. On seeing
this, the old hag chuckled, and went on mocking and teasing the wife of
Kunuk till she could not help crying; and Kunuk asked his brother, who
was in command of the boat, "Why is my wife crying?" "Oh, that's on
account of the arrow," he answered; "she is so mortified because the old
woman laughed at thee." Kunuk now purposely dropped astern a little, and
holding his harpoon ready, suddenly pushed forward, and flung it across
the boat, so that it hit the hood of the old woman's fur coat, while she
sat rowing in the fore-end of the boat, even tearing a piece out of it;
and this trick he repeated once more. After a while, Kunuk's brother
turned his looks towards land, and recognised the burial-place of their
little sister. This made him very sad, and he asked for some one to
relieve him at the helm, he wanting to go and sit down forward, where,
bent down, he went on sobbing, and vainly striving to keep back his
tears, while the water from the sea came into the boat, which kept
swinging and tossing from his convulsions. He took ill from that very
day, and died before they reached their destination, so that Kunuk came
alone to Ungilagtake. It was in the depth of winter, and they were met
by many people on the ice. A somewhat biggish man invited them to come
and put up at his house. This man likewise happened to be an enemy of
Ungilagtake; and as soon as the guests had entered, he told them that
before the meal he would show them how Ungilagtake used to behave to
strangers. He took an entire seal-skin, stuffed with sand, and to the
centre of which a strap was attached. Into this he put his third finger,
and carried it round the room, after which he ordered his guest to do
the same. Kunuk <span id="page_141">p. 141</span> took hold of the strap
with his little finger, lifted the thing with unbent arm, and put it
down without being fatigued. The host then went on, "Now sit down
opposite to me, and I will throw a lance at thee, which, however, won't
hurt thee;" upon which he brought out a lance and a drum, and began
singing, while Kunuk heard the others saying, "Bend thee down,
stranger!" Kunuk at once complied, so that nothing but his chin was
visible; and when his host threw the lance at him, he lost his aim,
merely observing, "This is the way of Ungilagtake, who always hits the
mark, and never fails. Yet I don't know how thou wilt fare with him; he
will hardly be able to molest thee. But then he has a companion, called
Tajangiarsuk, with a double back, being as fat in front as behind, who
is immensely strong, and gives him a hand if there happen to be any one
he cannot master." Whilst they were sitting down at the meal a cry was
heard without, "Ungilagtake invites the stranger to his house!" When
Kunuk and his wife were preparing to go, the host said, "Now make a bold
entrance, or he will be sure to kill thee at once." The visitors now
went up to a large house with three windows, which was occupied with
Ungilagtake's numerous wives—all of whom he had stolen. Kunuk was
ordered to sit down on the side bench, but his wife was brought to a
seat on the main ledge, and their former host placed himself opposite
her husband. Many other spectators now entered; but whenever a new
visitor made his appearance, Kunuk asked his first host if that were
Tajangiarsuk, until at last he too arrived. Refreshments, consisting of
various dishes, were now served before them; and when they had finished
eating, Ungilagtake ordered Kunuk to seat himself opposite to him, and
presently drew out a huge spear from beneath the bench, and striking
upon the drum, which had likewise been produced, the whole joined in a
song for Kunuk, at the same time crying out, "Bend thee down, stranger
that <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> has come among us; the great
Ungilagtake, who never missed his aim, is going to thrust his spear at
thee." He bent down as before, so that only his chin appeared; but
whilst Ungilagtake was taking aim at him, he nimbly gave a jump, and
caught hold of one of the roof-beams, while the spear went far below
him; and when it was flung at him the second time, he quickly jumped
down, and the spear came flying above him, amid great cheers from the
spectators. When Ungilagtake was about to take aim the third time, Kunuk
seized the spear, saying that he, too, would like to have a try at
killing with it. They now exchanged places. Kunuk, beating the drum, now
struck up a song for Ungilaktake; but the very moment the latter was
preparing to bend his back, Kunuk had already taken aim at him, and the
spear hit him in the throat, so that he fell dead on the spot. Everybody
now rushed out of the house, and Kunuk was following, but soon found
himself seized from behind by some one, who proved to be Tajangiarsuk. A
wrestling-match soon ensued on a plain of ice, covered with many
projecting stones, which he had chosen on purpose, in order to finish
off his adversaries by dashing them against the stones. Kunuk felt a
little irresolute when he noticed that he had found his equal. However,
he took hold of him, and tried to lift him up before he got tired out.
He flung him down on the ground, so that the blood gushed out of his
mouth. Another champion soon made his appearance, who was of a still
stronger and larger make; and he soon got Kunuk down, and had already
put his knee on the heart of Kunuk, when the latter suddenly took hold
of him from beneath, grasped his shoulders, and pressed the lungs out of
him. The applause of the spectators was again heard, while some of them
were crying, "Now they are bringing the last of the lot, him with the
lame legs;" and soon after three boats were seen to carry this champion
thither, for he was not like ordinary men, but <span id="page_143">p.
143</span> of an immense size, so that he was obliged to lie across all
three boats to get along. Having reached the landing-place, he crept up
to the combat-field on his elbows. When Kunuk tried to throw him, his
legs never moved an inch; but when he proceeded to lift him up by taking
hold of him round the waist, and began to whirl him round, he gradually
succeeded in lifting also his feet; and when they at last turned right
outwards, to let him fall in such a way that his skull was crushed. The
people rejoiced, and cried, "Thanks to thee! now we shall have no
masters!" and those who had been robbed of their wives got them back
again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-011)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_139">p. 139</span>

<span id="page_139_note_1"></span>[1](#page_139_fr_1) Small harpoons
with a bladder attached to the shaft, but without any line, and
principally used for small animals.

<span id="page_139_note_2"></span>[2](#page_139_fr_2) Pron.
Unghilagtakee.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
