[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-007) [Next](tte2-009)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8. A TALE ABOUT TWO GIRLS.

<span class="small">\[The text is constructed from two manuscripts, one
from Labrador and the other written down in Greenland, anterior to
1828.\]</span>

TWO little girls were playing with some small bones on the beach; the
one with eagle-bones, the other with whale-bones. Suddenly an eagle came
soaring through the air above them, and one of the girls said, "I will
have an eagle for my husband;" and the other replied, "Thou mayst
rejoice that thou hast already got a husband; I will have a whale for
mine." Instantly a whale was seen to spout out at sea. And the eagle
took one girl up and flew away with her, and the whale took the other
down to the bottom of the sea, having first <span id="page_127">p.
127</span> made her eyes and ears impenetrable, so that the water could
not enter. The eagle carried his bride to the top of a steep cliff, and
brought her different sorts of little birds for food; but she gathered
all the sinews of the birds' wings, and knotted them together, in order
to make a string of them. One day, when the eagle was away, she tried
the length of it, and found that it reached down to the level of the
sea. Another day she saw a kayaker rowing along the shore; and when he
came just below, she called out to him to send a boat to rescue her.
Soon afterwards the boat appeared, and she went sliding down by her
string of sinews, and got back to her parents. But the eagle, who missed
his mate, soared above the houses beating his wings; and one of the
inhabitants of the place cried out to him, "If thou wantest to show thou
hast been married into our family, spread out thy wings;" but when the
eagle did so they shot him through the body. The other girl who had been
stolen by the whale was secured to the bottom of the sea by a rope; and
when he was at home, she had nothing to do but to sit picking the
lice<span id="page_127_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_127_note_1) from off his
body. She had two brothers living close by, and both set about building
a boat of immense swiftness, in which they intended to deliver their
sister; but when the boat was finished it could not match a bird in
speed, and was therefore broken to pieces, and another begun. This boat
proved a match for a flying bird, but was nevertheless discarded, and
they again built a new one, in which they tried to overtake a gull; and
on finding that this one even outdid the bird, they started from home to
fetch back their sister. On becoming aware of their approach she
loosened the cord that held her, and twisting it round the stone, she
left with the boat. When the whale on his return drew the cord to get
hold of her, and discovered that she was gone, he hurried after her. But
<span id="page_128">p. 128</span> when he came quite close to the boat
she threw her outer jacket into the water to him. Having snapped at it
he let it go, and again pursued her; and when he had got quite close up
with them, she flung her inner jacket at him, which again detained the
whale: but he soon reached them for the third time. Then she threw her
long jacket, and before he could overtake them again they had already
landed; but when the whale reached the shore he was transformed into a
piece of whalebone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-009)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_127">p. 127</span>

<span id="page_127_note_1"></span>[1](#page_127_fr_1) *Cyamus ceti*, a
parasitic crustacean, well known as the "whale louse."

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
