[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-021) [Next](tte2-023)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

### 22. ANGUTISUGSUK.

THERE were three brothers, the eldest of whom was called Angutisugsuk.
They had never lived apart; and all of them were clever hunters,
especially Angutisugsuk. One winter the weather was dreadfully severe,
and all the neighbours were in great want. Only the three brothers had
enough to spare, and the others claimed their assistance. It so happened
that two old men came to them with that intention; and during their
visit the wife of Angutisugsuk remonstrated, saying that they were
having rather too many visitors about the place, at which the old men
quickly took offence; and in spring-time, when Angutisugsuk's family
left their winter-quarters, and were away on some long excursion, they
visited the place in their kayaks, entered the empty house, and
practised all manner of sorcery and witchcraft upon the wall adjoining
the ledge occupied by Angutisugsuk's wife, in order to produce discord
among the family when they came back from their travels. In autumn they
all returned to the old house as usual. One day Angutisugsuk did not go
out kayaking, but stayed at home to make a wooden plate and spoon. At
that time he had got two wives, both of whom were very clever at
needle-work; and he offered to give her who would mend his fur jacket
for him the wooden plate and spoon. The first wife made answer, before
the second could put in a word, "I want to have them—I will mend the
jacket;" and she worked very quickly on it. The second wife, however,
who happened to be the best beloved, on her part became envious, and got
into a passion. Perceiving this, the husband struck her, because of her
having borne him no children. At <span id="page_190">p. 190</span> this
his youngest son began crying; and seeing it, the child's uncle fell
upon the father, who was still ill-treating his second wife. In this
fight Angutisugsuk thrust his brother against the door-sill with such
force that his thigh-bone was bruised; and he would have followed up his
advantage over him but for the younger brother and some others, who
interfered in the quarrel. Thus it came to pass as the old men had
planned when they went and bewitched the empty house in their absence.
After having lamed his brother, Angutisugsuk next day loaded his boat
and went off in it, taking a small roofless house for himself which he
found a little north of his former station; and as a substitute for
roof-beams he made a shift with his tent-poles. His proper wife he left
behind, and only took the second one along with him. Seeing that his
brother was now able to stir, he resolved to kill him, and repeatedly
returned to despatch him; but somehow he always found his younger
brother or his nephew by his side, and never succeeded in accomplishing
his end. These two watched the sick man by turns; and only one at a time
went out in his kayak. Angutisugsuk one day encountered his nephew at
sea, and resolved to pursue him; but as soon as they came within sight
of the house on shore, he left off and turned back. When the nephew got
home, he told them that Angutisugsuk had been persecuting him; and his
father (viz., the invalid) said, "To-morrow thou must go and ask our
neighbours to assist us in getting Angutisugsuk out of the way, because
he has gone raving mad; but two or three men will not suffice, for he is
immensely strong himself." The son went the following morning to several
stations, and brought a considerable party of kayakers along with him;
and the invalid accosted them, saying, "Let us agree to kill
Angutisugsuk. Every day he comes this way intending to take my life; but
as soon as he sees anybody staying with me, he desists and turns back."
All the men prepared to pass the <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> night
there, hiding their kayaks behind the house; and early in the morning
they saw Angutisugsuk in his kayak emerging from behind a rocky point
close by. As nobody was to be seen, and he did not even observe the
kayaks of his brother and nephew, he supposed them to be off, and made
for the shore as fast as possible. An old man among the strangers now
drew his hood closer to his head, and pronounced a magic spell, adding
that, if it were likely to succeed, Angutisugsuk as a sure sign would
turn the back of his hands downwards, instead of using the palms in
ascending the beach. Watching him very closely, they noticed that he did
as the old man had foretold, and they no longer had any doubt of their
success. Having got out on the beach, he only drew his kayak half-way
out of the water, and went straight up to the house as if to enter it at
once; but bethinking himself of something, turned back to the large boat
to get hold of a flensing-knife, and then proceeded to the entry. The
men were all reclining on the side-ledge couches except two, who stood
posted at the inner entrance ready to seize him. When he saw his brother
sitting on the main ledge, he addressed him in

![](191.jpg)

the following words, saying, "Here is a brave man for thee! I'll show
thee the way to fight! Didst thou really believe I did not intend to
kill thee?" Thus speaking, he advanced a step or two, but was soon
seized <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> by the two men, and quickly
disarmed. He was at once conducted outside, where all the rest fell upon
him; but nobody could manage to overthrow him. At last, when they had
got him hamstrung, he fell; whereat they seized him, and held a council
as to which of them should first stab him. At last the invalid brother
was carried out, in order that he might finish him off. They put him
down close beside the other, and he said, "Go and fetch me my spear from
under the boat." When he had got it, he lanced his brother several times
in the shoulder, saying, "Now let go your hold; if he boasts himself a
man, he will be sure to rise." He did get up, and went towards his kayak
on the beach, but fell down dead before he reached it. Then the
surviving brother exclaimed, "Alas! we have killed him who did well
towards us. In the short, dark days, when we were almost starving, he
did not mind toiling away for us. I am sorry indeed: now do kill me
also!" He asked his brother, his son, and all the other men; but finding
that nobody would do it, he said, "Well, then, go and fetch his second
wife, and kill her at any rate; it was she who began it all." They did
so; and the person who slew her admonished the bystanders, saying, "Now
put together all her things, and all her clothes, all her jackets of
reindeer-skin, her breeches and boots of seal-skin—get them all
together, and carry them along with her; and mind you close up the
burial-place well, and heap plenty of stones on top of it." Later on,
when the invalid recovered, he felt great remorse for his act of
violence; but the old magician was quite satisfied that Angutisugsuk
should have been killed by his brother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-023)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
