[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-044) [Next](tte2-046)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 45. THE ANGAKOK'S FLIGHT TO AKILINEK.

<span class="small">\[The following three tales are here given
separately, but nevertheless put under one number, their contents being,
on the one hand, interesting with regard to the information implied
about the art of *angakut* (plur. of angakok) in general, while, on the
other, they are somewhat imperfect and obscure, so as to make it
difficult to decide whether we have one or two original stories before
us. The first was written down in <span id="page_271">p. 271</span>
North Greenland before 1830; the second in the southernmost part of
Greenland, about 1860; and the last has been written down by the author
himself from a verbal narration, but is given here only in an abridged
form. Akilinek is the fabulous country beyond the ocean.\]</span>

(1.) THERE was once a very clever angakok. When he was about to practise
his art, and his limbs had been tied and the lamps extinguished, he took
flight, and having found the wind favourable, he flew across the sea,
but did not sight the opposite shore before daybreak, when he was
obliged to return. Several times he tried to get farther away, but was
never able to pass beyond this mark; and therefore he determined to
educate his son for an angakok, hoping that he might possibly be brought
to excel him. When the boy was grown up, he went through all the grades
and branches of the angakok-science with him; but when the father
proposed to give up teaching him, the son turned very moody and
low-spirited. The father now questioned him, saying, "Is there any part
of the science thou thinkest we have overlooked, and neglected to
practise?" and the son answered, "I think there is;" whereat the father
recalled all the exercises they had gone through, one by one, but after
due meditation asked him, "Didst thou visit the graves?" The son told
him he had not; and the father said, "Welll I will take thee thither
this evening;" whereat the son was very glad. At the time appointed,
they wandered to the burying-grounds, where the father opened one of the
graves, and undid the pall of a corpse beneath the waist, and made his
son thrust his hand right into the flesh of the deceased body. This
done, the father left him as if nothing at all were the matter. When the
son was about to follow him, the father remarked, "As yet thou hast
observed nothing particular at this tomb; but wait till thou seest the
last rays of the setting sun, and take not thy eyes from its splendour:
but the moment thou dost notice a spark of light falling down from it,
beware, and flee the place at <span id="page_272">p. 272</span> once."
While he was yet standing and gazing at the declining sun, the father
suddenly beheld something glistening through the brightness of the sky,
at the sight of which he immediately took flight, but the son remained
with his hands attached to the corpse, unable to extricate himself. Not
until midnight did he return, all smiles and joy; and now the father
deemed him thoroughly tried and expert in his art. On the night of the
following day he resolved to bind him for his first flight. When the
lamps had all been extinguished, the son flew out. Having no particular
end or aim, however, he only went backwards and forwards, but saw
nothing very remarkable: his father questioned him concerning the
currents of the air, but he did not happen to have taken note of any.
The next day he again prepared for an angakok flight, and this time
observed that the wind was favourable. He crossed part of the sea, and
soon perceived that he was taking the same course as his father. At last
great perpendicular rocks arose in front of him, and he had reached now
the limit of his father's journey. He continued his flight towards it;
and having with some difficulty succeeded in passing it, he saw an
extensive country: crossing it in a southerly direction, he came upon a
small house, and alighted close beside it. It was a house with two
windows; and peeping within, he saw one man standing at each window, and
watching him closely. One of the men went out and beckoned to a woman:
on seeing the stranger, he invited him to step inside; and as both were
entering, they met the woman in the passage ready to follow, and he now
turned to her, saying, "Thou seest I have brought a visitor." Having
passed the doorway, the angakok seated himself on the side-ledge to the
right, and on the opposite side he saw a squint-eyed person, whose
breath was like fire (peculiar to angakut, and also only to be observed
by them). At his feet were chips of bone, at which he had been working.
Further away he observed <span id="page_273">p. 273</span> a woman,
whose body was all over hairy. When the squint-eyed man noticed that he
was being looked at, he said, "Why dost thou thus stare at me?" "Oh, I
was only looking at the chips at thy feet." The other answered, "In the
summer I have not got time to make chips, and that is why I am at it
now." Some of them said, "Perhaps our visitor would like to show us some
of his art?" and be answered, "Why, I am not unwilling, though it is but
the second time I have practised angakok science." They all repaired to
the *kagse* (their house of festivities). The squint-eyed person, who
was always keeping close at the visitor's heels, asked him what fearful
*tornak* (guardian spirit) he had got at his service; and he answered,
"If I succeed, a large iceberg will presently appear." They all entered
the dark *kagse*, and he also observed the hairy woman, the sight of
whom he did not like, suspecting her to be dangerous to his purpose.
When the conjuring had begun, and he felt that his tornak was drawing
nigh, he said, "I fancy that something is approaching us." They looked
out at the window, and whispered to each other, "A monstrous iceberg is
close upon the beach." The angakok said, "Let a young man and a maiden
step forth and post themselves in the middle of the floor." When they
had taken their place, a tremendous noise proceeded from the iceberg
bouncing ashore and suddenly calving. Then a married couple was ordered
out on the floor, and a loud roar from without followed. Thus they were
all called forth, one after the other, and at last it was the turn of
the ugly woman to step out. When she was about to advance, she missed
her footing on one of the flags, and got beyond the proper
stepping-stones, and at the same time the iceberg turned over, and came
tumbling over the shore, crushing the house to atoms. Only the angakok
visitor and the man with the squint came out unhurt. He now tied his
limbs, rose high in the air, and returned, accompanied by a swarm of
croaking ravens. He was <span id="page_274">p. 274</span> silent and
dejected; and when his father questioned him as to the reason, he
answered, "I am heavy with grief because I have practised my art badly:
I did wrong in calling forth the hairy woman; and by this fault of mine
many happy and vigorous people have perished." Next day the squint-eyed
person made his appearance in the house, and observed, "Perhaps I too
may be allowed to exhibit my art? I too am an angakok." To this the old
angakok remarked, "My son there is just telling me that he has killed
many brave and strong people by his want of experience." The other
answered, "So he did, the bad one." The squint-eyed was now tied hand
and foot, and began his flight in the house, which was still lighted up,
and as soon as they began singing, he flew out of it. Somehow they
suspected that he was likely to be dangerous to them, and accordingly
they extinguished the lamps, in order to prevent his re-entering the
place; but on looking out at the window, they saw him take a direction
towards his own homestead, and soon after proceeded to light the lamps,
concluding that, at any rate, he would not return the same night.

(2.) Of an angakok called Ipisanguak, who was still a novice in his art,
this tale is told: On a certain evening, when he was just ready to set
out on a flight, he said, "I intend to go away in search of the little
house my forefathers have often spoken of, outside of which lies the
bloody sword." Having spoken thus, he set off, making a circuit all
round the horizon, without having anything particular to relate on his
return; but the next time he flew straight across to Akilinek, and
alighted right in front of a house, where lay the bloody sword which was
to be taken by him. He went up to the entrance, from whence a man
emerged whose eyes were all dim, like those of an unborn seal. He
re-entered the house without noticing the stranger, and <span
id="page_275">p. 275</span> another man now appeared whose eyes were
like the blackest berries, and this one asked him to step inside, where
the inmates of the house welcomed him, saying, "Thou art just in time to
join us at our meal." After a while the angakok observed, "I want
another to fill my place at home to-night, otherwise my relatives will
not believe that I have been here." The dim-eyed man answered him, "I
should very much like to be thy substitute, but I am rather a slow one."
They now proceeded to have him tied. Presently he was lifted up within
the house, and then soared out into the open air, while Ipisanguak
enjoyed a happy night in the company of his pleasant hosts. At dawn of
day he broke off, saying, "The night is done; I must be off." Again he
crossed the sea; and about midway he saw a glare as of a great fire
shining about him, which appeared to be from his substitute, who
likewise was on his way home, and thus meeting, both aimed at each
other. Ipisanguak again visited Akilinek next evening, and at the same
time his substitute exclaimed, "I hear him coming; behold, there he is!"
whereupon he also went off, and again they encountered each other on the
way, and smiled as they met, and returned in the same way at daybreak.
On the following day, when Ipisanguak returned from a trip in his kayak,
he said he had met several kayakers from an adjoining place, called
Kagsimiut, and likewise reported that he had heard them say of himself,
"Ipisanguak has turned angakok, and almost every day exchanges place
with an angakok from Akilinek. Let us go and hear him." On the following
day a great many kayakers and several boats' crews arrived; and when he
suffered himself to be tied, and left for Akilinek, he was soon replaced
by his comrade, who entered the house, and entertained the guests all
the night long. Some time after this Ipisanguak paid a visit to
Kagsimiut; and during his stay one of the seal-hunters said: "Seals are
rather scanty with us at present: a clever <span id="page_276">p.
276</span> hunter can hardly get one at a time; thou mightest bring on
the seals, I should think, and thus improve the hunting." At the same
time Ipisanguak observed a handsome young woman, to whom he at once took
a fancy, standing outside the house. In the evening he conjured spirits;
and during that interval an immense iceberg appeared, fast approaching
the beach. He now let the women advance one by one; but she to whom he
had taken a liking would not come. At length one appeared with a fine
new ribbon round her topknot, and at that very moment the iceberg began
to waver and shake; the angakok immediately sank down beneath the floor,
and reached his own house by an underground way, while the iceberg came
rolling on, tumbling right across the beach, crushing the house to
atoms. On getting home he had all the lamps lighted; but in less than a
moment the angakok from Kagsimiut made his appearance to avenge his
people. However, they hit him with stones, and drove him back, and his
voice had become inaudible. The following day Ipisanguak went to have a
look at the destroyed house, but not a trace was left of it. The girl
with the new topknot was possessed of an *anghiak* (the ghost of an
abortion, or a child born in concealment), and it was all owing to her
that Ipisanguak had been the cause of the accident that had happened to
her housemates.

(3.) A great angakok at his conjurations always used to talk of his
having been to Akilinek, and his auditors fully believed him. Once he
forced his little son to attend his conjurations, sitting upon his knee.
The boy, who was horribly frightened, said, "Lo! what is it I see? The
stars are dropping down in the old grave on yonder hill." The father
said, "When the old grave is shining to thee, it will enlighten thy
understanding." When the boy had been lying down in his lap for a while,
he again burst out, "What is it I now see?—the bones in the old <span
id="page_277">p. 277</span> grave are beginning to join together." The
father only repeating his last words, the son grew obstinate and wanted
to run away; but the father still kept hold of him. Lastly, the ghost
from the grave came out, and being called upon by the angakok, he
entered the house to fetch the boy, who only perceived a strong smell of
maggots, and then fainted away. On recovering his senses, he found
himself in the grave quite naked, and when he arose and looked about,
his nature was totally altered—he found himself able at a sight to
survey the whole country away to the farthest north, and nothing
remained concealed from him. All the dwelling-places of man appeared to
be close together, side by side; and on looking at the sea, he saw his
father's tracks, stretching across to Akilinek. When going down to the
house, he observed his clothes flying through the air, and had only to
put forth his hands and feet to make them cover his body again. But on
entering the house he looked exceedingly pale, because of the great
angakok wisdom he had acquired down in the old grave. After having
become an angakok himself, he once went on a flight to Akilinek, and
entered a house where a number of men were assembled, one of whom he
observed to be dim-eyed. By help of his angakok sense he discovered this
man also to be an angakok, and remarked some bone-chips lying at his
feet. These chips (probably supernatural ones, and only visible to a
clairvoyant) the dim-eyed man had in vain tried to get rid of; because
they arose from some work he had taken in hand before the appointed days
of mourning for some person deceased had gone by, (thereby provoking the
invisible rulers). While staying here, the angakok visitor was requested
to make a conjuration, in order to procure a plentiful seal-hunting. He
summoned his tornak called a *kivingak* (viz., an iceberg, steep on one
side, but sloping down on the other, all covered with seals). The
iceberg quickly approached with the latter side towards them, and
bending <span id="page_278">p. 278</span> over, was just about to cast
off all the seals into the water. But it so happened that among the
housemates who had stepped forth on the floor there was a woman with an
anghiak, which immediately made the iceberg turn on its steep side; and
tumbling over with a tremendous roar, it crushed the house and all the
people within, all of whom perished excepting the two angakut, who took
care to make their escape at the right moment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-046)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
