[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-114) [Next](tte2-116)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

115\. K<span class="small">AKORTULIAK</span> was at a reindeer-hunt,when
they only succeeded in hitting one large deer, which made its escape by
jumping into a lake. Kakortuliak, however, pursued it by swimming, and
fastened a line to its antlers, by which it was hauled on land. He got a
large piece of the tallow, and leaving the party, went off by himself in
search of further game. He saw two ravens pursuing one another; but on
viewing them more closely they had the features of man. At the same
moment a reindeer suddenly bounded forth, apparently from his own bag;
and he found the tallow at the same time had disappeared, a little
morsel only remaining. He then felt himself lifted off his feet and
carried away through the air; but by rubbing his skin with the bit of
tallow he again quickly descended towards the earth; yet without
touching it he gained his home. On arriving, however, he had lost the
use of his senses, and lay down almost lifeless, though unable to die.
Such was, <span id="page_456">p. 456</span> as has been told, the
condition of the heathen when the ruler of the moon had taken the souls
out of their body. From this time Kakortuliak gave up hunting, and
turned a clairvoyant. His soul used to leave the body and roam about the
inland and along the east coast; and on returning he related what he had
seen, and how he had lived with the inlanders.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-116)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
