[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-128) [Next](tte2-130)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

129\. T<span class="small">HE</span> M<span class="small">OTHER
AND</span> S<span class="small">ON AS</span> K<span
class="small">IVIGTUT</span>.—A widow, greatly harassed by the
persecutions of a man who wanted to marry her, fled to the inland with
her <span id="page_463">p. 463</span> little son, whom she educated with
the view of making him a hater of the male sex. She built her hut near
the border of the inland glacier, and made the acquaintance of another
woman, who led the same solitary life on a bare hillock emerging from
the glacier. When the son had grown up, his reindeer-hunting secured
them ample subsistence. Once they were surprised by the visit of one of
her brothers, who told them that, from the time they had disappeared, he
had devoted himself to the study of angakok science in order to find out
her place of retreat; and having attained the powers of an angakok, he
instantly discovered her trace, by means of which he had found her out.
He henceforth remained with them. The sister died from old age, and,
later on, her son fell sick and died, but revived three times after his
mother's brother had buried him. The fourth time, however, the latter
pulled down the house on the top of him, and then left the place. While
passing the night in a cave on his way towards the coast, he was
overtaken by the ghost of the deceased appearing in the shape of a fire,
with a voice saying, that from childhood he had been fostered up to hate
the whole male sex, and had the other not been his mother's brother, he
would certainly have killed him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-130)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
