[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-055) [Next](tte2-057)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 56. THE ANGAKOK TUGTUTSIAK.

<span class="small">\[This tale, only received in one copy, has been
adopted for the present collection on account of its referring to the
process of being *angakok poolik*, frequently mentioned by the older
authors in connection with the Greenlanders.\]</span>

TUGTUTSIAK and his sister were a couple of orphans, and lived in a great
house. It once happened that all the grown-up people went away
berry-gathering, leaving all children at home. Tugtutsiak, who happened
to be the eldest of them, said, "Let us try to conjure up spirits;" and
some of them proceeded to make up the necessary preparations, while he
himself undressed, and covered the door with his jacket, and closed the
opening at the sleeves with a string. He <span id="page_325">p.
325</span> now commenced the invocation, while the other children got
mortally frightened, and were about to take flight. But the slabs of the
floor were lifted high in the air, and rushed after them. Tugtutsiak
would have followed them, but felt himself sticking fast to the floor,
and could not get loose until he had made the children come back, and
ordered them to uncover the door, and open the window, on which it again
became light in the room, and he was enabled to get up. He told his
companions not to mention it to the old ones when they returned; but as
soon as the boat landed in the evening some of the younger children
forgot their promise, and said: "We have had great fun to-day;
Tugtutsiak played at angakok, and when we got frightened and took to our
heels, the slabs rose up from their place on the floor and followed
after us." The elder people were astonished, but agreed to let him try
it over again in the evening. At this proposal Tugtutsiak got
frightened, and took to crying; but afterwards, when the hunting became
bad, they wanted him to conjure up the sea-animals, and he was made to
sit down and call forth a bear and a walrus, which were soon roaring
outside the house. The bear went ashore and took hold of Tugtutsiak, and
flung him along to the walrus, which again hurled him out to the bear.
In this manner Tugtutsiak alternately was thrust from the walrus to the
bear, and from the bear to the walrus, until he lost sight of his native
country, and at length a new land rose in front of him; but this country
was lower than the one he had left. Close to the shore the bear for the
last time seized hold of him, and threw him upon the beach. Having got
there, his senses revived, and close beside him he observed a house, and
on the roof, above the passage leading to it, was a terrible dog, which,
showing his white teeth, howled and snarled at him when he drew nigh.
Nevertheless he approached, and for the first time observed that a
bridge as narrow as a knife's edge led into the inner room, <span
id="page_326">p. 326</span> which appeared totally dark. Still he
proceeded, and made his way to the main room, where the female owner of
the house lay on the ledge, suffering great pain. Her hair was all loose
and dishevelled, and her face turned to the wall. On seeing Tugtutsiak,
she started to her feet, crying out aloud, "What hast thou come for?
thou canst not take away what makes me suffer." But from the narrow
passage he rushed right upon her, took hold of her by the hair, and
flung her against the door-post. Having, however, got his hands
entangled in her long hair, he was himself dragged along with her, and
could not extricate himself. He tried to throw her off, but his hands
could not be got loose; and she surrendered herself to him, saying, "Now
I see thou mayst be capable of removing my sufferings." On closer
examination Tugtutsiak found her eyes, nostrils, and mouth stuffed with
dirt and filth. He cleaned it away, and threw it outside, after which
the hideous woman grew somewhat composed, and after a while resumed,
"Now do my hair." He put it up in the usual tuft, upon which she took
down some eagles' wings from a nail in the wall, and stirred up the
smoking lamp, so as to make it burn brightly. For the first time he
could now see that the walls were hung with skins like those used for
boat-covers; and though the lamp was now burning quite clearly, he could
not distinguish any objects in the more remote parts of the room, which
were in total darkness. A moment after he heard the horrible woman
saying, "My guest ought not to go alone; let some one accompany him out:
"and presently a little man with a very short nose emerged from out of
the wall, and after him a host of similar creatures, who all passed out
of the doorway; when the last had vanished, they were all heard to cry
out, "Kah, kah—sa, sa!" just like the shrieks of auks. Other varieties
followed soon-some with flat noses, and others with crooked ones; but
when they were getting too numerous she cried "Stop!" <span
id="page_327">p. 327</span> When the last were about to pass Tugtutsiak,
he scratched some of them in the forehead, because he noticed that they
were transfigured as soon as they passed the doorway, and he put a mark
upon some of the most beautiful specimens, that he might know them again
if he happened to catch them. Afterwards several other curious creatures
appeared, some of them with large heads and great beards, and as soon as
they were getting too numerous she again cried "Stop!" When these had
all passed by, he observed that the lamp burned still brighter, and the
way through the passage was now quite smooth, and sufficiently wide, and
the dog wagged his tail quite amicably at him. Simultaneously with all
these strange doings, his house-fellows at home observed that his
belongings were shaking. On his way home he was again alternately thrown
along by the bear and the walrus; but the last time by the bear, and he
gained his homestead, where his relatives sat singing for him on his
return. Being apprised of his arrival through the noise caused by his
entrance, a great man among them gave orders, "Light the lamp for him;"
and they could now see that no single spot of his body had remained
unwounded. This arose from the teeth of the bear and the walrus, and
they could not hear him breathe. The lamps were again extinguished, and
the singing commenced; some time after he began to revive a little, but
at daybreak they saw that his wounds were not yet healed, and so they
continued the singing. There happened to be among them one ostentatious
fellow, who on the following morning went out to have a look at the ice.
On his return he exclaimed, "I guess it will be a meagre hunt he will
procure us;" but Tugtutsiak only muttered, "Wait a bit—let my wounds
first heal, and then we will see;" and when they began healing, a gale
from the south-east had suddenly set in. A man who had gone out to
reconnoitre quickly returned, reporting that the ice was <span
id="page_328">p. 328</span> rapidly receding from the shore, and
instantly afterwards auks and dovekies were seen in numbers. The
inhabitants soon hastened out with their fowling-spears, and they had
their kayaks filled before evening. The boaster, however, only got one
bird. When they began to catch seals, they gave to the angakok the first
one they caught, of all varieties; and he examined all he got closely,
hoping to find out those he had marked, but all in vain. Some time
after, however, the report came that far away at Illulissat there had
been caught a thong-seal and a spotted seal both with a mark right
between the eyes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-057)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
