[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-005) [Next](tte2-007)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. THE FRIENDS.

<span class="small">\[This is a very famous Greenland story, and is, in
its present form, compiled from three copies.\]</span>

TWO friends loved each other very dearly. From childhood they had been
constant companions. One lived at one of the outermost islands, and the
other had his abode far up, at the head of a fiord. They very often
visited each other, and when they had been parted for some days, they
felt a mutual longing to meet again. In the summer the man from the
fiord used to go out <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> reindeer-hunting
in the interior; but before he went back to the place where he lived, he
always took a whole reindeer, choosing one of those with velvety horns
and leaving all the tallow in it, to regale his friend with. The
islander, on his part, saved and laid by large quantities of seals: and
when the reindeer-hunter returned, he immediately visited his friend and
was regaled with nicely-dried seal-flesh; but in the evening, when the
room grew heated, the frozen meat was produced and set before his friend
as a cold dish. The guest then praised it very much, and they gossiped
till late in the evening. The next day the reindeer-hunter usually had a
visit from his friend, but now they only ate reindeer-flesh, and
especially the tallow. The friend found it extremely delicious, and ate
till he was ready to burst; and at his departure next day he was
presented with some dried meat and tallow.

One autumn the hunter lingered in the interior longer than usual. At
length the earth was quite frozen over, and still he did not return. At
first the friend longed very much for him, but after a while he grew
angry with him; and when the first of the preserved seals began to
spoil, they commenced to eat away at the whole lot. Later on, when he
heard that the hunter had returned, he went out to a grave and cut a bit
of fat from a dead body, and with this he rubbed certain parts of a seal
he intended to treat his friend with, in order to do him an evil turn on
his arrival. Shortly afterwards he came to pay his visit. The meeting
was very pleasant, and as usual he was regaled with various delicacies;
and the hunter now told that he had had small luck in getting the
reindeer with velvety horns, and this was the reason why he had stayed
away so long; and his friend answered, "I was expecting thee very
anxiously for some time, but when my first preserved seals began to rot,
we ate them all up;" and he added, "let us have the one that was last
put by; we will have it for a cold dish." It was <span id="page_121">p.
121</span> accordingly brought in and nicely served up, and the host
laid the piece that had been rubbed over with the bit of fat uppermost,
and set it before his friend, at the same time begging him to partake of
it; but just as the visitor was in the act of helping himself to a
piece, something from beneath the ledge gave a pull at his leg. This
somewhat puzzled him; however, he was going to commence a second time
when he got another pull, on which he said, "I must go outside a
little," and rose up at the same time and went. Being an angakok, the
voice of his *tornak* (guardian-spirit) now warned him, saying, "Thy
friend regales thee with a base design; turn the piece over when thou
goest back and eat of the opposite part; if thou eatest of the part that
is now uppermost thou wilt be sure to go mad." Having again seated
himself, be turned the meat over; but his host thought it might be a
mere accident. When the guest had eaten sufficiently, be felt a pain in
his stomach—he had probably touched some of the poisoned flesh; but he
soon recovered, and on taking leave, he asked his friend to return the
visit soon. When he came home he took a reindeer with velvety horns and
treated it in the same manner as his friend had done the seal—rubbing it
well with some fat from a dead body; and when his guest came, be
instantly regaled him with dried meat and tallow, and never before had
the visitor found it so much to his taste. At night the reindeer was set
before them with the poisoned side turned up, and putting the knife into
it, be said, "There, we have got some cold meat; I have kept it for thee
this long while." The friend ate away at it, and several times
exclaimed, "This is really delicious!" and the host answered, "Yes, that
is because it is so very fat." When the meal was over, the guest felt a
pain in his stomach, and, looking hard at every one present, be got up
and went outside, but the pains were not relieved. Next day be took his
leave, and it was a long time before his friend saw him again; when he
<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> went out kayaking he never met him as
he had done formerly. At length, when the ice began to cover the waters,
a boat was seen to put into the firth from the sea, and was recognised
as being the boat of the friend; but finding that he himself was not of
the party, he asked, "Where is your master?" "He is ill, and has turned
raving mad; he wanted to eat us, and therefore we all took flight." On
the very next day the huntsman went out to visit his friend. Nobody was
to be seen about the house; but, creeping through the entry and looking
over the threshold, he beheld his friend lying on his back, with eyes
staring wildly, and his head hanging over the edge of the couch. He went
up to him and asked him how he did, but no answer was given. After a
short silence he suddenly started up and shouted with all his might,
"Because thou hast feasted me basely, I have eaten up all the inmates of
my house, and I will now devour thee too"—and he bounded towards him;
but the other escaped through the entry, and quickly made for his kayak.
He only succeeded in pushing off as his pursuer was in the very act of
seizing hold of him. The madman now continued running along the shore
and crying, "I feel much better now; do come back. When I have not seen
thee for a day or two, I am longing dreadfully for thee." On hearing him
speak quite sensibly the friend believed him, and put back again. As
soon as he reached the shore, however, the former made a rush at him;
but, happily observing this, he pushed off in time. At home he never
spoke nor ate from grief for his friend, and his housemates thought him
much altered. Towards night he commenced talking to them of his own
accord, and told them how he had fared; but the others advised him never
to return any more, being sure the madman would eat him too, if he had
the chance. Nevertheless, he paddled away the very next morning *as if
compelled to do so*. Then it all happened just as on the former day. The
madman pursued him right into the house, and <span id="page_123">p.
123</span> fastened the door, so that he was obliged to get out through
the window, and he barely escaped to his kayak. The day after, they
again tried to detain him; but he was bent upon going. He entered his
friend's house and found him worse than before: this time he was lying
with his head on the floor and his heels resting on the edge of the
bench; his eyes were far protruded and staring wildly, and the bone of
his nose as sharp as a knife's edge. On approaching him he started up
and pursued his former friend round the room, always crying, "I am
starving; I must have thee for food." At last the friend succeeded in
jumping out of the window, and reached his kayak; but no sooner had he
got clear of the shore than he saw the madman walking on the surface of
the water, ready to sieze hold of the prow of his kayak. He now began
swinging to and fro in his kayak, and by this means ripples were formed,
so that the madman could not steady himself, but was very nearly
falling. Thus he once more escaped him. The day after, his housemates
again wanted to detain him, but he answered them, "When I have not seen
my friend for a whole day, I am ready to die with longing, and cannot
desist from going to him." Having arrived at the house of his friend, he
found it to be deserted; he searched about everywhere, but did not find
him. Outside he observed some footprints winding up hills, and following
them, he stopped at a cave in the rock. Here his friend was sitting bent
together and much shrunk. As he did not move his friend went up to him,
and on trying to lift him up, found him to be quite dead, and his
eyelids filled with blood. He now carefully covered and closed up the
entrance of the cave, and was henceforth friendless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-007)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
