[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-040) [Next](tte2-042)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 41. THE WOMAN WHO GOT CONNECTED WITH THE INGNERSUIT<span id="page_262_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_262_note_1) OR UNDER-WORLD PEOPLE.

IT once happened that two men went out deer-hunting, accompanied by a
woman. On the way they scolded her, at which she got vexed, and tied up
her boots in order to remain behind. They waited a while for her, but at
length went along without her, and soon lost sight of her, as she had
purposely hidden herself behind some large heaps of stones. She heard
them seeking for her close beside her hiding-place, and lamenting their
loss; but nevertheless she remained quiet until they were gone. When she
was thus left alone she crept forth and went off in an opposite
direction. After some time she came to a *gull's mound*, and observed a
man coming out from it; she tried to escape, but he seized hold of her,
and asked her to follow him to his dwelling-place in the gull's-hill, as
he wished to marry <span id="page_263">p. 263</span> her. She followed
him reluctantly; but when he opened it to her, she noticed that it was
covered with reindeer-skins on the walls, and on the whole looked quite
comfortable. She now left off crying, entered the hill, and became his
wife, and in due time she bore him a child, whom the father wanted to be
named Imitlungnarsunguak. The wife, however, remonstrated, saying, "That
she had not got any relatives of that name;" but the husband answered
her, "It did not matter; he would take care to make a great huntsman of
him,"—and then she let him call the boy as he liked. When he grew on,
and his mother had spent a good many winters in this place, she longed
for her former home, and wished to return. The husband merely answered
her, "I claim his first catch, mind!" and then she left him along with
her son, and went back to her old relatives and housemates, and once
more lived with them. When the other children played with her son, she
used to tell them not to do him any harm; and for fear of his unknown
father they desisted. When he was quite grown up, and saw the men
prepare for the hunt, he was very desirous to join them; his mother
observing this, went outside and shouted out aloud, "Now get him some
tools!" When she came out next morning she found them lying on the
ground, close beside the entry. When the son brought home what he had
caught for the first time, she again went out and cried with all her
might, "Imitlungnarsunguak has caught a seal!" and when she was about to
re-enter, the people were all very busy in dragging this seal into the
house. When they had reached the farther end of the passage, it could
not be lifted across the threshold into the room, but rolled back, and
in no time had vanished. The father, of course, had taken it away. His
next catch the mother got; but when he went out hunting the third time,
he remained away. His mother now mended his clothes and put them to
rights, and in the evening went outside <span id="page_264">p.
264</span> as before, shouting something at the pitch of her voice, upon
which his garments came flying out of the house, and she hurried after
them. When they had got as far as the beach, the coast-ice appeared to
be lifted up, and left room for the clothes to slip down beneath,—the
mother following them closely. She now came to a house under ground
belonging to ingnersuit, and there found her son, tied hands and feet.
Loosening him she hurried him into his clothes, and brought him away
with her. Her own name was Nagguanguak.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-042)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_262">p. 262</span>

<span id="page_262_note_1"></span>[1](#page_262_fr_1) Cor. sp.
**ingnerssuit**, plur. of **ingnerssuaĸ**, signifying a sort of elves or
spirits, having their abodes in the rocks along the sea.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
