[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-024) [Next](tte2-026)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 25. NAMAK.

<span class="small">\[Of this story there is only one manuscript,
written down in North Greenland before 1828.\]</span>

THE parents of Namak were both killed by their house-fellows; and while
he was as yet but a weak and helpless child, a man happened to take pity
on him and adopted him for his son. But this same foster-father <span
id="page_203">p. 203</span> was fond of worrying the boy, and inventing
stories to frighten and excite him. Sometimes, when the child was
asleep, he would cry out, "Namak, thy enemies have come to kill thee,
too." At first he was much alarmed, but by degrees he got used to it.
But sometimes his foster-father would say, "Ah, how forgetful that Namak
is! Here are his parents newly murdered, and he forgetting all about
it." At this, Namak would get into a great rage. When he was still a
child, his father one day made him a present of a sling, saying, "I
don't mean to give thee a kayak, because I believe that thy enemies will
kill thee for all that; but take this sling and practise with it." Namak
instantly began to do so, and soon got very clever in using it. In the
spring he would betake himself to solitary places, practising his sling,
always pondering over the things his foster-father had said to stir up
vengeance within him. At home he spoke little, but inwardly rejoiced at
his growing strength. Sometimes he brought in hares, and sometimes
ptarmigan; he got them entirely by means of his sling. In the summer he
never slept at night, but always in the day-time. Sometimes, when he had
gone to sleep, his father would bring home a seal, and he was then
awakened to assist in carrying it up to the house; but he would then
hide his strength, and make-believe it was very hard work for him. One
day, however, he said that his sling was too weak, and his father went
to cut him a stronger one out of a very thick piece of seal-skin; and
after that time he left off gibing the boy, because he began to fear
him. During the winter it was reported that the enemies of Namak
intended to remove farther to the north in spring. He got quite enraged
at the thought that they would be going away before he could be
revenged; and from that day his manner changed altogether. When spring
came round, and they left their winter-house for the tents, he one day
said, "I wish I could get myself a new sling." On <span id="page_204">p.
204</span> hearing this the father went out in his kayak, and had the
good-luck to catch a thong-seal.<span
id="page_204_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_204_note_1) This he brought in while
Namak was still asleep. When the women were busy flensing it, and
preparing the skin for boat-covers, the husband said, "It just occurs to
me that Namak is wanting a sling." He then roused him, saying, "Namak,
thy enemies are making ready to depart." He awoke and ran out, and stood
staring at the neighbours. On his way down to the beach, his
foster-father said to him, "Just cut out a line for thy sling, wherever
thou choosest." Keeping an eye upon his neighbours, he took the knife
from his father, lifted up the seal by one of the forepaws with only one
hand, and turning it over without any difficulty, cut himself a sling to
his liking, all in one piece. On seeing this his foster-father got quite
frightened. Some time after this, their neighbours were really going to
depart. Namak slept, and his father roused him with these words, "Namak,
this time thou mayst believe me; thy enemies are in the very act of
departing:" but Namak did not think fit to stir; he had been cheated too
often. The father again cried to him, "Now they are taking their tents
away,"—and as he himself could hear the clattering of the bars and
poles, he rose and put on jacket and boots, but without getting into the
sleeves of his jacket, and catching hold of his sling from under the
ledge, he hid it inside. Further down on the beach were some large
stone-heaps; there he lay in ambush. Now that he had determined to
revenge himself, he no more concealed his strength. While some were yet
bringing down their luggage, the first boat put out, rowing briskly, and
when right athwart of him, Namak put a big stone in his sling, and threw
it into the boat, where it made a large hole, so that it instantly began
to sink. " Alas! alas!" they cried. The other boat hurried on to rescue
them, but underwent the same fate. The third one tried to save <span
id="page_205">p. 205</span> itself by turning in time, but at that
instant he flung the stone at it, hitting the prow and cleaving right
through; and thus he destroyed three boats, crews and all, and his mind
now got rest. One boat was saved from destruction, as it had gone out to
sea at once, instead of keeping along the shore. His enemies increased
in number after they had established themselves somewhere

![](205.jpg)

in the north; and seeing that they had reason to fear him, they trained
themselves to be as vigorous as he. Namak married, and though he had
never had a kayak himself, he taught his son to practise kayak-paddling.
He grew up and came to be an excellent kayaker; and subsequently owned a
boat as well as a tent. Now and then reports reached them from their
enemies that they were numerous, and also strong. At last he persuaded
his son to go and look them up; and in spring they went away northward
in their boat, asking the people <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> they
met with, "Where are Namak's enemies?" "Farther north" was the constant
answer. At last they learned that their station was close at hand; and
from that time they did not as usual land in the evening to take rest,
but rowed on incessantly. On their arrival they asked the people who
came down to the beach to meet them, " Where are Namak's enemies?" To
this, however, they made no reply, but entered their houses, and the
travellers had to make their way on shore by themselves; neither were
they afterwards invited to visit them. However, they took up their
winter-quarters at that very place, and settled down for the time. In
the beginning of their stay, Namak advised his son to watch them
closely, but afterwards they got less suspicious. That same winter, one
morning, it blew a gale from the south-west, and the kayakers remained
at home, and on that day it was announced, "They all want to see Namak."
He was ready in a moment; the son likewise went: and thus they were
going to visit their enemies for the first time. There was only set
forth meat for two. The son did not taste much of it, but the father
continued eating till the dish was nearly emptied. The visitors did not
speak; but at length one of the other party proposed different sports,
saying, "Ye ought to try strength at the *pulling-thong* first;" and
then he took out the string fitted with walrus-teeth from beneath the
ledge, and threw it upon the skin which was spread on the floor for the
champions. But Namak said, "This is but child's-play for people who
really want to try a match;" and so saying, he took hold of and tore the
thong asunder with one hand, and then flung them down on the floor.
Another offered to try strength with him, by hooking their arms
together, and trying to pull each other over. Namak did not hesitate,
but at once sat down on the skin. They now tried one after another, but
nobody was able to move his arm in the least. Seeing that they were not
able to match him, <span id="page_207">p. 207</span> they all departed.
The son went home, but Namak never stirred, but stayed on. At last,
however, he prepared to put on his outer coat, and did it very slowly
and deliberately, always expecting an attack. They were never invited
afterwards. In spring they again wanted to go to the south, and at
parting he let his

![](207.jpg)

house-fellows first go into the boat, while he kept back, still
expecting an attack from his enemies; but seeing that they did not come,
he finally left the place.

<span class="small">N<span class="small">OTE</span>.—The native writer
has added the following very characteristic remark: "It is generally
supposed that if his foster-father had not continually excited him, he
would scarcely have grown to be so immensely strong. People say that
among our ancestors, before they became Christians, there was no lack of
strong men, because their bad consciences induced them to cultivate
their strength. Nowadays, since people have turned Christians, and have
no bad consciences, there are no strong men among them."</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-026)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_204">p. 204</span>

<span id="page_204_note_1"></span>[1](#page_204_fr_1) *Phoca barbata*.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
