[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-099) [Next](tte2-101)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

100\. A<span class="small">TUNGAK, A</span> T<span class="small">ALE
FROM</span> L<span class="small">ABRADOR</span>.—A man named Atungak had
two wives. One of them having run away, he pursued her in his sledge,
and soon overtook her. They then travelled together, and came to
cannibals, whose chief invited them to his house, and set before them a
dish of man's and wolves' brains mixed together. When they declined
eating it, another was served consisting of the flesh of a child and of
a walrus; and this also being rejected, they brought in dried
reindeer-flesh, which they ate with hearty appetite. Meanwhile the
people got hold of some children, and feigning to pet them they killed
them and sucked out their brains. A young lad was also there who carried
a sling wherewith to entangle strangers; but when he approached Atungak
with this design he was struck on the head with a piece of
pyrites-stone, and fell to the ground. Afterwards, when his mother came
from another house to look for him she only found one of his legs left,
lying under the bench, with the boot still on it, by means of which she
recognised it. She then exclaimed, "Ye have done very ill in taking that
miserable Ajajusek, who ought to have served his younger brother for
food." Atungak and his wife travelling on, came to a country the people
of which were all lame. Before they reached them the chief came to
receive <span id="page_448">p. 448</span> them, and warned them against
his people as being a very ill-natured set. Nevertheless, when Atungak's
wife saw their ball-playing, she could not help laughing, and said that
they hopped about like so many ravens. Atungak got very much afraid when
he heard the bystanders repeating this. He at once cut asunder all the
lashings of the sledges belonging to the lame people, so that they could
not pursue them. Hastening from there they came to two black bears
engaged in a fight, and no other way being left they were obliged to
pass between them; after which they came to a pot boiling of itself,
which they could not avoid crossing over. Lastly, they came to a man
watching at the breathing-hole of a seal, and on speaking to him they
recognised him as Atungak's son, whom they had left behind a child. They
had travelled over the whole world without changing or getting old. In
the north, caves and clefts in the rocks are still to be seen, in which
they are said to have rested.

<span class="small">N<span class="small">OTE</span>.—This story, and the
next from East Greenland, being both imperfect fragments, received from
the most widely severed Eskimo countries, will be found to contain some
very curious similarities.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-101)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
