[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-042) [Next](tte2-044)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 43. THE GIRL WHO WAS STOLEN BY AN INLANDER.

<span class="small">\[This tale appearing somewhat obscure and
fragmentary, has been added here only on account of its probable
relation to Nos. [28](tte2-028) and [30](tte2-030). The details in the
different manuscripts of these three stories appear to be more or less
confounded and intermixed.\]</span>

A BROTHER and a sister once lived together, and were very much attached
to each other. The sister, who was very desirous of going off for the
salmon-fishing, asked her brother to take her up to a salmon river. Not
being able to deny her, he put the boat into the sea and went with her
to the fishing-place; but when they had landed and discharged the boat,
putting all their things on the beach, she climbed a little way up the
rocks, and went across a smooth level <span id="page_266">p. 266</span>
to the brook. All at once she saw an *inorusek* (fabulous giant-like
inlander) close beside her. Stupefied with terror, she tried to escape;
but he caught hold of her and carried her further and further inland.
The others plainly heard her shrieks for help, and hurried off to rescue
her; but she was already gone, and her cries soon died away among the
mountains. In the meantime the inorusek carried her up through the
highlands till they stopped at a place with a number of huts. He
intended to marry her, but first brought her to the house of a
neighbour, where he put her down on the ledge and seated himself in
front of her. She cried incessantly, but whenever she tried to run away,
he took hold of her like a little child and put her down again. While
she was thus sitting, an old woman peeped across the screen of the
ledge, asking her, "What wouldst thou like to eat? dost thou like
*talu?*" and the unhappy girl thought to herself, "I wonder what *talu*
is like!" She soon heard the old woman step down to fetch something, and
though still weeping, she peeped through her fingers, and perceived it
to be the fat of a deer's heart they were giving her. However, she would
not take it, and the old woman again retired. Then she again asked her,
"Wouldst thou like some *ernowt?*" and the girl still crying, answered,
"What may it be like?" This time she saw the old hag produce some common
tallow, saying, "Now do eat that and be quiet;" but she would not take
that either. Being very disheartened, she continued to weep; and the old
woman now menaced her, and threatened to take away her boots, at which
she cried still more. Then she heard a rattling noise, and peeping
through her fingers, she saw a strange figure, all bones and joints,
creeping along the ledge towards her. This creature warned her, saying,
"Leave off crying, lest they should treat thee as they did me. I was
once like thee; I was stolen and <span id="page_267">p. 267</span>
brought to this place, and because I would not leave off crying, they
took away my boots and gave me others filled with reptiles, spiders, and
vermin. They fastened them on my legs, and when they were taken off, the
flesh was all gone." When the skeleton had done speaking, she cried all
the more. The old hag now in an outburst of ill temper and vexation
approached; and she saw her holding a pair of boots, in which she
observed something crawling about; but the giant took hold of them and
flung them away into the corner of the room, and then at length she was
able to leave off crying. Her husband, however, kept a close watch upon
her, and led her by the hand whenever she wished to go out. One day she
said to him, "Don't go on watching me so; I have no intention of leaving
thee now; I like thee very much, and thou mayst safely leave me and go
out deer-hunting as usual." After that she feigned to go behind the
house; but she started from her hiding-place and ran up and down hill,
and continued running towards the coast until she reached the tent of
her parents, where she burst right through the door-curtain, not giving
herself time to draw it before entering. She hastened to say, "Let us be
off at once and remove to some other place; the inlanders are sure to
come and seek me here." They at once left the mainland to settle down on
one of the farthest-off islets; and after that time they never again
ventured to pitch their tents on the continent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-044)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
