[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-143) [Next](tte2-145)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

144\. T<span class="small">HE</span> N<span class="small">ATIVES
OF</span> L<span class="small">ABRADOR</span> tell how our ancestors and
the *tunneks* (or *tunnit*, in Greenlandish **tornit**, plural of
**tuneĸ**) in days of yore lived together; but the tunneks fled from
fear of our people, who used to drill holes in their foreheads while yet
alive. With this view they removed from here to the north, crossing over
to Killinek (Cape Chudleigh). While dwelling among us they had sealskins
with the blubber attached for bedrobes. Their clothes were made in the
same way. Their weapons were formed of slate and hornstone, and their
drills of crystal. They were strong and formidable, especially one of
them, called by the name of Jauranat, from which is formed *javianarpok*
(Greenlandish, **navianarpoĸ**). Huge blocks of stone are still to be
seen which they were able to move. Some ruins of their houses are also
to be found here and there in our country, <span id="page_470">p.
470</span> chiefly upon the islands, having been built of stones, and
differing from the abodes of our people. One of our ancestors when
kayaking had a tunnek for his companion, who had a bird-spear, the
points of which were made of walrus-tooth,

<span class="small">N<span class="small">OTE</span>.—This tradition is
compiled from several manuscripts in German from the missionaries in
Labrador, in which the alien nation, expelled by the present
inhabitants, are called partly "Die Tunnit," and partly "Die
Grönlaender." Very probably these denominations have arisen from a
misunderstanding, induced by inquiries put to the natives as to their
knowing anything about the Greenlanders. The tunnit are almost certainly
identical with the tornit or inlanders of the Greenland tales. The
Eskimo of Cumberland Inlet speak about the *tunudlermiut*, which
signifies people living in the inland. The present Indians of Labrador
are called by the Eskimo of the same country *aullak;* but it is
possible they distinguish between these and the traditional or fabulous
inlanders. However, the most striking incongruity is that of the tunnit
having had their abodes on the islands, which looks as if ancient
settlers of European race are hinted at. Be this as it may, the
tradition of the Labradorans should be more closely examined.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-145)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
