[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-019) [Next](tte2-021)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 20. THE GIRL WHO MARRIED AN ATLIARUSEK.<span id="page_183_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_183_note_1)

AN aged couple had a daughter who had a great many suitors; but the old
people were very selfish, and wanted to keep her at home. Meanwhile a
man came who was very anxious to get the daughter. At last he fought
them, and had nearly killed them; but the old man escaped, and got into
his boat. The other men of the place despised and scorned him; but they
got the boat loaded, and left. The others shouted to him contemptuously,
"It won't be easy for thee to get a husband for thy daughter! The poor
old thing, who is quite unable to hunt—he to dare reject any one! Only
let him come to be in want of necessaries, and <span id="page_184">p.
184</span> then look out if there be any one to help him!" But he set
off without deigning to answer them, and landed at one of the outermost
islets. There they built their house, and put up for the winter. One
morning the old man awoke, saying, "I wonder what I have just been
seeing? Methinks I saw a man gliding through the doorway." He questioned
his daughter; but she keeping silence, he got suspicious. When he awoke
the next morning, he saw a real man slip out of the doorway; and on
being closely questioned, the daughter confessed that she was married to
an *atliarusek*. On hearing this, the father was very happy; but she
went on saying, "For fear thou wouldst not like him, he keeps out of
sight; but if thou dost not mind, he will come and live with us." The
father said it was all right, and he might come and take up his quarters
with them at once. The next morning the old man, on awakening, turned
his eyes towards the entrance, but saw nothing remarkable there; but on
turning round to his daughter's resting-place, he saw a stout man
sitting there beneath her lamp. The father was very well pleased, and
leaned back on his couch; but listening again, and peeping out, the man
was not to be seen. Towards evening the daughter several times left the
room. At last she stayed away rather long, but after some time returned
with a hunting-line, which she hung up on a nail to dry, saying that he
had returned and brought home the produce of his hunt, but that he must
take some part of it to his relatives. When her parents went outside,
they saw many seals on the beach, and they rejoiced very much at their
sudden prosperity. The following morning the old man peeped over the
screen of the ledge, and there beheld the stranger reposing beside his
daughter. The old man again lay down, believing him to be asleep. In a
little while, however, he heard something stirring, at which he arose;
but the son-in-law had already taken himself off. He again spoke to his
daughter, saying, <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> "Why do you not make
him come and stay with us? We like him very well indeed." In the
evening, when he again returned with his catch, he went inside and made
himself at home; and the parents were very civil to him. In the spring
he wanted to go further inland along the fiord-side, as was generally
his custom, but told them that he was obliged to join his parents, he
being their only son, and as such he ought not to let his sisters be
without protection. He then went away to his own home; and when they
again met, he told them that now they were ready for starting. On
hearing this, his father-in-law likewise put his boat into the water;
and when it was ready loaded, and they were going to set off, another
boat appeared, coming straight out of the beach. Both went along
together, and made the land at the same time in the evening. Next
morning they again started; and when they approached an inhabited place,
the head-man of the atliaruseks told them always to keep close in their
wake; and all of a sudden they saw his boat sink beneath the surface,
and totally disappear. At this sight the old man got rather frightened;
but on arriving at the spot, their boat dived down in the same manner,
without any damage to the crew. Presently they caught sight of their
companions' boat right ahead of them, and they continued their course
beneath the waves of the sea. Having safely passed the inhabited places,
they once more rose to the surface, and continued their voyage without
further peril; and when they had arrived at their place of destination,
went reindeer-hunting, and got their boats fully laden. When the old
people had again taken up their winter-quarters, the son-in-law provided
amply for them, and they prospered and were well off: About this time
intelligence reached them that the men who had once scorned and abused
them were living in great want, and the old man determined to help them.
He loaded his kayak with matak, and brought it to <span id="page_186">p.
186</span> them. On his arrival, they asked him whence he had got
it—whether it was not taken from the carcass of a whale that had been
driven on shore accidentally. However, he left them without deigning
them an answer to this question; and talking over this matter on his
return home, the son-in-law exclaimed, "I should really like to have a
look at these people;" whereat the old man went back to fetch off all
the men who had formerly been his daughter's suitors, and returned with
a large train of kayaks following him. They landed, and were very
hospitably received, and regaled with reindeer-meat and seal-flesh; and
when they had satisfied their appetite, the old man accosted them thus:
"I wonder if ye can still remember what ye were telling me a long time
ago when ye had nearly killed me, wanting by main force my daughter for
your wife? Your words were these: 'Thou wilt surely never get a clever
husband for thy daughter.' But you see I have, for all that. Likewise ye
said that ye would deny me your assistance if ever I came in want: now
help yourself, if ye please, and eat as much as ever ye like."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-021)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_183">p. 183</span>

<span id="page_183_note_1"></span>[1](#page_183_fr_1) The *atliaruseks*,
probably identical with the *ingnersuaks*, were a sort of elves or
gnomes, supposed to have their abodes within rocks along the sea-shore.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
