[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-064) [Next](tte2-066)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 65. THE TWO FRIENDS RESCUED BY THE BENEVOLENT INGNERSUIT.

ONE widow lived all alone with her son at a winter station; and a little
more to the south another widow, also with an only son, had her
residence. The young men were fast friends, and used to go out kayaking
and perform their several tasks in company. But one morning the one who
was to the north seeing the clear bright sky and a light breeze from the
east, resolved on going to the hunting-place by himself, without waiting
his friend's arrival. After he had been on the hunting-ground for some
time, he suddenly heard a noise from the sunny side of the bay, and,
turning round, he saw his friend with gloomy looks and hand uplifted,
about to throw his harpoon at him. Having no other choice, he kept his
look steadily fixed on him; and the moment the harpoon came flying
towards him, he upset himself, kayak and all, so that the weapon touched
the edge of the kayak, and fell splashing into the water beside him,
after which he again rose by means of his paddle. The other now
proceeded to coil up his harpoon-line; and without further reference to
the matter, the friends as usual remained together, catching their <span
id="page_359">p. 359</span> seals, and speaking pleasantly to each other
on the way home. Still he kept an eye upon his companion, but did not
find anything to rouse his suspicion. Another time he again left home
without waiting the arrival of his friend, and the same thing happened.
After a third similar attempt, however, he resolved to revenge himself.
He did so in the following way: As soon as he rose above water after
having capsized his kayak as before, he aimed his harpoon at his friend,
who, however, averted the danger by likewise upsetting himself; but
before he was able to get his kayak righted, the other was by his side
and kept him from rising by running the point of his own kayak right
across the one that lay bottom upwards. After having killed his friend
in this manner, he rowed towards land; but before he reached the first
islets, he noticed the water coming fast into his kayak. He pulled as
quickly as possible, but all in vain, and was only kept above water by
means of the bladder. He then happily remembered that he was himself an
angakok, and that he had several tornaks (guardian spirits) among the
ingnersuit (under-world people). No sooner had he called them than he
saw three kayakers coming straight towards him. Two of the strangers put
their paddles, one from each side, into the sinking kayak to hold it up;
and, at the same time, the third mended the kayak as well as possible,
by filling the leak with blubber, and hastened to give the drowning man
his dry breeches to put on. He was now again placed in his kayak, to
which they made fast their seals, all strung together in a long row; and
they told him to tug them along, that he might get warm. He rowed in
front, and they closely followed him with the greatest speed. They came
to a high island, with only one house; there they landed, and at once
entered. When they had seated themselves, he saw the master of the
house, a man so very old that his wrinkled skin was hanging, and almost
hiding his eyes; but the old man <span id="page_360">p. 360</span>
pushed it aside a little, and then looked at the newcomers. Presently
some one called out that two kayakers were approaching, tugging seals
along with them. Those whose business it was to bring them up to the
house soon returned with hauling-thongs, ornamented with fittings of
bright walrus-bone; and then followed the seal-hunters themselves. On
entering the house, they accosted their brothers, and reproached them,
saying, "Why were ye not quicker in giving him your assistance before he
got to be so cold?" but they answered, "He did not call for our aid till
then." They now ordered the women to bring some dry meat. After the
meal, the old man moved aside the wrinkled skin from off his eyes, gave
a look out of the window, and said, "Go and call our other relatives;"
upon which the youngest immediately went away, and after some time came
back covered with sweat. The stranger on seeing him reflected, "Where
can he have been, since no house seems to be near?" and soon after five
other brothers, much like his hosts, and also accompanied by an old man,
entered the house. There was also another man, who turned out to be his
former friend and companion, whom he had killed in his kayak. He sat
down right opposite, and hardly dared to look up. When they had had
their meal, the eldest brother brought out a skin, spread it on the
floor, and first tried a wrestling-match with his own brothers, and
afterwards with the visitors; but no one was able to hold his own
against him. The master of the house now challenged the other old man,
who, however, had to give in to him. Having thus been vanquished and put
to shame, the strangers prepared to leave their hosts; these reproved
them sharply for their former behaviour, and told them henceforth to
give up quarrelling, and be friends again. When the rest had all
withdrawn, the stranger who had been saved remained five days longer;
but on the sixth he left. On passing his usual hunting-place, he
encountered <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> his friend, who had been
restored to life in the same manner as himself, and they spoke to each
other. It so happened that they were both angakut, and that each of them
had his tornaks among the ingnersuit. From this time they were quite
reconciled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-066)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
