[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-117) [Next](tte2-119)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

118\. T<span class="small">HE</span> R<span
class="small">EVENGING</span> A<span class="small">NIMALS</span>.—A
great angakok, while kayaking about at midsummer, suddenly took a <span
id="page_457">p. 457</span> longing for eggs; and landing upon an
island, he found a merganser's nest with plenty of eggs, all of which be
carried away. On his way home be met with a flock of seals, of which be
harpooned one; but after having taken it, he heard voices from among the
rest encouraging each other to go and get hold of a piece of ice, and
return as *umiarissat*. On getting home he walked up to his house,
forgetting the eggs in his kayak; but he ordered his housemates to throw
down on the beach all manner of filthy stuff to frighten away the
umiarissat. In the evening a boat was seen to arrive manned with seals,
but as soon as they scented the filth they all jumped into the water,
and the boat appeared as a piece of ice. Later in the evening a voice
was heard outside, and the head of the gooseander emerged from the
entrance with dreadfully enlarged eyes. Addressing itself to the
angakok, it scolded him for having robbed it of its descendants, but now
it had come to fetch its eggs back, having by help of a charm caused him
to forget them and leave them in his kayak. If he had not left them it
certainly would have frightened them all to death. Another angakok in a
similar case was bereft of his angakok power by the merganser.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-119)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
