[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc43000)  [Next](cc43002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>IT may be natural to inquire why the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus have been less copiously illustrated by popular
Commentaries than the other writings of the Apostle Paul. The reason
probably is, that they are addressed chiefly to office-bearers, and not
to private members of the Church; though they abound largely in those
doctrinal statements and practical instructions which every Christian
ought carefully to study.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>While fewer expositors than might have been
desired have devoted their labors to this portion of the word of God,
the leading subject of it has been ably handled in a different form. Not
to mention the early Fathers, it is sufficient to name “The Pastoral
*Care,”* “The Reformed Pastor,” and other kindred works, which have
taken their rank among the standard volumes of Christian Theology.
*Besides* elaborate treatises, extending over the whole field of
ministerial labor, detached parts of it have been sometimes selected for
separate illustration. Of every collection of books fitted to make

<span id="ii-p4"></span>“the man of God perfect, thoroughly prepared  
for every good work,” (<span id="ii-p4.2"></span>[2Ti
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017)<span id="ii-p4.2"></span>.md)

<span id="ii-p5"></span>a goodly portion relates to the duties of the
pastorate. It has been of unspeakable importance to the interests of
religion, and ought to be recorded to the praise of divine grace, that
the valuable instructions on this subject to which readers have access
derive additional weight from the holy lives and devoted zeal of their
authors, who have only inculcated on others what they had faithfully
practiced. To all whose views are directed to the sacred office, or who
have already been invested with it, the perusal of such books must be
exceedingly advantageous.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>Yet here, as in everything else, let us appeal

<span id="ii-p7"></span>“to the law and to the *testimony.”*( <span
id="ii-p7.1"></span>[Isa 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii-p8"></span>The foundation of every code of rules for
guiding the ministers of Christ must be sought, not in the judgments of
uninspired men, however able and judicious, but in the Holy Scriptures,
and chiefly in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, the accurate
interpretation of which is therefore unspeakably valuable. Calvin has
examined them with his usual skill, and will be heard with profound
attention. His candor appears to more than ordinary advantage. Never
does he press the words of the Holy Spirit beyond what appears to him to
be their natural meaning, or depart from the rigid discharge of his task
as an expositor for the sake of giving undue prominence to his peculiar
views. On this point it may be sufficient to refer to his remarks on the
authority which some ministers of the gospel appear to have exercised
over others, as a specimen of his unshaken determination to adhere to
the sacred records, and of his utter indifference to any use that might
be made of such statements by those whose views of church-government
differed from his own. Nowhere is his sterling honesty more conspicuous.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>The notes to the present volume are enriched by
numerous extracts from a rare work — the Author’s Sermons on the two
Epistles to Timothy. But for the strong and general desire that
posterity should listen to this great preacher, those Sermons would
never have seen the light. They were written down, as they flowed from
his lips, in the same manner as the extemporaneous Latin expositions of
which some account has been given elsewhere. While they are Expository
Discourses, leaving no part of the two Epistles unexplored, they are
addressed to the great body of the Christian people, and are
distinguished by those homely and striking appeals, and that marvelous
felicity of language, which even his biographer Audin reluctantly
ascribes to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on First Timothy](cc43002.md)
