[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc43030)  [Next](cc43032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii-p1"></span>TRANSLATION OF CALVIN’S VERSION

<span id="vii.iii-p2"></span>OF The

<span id="vii.iii-p3"></span>EPISTLE OF PAUL TO TITUS

<span id="vii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vii.iii.i-p3"></span>**1** Paul*,* a servant of God, and an
apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of the elect of God, and
(or, *that is,)* the knowledge of that truth which is according to
godliness;

<span id="vii.iii.i-p4"></span>**2** In the hope (or, on *account of the
hope)* of eternal life, which God, who cannot lie, promised before
eternal ages,

<span id="vii.iii.i-p5"></span>**3** but hath manifested in his own
times his word (or, *by his word,)* in the preaching which hath been
committed to me, according to the appointment of God our Savior;

<span id="vii.iii.i-p6"></span>**4** To Titus, my own son, according to
the common faith, grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father, and from the
Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p7"></span>**5** For this reason I left thee in
Crete, that thou mightest continue to correct those things which are
still wanting, f  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282.md) and mightst
ordain presbyters f  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283.md) in each
city, as I appointed thee:

<span id="vii.iii.i-p10"></span>**6** If any one is blameless, the
husband of one wife, having believing children, not accused of
licentiousness, not disobedient.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p11"></span>**7** For a bishop ought to be
blameless, as a governor of the house of God; not self-willed, not
passionate, not given to wine, not a striker, not wickedly desirous of
gain;

<span id="vii.iii.i-p12"></span>**8** But hospitable, devoted to
kindness, prudent, just, holy, temperate;

<span id="vii.iii.i-p13"></span>**9** Holding fast the faithful word,
which is according to instruction, that he maybe able both to exhort by
sound doctrine, and to convince adversaries.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p14"></span>**10** For there are many unruly,  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284.md) and vain talkers, and deceivers of
minds’ chiefly they who are of the circumcision;

<span id="vii.iii.i-p16"></span>**11** Whose month must be stopped, who
overturn whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for the
sake of dishonest gain.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p17"></span>**12** One of themselves, a prophet of
their own, said, The Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy
bellies.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p18"></span>**13** This testimony is true; wherefore
rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,

<span id="vii.iii.i-p19"></span>**14** And may not give heed to Jewish
fables, and to commandments of men who turn aside from the truth.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p20"></span>**15** To the pure all things indeed are
pure; but to the polluted and unbelieving nothing is pure, but their
mind and conscience are polluted.

<span id="vii.iii.i-p21"></span>**16** They profess that they know God,
but in works they deny him; for they are abominable, disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate.

<span id="vii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p3"></span>**1** But speak thou the things which
become sound doctrine;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p4"></span>**2** That aged men be sober, grave,
temperate, sound in faith, in love, in patience;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p5"></span>**3** That aged women, in like manner,
wear raiment which becomes religious persons, that they be not
slanderers, not slaves to much wine, (that they be) teachers of what is
good;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p6"></span>**4** That they may teach the young
women temperance to love their husbands and their children,

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p7"></span>**5** To be temperate, chaste, keepers
of the house, kind, subject to their husbands f  <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285.md) that the word of God may not be evil
spoken of.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p9"></span>**6** Exhort likewise younger men to be
temperate;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p10"></span>**7** In all things shewing thyself a
pattern of good works; in doctrine, (chewing) integrity, gravity;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p11"></span>**8** Sound speech, unblameable, that
the adversary may be ashamed, having nothing evil to say of you.

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p12"></span>**9** Exhort servants to be subject to
their own masters, endeavoring to please them in all things, not
answering again;

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p13"></span>**10** Not thievish, but shewing all
good faith, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all
things

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p14"></span>**11** For the grace of God hath
appeared, bringing salvation to all men,

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p15"></span>**12** Teaching us that, denying
ungodliness and worldly desires, we should live temperately and
righteously and piously, in this world,

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p16"></span>**13** Looking for the blessed hope and
the appearing of Jesus Christ, the great God and our Savior,

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p17"></span>**14** Who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar,
people, zealous of good works. f  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286.md)

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p19"></span>**15** Speak these things, and exhort,
and rebuke with all authority. Let no man despise thee.

<span id="vii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p3"></span>**1** Remind them to be subject to
principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready for every
good work;

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p4"></span>**2** To speak evil of no one, not to
be given to fighting, (to be) kind, shew shewing all meekness towards
all men.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p5"></span>**3** For we ourselves were also
formerly foolish, disobedient, going astray, serving various desires and
pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful,  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md) and hating one another.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p7"></span>**4** But after that the goodness and
love of God our Savior towards men appeared,

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p8"></span>**5** Not by works, which were in
righteousness, which we had done, but according to his mercy, he saved
us, by the washing of regeneration and of the renewing of the Holy
Spirit,

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p9"></span>**6** Which (or, *whom)* he shed
abundantly on us, through Jesus Christ our Savior,

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p10"></span>**7** That, being justified by his
grace, we might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p11"></span>**8** A faithful saying: I wish thee
to affirm these things, that they who have believed in God may be
careful to excel in good works, *(or, to extol good works, or, to assign
to them the highest rank.)* For these things are honorable and
profitable to men

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p12"></span>**9** But avoid foolish questions, and
genealogies, and contentions, and fightings about the law; for they are
unprofitable and unnecessary.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p13"></span>**10** Avoid an heretical man after
the first and second admonition;

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p14"></span>**11** Knowing that he who is such is
ruined, being condemned by himself.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p15"></span>**12** When I shall send to thee
Artemas, or Tychicus, hasten to come to me to Nicopolis for I have
determined to winter there.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p16"></span>**13** Be careful to help forward
Zenas the lawyer, and Apollo, that they may not be in want of anything.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p17"></span>**14** And let ours also learn to
excel in good works (or, as formerly, to *assign to them the highest
rank, that they may excel,)* for necessary uses, that they may not be
unfruitful.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p18"></span>**15** All who are with me salute
thee. Salute those who love us in faith. Grace (be) with you all. Amen.

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p19"></span>It was written from Nicopolis of
Macedonia, to Titus, who was ordained the first bishop of the Church of
the Cretans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc43031.htm#fr_282.md) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p8"></span> “<span id="vii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>La
cause pourquoy je tay laisse en Crete, c’est afin que tu poursuyves de
corriger les choses qui restent.” — “The reason why I left thee in
Crete, is in order that thou mayest continue to correct the things that
are wanting.”

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc43031.htm#fr_283.md) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p9"></span> “<span id="vii.iii.i-p9.1"></span>Des
prestres, ou anciens.” — “Presbyters, or elders.”

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc43031.htm#fr_284.md) <span
id="vii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="vii.iii.i-p15.1"></span>Car
il y en a plusieurs qui ne se peuvent ranger.” — “For there are many of
them who cannot submit to authority.”

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc43031.htm#fr_285.md) <span
id="vii.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="vii.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>Ou,
propre a luy.” — “Or, belonging to him.”

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc43031.htm#fr_286.md) <span
id="vii.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.ii-p18"></span> “<span
id="vii.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>Adonne a bonnes oeuvres.” — “Devoted to
good works.”

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc43031.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="vii.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.iii.iii-p6"></span> “<span
id="vii.iii.iii-p6.1"></span>Odieux, ou, hays.” — “Hateful or hated.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon](cc43032.md)
