[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc43026)  [Next](cc43028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span>Philemon Verses 20-25

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>**20**. Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee
in the Lord: refresh my bowels in the Lord.

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span>**20**. Certe frater, ego to fruar in Domino:
refocilla mea viscera in Domino.

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span>**21**. Having confidence in thy obedience I
wrote unto thee, knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say.

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span>**21**. Persuasus de tua obedientia scripsi
tibi, sciens etiam, quod supra id, quod scribo, facturus sis.

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span>**22**. But withal prepare me also a lodging:
for I trust that through your prayers I shall be given unto you.

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span>**22**. Simul vero praepara mihi hospitium;
spero enim quod etiam per vestras precationes donabor vobis.

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span>**23**. There salute thee Epaphras, my
fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus;

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span>**23**. Salutant to Epaphras concaptivus meus
in Christo Iesu:

<span id="vi.iv-p10"></span>**24**. Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas,
my fellowlabourers.

<span id="vi.iv-p11"></span>**24**. Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas,
cooperarii mei.

<span id="vi.iv-p12"></span>**25**. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
*be* with your spirit. Amen.

<span id="vi.iv-p13"></span>**25**. Gratia Domini nostri Iesu Christi
cum spiritu vestro. Amen.

<span id="vi.iv-p14"></span>Written from Rome to Philemon by Onesimus a
servant.

<span id="vi.iv-p15"></span>Ad Philemonem missa fuit e Roma per Onesimum
servum.

<span id="vi.iv-p16"></span><span id="vi.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p17"></span>**20** *Yea, brother*. This affirmation is
used in order to increase the ardor of the exhortation; as if he had
said — “Now shall it be clearly proved that there hath been no variance
between thee and me, but that, on the contrary, thou art sincerely
attached to me, and that all that thou hadst is at my disposal, if thou
pardon offenses and receive into favor him who is so closely related to
me.”

<span id="vi.iv-p18"></span>*Refresh my bowels in the Lord.* He again
repeats the same form of expressions which he had previously employed.
Hence we infer that the faith of the gospel does not overturn civil
government, or set aside the power and authority which masters have over
slaves. For Philemon was not a man of the ordinary rank, but a
fellow-laborer of Paul in cultivating Christ’s vineyard; and yet that
power over a slave which was permitted by the law is not taken away, but
he is only commanded to receive him kindly by granting forgiveness, and
is even humbly besought by Paul to restore him to his former condition.

<span id="vi.iv-p19"></span>When Paul pleads so humbly in behalf of
another, we are reminded how far distant they are from true repentance
who obstinately excuse their vices, or who, without shame and without
tokens of humility, acknowledge indeed that they have sinned, but in
such a manner as if they had never sinned. When Onesimus saw so
distinguished an apostle of Christ plead so eagerly in his behalf, he,
must undoubtedly have been much more humbled, that he might bend the
heart of his master to be merciful to him. To the same purpose is the
excuse which he offers (<span id="vi.iv-p19.1"></span>[Phm
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv-p19.1"></span>.md)
for writing so boldly, because he knew that Philemon would do more than
he had been requested.

<span id="vi.iv-p20"></span><span id="vi.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p21"></span>**22** *But at the same time prepare for me
a lodging*. This confidence must have powerfully excited and moved
Philemon; and next, he holds out to him the hope of being gratified by
his own arrival. Although we do not know whether or not Paul was
afterwards released from prison, yet there is no absurdity in this
statement, even though he was disappointed of the hope which he
cherished about God’s temporal kindness. He had no confident hope of his
release, further than if it pleased God. Accordingly, he always kept his
mind in suspense, till the will of God was made known by the result.

<span id="vi.iv-p22"></span>*That through your prayers I shall be given
to you*. Here it deserves notice, that he says that everything that
believers obtain “through their prayers,” is “given” to them; for hence
we infer that our prayers, though they are not unsuccessful, yet have no
power through their own merit; for what is yielded to them is of free
grace.

<span id="vi.iv-p23"></span><span id="vi.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p24"></span>**24** *Demas*. This is the same person who
afterwards forsook him, as he complains in the Second Epistle to Timothy
(<span id="vi.iv-p24.1"></span>[2Ti
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv-p24.1"></span>..md)
And if one of Paul’s assistants, having become weary and discouraged,
was afterwards drawn aside by the vanity of the world, let no man reckon
too confidently on the zeal of a single year; but, considering how large
a portion of the journey still remains to be accomplished, let him pray
to God for steadfastness.

<span id="vi.iv-p25"></span>END OF THE COMMENTARIES ON THE EPISTLE TO
PHILEMON.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Calvin's Scripture Translations](cc43028.md)
