[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc43014)  [Next](cc43016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Timothy
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span>**1**. This know also, that in the last
days perilous times shall come:

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Illhud autem scito, quod in exremis
diebus instabunt tempora periculosa (*vel. gravia*)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p4"></span>**2**. For men shall be lovers of their own
selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Erunt enim homines sui amantes,
avari, fastuosi, superbi, maledici, parentibus immorigeri, ingrati,
impii,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p6"></span>**3**. Without natural affection,
trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those
that are good,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Carentes affectu, nescii faederis,
calumniatores, intermperantes, inmites, negligentes bonorum,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p8"></span>**4**. Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers
of pleasures more than lovers of God;

<span id="iv.iv.i-p9"></span>**4**. Proditores protervi tumidi
voluptatium amatores magis quam Dei

<span id="iv.iv.i-p10"></span>**5**. Having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof: from such turn away.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p11"></span>**5**. Habentes speciem quidem pietatis
virtutem autem eius abnegantes et hos devita

<span id="iv.iv.i-p12"></span>**6**. For of this sort are they which
creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led
away with divers lusts,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p13"></span>**6**. Ex iis enim sunt qui subintrant in
familias, et captivas ducunt mulierculas oneratas peccatis, quae
ducuntur concupiscentiis variis,

<span id="iv.iv.i-p14"></span>**7**. Ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p15"></span>**7**. Semper discentes, quum tamen
numquam ad cognitionem veritatis pervenire valeant.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p17"></span>**1** *But know this* By this prediction
he intended still more to sharpen his diligence; for, when matters go on
to our wish, we become more careless; but necessity urges us keenly.
Paul, therefore informs him, that the Church will be subject to terrible
diseases, which will require in the pastors uncommon fidelity,
diligence, watchfulness, prudence, and unwearied constancy; as if he
enjoined Timothy to prepare for arduous and deeply anxious contests
which awaited him. And hence we learn, that, so far from giving way, or
being terrified, on account of any difficulties whatsoever, we ought, on
the contrary. to arouse our hearts for resistance.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p18"></span>*In the last days* Under “the last days,”
he includes the universal condition of the Christian Church. Nor does he
compare his own age with ours, but, on the contrary, informs Timothy
what will be the future condition of the kingdom of Christ; for many
imagined some sort of condition that would be absolutely peaceful, and
free from any annoyance.  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) In
short, he means that there will not be, even under the gospel, such a
state of perfection, that all vices shall be banished, and virtues of
every kind shall flourish; and that therefore the pastors of the
Christian Church will have quite as much to do with wicked and ungodly
men as the prophets and godly priests had in ancient times. Hence it
follows, that there is no time for idleness or for repose.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p21"></span>**2** *For men will be* It is proper to
remark, first, in what he makes the hardship of those “dangerous” or
“troublesome” times to consist; not in war, nor in famine, nor in
diseases, nor in any calamities or inconveniences to which the body is
incident, but in the wicked and depraved actions of men. And, indeed,
nothing is so distressingly painful to godly men, and to those who truly
fear God, as to behold such corruptions of morals; for, as there is
nothing which they value more highly than the glory of God, so they
cannot but suffer grievous anguish when it is attacked or despised.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p22"></span>Secondly, it ought to be remarked, who are
the persons of whom he speaks. They whom he briefly describes are not
external enemies, who openly assail the name of Christ, but domestics,
who wish to be reckoned among the members of the Church; for God wishes
to try his Church to such an extent as to carry within her bosom such
plagues, though she abhors to entertain them. So then, if in the present
day many whom we justly abhor are mingled within us, let us learn to
groan patiently under that burden, when we are informed that this is the
lot of the Christian Church.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p23"></span>Next, it is wonderful that those persons,
whom Paul pronounces to be guilty of so many and so aggravated acts of
wickedness, can keep up the appearance of piety, as he also declares.
But daily experience shows that we ought not to regard this as so
wonderful; for such is the amazing audacity and wickedness of
hypocrites, that, even in excusing the grossest crimes, they are
excessively impudent, after having once learned falsely to shelter
themselves under the name of God. In ancient times, how many crimes
abounded in the life of the Pharisees? And yet, as if they had been pure
from every stain, they enjoyed a reputation of eminent holiness.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p24"></span>Even in the present day, although the
lewdness of the Popish clergy is such that it stinks in the nostrils of
the whole world, still, in spite of their wickedness, they do not cease
to arrogate proudly to themselves all the rights and titles of saints.
Accordingly, when Paul says that hypocrites, though they are chargeable
with the grossest vices, nevertheless deceive under a mask of piety,
this ought not to appear strange, when we have examples before our eyes.
And, indeed, the world deserves to be deceived by those wicked
scoundrels, when it either despises or cannot endure true holiness.
Besides, Paul enumerates those vices which are not visible at first
sight, and which are even the ordinary attendants of pretended holiness.
Is there a hypocrite who is not proud, who is not a lover of himself,
who is not a despiser of others, who is not fierce and cruel, who is not
treacherous? But all these are concealed from the eyes of men.  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md)

<span id="iv.iv.i-p26"></span>To spend time in explaining every word
would be superfluous; for the words do not need exposition. Only let my
readers observe that φιλαυτία, *self-love,* which is put first, may be
regarded as the source from which flow all the vices that follow
afterwards. He who loveth himself claims a superiority in everything,
despises all others, is cruel, indulges in covetousness, treachery,
anger, rebellion against parents, neglect of what is good, and such
like. As it was the design of Paul to brand false prophets with such
marks, that they might be seen and known by all; it is our duty to open
our eyes, that we may see those who are pointed out with the finger.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p27"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p28"></span>**5** *From those turn away*. This
exhortation sufficiently shows that Paul does not speak of a distant
posterity, nor foretell what would happen many ages afterwards; but
that, by pointing out present evils, he applies to his own age what he
had said about “the last times;” for how could Timothy “turn away” from
those who were not to arise till many centuries afterwards? So then,
from the very beginning of the gospel, the Church must have begun to be
affected by such corruptions.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p29"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p30"></span>**6** *Of those are they who creep into
families* You would say, that here Paul intentionally draws a lively
picture of the order of monks. But without saying a single word about
monks, those marks by which Paul distinguishes false and pretended
teachers are sufficiently clear; creeping into houses, snares for
catching silly women, mean flattery, imposing upon people by various
superstitions. These marks it is proper to observe carefully, if we wish
to distinguish between useless drones and faithful ministers of Christ.
These former are here marked by so black a coal, that it is of no use
for them to shuffle. To “creep into families” means to enter stealthily,
or to seek an entrance by cunning methods.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p31"></span>*And lead captive silly women laden with
sins* Now, he speaks of “women” rather than men, because the former are
more liable to be led astray in this manner. He says that they “are led
captive,” because false prophets of this sort, through various tricks,
gain their ear, partly by prying curiously into all their affairs, and
partly by flattery. And this is what he immediately adds, “laden with
sins;” for, if they had not been bound by the chain of a bad conscience,
they would not have allowed themselves to be led away, in every possible
manner, at the will of others.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p32"></span>*By various sinful desires* I consider
“sinful desires” to denote generally those foolish and light desires by
which women, who do not seek God sincerely, and yet wish to be reckoned
religious and holy, are carried away. There is no end of the methods
adopted by them, when, departing from a good conscience, they are
constantly assuming new masks. Chrysostom is more disposed to refer it
to disgraceful and immodest desires; but, when I examine the context, I
prefer the former exposition; for it immediately follows —

<span id="iv.iv.i-p33"></span><span id="iv.iv.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p34"></span>**7** *Always learning, while yet they
never can come to the knowledge of the truth* That fluctuation between
various desires, of which he now speaks, is when, having nothing solid
in themselves, they are tossed about in all directions. They “learn,” he
says, as people do who are under the influence of curiosity, and with a
restless mind, but in such a manner as never to arrive at any certainty
or truth. It is ill-conducted study, and widely different from
knowledge. And yet such persons think themselves prodigiously wise; but
what they know is nothing, so long as they do not hold the truth, which
is the foundation of all knowledge.

<span id="iv.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[2 Timothy
3:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p2"></span>**8**. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the faith.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p3"></span>**8**. Quemadmodum autem Iannes et Iambres
restiterunt Mosi, ita et hi resistunt veritati, homines corrupti mente,
reprobi circa fidem.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p4"></span>**9**. But they shall proceed no further:
for their folly shall be manifest unto all *men*, as theirs also was.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p5"></span>**9**. Sed non proficient amplius; amentia
enim eorum manifesta erit omnibus, sicut et illorum fuit.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p6"></span>**10**. But thou hast fully known my
doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity,
patience,

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p7"></span>**10**. Tu autem assectatus es meam
doctrinam institutionem, propositum, fidem, tolerantiam, dilectionem,
patientiam,

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p8"></span>**11**. Persecutions, afflictions, which
came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I
endured: but out of *them* all the Lord delivered me.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p9"></span>**11**. Persequutiones, afflictiones, quae
mihi acciderunt Antiochae, Iconii, Lystris, quas, inquam, persequutiones
sustinuerim; sed ex omnibus me Dominus

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p10"></span>**12**. Yea, and all that will live godly
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p11"></span>**12**. Et omnes, qui piè volunt in
Christo Iesu, persequutionem patientur.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p12"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p13"></span>**8** *And as Jannes and Jambres resisted
Moses* This comparison confirms what I have already said about the “last
times”, for he means that the same thing happens to us under the gospel,
which the Church experienced almost from her very commencement, or at
least since the law was published. In like manner the Psalmist also
speaks largely about the unceasing battles of the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p14"></span>“Often did they fight against me from my
youth, now let Israel say. The wicked ploughed upon my back, they made
long their furrows.” (<span id="iv.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>[Ps.
129:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#001.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.ii-p14.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p15"></span>Paul reminds us, that we need not wonder
if adversaries rise up against Christ to oppose his gospel, since Moses
likewise had those who contended with him; for these examples drawn from
a remote antiquity yield us strong consolation.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p16"></span>It is generally believed; that the two
who are mentioned, “Jannes and Jambres,” were magicians put forward by
Pharaoh. But from what source Paul learned their names is doubtful,
except that it is probable, that many things relating to those histories
were handed down, the memory of which God never permitted to perish. It
is also possible that in Paul’s time there were commentaries on the
prophets that gave more fully those narratives which Moses touches very
briefly. However that may be, it is not at random that he calls them by
their names. The reason why there were two of them may be conjectured to
have been this, that, because the Lord had raised up for his people two
leaders, Moses and Aaron, Pharaoh determined to place against them the
like number of magicians.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p17"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p18"></span>**9** *But they shall not proceed
further* He encourages Timothy for the contest, by the confident hope of
victory; for, although false teachers give him annoyance, he promises
that they shall be, within a short time, disgracefully ruined.  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md) Yet the event does not agree with this
promise; and the Apostle appears to make a totally different
declaration, a little afterwards, when he says that they will grow worse
and worse. Nor is there any force in the explanation given by
Chrysostom, that they will grow worse every day, but will do no injury
to any person; for he expressly adds, “deceived and deceiving;” and,
indeed, the truth of this is proved by experience. It is more correct to
say, that he looked at them in various aspects; for the affirmation,
that they will not make progress, is not universal; but he only means,
that the Lord will discover their madness to many whom they had, at
first, deceived by their enchantments.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p20"></span>*For their folly shall be manifest to
all* When he says, *to all,* it is by a figure of speech, in which the
whole is taken for a part. And, indeed, they who are most successful in
deceiving do, at first, make great boasting, and obtain loud applause;
and, in short, it appears as if nothing were beyond their power. But
speedily their tricks vanish into air; for the Lord opens the eyes of
many, so that they begin to see what was concealed from them for a time.
Yet never is the “folly” of false prophets discovered to such an extent
as to be known to all. Besides, no sooner is one error driven away than
new errors continually spring up.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p21"></span>Both admonitions are therefore necessary.
That godly teachers may not despair, as if it were in vain for them to
make war against error, they must be instructed about the prosperous
success which the Lord will give to his doctrine. But that they may not
think, on the other hand, that they are discharged from future service,
after one or two battles, they must be reminded that there will always
be new occasion for fighting. But on this second point we shall speak
afterwards; at present, let it suffice us, that he holds out to Timothy
the sure hope of a successful issue, that he may be time more encouraged
to fight, And he confirms this by the example which he had quoted; for,
as the truth of God prevailed against the tricks of the magicians, so he
promises that the doctrine of the gospel shall be victorious against
every kind of errors that may be invented.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p22"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p23"></span>**10** *But thou hast followed*  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) In order to urge Timothy, he employs
this argument also, that he is not an ignorant and untaught soldier,
because Paul carried him through a long course of training. Nor does he
speak of doctrine only; for those things which he likewise enumerates
add much weight, and he gives to us, in this sentence, a very lively
picture of a good teacher, as one who does not, by words only, train and
instruct his disciples, but, so to speak, opens his very breast to them,
that they may know, that whatever he teaches, he teaches sincerely. This
is what is implied in the word *purpose* He likewise adds other proofs
of sincere and unfeigned affection, such as *faith, mildness, love,
patience* Such were the early instructions which had been imparted to
Timothy in the school of Paul. Yet he does not merely bring to
remembrance what he had learned from him, but bears testimony to his
former life, that in this manner he may urge him to perseverance; for he
praises him as an imitator of his own virtues; as if he had said, “Thou
hast been long accustomed to follow my instructions; I ask nothing more
than that thou shouldst go on as thou hast begun.” It is his wish,
however; that the example of his “faith, love, and patience” should be
constantly before the eyes of Timothy; and for that reason he dwells
chiefly on his persecutions, which were best known to him.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p25"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p26"></span>**11** *But out of them all the Lord
delivered me* It is a consolation which mitigates the bitterness of
afflictions, that they always have a happy and joyful end. If it be
objected, that the success of which he boasts is not always visible, I
acknowledge that this is true, so far as relates to the feeling of the
flesh; for Paul had not yet been delivered. But when God sometimes
delivers us, he testifies, in this manner, that he is present with us,
and will always be present; for from the feeling, or actual knowledge,
of present aid, our confidence ought to be extended to the future. The
meaning, therefore, is as if he had said, “Thou hast known by experience
that God hath never forsaken me, so that thou hast no right to hesitate
to follow my example.”

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p27"></span><span id="iv.iv.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p28"></span>**12** *And all who wish to live a godly
life*  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) Having mentioned his own
persecutions, he likewise adds now, that nothing has happened to him
which does not await all the godly.  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md) And he says this, partly that
believers may prepare themselves for submitting to this condition, and
partly that good men may not view him with suspicion on account of the
persecutions which he endures from wicked persons; as it frequently
happens that the distresses to which men are subjected lead to
unfavorable opinions concerning them; for he whom men regard with
aversion is immediately declared by the common people to be hated by
God.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p31"></span>By this general statement, therefore,
Paul classes himself with the children of God, and, at the same time,
exhorts all the children of God to prepare for enduring persecutions;
for, if this condition is laid down for “all who wish to live a godly
life in Christ,” they who wish to be exempt from persecutions must
necessarily renounce Christ. In vain shall we endeavor to detach Christ
from his cross; for it may be said to be natural that the world should
hate Christ even in his members. Now hatred is attended by cruelty, and
hence arise persecutions. In short, let us know that we are Christians
on this condition, that we shall be liable to many tribulations and
various contests.

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p32"></span>But it is asked, Must all men be martyrs?
for it is evident that there have been many godly persons who have never
suffered banishment, or imprisonment, or flight, or any kind of
persecution. I reply, it is not always in one way that Satan persecutes
the servants of Christ. But yet it is absolutely unavoidable that all of
them shall have the world for their enemy in some form or other, that
their faith may be tried and their steadfastness proved; for Satan, who
is the continual enemy of Christ, will never suffer any one to be at
peace during his whole life; and there will always be wicked men that
are thorns in our sides. Moreover, as soon as zeal for God is manifested
by a believer, it kindles the rage of all ungodly men; and, although
they have not a drawn sword, yet they vomit out their venom, either by
murmuring, or by slander, or by raising a disturbance, or by other
methods. Accordingly, although they are not exposed to the same
assaults, and do not engage in the same battles, yet they have a warfare
in common, and shall never be wholly at peace and exempt from
persecutions.

<span id="iv.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Timothy 3:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p2"></span>**13**. But evil men and seducers shall
wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p3"></span>**13**. Mali autem homines et impostores
proficient in pejus, errantes, et in errorem.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p4"></span>**14** But continue thou in the things
which thou hast learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou
hast learned *them*;

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p5"></span>**14**. Tu autem mane in iis, quae
didicisti, et quae credita sunt tibi, sciens a quo didiceris;

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p6"></span>**15**. And that from a child thou hast
known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p7"></span>**15**. Et quòd a pueritia Sacras
litteras novisti, quae to eruditum reddere ad salutem per fidem, quae
est in Christo Iesu.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p8"></span>**16**. All scripture *is* given by
inspiration of God, and *is* profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness:

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p9"></span>**16**. Omnis Scriptura divinitus
inspirata est ac utilis ad doctrinam, ad redargutionem, ad correctionem,
ad institutionem, qua est in justitia.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p10"></span>**17**. That the man of God may be
perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p11"></span>**17**. Ut integer sit Dei homo, ad omne
opus bonum formatus.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p13"></span>**13** *But wicked men and impostors*
This is the most bitter of all persecutions, when we see wicked men,
with their sacrilegious hardihood, with their blasphemies and errors,
gathering strength. Thus Paul says elsewhere, that Ishmael persecuted
Isaac, not by the sword, but by mockery (<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>[Ga
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>.) Hence also we may conclude, that in the
preceding verse, it was not merely one kind of persecution that was
described, but that the Apostle spoke, in general terms, of those
distresses which the children of God are compelled to endure, when they
contend for the glory of their Father.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p14"></span>I stated, a little before, in what
respect they *shall grow worse and worse;* for he foretells not only
that they will make obstinate resistance, but that they will succeed in
injuring and corrupting others. One worthless person will always be more
effectual in destroying, than ten faithful teachers in building, though
they labor with all their might. Nor are there ever wanting the tares
which Satan sows for injuring the pure corn; and even when we think that
false prophets are driven away, others continually spring up in other
directions.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p15"></span>Again, as to the power of doing injury,
 <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md) it is not because falsehood, in
its own nature, is stronger than truth, or that the tricks of Satan
exceed the energy of the Spirit of God; but because men, being naturally
inclined to vanity and errors, embrace far more readily what agrees with
their natural disposition, and also because, being blinded by a
righteous vengeance of God, they are led, as captive slaves, at the will
of Satan.  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md) And the chief reason,
why the plague of wicked doctrines is so efficacious, is, that the
ingratitude of men deserves that it should be so. It is highly necessary
for godly teachers to be reminded of this, that they may be prepared for
uninterrupted warfare, and may not be discouraged by delay, or yield to
the haughtiness and insolence of adversaries.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p18"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p19"></span>**14** *But as for thee, continue in
those things which thou hast learned* Although wickedness prevail, and
push its way forward, he advises Timothy nevertheless to stand firm. And
undoubtedly this is the actual trial of faith, when we offer unwearied
resistance to all the contrivances of Satan, and do not alter our course
for every wind that blows, but remain steadfast on the truth of God, as
on a sure anchor.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p20"></span>*Knowing from whom thou hast learned
them* This is said for the purpose of commending the certainty of the
doctrine; for, if any one has been wrong instructed, he ought not to
persevere in it. On the contrary, we ought to unlearn all that we have
learned apart from Christ, if we wish to be his disciples; as, for
example, it is the commencement of our pure instruction in the faith to
reject and forget all the instruction of Popery. The Apostle therefore
does not enjoin Timothy to defend indiscriminately the doctrine which
has been delivered to him, but only that which he knows to be truth; by
which he means, that he must make a selection.  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189.md) Besides, he does not claim this as a
private individual, that what he has taught shall be reckoned to be a
divine revelation; but he boldly asserts his own authority to Timothy,
who, he was aware, knew that his fidelity and his calling had been
proved. And if he was fully convinced that he had been taught by an
Apostle of Christ, he concluded that therefore it was not a doctrine of
man, but of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p22"></span>This passage teaches us, that we ought
to be as careful to guard against obstinacy in matters that are
uncertain, (such as all the doctrines of men are,) as to hold within
unshaken firmness the truth *of* God. Besides, we learn from it, that
faith ought to be accompanied by prudence, that it may distinguish
between the word of God and the word of men, so that we may not adopt at
random everything that is brought forward. Nothing is more inconsistent
with the nature of faith than light credulity, which allows us to
embrace everything indiscriminately, whatever it may be, and from
whomsoever it proceeds; because it is the chief foundation of faith, to
know that it has God for its author.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p23"></span>*And which have been intrusted to thee*
 <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md) When he adds, that the doctrine
had been intrusted to Timothy, this gives (αὔξησιν) additional force to
the exhortation; for to “commit a thing in trust” is something more than
merely to deliver it. Now Timothy had not been taught as one of the
common people, but in order that he might faithfully deliver into the
hands of others what he had received.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p25"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p26"></span>**15** *And that from (thy) childhood*
This was also no ordinary addition, that he had been accustomed, from
his infancy, to the reading of the Scripture; for this long habit may
make a man much more strongly fortified against every kind of deception.
It was therefore a judicious caution observed in ancient times, that
those who were intended for the ministry of the word should be
instructed, from their infancy, in the solid doctrine of godliness,
that, when they came to the performance of their office, they might not
be untried apprentices. And it ought to be reckoned a remarkable
instance of the kindness of God, if any person, from his earliest years,
has thus acquired a knowledge of the Scriptures.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p27"></span>*Which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation* It is a very high commendation of the Holy Scriptures, that
we must not seek anywhere else the wisdom which is sufficient for
salvation; as the next verse also expresses more fully. But he states,
at the same time, what we ought to seek in the Scripture; for the false
prophets also make use of it as a pretext; and therefore, in order that
it may be useful to us for salvation, it is necessary to understand the
right use of it.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p28"></span>*Through faith, which is in Christ
Jesus* What if any one give his whole attention to curious questions?
What if he adhere to the mere letter of the law, and do not seek Christ?
What if he pervert the natural meaning by inventions that are foreign to
it? For this reason he directs us to the faith of Christ as the design,
and therefore as the sum, of the Scriptures; for on faith depends also
what immediately follows.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p29"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p30"></span>**16** *All Scripture;* or, *the whole
of Scripture;* though it makes little difference as to the meaning. He
follows out that commendation which he had glanced at briefly. First, he
commends the Scripture on account of its authority; and secondly, on
account of the utility which springs from it. In order to uphold the
authority of the Scripture, he declares that *it is divinely inspired;*
for, if it be so, it is beyond all controversy that men ought to receive
it with reverence. This is a principle which distinguishes our religion
from all others, that we know that God hath spoken to us, and are fully
convinced that the prophets did not speak at their own suggestion, but
that, being organs of the Holy Spirit, they only uttered what they had
been commissioned from heaven to declare. Whoever then wishes to profit
in the Scriptures, let him first of all, lay down this as a settled
point, that the Law and the Prophets are not a doctrine delivered
according to the will and pleasure of men, but dictated by the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p31"></span>If it be objected, “How can this be
known?” I answer, both to disciples and to teachers, God is made known
to be the author of it by the revelation of the same Spirit. Moses and
the prophets did not utter at random what we have received from their
hand, but, speaking at the suggestion of God, they boldly and fearlessly
testified, what was actually true, that it was the mouth of the Lord
that spake. The same Spirit, therefore, who made Moses and the prophets
certain of their calling, now also testifies to our hearts, that he has
employed them as his servants to instruct us. Accordingly, we need not
wonder if there are many who doubt as to the Author of the Scripture;
for, although the majesty of God is displayed in it, yet none but those
who have been enlightened by the Holy Spirit have eyes to perceive what
ought, indeed, to have been visible to all, and yet is visible to the
elect alone. This is the first clause, that we owe to the Scripture the
same reverence which we owe to God; because it has proceeded from him
alone, and has nothing belonging to man mixed with it.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p32"></span>*And is profitable* Now follows the
second part of the commendation, that the Scripture contains a perfect
rule of a good and happy life. When he says this, he means that it is
corrupted by sinful abuse, when this usefulness is not sought. And thus
he indirectly censures those unprincipled men who fed the people with
vain speculations, as with wind. For this reason we may in the present
day, condemn all who, disregarding edification, agitate questions which,
though they are ingenious, are also useless. Whenever ingenious trifles
of that kind are brought forward, they must be warded off by this
shield, that “Scripture is profitable.” Hence it follows, that it is
unlawful to treat it in an unprofitable manner; for the Lord, when he
gave us the Scriptures, did not intend either to gratify our curiosity,
or to encourage ostentation, or to give occasion for chatting and
talking, but to do us good; and, therefore, the right use of Scripture
must always tend to what is profitable.  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md)

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p34"></span>*For instruction* Here he enters into a
detailed statement of the various and manifold advantages derived from
the Scriptures. And, first of all, he mentions *instruction,* which
ranks above all the rest; for it will be to no purpose that you exhort
or reprove, if you have not previously instructed. But because
“instruction,” taken by itself, is often of little avail, he adds
*reproof* and *correction*

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p35"></span>It would be too long to explain what we
are to learn from the Scriptures; and, in the preceding verse, he has
given a brief summary of them under the word *faith.* The most valuable
knowledge, therefore, is “faith in Christ.” Next follows instruction for
regulating the life, to which are added the excitements of exhortations
and reproofs. Thus he who knows how to use the Scriptures properly, is
in want of nothing for salvation, or for a Holy life. *Reproof* and
*correction* differ little from each other, except that the latter
proceeds from the former; for the beginning of repentance is the
knowledge of our sinfulness, and a conviction of the judgment of God.
*Instruction in righteousness* means the rule of a good and holy life.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p36"></span><span id="iv.iv.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p37"></span>**17** *That the man of God may be
perfect. Perfect* means here a blameless person, one in whom there is
nothing defective; for he asserts absolutely, that the Scripture is
sufficient for perfection. Accordingly, he who is not satisfied with
Scripture desires to be wiser than is either proper or desirable.

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p38"></span>But here an objection arises. Seeing
that Paul speaks of the Scriptures, which is the name given to the Old
Testament, how does he say that it makes a man thoroughly perfect? for,
if it be so, what was afterwards added by the apostles may be thought
superfluous. I reply, so far as relates to the substance, nothing has
been added; for the writings of the apostles contain nothing else than a
simple and natural explanation of the Law and the Prophets, together
with a manifestation of the things expressed in them. This eulogium,
therefore, is not inappropriately bestowed on the Scriptures by Paul;
and, seeing that its instruction is now rendered more full and clear by
the addition of the Gospel, what can be said but that we ought assuredly
to hope that the usefulness, of which Paul speaks, will be much more
displayed, if we are willing to make trial and receive it?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc43015.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p19"></span> “Why does the holy Apostle, both here and
elsewhere, speak of the ‘last days,’ when he forewarns believers that
they must prepare themselves, and make provision for many troubles and
annoyances? It is because this fancy was so common, that matters would
go much better than before; because, formerly, the prophets, when
speaking of the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, said that everything
would be astonishingly reformed, that the world would obey God, that his
majesty would be adored by the high and the low, that every mouth would
sing his praise, and every knee would bow before him. In short, when we
hear such promises, we think that we must be in a state of angelical
holiness, now that Christ has appeared. Many concluded, in their
mistaken fancy, that, since the coming of the Redeemer, nothing but the
most correct virtue and modesty would ever be seen, and that everything
would be so thoroughly regulated, that there would be no more vices in
the world.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc43015.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="iv.iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.i-p25"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.i-p25.1"></span>Mais ce
sont tous vices cachez, et qui n’apparoissent pas devant les yeux des
hommes.” — “But all these are concealed vices, and do not show
themselves before the eyes of men.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc43015.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p19"></span> “Thus we see, that the Holy Spirit, by
the mouth of Paul, holds out two reasons to fortify us. When we see that
Satan opposes, and that the truth of God is not received by all, but
that there are bad men who labor to pervert everything, and who slander
and falsify the truth, here are consolations provided for us. In the
first place, that our Lord treats us in the same manner as he has
treated the Church in all ages, that those who lived before us were not
better situated in this respect; for God tried them by sending false
pastors, or rather by giving free scope to Satan for sending them. Let
us know what has happened since the law was published. Here is Moses,
who was before the other prophets. Yet already the war was begun, and
that evil has never ceased. If we must now endure the like, let us bear
it with patience; for it is not reasonable to expect that our condition
shall be better or easier than that of Moses, and of others who followed
him. That is one argument. The second is that the result shall be
prosperous and successful. Although we dislike fighting, and though it
appears as if the truth of God were about to perish utterly, let us wait
till God come forth in defense of it, for he will cause wicked men to be
completely disgraced. After they have triumphed, God will, undoubtedly,
discover their baseness, and we shall see how God takes care to support
his cause, though that may not be evident for a time.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc43015.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p24"></span> “Having spoken of the troubles which
were to befall the Church, and having exhorted Timothy to be firm, so as
not to shrink from them, the Apostle adds, that now, for a long time, he
must have been prepared for all this, because he had been taught in a
good school. ‘Thou hast known intimately,’ like one who had followed him
step by step; for such is the import of the word which Paul uses: ‘Thou
hast known well the course which I have pursued.’” — *Fr. Ser*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc43015.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p29.1"></span>Et
tous ceux aussi qui veulent vivre en la crainte de Dieu.” — “And all
those also who wish to live in the fear of God.”

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc43015.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="iv.iv.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ii-p30"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.ii-p30.1"></span>Que
rien ne luy est advenu que tous fideles ne doyvent aussi attendre.” —
“That nothing has happened to him which all believers must not also look
for.”

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc43015.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p16"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iii-p16.1"></span>Si
on demande d’ou vient ceste puissance et facilite de nuire?” — “If it be
asked, Whence comes this power and facility of doing injury?”

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc43015.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="iv.iv.iii-p17.1"></span>Satan les tire, d’un coste et d’autre, a son
plaisir.” — “Satan leads them, on one side or another, at his pleasure.”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc43015.htm#fr_189.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p21"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iii-p21.1"></span>Par
lequel mot il signifie qu’il est requis d’user de jugement et discretion
en cest endroit.” — “By this word, he means that it is necessary to use
judgment and discretion in that matter.”

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc43015.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="iv.iv.iii-p24.1"></span>Et
qui to vent commises ou desquelles plene assurance t’a este donnee.” —
“And which have been intrusted to thee, or of which full assurance hath
been given to thee.”

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc43015.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii-p33"></span> “Who is it that by nature will not
desire his happiness and his salvation? And where could we find it but
in the Holy Scripture, by which it is communicated to us? Woe to us if
we will not listen to God when he speaks to us, seeing that he asks
nothing but our advantage. He does not seek his own profit, for what
need has he of it? We are likewise reminded not to read the Holy
Scripture so as to gratify our fancies, or to draw from it useless
questions. Why? Because it is profitable for salvation, says Paul. Thus,
when I expound the Holy Scripture, I must be guided by this
consideration, that those who hear me may receive profit from the
doctrine which I teach, that they may be edified for salvation. If I
have not that desire, and do not aim at the edification of those who
hear me, I am a sacrilegious person, profaning the word of God. On the
other hand, they who read the Scripture, or who come to the sermon to
listen, if they are in search of some foolish speculation, if they come
here to take their amusement, are guilty of having profaned a thing so
holy.” — *Fr. Ser.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc43016.md)
