[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc43015)  [Next](cc43017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="iv.v.i"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Timothy
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p2"></span>**1**. I charge *thee* therefore before God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing and his kingdom;

<span id="iv.v.i-p3"></span>**1**. Obtestor igitur ego coram Deo et
Domino Iesu Christo, qui judicaturus est vivos et mortuos in apparitione
sua et in regno suo;

<span id="iv.v.i-p4"></span>**2**. Preach the word; be instant in
season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering
and doctrine.

<span id="iv.v.i-p5"></span>**2**. Praedica sermonem, insta tempestivè,
intempestivè; argue, increpa, hortare cum omni lenitate et doctrina.

<span id="iv.v.i-p6"></span>**3**. For the time will come when they will
not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears;

<span id="iv.v.i-p7"></span>**3**. Nam erit tempus, quum sanam doctrinam
non sustinebunt; sed juxta concupiscentias suas coacervabunt sibi
doctores, ut qui prurient auribus,

<span id="iv.v.i-p8"></span>**4**. And they shall turn away *their* ears
from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables.

<span id="iv.v.i-p9"></span>**4**. Et a veritate quidem aures avertent,
ad fabulas autem convertentur.

<span id="iv.v.i-p10"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p11"></span>**1** *I charge thee, therefore, before God
and the Lord Jesus Christ* It is proper to observe carefully the word
*therefore,* by means of which he appropriately connects Scripture with
preaching. This also refutes certain fanatics, who haughtily boast that
they no longer need the aid of teachers, because the reading of
scripture is abundantly sufficient. But Paul, after having spoken of the
usefulness of Scripture, infers not only that all ought to read it, but
that teachers ought to administer it, which is the duty enjoined on
them. Accordingly, as all our wisdom is contained in the Scriptures, and
neither ought we to learn, nor teachers to draw their instructions, from
any other source; so he who, neglecting the assistance of the living
voice, shall satisfy himself with the silent Scripture, will find how
grievous an evil it is to disregard that way of learning which has been
enjoined by *God* and *Christ.* Let us remember, I say, that the reading
of Scripture is recommended to us in such a manner as not to hinder, in
the smallest degree, the ministry of pastors; and, therefore, let
believers endeavor to profit both in reading and in hearing; for not in
vain hath God ordained both of them.

<span id="iv.v.i-p12"></span>Here, as in a very weighty matter, Paul
adds a solemn charge, exhibiting to Timothy, God as the avenger, and
Christ as the judge, if he shall cease to discharge his office of
teaching. And, indeed, in like manner as God showed by an inestimable
pledge, when he spared not his only-begotten Son, how great is the care
which he has for the Church, so he will not suffer to remain unpunished
the negligence of pastors, through whom souls, which he hath redeemed at
so costly a price, perish or are exposed as a prey.

<span id="iv.v.i-p13"></span>*Who shall judge the living and the dead*
More especially the Apostle fixes attention on the judgment of Christ;
because, as we are his representatives, so he will demand a more strict
account of evil administration. By “the living and the dead” are meant
those whom he shall find still alive at his coming, and likewise those
who shall have died. There will therefore be none that escape his
judgment.

<span id="iv.v.i-p14"></span>*The appearance of Christ and his kingdom*
mean the same thing; for although he now reigns in heaven and earth, yet
hitherto his reign is not clearly manifested, but, on the contrary, is
obscurely hidden under the cross, and is violently assailed by enemies.
His kingdom will therefore be established at that time when, having
vanquished his enemies, and either removed or reduced to nothing every
opposing power, he shall display his majesty.

<span id="iv.v.i-p15"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p16"></span>**2** *Be instant in season, out of season*
By these words he recommends not only constancy, but likewise
earnestness, so as to overcome all hindrances and difficulties; for,
being, by nature, exceedingly effeminate or slothful, we easily yield to
the slightest opposition, and sometimes we gladly seek apologies for our
slothfulness. Let us now consider how many arts Satan employs to stop
our course, and how slow to follow, and how soon wearied are those who
are called. Consequently the gospel will not long maintain its place, if
pastors do not urge it earnestly.

<span id="iv.v.i-p17"></span>Moreover, this earnestness must relate both
to the pastor and to the people; to the pastor, that he may not devote
himself to the office of teaching merely at his own times and according
to his own convenience, but that, shrinking neither from toils nor from
annoyances, he may exercise his faculties to the utmost. So far as
regards the people, there is constancy and earnestness, when they arouse
those who are asleep, when they lay their hands on those who are
hurrying in a wrong direction, and when they correct the trivial
occupations of the world. To explain more fully in what respects the
pastor must “be instant,” the Apostle adds —

<span id="iv.v.i-p18"></span>*Reprove, rebuke, exhort* By these words he
means, that we have need of many excitements to urge us to advance in
the right course; for if we were as teachable as we ought to be, a
minister of Christ would draw us along by the slightest expression of
his will. But now, not even moderate exhortations, to say nothing of
sound advices, are sufficient for shaking off our sluggishness, if there
be not increased vehemence of reproofs and threatenings.

<span id="iv.v.i-p19"></span>*With all gentleness and doctrine. A* very
necessary exception; for reproofs either fall through their own
violence, or vanish into smoke, if they do not rest on *doctrine* Both
exhortations and reproofs are merely aids to doctrine, and, therefore,
have little weight without it. We see instances of this in those who
have merely a large measure of zeal and bitterness, and are not
furnished with solid doctrine. Such men toil very hard, utter loud
cries, make a great noise, and all to no purpose, because they build
without a foundation. I speak of men who, in other respects, are good,
but with little learning, and excessive warmth; for they who employ all
the energy that they possess in battling against sound doctrine, are far
more dangerous, and do not deserve to be mentioned here at all.

<span id="iv.v.i-p20"></span>In short, Paul means that reproofs are
founded on doctrine, in order that they may not be justly despised as
frivolous. Secondly, he means that keenness is moderated by gentleness;
for nothing is more difficult than to set a limit to our zeal, when we
have once become warm. Now when we are carried away by impatience, our
exertions are altogether fruitless. Our harshness not only exposes us to
ridicule, but also irritates the minds of the people. Besides, keen and
violent men seem generally unable to endure the obstinacy of those with
whom they are brought into intercourse, and cannot submit to many
annoyances and insults, which nevertheless must be digested, if we are
desirous to be useful. Let severity be therefore mingled with this
seasoning of gentleness, that it may be known to proceed from a peaceful
heart.

<span id="iv.v.i-p21"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p22"></span>**3** *For there will be a time*  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md) From the very depravity of men he
shews how careful pastors ought to be; for soon shall the gospel be
extinguished, and perish from the remembrance of men, if godly teachers
do not labor with all their might to defend it. But he means that we
must avail ourselves of the opportunity, while there is any reverence
for Christ; as if one should say that, when a storm is at hand, we must
not labor remissly, but must hasten with all diligence, because there
will not afterwards be an equally fit season.

<span id="iv.v.i-p24"></span>*When they will not endure sound doctrine*
This means that they will not only dislike and despise, but will even
hate, sound doctrine; and he calls it “sound (or healthful) doctrine,”
with reference to the effect produced, because it actually instructs to
godliness. In the next verse he pronounces the same doctrine to be
*truth*, and contrasts it with *fables,* that is, useless imaginations,
by which the simplicity of the gospel is corrupted.

<span id="iv.v.i-p25"></span>First, let us learn from it, that the more
extraordinary the eagerness of wicked men to despise the doctrine of
Christ, the more zealous should godly ministers be to defend it, and the
more strenuous should be their efforts to preserve it entire; and not
only so, but also by their diligence to ward off the attacks of Satan.
And if ever this ought to have been done, the great ingratitude of men
has now rendered it more than necessary; for they who at first receive
the gospel warmly, and make a show of some kind of uncommon zeal,
afterwards contract dislike, which is by and by followed by loathing;
others, from the very outset, either reject it furiously, or,
contemptuously lending an ear, treat it with mockery; while others, not
suffering the yoke to be laid on their neck, kick at it, and, through
hatred of holy discipline, are altogether estranged from Christ and,
what is worse, from being friends become open enemies. So far from this
being a good reason why we should be discouraged and give way, we ought
to fight against such monstrous ingratitude, and even to strive with
greater earnestness than if all were gladly embracing Christ offered to
them.

<span id="iv.v.i-p26"></span>Secondly, having been told that men will
thus despise and even reject the word of God, we ought not to stand
amazed as if it were a new spectacle, when we see actually accomplished
that which the Holy Spirit tells us will happen. And indeed, being by
nature prone to vanity, it is no new or uncommon timing, if we lend an
ear more willingly to fables than to truth.

<span id="iv.v.i-p27"></span>Lastly, the doctrine of the gospel, being
plain and mean in its aspect, is unsatisfactory partly to our pride, and
partly to our curiosity. And how few are there who are endued with
spiritual taste, so as to relish newness of life and all that relates to
it! Yet Paul foretells some greater impiety of one particular age,
against which he bids Timothy be early on his guard.

<span id="iv.v.i-p28"></span>*Shall heap up to themselves teachers* It
is proper to observe the expression, *heap up,* by which he means that
the madness of men will be so great, that they will not be satisfied
with a few deceivers, but will desire to have a vast multitude; for, as
there is an unsatiable longing for those things which are unprofitable
and destructive, so the world seeks, on all sides and without end, all
the methods that it can contrive and imagine for destroying itself; and
the devil has always at hand a sufficiently large number of such
teachers as the world desires to have. There has always been a plentiful
harvest of wicked men, as there is in the present day; and therefore
Satan never has any lack of ministers to deceive men, as he never has
any lack of the means of deceiving.

<span id="iv.v.i-p29"></span>Indeed, this monstrous depravity, which
almost constantly prevails among men, deserves that God, and his
healthful doctrine, should be either rejected or despised by them, and
that they should more gladly embrace falsehood. Accordingly, that false
teachers frequently abound, and that they sometimes multiply like a nest
of hornets, should be ascribed by us to the righteous vengeance of God.
We deserve to be covered and choked by that kind of filth, seeing that
the truth of God finds no place in us, or, if it has found entrance, is
immediately driven from its possession; and since we are so much
addicted to fabulous notions, that we never think that we have too great
a multitude of deceivers. Thus what all abomination of Monks is there in
Popery! If once godly pastor were to be supported, instead of ten Monks
and as many priests, we should presently hear nothing else than
complaints about the great expense.  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md)

<span id="iv.v.i-p31"></span>The disposition of the world is therefore
such that, by “heaping up” with insatiable desire innumerable deceivers,
it desires to banish all that belongs to God. Nor is there any other
cause of so many errors than that men, of their own accord, choose to be
deceived rather than to be properly instructed. And that is the reason
why Paul adds the expression, *itching ears*.  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md) When he wishes to assign a cause for
so great an evil, he makes use of an elegant metaphor, by which he
means, that the world will have ears so refined, and so excessively
desirous of novelty, that it will collect for itself various
instructors, and will be incessantly carried away by new inventions. The
only remedy for this vice is, that believers be instructed to adhere
closely to the pure doctrine of the gospel.

<span id="iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[2 Timothy
4:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p2"></span>**5**. But watch thou in all things, endure
afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, make full proof of thy
ministry.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p3"></span>**5**. Tu verò vigila in omnibus, perfer
afflictiones, opus fac Evangelistae, ministerium tuum probatum redde.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p4"></span>**6**. For I am now ready to be offered,
and the time of my departure is at hand.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p5"></span>**6**. Ego enim jam immolor, et tempus meae
resolutionis instat.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p6"></span>**7**. I have fought a good fight, I have
finished *my* course, I have kept the faith:

<span id="iv.v.ii-p7"></span>**7**. Bonum certamen certavi, cursum
consummavi, fidem servavi.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p8"></span>**8**. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give
me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p9"></span>**8**. Quod superest, reposita est mihi
justitiæ corona, quam reddet mihi Dominus in illa die justus judex, nec
solum mihi, sed etiam omnibus, qui diligunt adventum ejus.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p10"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p11"></span>**5** *But watch thou in all things*. He
proceeds with the former exhortation, to the effect that the more
grievous the diseases are, the more earnestly Timothy may labor to cure
them; and that the nearer dangers are at hand, the more diligently he
may keep watch. And because the ministers of Christ, when they
faithfully discharge their office, are immediately called to engage in
combats, he at the same time reminds Timothy to be firm and immovable in
enduring adversity.  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p13"></span>*Do the work of an Evangelist* That is,
“Do that which belongs to an evangelist.” Whether he denotes generally
by this term any ministers of the gospel, or whether this was a special
office, is doubtful; but I am more inclined to the second opinion,
because from <span id="iv.v.ii-p13.1"></span>[Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.v.ii-p13.1"></span>
it is clearly evident that this was an intermediate class between
apostles and pastors, so that the evangelists ranked as assistants next
to the apostles. It is also more probable that Timothy, whom Paul had
associated with himself as his closest companion in all things,
surpassed ordinary pastors in rank and dignity of office, than that he
was only one of their number. Besides, to mention an honorable title of
office tends not only to encourage him, but to recommend his authority
to others; and Paul had in view both of these objects.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p14"></span>*Render thy ministry approved* If we read
this clause as in the old translation, “Fulfill thy ministry,” the
meaning will be: “Thou canst not fully discharge the office intrusted to
thee but by doing those things which I have enjoined. Wherefore see that
you fail not in the middle of the course.” But because πληροφορεῖν
commonly means “to render certain” or “to prove,” I prefer the following
meaning, which is also most agreeable to the context, — that Timothy, by
watching, and by patiently enduring afflictions, and by constant
teaching, will succeed in having the truth of his ministry established,
because from such marks all will acknowledge him to be a good and
faithful minister of Christ.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p15"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p16"></span>**6** *For I am now offered as a
sacrifice* He assigns the reason for the solemn protestation which he
employed. As if he had said, “So long as I lived, I stretched out my
hand to thee; my constant exhortations were not withheld from thee; thou
hast been much aided by my advices, and much confirmed by my example;
the time is now come, that thou shouldst be thine own teacher and
exhorter, and shouldst begin to swim without support: beware lest any
change in thee be observed at my death.”

<span id="iv.v.ii-p17"></span>*And the time of my dissolution is at
hand*  <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md) We must attend to the
modes of expression by which he denotes his death. By the word
*dissolution* he means that we do not altogether perish when we die;
because it is only a separation of the soul from the body. Hence we
infer, that death is nothing else than a departure of the soul from the
body — a definition which contains a testimony of the immortality of the
soul.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p19"></span>“Sacrifice” was a term peculiarly
applicable to the death of Paul, which was inflicted on him for
maintaining the truth of Christ; for, although all believers, both by
their obedient life and by their death, are victims or offerings
acceptable to God, yet martyrs are sacrificed in a more excellent
manner, by shedding their blood for the name of Christ. Besides, the
word σπένδεσθαι which Paul here employs, does not denote every kind of
sacrifice, but that which serves for ratifying covenants. Accordingly,
in this passage, he means the same thing which he states more clearly
when he says,

<span id="iv.v.ii-p20"></span>“But if I am offered on the sacrifice of
your faith, I rejoice.” (<span id="iv.v.ii-p20.1"></span>[Php
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#017)<span id="iv.v.ii-p20.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p21"></span>For there he means that the faith of the
Philippians was ratified by his death, in precisely the same manner that
covenants were ratified in ancient times by sacrifices of slain beasts;
not that the certainty of our faith is founded, strictly speaking, on
the steadfastness of the martyrs, but because it tends greatly to
confirm us. Paul has here adorned his death by a magnificent
commendation, when he called it the ratification of his doctrine, that
believers, instead of sinking into despondency — as frequently happens —
might be more encouraged by it to persevere.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p22"></span>*The time of dissolution* This mode of
expression is also worthy of notice, because he beautifully lessens the
excessive dread of death by pointing out its effect and its nature. How
comes it that men are so greatly dismayed at any mention of death, but
because they think that they perish utterly when they die? On the
contrary, Paul, by calling it “Dissolution,” affirms that man does not
perish, but teaches that the soul is merely separated from the body. It
is with the same object that he fearlessly declares that “the time is at
hand,” which he could not have done unless he had despised death; for
although this is a natural feeling, which can never be entirely taken
away, that man dreads and shrinks from death, yet that terror must be
vanquished by faith, that it may not prevent us from departing form this
world in an obedient manner, whenever God shall call us.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p23"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p24"></span>**7** *I have fought the good fight*
Because it is customary to form a judgment from the event, Paul’s fight
might have been condemned on the ground that it did not end happily. He
therefore boasts that it is excellent, whatever may be the light in
which it is regarded by the world. This declaration is a testimony of
eminent faith; for not only was Paul accounted wretched in the opinion
of all, but his death also was to be ignominious. Who then would not
have said that he fought without success? But he does not rely on the
corrupt judgments of men. On the contrary, by magnanimous courage he
rises above every calamity, so that nothing opposes his happiness and
glory; and therefore he declares “the fight which he fought” to be good
and honorable.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p25"></span>*I have finished my course* He even
congratulates himself on his death, because it may be regarded as the
goal or termination of his course. We know that they who run a race have
gained their wish when they have reached the goal. In this manner also
he affirms that to Christ’s combatants death is desirable, because it
puts an end to their labors; and, on the other hand, he likewise
declares that we ought never to rest in this life, because it is of no
advantage to have run well and constantly from the beginning to the
middle of the course, if we do not reach the goal.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p26"></span>*I have kept the faith*  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md) This may have a twofold meaning,
either that to the last he was a faithful soldier to his captain, or
that he continued in the right doctrine. Both meanings will be highly
appropriate; and indeed he could not make his fidelity acceptable to the
Lord in any other way then by constantly professing, the pure doctrine
of the gospel. Yet I have no doubt that he alludes to the solemn oath
taken by soldiers; as if he had said that he was a good and faithful
soldier to his captain.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p28"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p29"></span>**8** *Henceforth there is laid up for me
the crown of righteousness* Having boasted of having fought his fight
and finished his course, and kept the faith, he now affirms that he has
not labored in vain. Now it is possible to put forth strenuous exertion,
and yet to be defrauded of the reward which is due. But Paul says that
his reward is sure. This certainty arises from turning his eyes to the
day of the resurrection, and this is what we also ought to do; for all
around we see nothing but death, and therefore we ought not to keep our
eye fixed on the outward appearance of the world, but, on the contrary,
to hold out to our minds the coming of Christ. The consequences will be,
that nothing can detract from our happiness.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p30"></span>*Which the Lord the righteous Judge will
render to me* Because he mentions “the crown of righteousness” and “the
righteous Judge,” and employs the word “render,” the Papists endeavor,
by means of this passage, to build up the merits of works in opposition
to the grace of God. But their reasoning is absurd. Justification by
free grace, which is bestowed on us through faith, is not at variance
within the rewarding of works, but, on the contrary, those two
statements perfectly agree, that a man is justified freely through the
grace of Christ, and yet that God will render to him the reward of
works; for as soon as God has received us into favor, he likewise
accepts our works, so as even to deign to give them a reward, though it
is not due to them.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p31"></span>Here two blunders are committed by the
Papists; first, in arguing that we deserve something from God, because
we do well by virtue of our freewill; and secondly, in holding that God
is bound to us, as if our salvation proceeded from anything else than
from his grace. But it does not follow that God owes anything to us,
because he renders righteously what he renders; for he is righteous even
in those acts of kindness which are of free grace. And he “renders the
reward” which he has promised, not because we take the lead by any act
of obedience, but because, in the same course of liberality in which he
has begun to act toward us, he follows up his former gifts by those
which are afterwards bestowed. In vain, therefore, and to no purpose, do
the Papists labor to prove from this, that good works proceed from the
power of freewill; because there is no absurdity in saying that God
crowns in us his own gifts. Not less absurdly and foolishly do they
endeavor, by means of this passage, to destroy the righteousness of
faith; since the goodness of God — by which he graciously embraces a
man, not imputing to him his sins — is not inconsistent with that
rewarding of works which he will render by the same kindness with which
he made the promise.  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p33"></span>*And not to me only* That all the rest of
the believers might fight courageously along with him, he invites them
to a participation of the crown; for his unshaken steadfastness could
not have served for an example to *us*, if the same hope of obtaining
the crown had not been held out to us.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p34"></span>*To all who love his coming*  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) This is a singular mark which he
employs in describing believers. And, indeed, wherever faith is strong,
it will not permit their minds to fall asleep in this world, but will
elevate them to the hope of the last resurrection. His meaning therefore
is, that all who are so much devoted to the world, and who love so much
this fleeting life, as not to care about the coming of Christ, and not
to be moved by any desire of it, deprive themselves of immortal glory.
Woe to our stupidity, therefore, which exercises such power over us,
that we never think seriously about the coming of Christ, to which we
ought to give our whole attention. Besides, he excludes from the number
of believers those in whom the coming of Christ produces terror and
alarm; for it cannot be loved unless it be regarded as pleasant and
delightful.

<span id="iv.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>[2 Timothy
4:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p2"></span>**9**. Do thy diligence to come shortly
unto me:

<span id="iv.v.iii-p3"></span>**9**. Da operam, ut ad me venias cito.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p4"></span>**10**. For Demas hath forsaken me, having
loved this present world, and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to
Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p5"></span>**10**. Demas enim me reliquit, amplexus
hoc saeculum, et profectus est Thessalonicam, Crescens in Galliam, Titus
in Dalmatiam.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p6"></span>**11**. Only Luke is with me. Take Mark,
and bring him with thee: for he is profitable to me for the ministry.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p7"></span>**11**. Lucas est solus mecum. Marcum
assume, ut tecum adducas; est enim mihi utilis in ministerium.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p8"></span>**12**. And Tychicus have I sent to
Ephesus.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p9"></span>**12**. Tychicum autem misi Ephesum.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p10"></span>**13**. The cloke that I left at Troas
with Carpus, when thou comest, bring *with thee*, and the books, *but*
especially the parchments.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p11"></span>**13**. Paenulam, quam Troade reliqui
apud Carpum, quum veniens, affer, et libros et membranas.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p13"></span>**9** *Make haste, to come to me
quickly.* As he knew that the time of his death was at hand, there were
many subjects — I doubt not — on which he wished to have a personal
interview with Timothy for the good of the Church; and therefore he does
not hesitate to desire him to come from a country beyond the sea.
Undoubtedly there must have been no trivial reason why he called him
away from a church over which he presided, and at so great a distance.
Hence we may infer how highly important are conferences between such
persons; for what Timothy had learned in a short space of time would be
profitable, for a long period, to all the churches; so that the loss of
half a year, or even of a whole year, was trivial compared with the
compensation gained. And yet it appears from what follows, that Paul
called Timothy with a view to his own individual benefit likewise;
although his own personal matters were not preferred by him to the
advantage of the Church, but it was because it involved the cause of the
gospel, which was common to all believers; for as he defended it from a
prison, so he needed the labors of others to aid in that defense.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p14"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p15"></span>**10** *Having embraced this world* It
was truly base in such a man to prefer the love of this world to Christ.
And yet we must not suppose that he altogether denied Christ or gave
himself up either to ungodliness or to the allurements of the world; but
he merely preferred his private convenience, or his safety, to the life
of Paul. He could not have assisted Paul without many troubles and
vexations, attended by imminent risk of his life; he was exposed to many
reproaches, and must have submitted to many insults, and been
constrained to leave off the care of his own affairs; and, therefore
being overcome by his dislike of the cross, he resolved to consult his
own interests. Nor can it be doubted, that he enjoyed a propitious gale
from the world. That he was one of the leading men may be conjectured on
this ground, that Paul mentions him amidst a very few at (<span
id="iv.v.iii-p15.1"></span>[Col
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p15.1"></span>,) and likewise in the Epistle to Philemon,
(<span id="iv.v.iii-p15.2"></span>[Phm
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p15.2"></span>,) where also he is ranked among Paul’s
assistants; and, therefore, we need not wonder if he censures him so
sharply on this occasion, for having cared more about himself than about
Christ.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p16"></span>Others, whom he afterwards mentions, had
not gone away from him but for good reasons, and with his own consent.
Hence it is evident that he did not study his own advantage, so as to
deprive churches of their pastors, but only to obtain from them some
relief. Undoubtedly he was always careful to invite to come to him, or
to keep along with him, those whose absence would not be injurious to
other churches. For this reason he had sent *Titus to Dalmatia,* and
some to one place and some to another, when he invited Timothy to come
to him. Not only so, but in order that the church at Ephesus may not be
left destitute or forlorn during Timothy’s absence, he sends *Tychicus*
thither, and mentions this circumstance to Timothy, that he may know
that that church will not be in want of one to fill his place during his
absence.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p17"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p18"></span>*Bring the cloak which I left at Troas*
As to the meaning of the word φελόνη,  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md) commentators are not agreed; for some
think that it is a chest or box for containing books, and others that it
is a garment used by travelers, and fitted for defending against cold
and rain. Whether the one interpretation or the other be adopted, how
comes it that Paul should give orders to have either a garment or a
chest brought to him from a place so distant, as if there were not
workmen, or as if there were not abundance both of cloth and timber? If
it be said, that it was a chest filled with books, or manuscripts, or
epistles, the difficulty will be solved; for such materials could not
have been procured at any price. But, because many will not admit the
conjecture, I willingly translate it by the word *cloak.* Nor is there
any absurdity in saying that Paul desired to have it brought from so
great a distance, because that garment, through long use, would be more
comfortable for him, and he wished to avoid expense.  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md)

<span id="iv.v.iii-p21"></span>Yet (to own the truth) I give the
preference to the former interpretation; more especially because Paul
immediately afterwards mentions *books and parchments*. It is evident
from this, that the Apostle had not given over reading, though he was
already preparing for death. Where are those who think that they have
made so great progress that they do not need any more exercise? Which of
them will dare to compare himself with Paul? Still more does this
expression refute the madness of those men who — despising books, and
condemning all reading — boast of nothing but their own ἐνθουσιασμοὺς
divine inspirations.  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) But let us
know that this passage gives to all believers  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) a recommendation of constant reading,
that they may profit by it.  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md)

<span id="iv.v.iii-p25"></span>Here some one will ask, “What does Paul
mean by asking for a robe or cloak, if he perceived that his death was
at hand?” This difficulty also induces me to interpret the word as
denoting a chest, though there might have been some use of the “cloak”
which is unknown in the present day; and therefore I give myself little
trouble about these matters.

<span id="iv.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>[2 Timothy
4:14-22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p2"></span>**14**. Alexander the coppersmith did me
much evil: the Lord reward him according to his works:

<span id="iv.v.iv-p3"></span>**14**. Alexander faber aerarius multis me
malis affecit: reddat illi Dominus juxta facta ipsius.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p4"></span>**15**. Of whom be thou ware also; for he
hath greatly withstood our words.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p5"></span>**15**. Quem et tu cave; vehementer enim
restitit verbis nostris.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p6"></span>**16**. At my first answer no man stood
with me, but all *men* forsook me: *I pray God* that it may not be laid
to their charge.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p7"></span>**16**. In prima defensione nemo mihi
affuit, sed omnes me deseruerunt: ne illis imputetur.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p8"></span>**17**. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with
me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known,
and *that* all the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the
mouth of the lion.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p9"></span>**17**. Sed dominus mihi affit, et
corroboravit me, ut per me praeconium confirmaretur, et qudirent omnes
Gentes.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p10"></span>**18**. And the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil work, and will preserve *me* unto his heavenly kingdom: to
whom *be* glory for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p11"></span>**18**. Et ereptus fui ex ore leonis, et
eripiet me Dominus ex omni facto (*vel, opere*) malo, servabitquie in
regnum suum caeleste, cui gloria in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p12"></span>**19**. Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the
household of Onesiphorus.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p13"></span>**19**. Saluta Priscam et Aquilam et
familiam Onesiphori.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p14"></span>**20**. Erastus abode at Corinth: but
Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p15"></span>**20**. Erastus mansit Corinthi: Trophimum
autem reliqui in Mileti languentem.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p16"></span>**21**. Do thy diligence to come before
winter. Eubulus greeteth thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and
all the brethren.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p17"></span>**21**. Da operam, ut ante hyemem venias.
Salutat to Eubulus et Pudens et Linus et Claudia et fratres omnes.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p18"></span>**22**. The Lord Jesus Christ *be* with
thy spirit. Grace *be* with you. Amen.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p19"></span>**22**. Dominus Iesus Christus cum spiritu
tuo. Gratia vobiscum. Amen.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p20"></span>The second epistle unto Timotheus,
ordained the first bishop of the church of the Ephesians, was written
from Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero the second time.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p21"></span>Scripta e Roma secunda ad Timotheum, qui
primus Ephesi ordinatus fuit Episcopus, quum, Paulus iterum sisteretur
Caesari Neroni.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p22"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p23"></span>**14** *Alexander the coppersmith* In this
man was exhibited a shocking instance of apostasy. He had made
profession of some zeal in advancing the reign of Christ, against which
he afterwards carried on open war. No class of enemies is more dangerous
or more envenomed than this. But from the beginning, the Lord determined
that his Church should not be exempted from this evil, lest our courage
should fail when we are tried by any of the same kind.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p24"></span>*Hath done me many evil things* It is
proper to observe, what are the “many evils” which Paul complains that
Alexander brought upon him. They consisted in this, that he opposed his
doctrine. Alexander was an artificer, not prepared by the learning of
the schools for being a great disputer; but domestic enemies have always
been abundantly able to do injury. And the wickedness of such men always
obtains credit in the world, so that malicious and impudent ignorance
sometimes creates trouble and difficulty greater than the highest
abilities accompanied by learning. Besides, when the Lord brings his
servants into contest with persons of this low and base class, he
purposely withdraws them from the view of the world, that they may not
indulge in ostentatious display.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p25"></span>From Paul’s words, (<span
id="iv.v.iv-p25.1"></span>[2Ti
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#015)<span id="iv.v.iv-p25.1"></span>,.md)
*for he vehemently opposed our discourses,* we may infer that he had
committed no greater offense than an attack on sound doctrine; for if
Alexander had wounded his person, or committed an assault on him, he
would have endured it patiently; but when the truth of God is assailed,
his holy breast burns with indignation, because, in all the members of
Christ that saying must hold good,

<span id="iv.v.iv-p26"></span>“The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up.”
(<span id="iv.v.iv-p26.1"></span>[Ps
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)<span id="iv.v.iv-p26.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.iv-p27"></span>And this is also the reason of the stern
imprecation into which he breaks out, that *the Lord may reward him
according to his works. A* little afterwards, when he complains that
*all had forsaken him,* (<span id="iv.v.iv-p27.1"></span>[Ps
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)<span id="iv.v.iv-p27.1"></span>,.md)
still he does not call down the vengeance of God on them, but, on the
contrary, appears as their intercessor, pleading that they may obtain
pardon. So mild and so merciful to all others, how comes it that he
shows himself so harsh and inexorable towards this individual? The
reason is this. Because some had fallen through fear and weakness, he
desires that the Lord would forgive them; for in this manner we ought to
have compassion on the weakness of brethren. But because this man rose
against God with malice and sacrilegious hardihood, and openly attacked
known truth, such impiety had no claim to compassion.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p28"></span>We must not imagine, therefore, that Paul
was moved by excessive warmth of temper, when he broke out into this
imprecation; for it was from the Spirit of God, and through a well
regulated zeal, that he wished eternal perdition to Alexander, and mercy
to the others. Seeing that it is by the guidance of the Spirit that Paul
pronounces a heavenly judgment from on high, we may infer from this
passage, how dear to God is his truth, for attacking which he punishes
so severely. Especially it ought to be observed how detestable a crime
it is, to fight with deliberate malice against the true religion

<span id="iv.v.iv-p29"></span>But lest any person, by falsely imitating
the Apostle, should rashly utter similar imprecations, there are three
things here that deserve notice. First, let us not avenge the injuries
done to ourselves, lest self-love and a regard to our private advantage
should move us violently, as frequently happens. Secondly, while we
maintain the glory of God, let us not mingle with it our own passions,
which always disturb good order. Thirdly, let us not pronounce sentence
against every person without discrimination, but only against
reprobates, who, by their impiety, give evidence that such is their true
character; and thus our wishes will agree with God’s own judgment
otherwise there is ground to fear that the same reply may be made to us
that Christ made to the disciples who thundered indiscriminately against
all who did not comply with their views,

<span id="iv.v.iv-p30"></span>“Ye know not of what spirit ye are.”
(<span id="iv.v.iv-p30.1"></span>[Lu
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055)<span id="iv.v.iv-p30.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iv.v.iv-p31"></span>They thought that they had Elijah as their
supporter, (<span id="iv.v.iv-p31.1"></span>[2Ki
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#010)<span id="iv.v.iv-p31.1"></span>,.md)
who prayed to the Lord in the same manner; but because they differed
widely from the spirit of Elijah, the imitation was absurd. It is
therefore necessary, that the Lord should reveal his judgment before we
burst forth into such imprecations; and wish that by his Spirit he
should restrain and guide our zeal. And whenever we call to our
remembrance the vehemence of Paul against a single individual, let us
also recollect his amazing meekness towards those who had so basely
forsaken him, that we may learn, by his example, to have compassion on
the weakness of our brethren.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p32"></span>Here I wish to put a question to those who
pretend that Peter presided over the church at Rome. Where was he at
that time? According to their opinion, he was not dead; for they tell
us, that exactly a year intervened between his death and that of Paul.
Besides, they extend his pontificate to seven years. Here Paul mentions
his first defense: his second appearance before the court would not be
quite so soon. In order that Peter may not lose the title of Pope, must
he endure to be charged with the guilt of so shameful a revolt?
Certainly, when the whole matter has been duly examined, we shall find
that everything that has been believed about his Popedom is fabulous.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p33"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p34"></span>**17** *But the Lord assisted me* He adds
this, in order to remove the scandal which he saw might arise from that
base desertion of his cause.  <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md)
Though the church at Rome had failed to perform its duty, he affirms
that the gospel had suffered no loss by it, because, leaning on heavenly
power, he was himself fully able to bear the whole burden, and was so
far from being discouraged by the influence of that fear which seized on
all, that it became only the more evident that the grace of God has no
need of receiving aid from any other quarter. He does not boast of his
courage, but gives thanks to the Lord; that, when reduced to
extremities, he did not give way nor lose heart under so dangerous a
temptation. He therefore acknowledges that he was supported by the arm
of the Lord, and is satisfied with this, that the inward grace of God
served for a shield to defend him against every assault. He assigns the
reason —

<span id="iv.v.iv-p36"></span>*That the proclamation might be confirmed*
The word “proclamation” is employed by him to denote the office of
publishing the gospel among the Gentiles, which was especially assigned
to him;  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) for the preaching of
others did not so much resemble a proclamation, in consequence of being
confined to the Jews. And with good reason does he make use of this word
in many passages. It was no small confirmation of his ministry, that,
when the whole world foamed with madness against him, and on the other
hand, all human assistance failed him, still he remained unshaken. Thus
he gave practical demonstration that his apostleship was from Christ.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p38"></span>He now describes the manner of the
confirmation, *that all the Gentiles might hear* that the Lord had so
powerfully assisted him; for from this event they might infer that both
their own calling and that of Paul were from the Lord.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p39"></span>*And I was delivered out of the mouth of
the lion.* By the word “lion,” many suppose that he means Nero. For my
part, I rather think that he makes use of this expression to denote
danger in general; as if he had said, “out of a blazing fire,” or “out
of the jaws of death.” He means that it was not without wonderful
assistance from God, that he escaped, the danger being so great that but
for this he must have been immediately swallowed up.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p40"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p41"></span>**18** *And the Lord will deliver me from
every evil work* He declares, that he hopes the same for the future; not
that he will escape death, but that he will not be vanquished by Satan,
or turn aside from the right course. This is what we ought chiefly to
desire, not that the interests of the body may be promoted, but that we
may rise superior to every temptation, and may be ready to suffer a
hundred deaths rather than that it should come into our mind to pollute
ourselves by any “evil work.” Yet I am well aware, that there are some
who take the expression *evil work* in a passive sense, as denoting the
violence of wicked men, as if Paul had said, “The Lord will not suffer
wicked men to do me any injury.” But the other meaning is far more
appropriate, that he will preserve him pure and unblemished from every
wicked action; for he immediately adds, *to his heavenly kingdom,* by
which he means that that alone is true salvation, when the Lord — either
by life or by death — conducts us into his kingdom.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p42"></span>This is a remarkable passage for
maintaining the uninterrupted communication of the grace of God, in
opposition to the Papists. After having confessed that the beginning of
salvation is from God, they ascribe the continuation of it to freewill;
so that in this way perseverance is not a heavenly gift, but a virtue of
man. And Paul, by ascribing to God this work of “preserving us to his
kingdom,” openly affirms that we are guided by his hand during the whole
course of our life, till, having discharged the whole of our warfare, we
obtain the victory. And we have a memorable instance of this in Demas,
whom he mentioned a little before, because, from being a noble champion
of Christ, he had become a base deserter. All that follows has been seen
by us formerly, and therefore does not need additional exposition.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p43"></span>END OF THE SECOND EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc43016.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="iv.v.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p23"></span> “<span id="iv.v.i-p23.1"></span>Car un
temps viendra.” — “For a time will come.”

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc43016.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="iv.v.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p30"></span> “<span
id="iv.v.i-p30.1"></span>Incontinent on n’orroit autre chose que
plaintes de la trop grande despense.”

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc43016.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="iv.v.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p32"></span> “The greater part cannot endure
corrections, or threatenings, or even simple doctrine. When we denounce
vices, though we do not employ violent language, they think that all is
lost. Never was the world so obstinately wicked as it now is, and those
who have made a profession of the gospel appear to endeavor, as far as
they can, to destroy the grace of God. For we are not speaking about
Papists only, who fight furiously against us, but of those who adhere to
the Protestant Reformation of the Gospel. We see that they would wish to
be like unbridled calves. (They care not about a yoke, or government, or
anything of that sort.) Let them be allowed to do what they please, let
blasphemies and all licentious conduct be permitted; it is all one,
provided that they have no form of ceremony, and that they despise the
Pope and idolaters. This is the way in which many who make a profession
of the gospel would wish to be governed, but the reason is, that they
have ‘itching ears.’” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc43016.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p12"></span> “When the devil has raised his standard,
and when scandals and disturbances abound everywhere, we cannot be
sufficiently attentive to guard against them, unless we are fortified by
patience, and are not discouraged by the adversity which we must endure.
If this warning ever was advantageous, how exceedingly necessary is it
at the present day! Has not the world arrived at the highest pitch of
iniquity? We see that the majority furiously reject the gospel. As to
others who pretend to welcome the gospel, what sort of obedience do they
render to it? There is so much contempt and so much pride, that, as soon
as vices are reproved, or more sharpness is used than suits the taste of
those who would wish to have full permission to act wickedly, and whose
sole aim is to destroy everything, they are filled with spite. Although
Papists will permit their preaching Friars to cry out and storm against
them, and at the same time do nothing but steep themselves in lies to
their destruction, they who openly declare that they wish the
reformation of the gospel cannot endure to be reproved when it is
necessary, but gnash their teeth against God, and fulfill what Paul says
to the Corinthians, that if deceivers came to impose upon them, they
would bear with all tyranny, and would be quiet when they were buffeted;
but if we teach them faithfully in the name of God and for their
salvation, they are so fastidious that a single word will provoke them
to rebellion; and if we persevere in doing our duty, war will be
immediately declared. Would to God that these things were not so visible
amongst us as they are!*”* — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc43016.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="iv.v.ii-p18.1"></span>Car de
moy je m’en vay maintenant estre sacrifie.” — “For, for my part, I am
going to be now sacrificed.”

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc43016.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p27"></span> “This word ‘Faith’ may indeed be taken
for Fidelity; as if he had said that he was loyal to our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that he never flinched, that he always performed what
belonged to his office. But we may also take this word faith in its
ordinary meaning, that Paul did not turn aside from the pure simplicity
of the gospel, and even that he relied on the promises of salvation
which had been given to him, and, having preached to others, shewed that
he was in earnest in what he spoke. For, indeed, all the loyalty which
God demands from us proceeds from our adhering firmly to his word, and
being founded on it in such a manner that we shall not be moved by any
storm or tempest that may arise.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc43016.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p32"></span> “The Papists themselves ought to observe
carefully what was said by one of those whom they call their Doctors.
‘How would God render the crown as a righteous Judge, if he had not
first given grace as a merciful Father? And how would there have been
righteousness in us, had it not been preceded by the grace which
justifies us? And how would that crown have been rendered as due, had
not all that we have — been given when it was not due?’ These are the
words of Augustin; and although the Papists do not choose to keep by the
Holy Scripture, they ought at least not to be so base as to renounce
that which they pretend to hold. But even this is not all. It is true
that it is a doctrine which well deserves to be embraced, that God
cannot be a righteous Judge to save us, unless he have been previously
declared to be in the highest degree a merciful Father; that there will
be no righteousness in us but that which he has placed there; and that
he cannot reward us but by crowning his gifts. But it is also true,
that, though God has given us grace to serve him, though we have
laboriously done, according to our ability, all that was possible for
us, though we have done so well that God accepts of it all; still there
will be much to censure in all the best works that we have done, and the
greatest virtue that can be perceived in us will be vicious.” — *Fr.*
*Ser.*

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc43016.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p35"></span> “<span id="iv.v.ii-p35.1"></span>Son
apparition.” — “His appearing.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc43016.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p19"></span> “<span id="iv.v.iii-p19.1"></span>Quant
au mot Grec, lequel on traduit manteline.” — “As to the Greek word which
is translated mantle or cloak.”

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc43016.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="iv.v.iii-p20.1"></span>Et
aussi qu’il vouloit eviter la despense d’en achever une autre.” — “And
also because he wished to avoid the expense of buying another.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc43016.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p22"></span> “<span id="iv.v.iii-p22.1"></span>De
leurs inspirations Divines.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc43016.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p23"></span> “Above all, let those whose office it is
to instruct others look well to themselves; for however able they may
be, they are very far from approaching Paul. This being the case, let
them resolve to commit themselves to God, that he may give them grace to
have still more ample knowledge of his will, to communicate to others
what they have received. And when they have faithfully taught during
their whole life, and when they are at the point of death, let them
still desire to profit, in order to impart to their neighbors what they
know; and let great and small, doctors and the common people,
philosophers and idiots, rich and poor, old and young, — let all be
exhorted by what is here taught them, to profit during their whole life,
in such a manner that they shall never slacken their exertions, till
they no longer see in part or in a mirror, but behold the glory of God
face to face. — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc43016.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p24"></span> “<span id="iv.v.iii-p24.1"></span>Comme
un moyen ordonne de Dieu pour profiter.” — “As a method appointed by God
for profiting.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc43016.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p35"></span> “<span id="iv.v.iv-p35.1"></span>De ce
que plusieurs L’avoyent ainsi lachement abandonne en la defense de sa
cause.” — “From many having so basely deserted them in the defense of
his cause.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc43016.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p37"></span> “<span id="iv.v.iv-p37.1"></span>Le mot
Grec signifie proprement une publication et proclamation qui se fait
solennellement et comme a son de trompe.” — “The Greek word properly
denotes a publication or proclamation which is made solemnly, and, as it
were, with the sound of a trumpet.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Titus](cc43017.md)
