[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc43006)  [Next](cc43008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iii.v.i"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Timothy
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p2"></span>**1**. This *is* a true saying, If a man
desire the office of a bishop, he desireth a good work.

<span id="iii.v.i-p3"></span>**1**. Certus sermo, si quis episcopatum
appetit, praeclarum opus desiderat.

<span id="iii.v.i-p4"></span>**2**. A bishop then must be blameless, the
husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to
hospitality, apt to teach;

<span id="iii.v.i-p5"></span>**2**. Oportet ergo Episcopum
irreprehensibilem esse, unius uxoris maritum, sobrium, temperantem,
compositum, (*vel, honestum*,) hospitalem, aptum ad docendum.

<span id="iii.v.i-p6"></span>**3**. Not given to wine, no striker, not
greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous;

<span id="iii.v.i-p7"></span>**3**. Non vinolentum, (*vel, ferocem*,)
non percussorem, non turpiter lucri cupidum, sed aequum, alienum a
pugnis, alienum ab avaritia.

<span id="iii.v.i-p8"></span>**4**. One that ruleth well his own house,
having his children in subjection with all gravity;

<span id="iii.v.i-p9"></span>**4**. Qui domui suae bene praesit, qui
filios habeat in subjectione, cum omni reverentia.

<span id="iii.v.i-p10"></span>**5**. (For if a man know not how to rule
his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?)

<span id="iii.v.i-p11"></span>**5**. Quodsi quis propriae domui praeesse
non novit, ecclesiam Dei quomodo curabit?

<span id="iii.v.i-p12"></span>**6**. Not a novice, lest being lifted up
with pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil.

<span id="iii.v.i-p13"></span>**6**. Non novicium, ne inflatus in
condemnationem incidat diaboli.

<span id="iii.v.i-p14"></span>**7**. Moreover he must have a good report
of them which are without; lest he fall into reproach and the snare of
the devil.

<span id="iii.v.i-p15"></span>**7**. Oportet autem illum et bonum
testimonium habere ab extraneis, ne in probum incidat et laqueum
diaboli.

<span id="iii.v.i-p16"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p17"></span>**1** *It is a true saying* Chrysostom
thinks, that this is the conclusion of the preceding doctrine. But I do
not approve of the opinion; for Paul commonly makes use of this form of
expression as a prelude to what he is about to introduce, Besides, in
the former discourse there was no need of so strong an affirmation; but
what he is now about to say, is somewhat more weighty. Let these words,
therefore, be received as a preface intended to point out the importance
of the subject; for Paul now begins a new discourse about ordaining
pastors, and appointing the government of the Church.

<span id="iii.v.i-p18"></span>*If any one desireth the office of a
bishop*  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) Having forbidden women to
teach, he now takes occasion to speak of the office of a bishop. First,
that it may be more clearly seen that it was not without reason that he
refused to allow women to undertake so arduous a work; secondly, that it
might not be thought that, by excluding women only, he admitted all men
indiscriminately; and, thirdly, because it was highly proper that
Timothy and others should be reminded what conscientious watchfulness
ought to be used in the election of bishops. Thus the context, in my
opinion, is as if Paul had said, that so far are women from being fit
for undertaking so excellent an office, that not even men ought to be
admitted into it without distinction.

<span id="iii.v.i-p20"></span>*He desireth an excellent work* The
Apostle affirms that this is no inconsiderable work, such as any man
might venture to undertake. When he says that it is καλός, I have no
doubt that he alludes to the ancient Greek proverb, often quoted by
Plato, δύσκολα τὰ καλά, which means that “those things which are
excellent, are also arduous and difficult;” and thus he unites
difficulty with excellence, or rather he argues thus, that it does not
belong to every person to discharge the office of a bishop, because it
is a thing of great value.

<span id="iii.v.i-p21"></span>I think that Paul’s meaning is now
sufficiently clear; though none of the commentators, so far as I
perceive, have understood it. The general meaning is, that a selection
ought to be made in admitting bishops, because it is a laborious and
difficult charge; and that they who aim at it should carefully consider
with themselves, whether or not they were able to bear so heavy a
burden. Ignorance is always rash; and a mature knowledge of things makes
a man modest. How comes it that they who have neither ability nor wisdom
often aspire so confidently to hold the reins of government, but because
they rush forward with their eyes shut? On this subject Quintilian
remarked, that the ignorant speak boldly, while the greatest orators
tremble.

<span id="iii.v.i-p22"></span>For the purpose of restraining such
rashness in desiring the office of a bishop, Paul states, first, that
this is not an indolent rank, but a *work*; and next, that it is not any
kind of work, but *excellent,* and therefore toilsome and full of
difficulty, as it actually is. It is no light matter to be a
representative of the Son of God, in discharging an office of such
magnitude, the object of which is to erect and extend the kingdom of
God, to procure the salvation of souls which the Lord himself hath
purchased with his own blood, and to govern the Church, which is God’s
inheritance. But it is not my intention at present to make a sermon, and
Paul will again glance at this subject in the next chapter.

<span id="iii.v.i-p23"></span>Here a question arises: “Is it lawful, in
any way, to desire the office of a bishop?” On the one hand, it appears
to be highly improper for any one to anticipate, by his wish, the
calling of God, and yet Paul, while he censures a rash desire, seems to
permit it to be desired with prudence and modesty. I reply, if ambition
is condemned in other matters, much more severely ought it to be
condemned in “the office of a bishop.” But Paul speaks of a godly
desire, by which holy men wish to employ that knowledge of doctrine
which they possess for the edification of the Church. For, if it were
altogether unlawful to desire the office of a teacher, why should they
who spend all their youth in reading the Holy Scriptures prepare
themselves by learning? What are the theological schools but nurseries
of pastors?

<span id="iii.v.i-p24"></span>Accordingly, they who have been thus
instructed not only may lawfully devote themselves and their labors to
God by a voluntary offering, but even ought to do so, and that too,
before they have been admitted unto the office; provided that,
nevertheless, they do not thrust themselves forward, and do not, even by
their own wish, make themselves bishops, but are only ready to discharge
the office, if their labors shall be required. And if it turn out that,
according to the lawful order; they are not called, let them know that
such was the will of God, and let them not take it in that others have
been preferred to them. But they who, without any selfish motive, shall
have no other wish than to serve God and the Church, will be affected in
this manner; and, at the same time, will have such modesty that they
will not be at all envious, if others be preferred to them as being more
worthy.

<span id="iii.v.i-p25"></span>If any one object, that the government of
the Church is a matter of so great difficulty, that it ought rather to
strike terror into the minds of persons of sound judgment than to excite
them to desire it. I reply, that the desire of great men does not rest
on confidence of their own industry or virtue, but on the assistance of

<span id="iii.v.i-p26"></span>“God, from whom is our sufficiency,”

<span id="iii.v.i-p27"></span>as Paul says elsewhere. (<span
id="iii.v.i-p27.1"></span>[2Co
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.i-p27.1"></span>..md)
At the same time, it is necessary to observe what it is that Paul calls
“the office of a bishop;” and so much the more, because the ancients
were led away, by the custom of their times, from the true meaning; for,
while Paul includes generally all pastors, they understand a bishop to
be one who was elected out of each college to preside over his brethren.
Let us remember, therefore, that this word is of the same import as if
he had called them ministers, or pastors, or presbyters.  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md)

<span id="iii.v.i-p29"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p30"></span>**2** *A bishop, therefore, must be
blameless* The particle *therefore* confirms the exposition which I have
given; for, on account of the dignity of the office, he concludes that
it is requisite that he be a man endowed with rare gifts, and not any
person taken out of the crowd.  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) If
the expression used had been “a good work,” as the ordinary translation
has it, or “an honorable work,” (<span
id="iii.v.i-p31.2"></span>*honestam*,) as Erasmus has translated it, the
inference would not have been suitable.

<span id="iii.v.i-p32"></span>He wishes a bishop to be *blameless*,
 <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) instead of which, in the Epistle
to Titus, He has used (<span id="iii.v.i-p33.3"></span>[Titus
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)<span id="iii.v.i-p33.3"></span>.md)
the word ἀνέγκλητον, meaning by both words, that he must not be marked
by any infamy that would lessen his authority. There will be no one
found among men that is free from every vice; but it is one thing to be
blemished with ordinary vices, which do not hurt the reputation, because
they are found in men of the highest excellence, and another thing to
have a disgraceful name, or to be stained with any baseness. In order,
therefore, that a bishop may not be without authority, he enjoins that
there shall be made a selection of one who has a good and honorable
reputation, and not chargeable with any remarkable vice. Besides, he
does not merely lay down a rule for Timothy what sort of person he must
select, but likewise reminds every one of those who aspire to that rank,
to institute a careful examination of himself and of his life.

<span id="iii.v.i-p34"></span>*The husband of one wife*. It is a
childish fancy to interpret this as meaning “the pastor of a single
church.” Another other exposition has been more generally received, that
the person set apart to that office must be one who has not been more
than once married, that one wife being since dead, so that now he is not
a married man. But both in this passage and in <span
id="iii.v.i-p34.2"></span>[Titus
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.v.i-p34.2"></span>,
the words of the apostle are, “Who is,” and not “Who hath been;” and in
this very Epistle, where he treats of widows, (<span
id="iii.v.i-p34.3"></span>[1Ti
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010)<span id="iii.v.i-p34.3"></span>,.md)
he expressly makes use of the participle of the past tense. Besides, in
this way he would contradict himself; because elsewhere he declares that
he has no wish to lay a snare on the consciences.

<span id="iii.v.i-p35"></span>The only true exposition, therefore, is
that of Chrysostom, that in a bishop he expressly condemns polygamy,
 <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) which at that time the Jews almost
reckoned to be lawful. This corruption was borrowed by them partly from
sinful imitation of the Fathers, (for they who read that Abraham, Jacob,
David, and others of the same class, were married to more wives than one
at the same time, thought that it was lawful for them also to do the
same) and partly from neighboring nations; for the inhabitants of the
East never observed that conscientiousness and fidelity in marriage
which was proper. However that might be, polygamy was exceedingly
prevalent among them;  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) and
therefore with great propriety does Paul enjoin that a bishop should be
free from this stain.

<span id="iii.v.i-p38"></span>And yet I do not disapprove of the opinion
of those who think that the Holy Spirit intended to guard against the
diabolical superstition which afterwards arose; as if he had said, “So
far is it from being right and proper that celibacy should be enforced
on bishops, that marriage is a state highly becoming in all believers.”
In this way, he would not demand it as a thing necessary for them, but
would only praise it as not inconsistent with the dignity of the office.
Yet the view which I have already given is more simple and more solid,
that Paul forbids polygamy in all who hold the office of a bishop,
because it is a mark of an unchaste man, and of one who does not observe
conjugal fidelity.

<span id="iii.v.i-p39"></span>But there it might be objected, that what
is sinful in all ought not to have been condemned or forbidden in
bishops alone. The answer is easy. When it is expressly prohibited to
bishops, it does not therefore follow that it is freely allowed to
others. Beyond all doubt, Paul condemned universally what was contrary
to an unrepealed law of God; for it is a settled enactment,

<span id="iii.v.i-p40"></span>“They shall be one flesh.” (<span
id="iii.v.i-p40.1"></span>[Ge
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="iii.v.i-p40.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.v.i-p41"></span>But he might, to some extent, bear with
that in others which, in a bishop, would have been excessively vile, and
therefore not to be endured.

<span id="iii.v.i-p42"></span>Nor is this a law laid down for the
future, that no bishop, who already has one wife, shall marry a second
or a third, while the first wife is still living; but Paul excludes from
the office of a bishop any one who shall be guilty of such an enormity.
Accordingly, what had been once done, and could not be corrected, he
reluctantly endures, but only in the common people. For what was the
remedy for those who, under Judaism, had fallen into the snare of
polygamy? Should they have divorced their second and third wives? Such a
divorce would not have been free from doing wrong. Since, therefore, the
deed was done, and could not be undone, he left it untouched, but with
this exception, that no bishop should be blemished by such a stain.

<span id="iii.v.i-p43"></span>*Sober, temperate, modest* The word which
we have translated *sober,* Erasmus has translated (<span
id="iii.v.i-p43.1"></span>vigilantem) *watchful.* As the Greek word
νηφάλεος  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) admits of either
signification, the readers may make their own choice. I have preferred
to translate σώφρονα, *temperate,* instead of *sober,* because σωφροσύνη
has a more extensive meaning than sobriety. *Modest* means one who
conducts himself with decency and propriety.

<span id="iii.v.i-p45"></span>*Hospitable*  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) The *“hospitality”* here spoken of, is
toward strangers, and this was very common among the ancients; for it
would have been reckoned disgraceful for respectable persons, and
especially for those who were well known, to lodge in taverns. In the
present day, the state of matters is different; but this virtue is and
always will be highly necessary in a bishop, for many reasons. Besides,
during the cruel persecution of the godly, many persons must have been
constrained frequently to change their habitation; and therefore it was
necessary that the houses of bishops should be a retreat for the exiles.
In those times hard necessity compelled the churches to afford mutual
aid, so that they gave lodgings to one another. Now, if the bishops had
not pointed out the path to others in this department of duty, the
greater part, following their example, would have neglected the exercise
of humanity, and thus the poor fugitives would have been greatly
discouraged.  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md)

<span id="iii.v.i-p48"></span>*Able to teach* In the epistle to Titus,
doctrine is expressly mentioned; here he only speaks briefly about skill
in communicating instruction. It is not enough to have profound
learning, if it be not accompanied by talent for teaching. There are
many who, either because their utterance is defective, or because they
have not good mental abilities, or because they do not employ that
familiar language which is adapted to the common people, keep within
their own minds the knowledge which they possess. Such persons, as the
phrase is, ought to Sing to themselves and to the muses.  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) They who have the charge of governing the
people, ought to be qualified for teaching. And here he does not demand
volubility of tongue, for we see many persons whose fluent talk is not
fitted for edification; but he rather commends wisdom in applying the
word of God judiciously to the advantage of the people.

<span id="iii.v.i-p50"></span>It is worth while to consider how the
Papists hold that the injunctions which the apostle gives do not at all
belong to them. I shall not enter into a minute explanation of all the
details; but on this one point what sort of diligence do they observe?
And, indeed, that gift would be superfluous; for they banish from
themselves the ministry of teaching as low and groveling, although this
belonged especially to a bishop. But everybody knows how far it is from
observing Paul’s rule, to assume the title of bishop, and boast proudly
of enacting a character without speaking, provided only that they make
their appearance in a theatrical dress. As if a horned mitre, a ring
richly set in jewels, or a silver cross, and other trifles, accompanied
by idle display, constituted the spiritual government of a church, which
can no more be separated from doctrine than any one of us can be
separated from his own soul.

<span id="iii.v.i-p51"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p52"></span>**3** *Not addicted to wine. By* the word
πάροινον,  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) which is here used, the
Greeks denote not merely drunkenness, but any intemperance in guzzling
wine. And, indeed, to drink wine excessively is not only very unbecoming
in a pastor, but commonly draws along with it many things still worse;
such as quarrels, foolish attitudes, unchaste conduct, and other things
which it is not necessary to describe. But the contrast which is added
shortly afterwards, shews that Paul goes farther than this.

<span id="iii.v.i-p54"></span>*Not a striker, not wickedly desirous of
gain*  <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) *As* he contrasts with “a
striker” one who is not quarrelsome, and with him who is covetous of
dishonest gain (ἀφιλάργυρον) one who is not covetous, so with τῷ
παροίνῳ, him who is addicted to wine, he contrasts one who is gentle or
kind. The true interpretation is that which is given by Chrysostom, that
men of a drunken and fierce disposition ought to be excluded from the
office of a bishop. As to the opinion given by Chrysostom, that “a
striker” means one who wounds with the tongue, (that is, who is guilty
of slander or of outrageous reproaches,) I do not admit it. Nor am I
moved by his argument, that it will be no great matter, if the bishop do
not strike with the hand; for I think that here he reproves generally
that fierceness which is often found in the military profession, and
which is utterly unbecoming in the servants of Christ. It is well known
to what ridicule they expose themselves, who are more ready to strike a
blow with the fist, and — we might even say — to draw the sword, than to
settle the disputes of others by their own sedate behavior. *Strikers*
is therefore the term which he applies to those who deal much in
threatenings, and are of a warlike temperament.

<span id="iii.v.i-p56"></span>All covetous persons are *wickedly
desirous of gain;* for, wherever covetousness is, there will also be
that baseness of which the apostle speaks. “He who wishes to become rich
wishes also to become rich soon.”  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md)
The consequence is, that all covetous persons, even though this is not
openly manifest, apply their minds to dishonest and unlawful gains.
Accordingly, he contrasts with this vice the contempt of money; as there
is no other remedy by which it can be corrected. He who will not
patiently and mildly endure poverty will never escape the disease of
mean and sordid covetousness.

<span id="iii.v.i-p58"></span>*Mild and not quarrelsome* He contrasts
with “the striker” the man who is “not quarrelsome.” *Mild* — which, we
have said, is contrasted with being “addicted to wine” — is the term
applied to him who knows how to bear injuries with a gentle and moderate
disposition, who forgives much, who passes by insults, who neither makes
himself be dreaded through harsh severity, nor exacts with full rigor.
*Not quarrelsome,* one who avoids disputes and quarrels; for, as he
elsewhere writes,

<span id="iii.v.i-p59"></span>“the servant of the Lord must not be
quarrelsome.”  
(<span id="iii.v.i-p59.2"></span>[2Ti
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024)<span id="iii.v.i-p59.2"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.v.i-p60"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p61"></span>**4** *Who ruleth well his own house*
Hence it is evident, that Paul does not demand that a bishop shall be
unacquainted within human life,  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md)
but that he shall be a good and praiseworthy master of a household; for,
whatever may be the admiration commonly entertained for celibacy and a
philosophical life altogether removed from ordinary custom, yet wise and
thoughtful men are convinced by experience, that they who are not
ignorant of ordinary life, but are practiced in the duties of human
intercourse, are better trained and adapted for governing the Church.
And, therefore, we ought to observe the reason which is added, (<span
id="iii.v.i-p62.2"></span>[1Ti
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.i-p62.2"></span>,.md)
that he who does not know how to rule his family, Will not be qualified
for governing the Church. Now, this is the case with very many persons,
and indeed with almost all who have been drawn out of an idle and
solitary life,  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) as out of dens and
caverns; for they are a sort of savages and destitute of humanity.

<span id="iii.v.i-p64"></span>*Who hath his children in subjection with,
all reverence* The apostle does not recommend a clever man, and deeply
skilled in domestic matters, but one who has learned to govern a family
by wholesome discipline. He speaks chiefly of *children,* who may be
expected to possess the natural disposition of their father; and
therefore it will be a great disgrace to a bishop, if he has children
who lead a wicked and scandalous life. As to wives, he will speak of
them afterwards; but at present, as I have said, he glances at the most
important part of a house.

<span id="iii.v.i-p65"></span>In the Epistle to Titus, (<span
id="iii.v.i-p65.1"></span>[Titus
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006)<span id="iii.v.i-p65.1"></span>,.md)
he shows what is here meant by the word *reverence;* for, after having
said that the children of a bishop must not be unruly and disobedient,
he likewise adds,

<span id="iii.v.i-p66"></span>“nor liable to the reproach of profligacy
or of intemperance.”

<span id="iii.v.i-p67"></span>He therefore means, in a word, that their
morals shall be regulated by all chastity, modesty, and gravity.

<span id="iii.v.i-p68"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p69"></span>**5** *And if any one know not how to rule
his own house*  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) This argument,
drawn from the less to the greater, is in itself manifest, that he who
is unfit for governing a family will be altogether unable to govern a
people. Besides that it is evident that he is destitute of the virtues
necessary for that purpose, what authority will he have over the people,
seeing that his own house makes him contemptible?

<span id="iii.v.i-p71"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p72"></span>**6** *Not a novice* There being many men
of distinguished ability and learning who at that time were brought to
the faith, Paul forbids that such persons shall be admitted to the
office of a bishop, as soon as they have made profession of
Christianity. And he shews how great would be the danger; for it is
evident that they are commonly vain, and full of ostentation, and, in
consequence of this, haughtiness and ambition will drive them headlong.
What Paul says we experience; for “novices” have not only impetuous
fervor and bold daring, but are also puffed up with foolish confidence,
as if they could fly beyond the clouds. Consequently, it is not without
reason that they are excluded from the honor of a bishopric, till, in
process of time their proud temper shall be subdued.

<span id="iii.v.i-p73"></span>*Lest he fall into the condemnation of the
devil*. The *judgment* or *condemnation of the devil* may be interpreted
in three ways; for some take Διαβόλου (of the devil) to mean Satan; and
others, to mean slanderers. I give the preference to the former view;
because it rarely happens that “judgment” means slander. But again, “the
judgment of Satan” may be taken either actively or passively. This
latter sense is adopted by Chrysostom, with whom I willingly agree There
is an elegant contrast, which heightens the enormity of the case, “If he
who is placed over the Church of God fall, by his pride, into the same
condemnation with the devil.” Yet I do not reject the active
signification, namely, that he will give the devil occasion for accusing
him. But the opinion of Chrysostom is more correct.  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md)

<span id="iii.v.i-p75"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p76"></span>**7** *A good report from those who are
without*. This appears to be very difficult, that a religious man should
have, as witnesses of his integrity, infidels themselves, who are
furiously mad to tell lies against us. But the apostle means, that, so
far as relates to external behavior, even unbelievers themselves shall
be constrained to acknowledge him to be a good man; for, although they
groundlessly slander all the children of God, yet they cannot pronounce
him to be a wicked man, who leads a good and inoffensive life amongst
them. Such is that acknowledgment of uprightness which Paul here
describes. The reason is added, —

<span id="iii.v.i-p77"></span>*Lest he fall into reproach and the snare
of the devil*; which I explain in this manner: “lest, being subject to
reproach, he begin to be hardened, and abandon himself the more freely
to all iniquity, which is to entangle himself in the snares of the
devil.” For what hope is left for him who sins without any shame?

<span id="iii.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Timothy
3:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p2"></span>**8**. Likewise *must* the deacons *be*
grave, not doubletongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy
lucre;

<span id="iii.v.ii-p3"></span>**8**. Diaconos similiter graves, non
bilingues, non multo vino deditos, non turpiter lucri cupidos:

<span id="iii.v.ii-p4"></span>**9**. Holding the mystery of the faith in
a pure conscience.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p5"></span>**9**. Habentes mysterium fidei in pura
conscientia.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p6"></span>**10**. And let these also first be
proved; then let them use the office of a deacon, being *found*
blameless.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p7"></span>**10**. Et hi probentur primum; deinde
ministrent ubi irreprehensibiles comperti fuerint.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p8"></span>**11**. Even so *must their* wives *be*
grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p9"></span>**11**. Uxores similiter graves, non
calumniatrices, sobrias, fideles in omnibus.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p10"></span>**12**. Let the deacons be the husbands
of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p11"></span>**12**. Diaconi sint unius uxoris mariti,
qui honeste praesint liberis et domibus suis.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p12"></span>**13**. For they that have used the
office of a deacon well purchase to themselves a good degree, and great
boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p13"></span>**13**. Nam qui bene ministraverint
gradum sibi bonum (*vel, honestum*) acquirunt, et multam libertatem in
fide, quae est in Christo Iesu.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p14"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p15"></span>**8** *Likewise the deacons* There is no
reason why the diversity of interpretations should lead us to entertain
any doubt. It is certain that time Apostle speaks of those who hold a
public office in the Church; and this refutes the opinion of those who
think that domestic servants are here meant. As to the view given by
others, that it denotes presbyters who are inferior to the bishop, that
is without foundation; for it is manifest from other passages, that the
term bishop belongs alike to all presbyters.  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) All are constrained to acknowledge this;
and more especially a passage in the first chapter of the Epistle to
Titus proves clearly that this is the meaning. (<span
id="iii.v.ii-p16.2"></span>[Titus
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)<span id="iii.v.ii-p16.2"></span>..md)
It remains to be stated that we understand “the deacons” to be those who
are mentioned by Luke, (<span id="iii.v.ii-p16.3"></span>[Ac
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003)<span id="iii.v.ii-p16.3"></span>,.md)
and who had the charge of the poor. But those who wish to have a more
full account of the duties of deacons may consult the Institutes.  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p18"></span>*Grave, not double-tongued* The first
four virtues, with which he wishes them to be endowed, are of themselves
sufficiently well known. Yet it ought to be carefully observed that he
advises them not to be *double-tongued;* because it is a vice which it
is difficult to avoid in the discharge of that office, and yet ought,
more than anything else, to be kept at a distance from it.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p19"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p20"></span>**9** *Holding the mystery of faith* As
if he had said, “Holding the pure doctrine of religion, and that from
the heart, with a sincere fear of God;” or, “Being well instructed in
the faith, so as not to be ignorant of anything which it is necessary
for Christians to know.” He gives to the sum of Christian doctrine the
honorable appellation of *a mystery;* as indeed God, through the gospel,
reveals to men on earth a wisdom which angels in heaven behold with
admiration, and, therefore, we need not wonder if it exceed human
capacity.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p21"></span>Let us therefore remember that it ought
to be embraced with the deepest reverence; and because we could never,
by our own strength, ascend to such a height, let us humbly entreat God
to impart it to us by the Spirit of revelation. On the other hand, when
we see wicked men either ridicule those doctrines or have no relish for
them, let us acknowledge that it is owing to the grace of God that those
things which have been hidden from others are in our hearts, and before
our eyes, as Moses says, (<span id="iii.v.ii-p21.1"></span>[De
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p21.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p22"></span>Thus he wishes that deacons should be
well instructed in “the mystery of faith;” because, although they do not
hold the office of *teaching*, yet it would be exceedingly absurd to
hold a public office in the Church, while they were ill informed in the
Christian faith, more especially since they must frequently be laid
under the necessity of administering advice and consolation, if they do
not choose to neglect their duties. It is added, *in a pure conscience,*
which extends to the whole life, but chiefly that they may know how to
obey God.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p23"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p24"></span>**10** *And let those be first tried* He
wishes that they who are chosen should not be unknown, but that their
integrity should be ascertained, like that of the bishops. And hence it
is evident, that they are called *blameless* who are not stained by any
marked vice. Besides, this trial is not for a single hour, but consists
in long experience. In a word, when deacons are to be ordained, the
choice must not fall at random, and without selection, on any that come
to hand, but those men are to be chosen who are approved by their past
life in such a manner that, after what may be called full inquiry, they
are ascertained to be well qualified.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p25"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p26"></span>**11.** *Likewise the wives* He means the
wives both of deacons and of bishops, for they must be aids to their
husbands in their office; which cannot be, unless their behavior excel
that of others.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p27"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p28"></span>*Let the deacons be* Since he mentioned
wives, he lays down the same injunction about deacons as he had formerly
down about bishops; namely, that each of them — satisfied within having
but one wife — shall set an example of a chaste and honorable father of
a family, and shall keep his *children* and his whole house under holy
discipline. And this refutes the error of those who understand this
passage as referring to domestic servants.  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p30"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p31"></span>**13***. For they who have served well*
Owing to a practice which came into use one or two centuries after the
death of the apostles, of choosing presbyters from the order of deacons,
this passage has been commonly interpreted as describing elevation to a
higher rank, as if the Apostle called to the honor of being presbyters
those who had faithfully discharged the office of a deacon. For my own
part, though I do not deny that the order of deacons might sometimes be
the nursery out of which presbyters were taken, yet I take Paul’s words
as meaning, more simply, that they who have discharged this ministry in
a proper manner are worthy of no small honor; because it is not a mean
employment, but a highly honorable office. Now by this expression he
intimates how much it is for the advantage of the Church to have this
office discharged by choice men; because the holy discharge of it
procures esteem and reverence.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p32"></span>How absurd is it for Papists to maintain
that, in making deacons, they do what Paul enjoins! First, why do they
make deacons but to carry the cup in a procession, and to feed the eyes
of the ignorant with I know not what ridiculous exhibitions? Besides,
they do not even observe this; for not a single deacon has been made,
during the last five hundred years, except that, after taking this step,
he may immediately rise to the priesthood. What impudence is it, to
boast of elevating to a higher rank those who have ministered well, when
they confer their priesthood on none but those who have never touched a
single part of the former office!

<span id="iii.v.ii-p33"></span>*And much liberty in the faith.* With
good reason does he add this; for there is nothing that tends so much to
produce liberty as a good conscience and a life free from crime and
reproach; as, on the contrary, timidity must be the lot of those who
have a bad conscience. And if they sometimes make a valiant boast of
liberty, yet it is not uniform and constant, nor has it any weight. For
this reason he describes also the kind of liberty. “In the faith,” says
he, *which is in Christ;* that is, that they may serve — Christ with
greater boldness; as, on the other hand, they who have acted basely in
the discharge of their office may be said to have their mouth shut and
their hands tied, and are unfit for doing good; because no reliance — no
authority is given to them.

<span id="iii.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Timothy 3:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p2"></span>**14**. These things write I unto thee,
hoping to come unto thee shortly:

<span id="iii.v.iii-p3"></span>**14**. Haec tibi scribo, sperans brevi
ad te venire.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p4"></span>**15**. But if I tarry long, that thou
mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God,
which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the
truth.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p5"></span>**15**. Quodsi tardavero, ut videas
quomodo oporteat in domo Dei versari, quae est Ecclesia Dei viventis,
columna et firmamentum veritatis.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p6"></span>**16**. And without controversy great is
the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in
the world, received up into glory.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p7"></span>**16**. Et sine controversia magnum est
pietatis mysterium; Deus manifestatus est in carne, justificatus in
Spiritu, visus Angelis, praedicatus, Gentibus, fidem obtinuit in mundo
receptus est in gloria.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p8"></span><span id="iii.v.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p9"></span>**14** *These things I write to thee* He
holds out to Timothy the hope of his coming, partly in order to
encourage him, and partly in order to repress the insolence of those who
grew more haughty on account of his absence. And yet he does not make
any feigned promise to Timothy, or terrify others through false
presence; for he fully expected that he would come, as it is probable
that he came, if he wrote this epistle at the time when he passed
through Phrygia, as is related by Luke. (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p9.1"></span>[Ac
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p9.1"></span>.) Let us look on this as a proof how great
was his anxiety for the churches, when he could not endure to delay for
a short time a remedy for a present evil. Yet immediately afterwards he
adds, that he wrote this epistle for the purpose of informing Timothy,
if it should happen that he were delayed longer than he thought.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p10"></span><span id="iii.v.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p11"></span>**15** *How thou oughtest to conduct
thyself:* By this mode of expression he commends the weight and dignity
of the office; because pastors  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) may
be regarded as stewards, to whom God has committed the charge of
governing his house. If any person has the superintendence of a large
house, he labors night and day with earnest solicitude, that nothing may
go wrong through his neglect, or ignorance, or carelessness. If only for
men this is done, how much more should it be done for God?

<span id="iii.v.iii-p13"></span>*In the house of God* There are good
reasons why God bestows this name on his Church; for not only has he
received us to be his children by the grace of adoption, but he also
dwelleth in the midst of us.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p14"></span>*The pillar and foundation of truth* No
ordinary enhancement is derived from this appellation. Could it have
been described in loftier language? Is anything more venerable, or more
holy, than that everlasting *truth* which embraces both the glory of God
and the salvation of men? Were all the praises of heathen philosophy,
with which it has been adorned by its followers, collected into one
heap, what is this in comparison of the dignity of this wisdom, which
alone deserves to be called light and truth, and the instruction of
life, and the way, and the kingdom of God? Now it is preserved on earth
by the ministry of the Church alone. What a weight, therefore, rests on
the pastors, who have been entrusted with the charge of so inestimable a
treasure! With what impudent trifling do Papists argue from the words of
Paul that all their absurdities ought to be held as oracles of God,
because they are “the pillar of truth,” and therefore cannot err!

<span id="iii.v.iii-p15"></span>First, we ought to see why Paul adorns
the Church with so magnificent a title. By holding out to pastors the
greatness of the office, he undoubtedly intended to remind them with
what fidelity, and industry, and reverence they ought to discharge it.
How dreadful is the vengeance that awaits them, if, through their fault,
that truth which is the image of the Divine glory, the light of the
world, and the salvation of men, shall be allowed to fall! This
consideration ought undoubtedly to lead pastors to tremble continually,
not to deprive them of all energy, but to excite them to greater
vigilance.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p16"></span>Hence we may easily conclude in what
sense Paul uses these words. The reason why the Church is called the
“pillar of truth” is, that she defends and spreads it by her agency. God
does not himself come down from heaven to us, nor does he daily send
angels to make known his truth; but he employs pastors, whom he has
appointed for that purpose. To express it in a more homely manner, is
not the Church the mother of all believers? Does she not regenerate them
by the word of God, educate and nourish them through their whole life,
strengthen, and bring them at length to absolute perfection? For the
same reason, also, she is called “the pillar of truth;” because the
office of administering doctrine, which God hath placed in her hands, is
the only instrument of preserving the truth, that it may not perish from
the remembrance of men.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p17"></span>Consequently this commendation relates
to the ministry of the word; for if that be removed, the truth of God
will fall to the ground. Not that it is less strong, if it be not
supported by the shoulders of men, as the same Papists idly talk; for it
is a shocking blasphemy to say, that the word of God is uncertain, till
it obtain from men what may be called a borrowed certainty. Paul simply
means what he states elsewhere in other words, that since our “faith is
by hearing,” there will be no faith, unless there be preaching. (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p17.1"></span>[Ro
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p17.1"></span>.) Accordingly in reference to men, the
Church maintains the truth, because by preaching the Church proclaims
it, because she keeps it pure and entire, because she transmits it to
posterity. And if the instruction of the gospel be not proclaimed, if
there are no godly ministers who, by their preaching, rescue truth from
darkness and forgetfulness, instantly falsehoods, errors, impostures,
superstitions, and every kind of corruption, will reign. In short,
silence in the Church is the banishment and crushing of the truth. Is
there anything at all forced in this exposition?

<span id="iii.v.iii-p18"></span>Having ascertained Paul’s meaning, let
us return to the Papists. First, by applying this eulogium to
themselves, they act wickedly; because they deck themselves with
borrowed feathers. For, granting that the Church were elevated above the
third heaven, I maintain that it has nothing to do with them in any
manner. Nay, I even turn the whole passage against them; for, if the
Church “is the pillar of truth,” it follows that the Church is not with
them, when the truth not only lies buried, but is shockingly torn, and
thrown down, and trampled under foot. Is this either a riddle or a
quibble? Paul does not wish that any society, in which the truth of God
does not hold a lofty and conspicuous place, shall be acknowledged to be
a Church; now there is nothing of all this in Popery, but only ruin and
desolation; and, therefore, the true mark of a Church is not found in
it. But the mistake arises from this, that they do not consider, what
was of the greatest importance, that the truth of God is maintained by
the pure preaching of the gospel; and that the support of it does not
depend on the faculties or understandings of men, but rests on what is
far higher, that is, if it does not depart from the simple word of God.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p19"></span><span id="iii.v.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p20"></span>**16** *Great is the mystery of
godliness* Again, here is another enhancement. That the truth of God
might not, through the ingratitude of men, be less esteemed than it
ought, he extols its value, by stating that

<span id="iii.v.iii-p21"></span>“great is the secret of godliness;”

<span id="iii.v.iii-p22"></span>that is, because it does not treat of
mean subjects, but of the revelation of the Son of God,

<span id="iii.v.iii-p23"></span>“in whom are hidden all the treasures of
wisdom.” (<span id="iii.v.iii-p23.1"></span>[Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p23.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.iii-p24"></span>From the greatness and importance of
such matters, pastors ought to judge of their office, that they may
devote themselves to the discharge of it with greater conscientiousness
and deeper reverence.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p25"></span>*God manifested in the flesh* The
Vulgate’s translator, by leaving out the name of *God,* refers what
follows to “the mystery,” but altogether unskillfully and
inappropriately, as will clearly be seen on a bare perusal, though he
has Erasmus on his side, who, however, destroys the authority of his own
views, so that it is unnecessary for me to refute it. All the Greek
copies undoubtedly agree in this rendering, “God manifested in the
flesh.” But granting that Paul did not express the name of God, still
any one who shall carefully examine the whole matter, will acknowledge
that the name of Christ ought to be supplied. For my own part, I have no
hesitation in following the reading which has been adopted in the Greek
copies. In calling the manifestation of Christ, such as he afterwards
describes it, a “great mystery,” the reason is obvious; for this is “the
height, depth, and breadth of wisdom,” which he has elsewhere mentioned,
(<span id="iii.v.iii-p25.1"></span>[Eph
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p25.1"></span>,) by which all our senses must unavoidably
be overwhelmed.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p26"></span>Let us now examine the various clauses
in their order. He could not have spoken more appropriately about the
person of Christ than in these words, “God manifested in the flesh.”
First, we have here an express testimony of both natures; for he
declares at the same time that Christ is true God and true man.
Secondly, he points out the distinction between the two natures, when,
on the one hand, he calls him God, and, on the other, expresses his
“manifestation, in the flesh.” Thirdly, he asserts the unity of the
person, when he declares, that it is one and the same who was God, and
who has been manifested in the flesh.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p27"></span>Thus, by this single passage, the true
and orthodox faith is powerfully defended against Arius, Marcion,
Nestorius, and Eutyches. There is also great emphasis in the contrast of
the two words, *God in flesh* How wide is the difference between God and
man! And yet in Christ we behold the infinite glory of God united to our
polluted flesh in such a manner that they become one.  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md)

<span id="iii.v.iii-p29"></span>*Justified in the Spirit* As the Son of
God “emptied himself,” (<span id="iii.v.iii-p29.1"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p29.1"></span>,) by taking upon him our flesh, so there
was displayed in him a spiritual power which testified that he is God.
This passage has received various interpretations; but, for my own part,
satisfied with having explained the Apostle’s real meaning, as far as I
understand it, I shall add nothing more. First, *justification* here
denotes an acknowledgment of divine power; as in <span
id="iii.v.iii-p29.2"></span>[Ps
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p29.2"></span>, where it is said, that

<span id="iii.v.iii-p30"></span>“the judgments of God are justified,”

<span id="iii.v.iii-p31"></span>that is, are wonderfully and absolutely
perfect;  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) and in <span
id="iii.v.iii-p32.2"></span>[Ps
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p32.2"></span>, that “God is justified,” meaning that the
praise of his justice is illustriously displayed. So also, (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p32.3"></span>[Mt
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p32.3"></span>, and <span id="iii.v.iii-p32.4"></span>[Lu
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#035.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p32.4"></span>,) when Christ says, that

<span id="iii.v.iii-p33"></span>“Wisdom hath been justified by her
children,”

<span id="iii.v.iii-p34"></span>he means that they have given honor unto
her; and when Luke (<span id="iii.v.iii-p34.1"></span>[Lu
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p34.1"></span>) relates that the publicans “justified
God,” he means that they acknowledged, with due reverence and gratitude,
the grace of God which they beheld in Christ. What we read here has,
therefore, the same meaning as if Paul had said, that he who appeared
clothed with human flesh was, at the same time, declared to be the Son
of God, so that the weakness of the flesh made no diminution of his
glory.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p35"></span>Under the word *Spirit,* he includes
everything in Christ that was divine and superior to man; and he does so
for two reasons: First, because he had been humbled in “the flesh,” the
Apostle now, by exhibiting the illustration of his glory, contrasts “the
Spirit” with “the flesh.” Secondly, that glory, worthy of the
only-begotten Son of God, which John affirms to have been seen in
Christ, (<span id="iii.v.iii-p35.1"></span>[Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p35.1"></span>,) did not consist in outward display, or in
earthly splendor, but was almost wholly spiritual. The same form of
expression is used by him, (<span id="iii.v.iii-p35.2"></span>[Ro
1:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p35.2"></span>,)

<span id="iii.v.iii-p36"></span>“Who was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh, and declared by the power of the Spirit to be
the Son of God;”

<span id="iii.v.iii-p37"></span> but with this difference, that in that
passage he mentions one kind of manifestation, namely, the resurrection.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p38"></span>*Seen by angels, preached to the
Gentiles* All these statements are wonderful and astonishing; that God
deigned to bestow on the Gentiles, who had hitherto wandered in the
blindness of their minds, a revelation of his Son, which had been
unknown even to the angels in heaven. When the Apostle says, that he was
“seen by angels,” he means that the sight was such as drew the attention
of angels, both by its novelty and by its excellence. How uncommon and
extraordinary the calling of the Gentiles was, we have stated in the
exposition of the second chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians.  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) Nor is it wonderful that it was a new
spectacle to angels, who, though they knew about the redemption of
mankind, yet did not at first understand the means by which it should be
accomplished, and from whom it must have been concealed, in order that
this remarkable display of the goodness of God might be beheld by them
with greater admiration.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p40"></span>*Obtained belief in the world* It was
above all things astonishing that God made the Gentiles, who were
heathens, and the angels, who held uninterrupted possession of his
kingdom, to be equally partakers of the same revelation. But this great
efficacy of the preached gospel was no ordinary miracle, when Christ,
overcoming all obstacles, subdued to the obedience of faith those who
seemed to be altogether incapable of being tamed. Certainly nothing
appeared to be less probable — so completely was every entrance closed
and shut up. Yet faith vanquished, but by an incredible kind of victory.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p41"></span>Lastly, he says that he was *received
into glory*; that is*,* from this mortal and wretched life. Accordingly,
as in the world, so far as related to the obedience of faith, so also in
the person of Christ, the change was wonderful, when, from the mean
condition of a servant, he was exalted to the right hand of the Father,
that every knee may bow to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc43007.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p19"></span> “<span id="iii.v.i-p19.1"></span>Ou, Si
aucun a affection d’estre evesque.” — “Or, If any one hath a desire to
be a bishop.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc43007.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p28"></span> “Let us know that the Holy Spirit,
speaking of those who are ordained ministers of the word of God, and who
are elected to govern the Church, calls them Pastors. And why? Because
God wishes us to be a flock of sheep, to be guided by him, hearing his
voice, following his guidance, and living peaceably. Since, therefore
the Church is compared to a flock, they who have the charge of guiding
the Church by the word of God are called Pastors. And next, the word
Pastor means Elder not by age, but by of office: as, at all times, they
who govern have been called Elders, even among heathen nations. Now the
Holy Spirit has retained this metaphor, giving the name Elder to those
who are chosen to proclaim the word of God. He likewise calls them
Bishops, that is persons who watch over the flock to show that it is not
a rank unaccompanied by active exertion, when a man is called to that
office, and that he must not make an idol of it, but must know that he
is sent to obtain the salvation of souls, and must be employed, and
watch, and labor, for that purpose. We see then the reason of these
words; and since the Holy Spirit hath given them to us, we must retain
them, provided that they be applied to a good and holy use.” — *Fr.
Ser*.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc43007.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p31"></span> “<span id="iii.v.i-p31.1"></span>Et non
pas le premier qui se pourroit presenter.” — “And not the first that
might offer himself.”

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc43007.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p33"></span> <span
id="iii.v.i-p33.1"></span>᾿Ανεπίληπτον — “This is properly an
antagonistic term, signifying, ‘one who gives his adversary no hold upon
him;’ but it is often (as here) applied metaphorically to one who gives
others no cause justly to accuse him. So Thucydides, v. 17, <span
id="iii.v.i-p33.2"></span>τοῖς ἐχθροῖς ἀνεπίληπτον εἶναι. “Such (says a
celebrated writer) is the perfect purity of our religion, such the
innocence and virtue which it exacts, that he must be a very good man
indeed who lives up to it.” And when we consider the still greater
requirements in a teacher of religion, (who is to be an example to
others,) and reflect on the injury done to religion through the side of
false professors, how much reason will there appear that such a one
should be, as the apostle says, blameless.” — *Broomfield.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc43007.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p36"></span> “<span id="iii.v.i-p36.1"></span>Qu’il
condamne en l’Evesque d’avoir deux femmes ensemble vivantes.” — “That he
condemns in a bishop the having two wives living at the same time.”

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc43007.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p37"></span> “<span id="iii.v.i-p37.1"></span>La
polygamie estoit une chose toute commune entre les Juifs.” — “Polygamy
was a thing quite common among the Jews.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc43007.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p44"></span> “<span
id="iii.v.i-p44.1"></span>Νηφάλιον, ‘vigilant or circumspect.’ In which
sense the word occurs in the later writers; as, for instance,
Phavorinus. The force of the word is well expressed by the Pesch. Syr.,
‘<span id="iii.v.i-p44.2"></span>mente sit vigilanti’ Instead of <span
id="iii.v.i-p44.3"></span>νηφάλιον, (the reading of many of the best
MSS. and all the early editions,) <span
id="iii.v.i-p44.4"></span>νηφάλεον was introduced by Beza, but without
any sufficient reason; and the former has been rightly restored by
Wetstein, Griesbach, Matthaei, Tittnhann, and Vater. Here, then, we have
a quality suggested by the very term <span
id="iii.v.i-p44.5"></span>ἐπίσχοπος, which imports vigilant
superintendence.” — *Bloomfield.*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc43007.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p46"></span> “<span
id="iii.v.i-p46.1"></span>Recueillant volontiers les estrangers;” —
“Willingly entertaining strangers.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc43007.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p47"></span> “Let every one know that the virtues
which are here required in all ministers of the word of God, are in
order to give an example to the flock. It is highly proper for every one
to know that, when it is said that ministers should be wise, temperate,
and of good moral behavior, it is in order that others may be conformed
to their example; for it is not for three or four only, but for all in
general, that these things are said. This is the way in which the
example of men must be profitable to us, so far as they shall conduct
themselves properly, according to the will of God. And if they depart
from that will ever so little, we must not yield to them such authority
as to follow them on that account; but we must attend to what Paul says,
that we ought to follow men so far as they are entirely conformed to the
pure word of God, and are imitators of Jesus Christ, to lead us in the
right way.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc43007.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p49"></span> “<span id="iii.v.i-p49.1"></span>Il faut
que tels s’employent a autre chose.” — “Such persons ought to be
employed in something else.”

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc43007.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p53"></span> “Some expositors, ancient and modern,
take this to be equivalent to <span id="iii.v.i-p53.1"></span>ὑβριστὴν
or <span id="iii.v.i-p53.2"></span>αὐθάδη; which is, indeed, much
countenanced by three *vices* in this clause, standing opposed to the
three *virtues* in the next. But considering that we have at <span
id="iii.v.i-p53.3"></span>[1Ti
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.v.i-p53.3"></span>
the expression <span id="iii.v.i-p53.4"></span>μή οἴνῳ προσέχοντας used
of the deacons, here at least the physical sense must be included; and,
according to every principle of correct exegesis, it must stand first.
In the word <span id="iii.v.i-p53.5"></span>πάροινος, the <span
id="iii.v.i-p53.6"></span>παρὰ means beyond, denoting excess. So the
expression in <span id="iii.v.i-p53.7"></span>[Hab
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.v.i-p53.7"></span>,
‘he transgresseth by wine.” — *Bloomfield.*

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc43007.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p55"></span> “<span id="iii.v.i-p55.1"></span>Ne
convoiteux de gain deshonneste.” — “Not covetous of dishonourable gain.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc43007.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p57"></span> “<span id="iii.v.i-p57.1"></span>Dives
fieri qui vult, Et cito vult fieri.” — *Juvenal.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc43007.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p62"></span> “<span id="iii.v.i-p62.1"></span>Que
I’Evesque ne sache que c’est de vivre au Monde.” — “That the bishop
shall not know what it is to live in the world.”

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc43007.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p62.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p63"></span> “<span id="iii.v.i-p63.1"></span>C’est a
dire, de la moinerie.” — “That is, from monkhood.”

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc43007.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p70"></span> “The house of a believer ought to be like
a little church. Heathens, who did not know what a church is, said that
a house is but an image and figure of any public government. A poor man,
living with his wife and children and servants, ought to be in his house
like a public governor; but Christians ought to go beyond this. Every
father of a family should know that God has appointed him to that place,
that he may know how to govern his wife and children and servants; so
that God shall be honored in the midst of them, and all shall do Him
homage. Paul speaks of children; and why? Because he who wishes to
discharge his duty as pastor of a church must be like a father to all
believers. Now, let us suppose that a man cannot govern two or three
children which he has in the house. They are his own children, and yet
he cannot keep them in subjection; they are deaf to all that he says to
them. How then shall he be able to govern those who are at a distance,
and who may be said to be unknown to him, who even refuse to become
wiser, and think that they have no need of being instructed? How shall
he be able to keep men in dread when his own wife is not subject to him?
Let us not, therefore, think it strange if it is required in all
pastors, that they be good fathers of a family, and know what it is to
govern their own children well. It is not enough to condemn the
children, but we must condemn the fathers, when they permit their
children to be worse than others.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc43007.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="iii.v.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p74"></span> “The words <span
id="iii.v.i-p74.1"></span>εἰς κρῖμα ἐμπέσὟ τοῦ Διαβόλου are, by most
expositors ancient and modern, understood of falling into the same
condemnation and punishment that the devil fell into through pride,
which is supported by the authority of the Pesch. Syr. Several eminent
expositors, from Luther and Erasmus downwards, take <span
id="iii.v.i-p74.2"></span>τοῦ Διαβόλου to mean the “calumniator,” or
slanderous enemy of the gospel, the noun being, they say, used
generically of those who seek an occasion to calumniate the Christians;
but, as Calvin observes, ‘it rarely happens that “judgment” means
slander.’ Moreover, the expression <span
id="iii.v.i-p74.3"></span>Διάβολος would thus have to be taken of just
condemnation.” — *Bloomfield.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc43007.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="iii.v.ii-p16.1"></span>Que le
nom d’Evesque estoit commun a tons prestres. et qu’entre prestre et
evesque il n’y a nulle difference.” — “That the term bishop was common
to all presbyters, and that there is no difference between presbyter and
bishop.”

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc43007.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p17"></span> See Calvin’s Inst. of the Christian
Religion, vol. 3.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc43007.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p29"></span> “<span id="iii.v.ii-p29.1"></span>Des
serviteurs domestiques, et non pas des diacres de l’Eglise.” — “To
domestic servants, and not to the deacons of the Church.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc43007.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="iii.v.iii-p12.1"></span>Les
Evesques, e’est a dire, pasteurs de l’Eglise.” — “Bishops, that is,
pastors of the Church.”

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc43007.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p28"></span> “By the word *flesh* Paul declares that
Christ was true man, and that he was clothed with our nature; but, at
the same time, by the word *manifested,* he shows that there were two
natures. We must not imagine a Jesus Christ who is God, and another
Jesus Christ who is man; but we must know that he alone is both God and
man. Let us distinguish his two natures, so as to know that this is the
Son of God who is our brother. Now I have said that God permits the
ancient heresies, with which the church was troubled, to be revived in
our time, in order to excite us to greater activity. But, on the other
hand, let us observe, that the devil is constrained to do his utmost to
overthrow this article of faith, because he sees clearly that it is the
foundation of our salvation. For if we have not that mystery of which
Paul speaks, what will become of us? We are all children of Adam, and
therefore we are accursed; we are in the pit of death; in short, we are
deadly enemies of God, and thus there is nothing in us but condemnation
and death, till we know that God came to seek us, and that, because we
could not rise to him, he came down to us. Till we have known this, are
we not more than wretched? For this reason the Devil wished, as far as
he could, to destroy that knowledge, or rather to mix it with his lies,
so as to be perverted. On the other hand, when we see that there is such
majesty in God, how shall we dare to approach unto Him, seeing that we
are full of misery? We must therefore come to this union of the majesty
of God with human nature. And thus, in every respect, till we have known
the divine majesty that is in Jesus Christ, and our human weakness which
he hath taken upon him, it is impossible for us to have any hope, or to
be capable of having recourse to the goodness of God, or of having the
boldness to call upon him, and return to him. In a word, we are entirely
shut out from the heavenly kingdom, the gate is shut against us, and we
cannot approach to it in any way whatever.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc43007.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p32"></span> “When he says, ‘They are justified
together,’ the meaning is, They are all righteous from the greatest to
the least, without a single exception. By this commendation he
distinguishes the law of God from the doctrines of men; for no blemish
or fault can be found in it, but: it is in all points absolutely
perfect.” — Calvin’s Com. *the Book of Psalms,* vol. 1, p. 323.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc43007.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p39"></span> Calvin’s Com. On the Ep. To the
Galatians and Ephesians, p. 226.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc43008.md)
