[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc000)  [Next](dc002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Hiram, Ohio, November 1, 1831. * History of the Church* 1:221-24.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:1">1:1</span></span> Hearken, O ye
people of my church, saith the voice of him who dwells on high, and
whose eyes are upon all men; yea, verily I say: Hearken ye people from
afar; and ye that are upon the islands of the sea, listen together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:2">1:2</span></span> For verily
the voice of the Lord is unto all men, and there is none to escape; and
there is no eye that shall not see, neither ear that shall not hear,
neither heart that shall not be penetrated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:3">1:3</span></span> And the
rebellious shall be pierced with much sorrow; for their iniquities shall
be spoken upon the housetops, and their secret acts shall be revealed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:4">1:4</span></span> And the voice
of warning shall be unto all people, by the mouths of my disciples, whom
I have chosen in these last days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:5">1:5</span></span> And they
shall go forth and none shall stay them, for I the Lord have commanded
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:6">1:6</span></span> Behold, this
is mine authority, and the authority of my servants, and my preface unto
the book of my commandments, which I have given them to publish unto
you, O inhabitants of the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:7">1:7</span></span> Wherefore,
fear and tremble, O ye people, for what I the Lord have decreed in them
shall be fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:8">1:8</span></span> And verily I
say unto you, that they who go forth, bearing these tidings unto the
inhabitants of the earth, to them is power given to seal both on earth
and in heaven, the unbelieving and rebellious;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:9">1:9</span></span> Yea, verily,
to seal them up unto the day when the wrath of God shall be poured out
upon the wicked without measure—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:10">1:10</span></span> Unto the
day when the Lord shall come to recompense unto every man according to
his work, and measure to every man according to the measure which he has
measured to his fellow man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:11">1:11</span></span> Wherefore
the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will
hear may hear:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:12">1:12</span></span> Prepare ye,
prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:13">1:13</span></span> And the
anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven, and it
shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:14">1:14</span></span> And the arm
of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not
hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither
give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off
from among the people;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:15">1:15</span></span> For they
have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting
covenant;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:16">1:16</span></span> They seek
not the Lord to establish his righteousness, but every man walketh in
his own way, and after the image of his own god, whose image is in the
likeness of the world, and whose substance is that of an idol, which
waxeth old and shall perish in Babylon, even Babylon the great, which
shall fall.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:17">1:17</span></span> Wherefore,
I the Lord, knowing the calamity which should come upon the inhabitants
of the earth, called upon my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and spake unto
him from heaven, and gave him commandments;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:18">1:18</span></span> And also
gave commandments to others, that they should proclaim these things unto
the world; and all this that it might be fulfilled, which was written by
the prophets—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:19">1:19</span></span> The weak
things of the world shall come forth and break down the mighty and
strong ones, that man should not counsel his fellow man, neither trust
in the arm of flesh—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:20">1:20</span></span> But that
every man might speak in the name of God the Lord, even the Savior of
the world;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:21">1:21</span></span> That faith
also might increase in the earth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:22">1:22</span></span> That mine
everlasting covenant might be established;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:23">1:23</span></span> That the
fulness of my gospel might be proclaimed by the weak and the simple unto
the ends of the world, and before kings and rulers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:24">1:24</span></span> Behold, I
am God and have spoken it; these commandments are of me, and were given
unto my servants in their weakness, after the manner of their language,
that they might come to understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:25">1:25</span></span> And
inasmuch as they erred it might be made known;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:26">1:26</span></span> And
inasmuch as they sought wisdom they might be instructed;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:27">1:27</span></span> And
inasmuch as they sinned they might be chastened, that they might repent;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:28">1:28</span></span> And
inasmuch as they were humble they might be made strong, and blessed from
on high, and receive knowledge from time to time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:29">1:29</span></span> And after
having received the record of the Nephites, yea, even my servant Joseph
Smith, Jun., might have power to translate through the mercy of God, by
the power of God, the Book of Mormon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:30">1:30</span></span> And also
those to whom these commandments were given, might have power to lay the
foundation of this church, and to bring it forth out of obscurity and
out of darkness, the only true and living church upon the face of the
whole earth, with which I, the Lord, am well pleased, speaking unto the
church collectively and not individually—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:31">1:31</span></span> For I the
Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:32">1:32</span></span>
Nevertheless, he that repents and does the commandments of the Lord
shall be forgiven;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:33">1:33</span></span> And he that
repents not, from him shall be taken even the light which he has
received; for my Spirit shall not always strive with man, saith the Lord
of Hosts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:34">1:34</span></span> And again,
verily I say unto you, O inhabitants of the earth: I the Lord am willing
to make these things known unto all flesh;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:35">1:35</span></span> For I am no
respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day
speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace
shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his
own dominion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:36">1:36</span></span> And also
the Lord shall have power over his saints, and shall reign in their
midst, and shall come down in judgment upon Idumea, or the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:37">1:37</span></span> Search
these commandments, for they are true and faithful, and the prophecies
and promises which are in them shall all be fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:38">1:38</span></span> What I the
Lord have spoken, I have spoken, and I excuse not myself; and though the
heavens and the earth pass away, my word shall not pass away, but shall
all be fulfilled, whether by mine own voice or by the voice of my
servants, it is the same.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_1:39">1:39</span></span> For behold,
and lo, the Lord is God, and the Spirit beareth record, and the record
is true, and the truth abideth forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Words of Moroni to Joseph Smith, Manchester, New York,
September 21, 1823.](dc002)
