[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc004)  [Next](dc006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Harmony, Pennsylvania, March 1829. * History of the Church* 1:28-31.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:1">5:1</span></span> Behold, I say
unto you, that as my servant Martin Harris has desired a witness at my
hand, that you, my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., have got the plates of
which you have testified and borne record that you have received of me;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:2">5:2</span></span> And now,
behold, this shall you say unto him—he who spake unto you, said unto
you: I, the Lord, am God, and have given these things unto you, my
servant Joseph Smith, Jun., and have commanded you that you should stand
as a witness of these things;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:3">5:3</span></span> And I have
caused you that you should enter into a covenant with me, that you
should not show them except to those persons to whom I commanded you;
and you have no power over them except I grant it unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:4">5:4</span></span> And you have
a gift to translate the plates; and this is the first gift that I
bestowed upon you; and I have commanded that you should pretend to no
other gift until my purpose is fulfilled in this; for I will grant unto
you no other gift until it is finished.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:5">5:5</span></span> Verily, I say
unto you, that woe shall come unto the inhabitants of the earth if they
will not hearken unto my words;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:6">5:6</span></span> For hereafter
you shall be ordained and go forth and deliver my words unto the
children of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:7">5:7</span></span> Behold, if
they will not believe my words, they would not believe you, my servant
Joseph, if it were possible that you should show them all these things
which I have committed unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:8">5:8</span></span> Oh, this
unbelieving and stiffnecked generation—mine anger is kindled against
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:9">5:9</span></span> Behold,
verily I say unto you, I have reserved those things which I have
entrusted unto you, my servant Joseph, for a wise purpose in me, and it
shall be made known unto future generations;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:10">5:10</span></span> But this
generation shall have my word through you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:11">5:11</span></span> And in
addition to your testimony, the testimony of three of my servants, whom
I shall call and ordain, unto whom I will show these things, and they
shall go forth with my words that are given through you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:12">5:12</span></span> Yea, they
shall know of a surety that these things are true, for from heaven will
I declare it unto them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:13">5:13</span></span> I will give
them power that they may behold and view these things as they are;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:14">5:14</span></span> And to none
else will I grant this power, to receive this same testimony among this
generation, in this the beginning of the rising up and the coming forth
of my church out of the wilderness—clear as the moon, and fair as the
sun, and terrible as an army with banners.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:15">5:15</span></span> And the
testimony of three witnesses will I send forth of my word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:16">5:16</span></span> And behold,
whosoever believeth on my words, them will I visit with the
manifestation of my Spirit; and they shall be born of me, even of water
and of the Spirit—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:17">5:17</span></span> And you
must wait yet a little while, for ye are not yet ordained—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:18">5:18</span></span> And their
testimony shall also go forth unto the condemnation of this generation
if they harden their hearts against them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:19">5:19</span></span> For a
desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth,
and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent
not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed
away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:20">5:20</span></span> Behold, I
tell you these things, even as I also told the people of the destruction
of Jerusalem; and my word shall be verified at this time as it hath
hitherto been verified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:21">5:21</span></span> And now I
command you, my servant Joseph, to repent and walk more uprightly before
me, and to yield to the persuasions of men no more;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:22">5:22</span></span> And that
you be firm in keeping the commandments wherewith I have commanded you;
and if you do this, behold I grant unto you eternal life, even if you
should be slain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:23">5:23</span></span> And now,
again, I speak unto you, my servant Joseph, concerning the man that
desires the witness—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:24">5:24</span></span> Behold, I
say unto him, he exalts himself and does not humble himself sufficiently
before me; but if he will bow down before me, and humble himself in
mighty prayer and faith, in the sincerity of his heart, then will I
grant unto him a view of the things which he desires to see.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:25">5:25</span></span> And then he
shall say unto the people of this generation: Behold, I have seen the
things which the Lord hath shown unto Joseph Smith, Jun., and I know of
a surety that they are true, for I have seen them, for they have been
shown unto me by the power of God and not of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:26">5:26</span></span> And I the
Lord command him, my servant Martin Harris, that he shall say no more
unto them concerning these things, except he shall say: I have seen
them, and they have been shown unto me by the power of God; and these
are the words which he shall say.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:27">5:27</span></span> But if he
deny this he will break the covenant which he has before covenanted with
me, and behold, he is condemned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:28">5:28</span></span> And now,
except he humble himself and acknowledge unto me the things that he has
done which are wrong, and covenant with me that he will keep my
commandments, and exercise faith in me, behold, I say unto him, he shall
have no such views, for I will grant unto him no views of the things of
which I have spoken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:29">5:29</span></span> And if this
be the case, I command you, my servant Joseph, that you shall say unto
him, that he shall do no more, nor trouble me any more concerning this
matter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:30">5:30</span></span> And if this
be the case, behold, I say unto thee Joseph, when thou hast translated a
few more pages thou shalt stop for a season, even until I command thee
again; then thou mayest translate again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:31">5:31</span></span> And except
thou do this, behold, thou shalt have no more gift, and I will take away
the things which I have entrusted with thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:32">5:32</span></span> And now,
because I foresee the lying in wait to destroy thee, yea, I foresee that
if my servant Martin Harris humbleth not himself and receive a witness
from my hand, that he will fall into transgression;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:33">5:33</span></span> And there
are many that lie in wait to destroy thee from off the face of the
earth; and for this cause, that thy days may be prolonged, I have given
unto thee these commandments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:34">5:34</span></span> Yea, for
this cause I have said: Stop, and stand still until I command thee, and
I will provide means whereby thou mayest accomplish the thing which I
have commanded thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_5:35">5:35</span></span> And if thou
art faithful in keeping my commandments, thou shalt be lifted up at the
last day. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. Revelation to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, Harmony,
Pennsylvania, April 1829.](dc006.md)
