[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc009)  [Next](dc011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10. Revelation to Joseph Smith, Harmony, Pennsylvania, summer of 1828. * History of the Church* 1:20-23.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:1">10:1</span></span> Now,
behold, I say unto you, that because you delivered up those writings
which you had power given unto you to translate by the means of the Urim
and Thummim, into the hands of a wicked man, you have lost them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:2">10:2</span></span> And you
also lost your gift at the same time, and your mind became darkened.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:3">10:3</span></span>
Nevertheless, it is now restored unto you again; therefore see that you
are faithful and continue on unto the finishing of the remainder of the
work of translation as you have begun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:4">10:4</span></span> Do not run
faster or labor more than you have strength and means provided to enable
you to translate; but be diligent unto the end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:5">10:5</span></span> Pray
always, that you may come off conqueror; yea, that you may conquer
Satan, and that you may escape the hands of the servants of Satan that
do uphold his work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:6">10:6</span></span> Behold,
they have sought to destroy you; yea, even the man in whom you have
trusted has sought to destroy you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:7">10:7</span></span> And for
this cause I said that he is a wicked man, for he has sought to take
away the things wherewith you have been entrusted; and he has also
sought to destroy your gift.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:8">10:8</span></span> And because
you have delivered the writings into his hands, behold, wicked men have
taken them from you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:9">10:9</span></span> Therefore,
you have delivered them up, yea, that which was sacred, unto wickedness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:10">10:10</span></span> And,
behold, Satan hath put it into their hearts to alter the words which you
have caused to be written, or which you have translated, which have gone
out of your hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:11">10:11</span></span> And
behold, I say unto you, that because they have altered the words, they
read contrary from that which you translated and caused to be written;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:12">10:12</span></span> And, on
this wise, the devil has sought to lay a cunning plan, that he may
destroy this work;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:13">10:13</span></span> For he
hath put into their hearts to do this, that by lying they may say they
have caught you in the words which you have pretended to translate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:14">10:14</span></span> Verily, I
say unto you, that I will not suffer that Satan shall accomplish his
evil design in this thing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:15">10:15</span></span> For
behold, he has put it into their hearts to get thee to tempt the Lord
thy God, in asking to translate it over again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:16">10:16</span></span> And then,
behold, they say and think in their hearts—We will see if God has given
him power to translate; if so, he will also give him power again;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:17">10:17</span></span> And if
God giveth him power again, or if he translates again, or, in other
words, if he bringeth forth the same words, behold, we have the same
with us, and we have altered them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:18">10:18</span></span> Therefore
they will not agree, and we will say that he has lied in his words, and
that he has no gift, and that he has no power;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:19">10:19</span></span> Therefore
we will destroy him, and also the work; and we will do this that we may
not be ashamed in the end, and that we may get glory of the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:20">10:20</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, that Satan has great hold upon their hearts; he
stirreth them up to iniquity against that which is good;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:21">10:21</span></span> And their
hearts are corrupt, and full of wickedness and abominations; and they
love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil; therefore
they will not ask of me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:22">10:22</span></span> Satan
stirreth them up, that he may lead their souls to destruction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:23">10:23</span></span> And thus
he has laid a cunning plan, thinking to destroy the work of God; but I
will require this at their hands, and it shall turn to their shame and
condemnation in the day of judgment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:24">10:24</span></span> Yea, he
stirreth up their hearts to anger against this work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:25">10:25</span></span> Yea, he
saith unto them: Deceive and lie in wait to catch, that ye may destroy;
behold, this is no harm. And thus he flattereth them, and telleth them
that it is no sin to lie that they may catch a man in a lie, that they
may destroy him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:26">10:26</span></span> And thus
he flattereth them, and leadeth them along until he draggeth their souls
down to hell; and thus he causeth them to catch themselves in their own
snare.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:27">10:27</span></span> And thus
he goeth up and down, to and fro in the earth, seeking to destroy the
souls of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:28">10:28</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, wo be unto him that lieth to deceive because he
supposeth that another lieth to deceive, for such are not exempt from
the justice of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:29">10:29</span></span> Now,
behold, they have altered these words, because Satan saith unto them: He
hath deceived you—and thus he flattereth them away to do iniquity, to
get thee to tempt the Lord thy God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:30">10:30</span></span> Behold, I
say unto you, that you shall not translate again those words which have
gone forth out of your hands;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:31">10:31</span></span> For,
behold, they shall not accomplish their evil designs in lying against
those words. For, behold, if you should bring forth the same words they
will say that you have lied and that you have pretended to translate,
but that you have contradicted yourself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:32">10:32</span></span> And,
behold, they will publish this, and Satan will harden the hearts of the
people to stir them up to anger against you, that they will not believe
my words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:33">10:33</span></span> Thus
Satan thinketh to overpower your testimony in this generation, that the
work may not come forth in this generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:34">10:34</span></span> But
behold, here is wisdom, and because I show unto you wisdom, and give you
commandments concerning these things, what you shall do, show it not
unto the world until you have accomplished the work of translation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:35">10:35</span></span> Marvel
not that I said unto you: Here is wisdom, show it not unto the world—for
I said, show it not unto the world, that you may be preserved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:36">10:36</span></span> Behold, I
do not say that you shall not show it unto the righteous;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:37">10:37</span></span> But as
you cannot always judge the righteous, or as you cannot always tell the
wicked from the righteous, therefore I say unto you, hold your peace
until I shall see fit to make all things known unto the world concerning
the matter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:38">10:38</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, that an account of those things that you have
written, which have gone out of your hands, is engraven upon the plates
of Nephi;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:39">10:39</span></span> Yea, and
you remember it was said in those writings that a more particular
account was given of these things upon the plates of Nephi.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:40">10:40</span></span> And now,
because the account which is engraven upon the plates of Nephi is more
particular concerning the things which, in my wisdom, I would bring to
the knowledge of the people in this account—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:41">10:41</span></span>
Therefore, you shall translate the engravings which are on the plates of
Nephi, down even till you come to the reign of king Benjamin, or until
you come to that which you have translated, which you have retained;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:42">10:42</span></span> And
behold, you shall publish it as the record of Nephi; and thus I will
confound those who have altered my words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:43">10:43</span></span> I will
not suffer that they shall destroy my work; yea, I will show unto them
that my wisdom is greater than the cunning of the devil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:44">10:44</span></span> Behold,
they have only got a part, or an abridgment of the account of Nephi.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:45">10:45</span></span> Behold,
there are many things engraven upon the plates of Nephi which do throw
greater views upon my gospel; therefore, it is wisdom in me that you
should translate this first part of the engravings of Nephi, and send
forth in this work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:46">10:46</span></span> And,
behold, all the remainder of this work does contain all those parts of
my gospel which my holy prophets, yea, and also my disciples, desired in
their prayers should come forth unto this people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:47">10:47</span></span> And I
said unto them, that it should be granted unto them according to their
faith in their prayers;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:48">10:48</span></span> Yea, and
this was their faith—that my gospel, which I gave unto them that they
might preach in their days, might come unto their brethren the
Lamanites, and also all that had become Lamanites because of their
dissensions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:49">10:49</span></span> Now, this
is not all—their faith in their prayers was that this gospel should be
made known also, if it were possible that other nations should possess
this land;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:50">10:50</span></span> And thus
they did leave a blessing upon this land in their prayers, that
whosoever should believe in this gospel in this land might have eternal
life;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:51">10:51</span></span> Yea, that
it might be free unto all of whatsoever nation, kindred, tongue, or
people they may be.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:52">10:52</span></span> And now,
behold, according to their faith in their prayers will I bring this part
of my gospel to the knowledge of my people. Behold, I do not bring it to
destroy that which they have received, but to build it up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:53">10:53</span></span> And for
this cause have I said: If this generation harden not their hearts, I
will establish my church among them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:54">10:54</span></span> Now I do
not say this to destroy my church, but I say this to build up my church;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:55">10:55</span></span>
Therefore, whosoever belongeth to my church need not fear, for such
shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:56">10:56</span></span> But it is
they who do not fear me, neither keep my commandments but build up
churches unto themselves to get gain, yea, and all those that do
wickedly and build up the kingdom of the devil—yea, verily, verily, I
say unto you, that it is they that I will disturb, and cause to tremble
and shake to the center.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:57">10:57</span></span> Behold, I
am Jesus Christ, the Son of God. I came unto mine own, and mine own
received me not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:58">10:58</span></span> I am the
light which shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth it not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:59">10:59</span></span> I am he
who said—Other sheep have I which are not of this fold—unto my
disciples, and many there were that understood me not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:60">10:60</span></span> And I
will show unto this people that I had other sheep, and that they were a
branch of the house of Jacob;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:61">10:61</span></span> And I
will bring to light their marvelous works, which they did in my name;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:62">10:62</span></span> Yea, and
I will also bring to light my gospel which was ministered unto them,
and, behold, they shall not deny that which you have received, but they
shall build it up, and shall bring to light the true points of my
doctrine, yea, and the only doctrine which is in me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:63">10:63</span></span> And this
I do that I may establish my gospel, that there may not be so much
contention; yea, Satan doth stir up the hearts of the people to
contention concerning the points of my doctrine; and in these things
they do err, for they do wrest the scriptures and do not understand
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:64">10:64</span></span>
Therefore, I will unfold unto them this great mystery;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:65">10:65</span></span> For,
behold, I will gather them as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings, if they will not harden their hearts;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:66">10:66</span></span> Yea, if
they will come, they may, and partake of the waters of life freely.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:67">10:67</span></span> Behold,
this is my doctrine—whosoever repenteth and cometh unto me, the same is
my church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:68">10:68</span></span> Whosoever
declareth more or less than this, the same is not of me, but is against
me; therefore he is not of my church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:69">10:69</span></span> And now,
behold, whosoever is of my church, and endureth of my church to the end,
him will I establish upon my rock, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_10:70">10:70</span></span> And now,
remember the words of him who is the life and light of the world, your
Redeemer, your Lord and your God. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Revelation through Joseph Smith to his brother Hyrum Smith,
Harmony, Pennsylvania, May 1829.](dc011)
