[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc028)  [Next](dc030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 29. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Fayette, New York, September 1830. * History of the Church* 1:111-15.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:1">29:1</span></span> Listen to
the voice of Jesus Christ, your Redeemer, the Great I AM, whose arm of
mercy hath atoned for your sins;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:2">29:2</span></span> Who will
gather his people even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings,
even as many as will hearken to my voice and humble themselves before
me, and call upon me in mighty prayer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:3">29:3</span></span> Behold,
verily, verily, I say unto you, that at this time your sins are forgiven
you, therefore ye receive these things; but remember to sin no more,
lest perils shall come upon you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:4">29:4</span></span> Verily, I
say unto you that ye are chosen out of the world to declare my gospel
with the sound of rejoicing, as with the voice of a trump.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:5">29:5</span></span> Lift up
your hearts and be glad, for I am in your midst, and am your advocate
with the Father; and it is his good will to give you the kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:6">29:6</span></span> And, as it
is written—Whatsoever ye shall ask in faith, being united in prayer
according to my command, ye shall receive.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:7">29:7</span></span> And ye are
called to bring to pass the gathering of mine elect; for mine elect hear
my voice and harden not their hearts;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:8">29:8</span></span> Wherefore
the decree hath gone forth from the Father that they shall be gathered
in unto one place upon the face of this land, to prepare their hearts
and be prepared in all things against the day when tribulation and
desolation are sent forth upon the wicked.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:9">29:9</span></span> For the
hour is nigh and the day soon at hand when the earth is ripe; and all
the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn
them up, saith the Lord of Hosts, that wickedness shall not be upon the
earth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:10">29:10</span></span> For the
hour is nigh, and that which was spoken by mine apostles must be
fulfilled; for as they spoke so shall it come to pass;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:11">29:11</span></span> For I
will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with all the
hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on earth a thousand
years, and the wicked shall not stand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:12">29:12</span></span> And
again, verily, verily, I say unto you, and it hath gone forth in a firm
decree, by the will of the Father, that mine apostles, the Twelve which
were with me in my ministry at Jerusalem, shall stand at my right hand
at the day of my coming in a pillar of fire, being clothed with robes of
righteousness, with crowns upon their heads, in glory even as I am, to
judge the whole house of Israel, even as many as have loved me and kept
my commandments, and none else.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:13">29:13</span></span> For a
trump shall sound both long and loud, even as upon Mount Sinai, and all
the earth shall quake, and they shall come forth—yea, even the dead
which died in me, to receive a crown of righteousness, and to be clothed
upon, even as I am, to be with me, that we may be one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:14">29:14</span></span> But,
behold, I say unto you that before this great day shall come the sun
shall be darkened, and the moon shall be turned into blood, and the
stars shall fall from heaven, and there shall be greater signs in heaven
above and in the earth beneath;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:15">29:15</span></span> And there
shall be weeping and wailing among the hosts of men;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:16">29:16</span></span> And there
shall be a great hailstorm sent forth to destroy the crops of the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:17">29:17</span></span> And it
shall come to pass, because of the wickedness of the world, that I will
take vengeance upon the wicked, for they will not repent; for the cup of
mine indignation is full; for behold, my blood shall not cleanse them if
they hear me not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:18">29:18</span></span>
Wherefore, I the Lord God will send forth flies upon the face of the
earth, which shall take hold of the inhabitants thereof, and shall eat
their flesh, and shall cause maggots to come in upon them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:19">29:19</span></span> And their
tongues shall be stayed that they shall not utter against me; and their
flesh shall fall from off their bones, and their eyes from their
sockets;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:20">29:20</span></span> And it
shall come to pass that the beasts of the forest and the fowls of the
air shall devour them up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:21">29:21</span></span> And the
great and abominable church, which is the whore of all the earth, shall
be cast down by devouring fire, according as it is spoken by the mouth
of Ezekiel the prophet, who spoke of these things, which have not come
to pass but surely must, as I live, for abominations shall not reign.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:22">29:22</span></span> And
again, verily, verily, I say unto you that when the thousand years are
ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the
earth but for a little season;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:23">29:23</span></span> And the
end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass
away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:24">29:24</span></span> For all
old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the
heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts,
the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:25">29:25</span></span> And not
one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine
hand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:26">29:26</span></span> But,
behold, verily I say unto you, before the earth shall pass away,
Michael, mine archangel, shall sound his trump, and then shall all the
dead awake, for their graves shall be opened, and they shall come
forth—yea, even all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:27">29:27</span></span> And the
righteous shall be gathered on my right hand unto eternal life; and the
wicked on my left hand will I be ashamed to own before the Father;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:28">29:28</span></span> Wherefore
I will say unto them—Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:29">29:29</span></span> And now,
behold, I say unto you, never at any time have I declared from mine own
mouth that they should return, for where I am they cannot come, for they
have no power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:30">29:30</span></span> But
remember that all my judgments are not given unto men; and as the words
have gone forth out of my mouth even so shall they be fulfilled, that
the first shall be last, and that the last shall be first in all things
whatsoever I have created by the word of my power, which is the power of
my Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:31">29:31</span></span> For by
the power of my Spirit created I them; yea, all things both spiritual
and temporal—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:32">29:32</span></span> First
spiritual, secondly temporal, which is the beginning of my work; and
again, first temporal, and secondly spiritual, which is the last of my
work—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:33">29:33</span></span> Speaking
unto you that you may naturally understand; but unto myself my works
have no end, neither beginning; but it is given unto you that ye may
understand, because ye have asked it of me and are agreed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:34">29:34</span></span>
Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual,
and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal;
neither any man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father,
whom I created.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:35">29:35</span></span> Behold, I
gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself; and I gave unto
him commandment, but no temporal commandment gave I unto him, for my
commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal, neither
carnal nor sensual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:36">29:36</span></span> And it
came to pass that Adam, being tempted of the devil—for, behold, the
devil was before Adam, for he rebelled against me, saying, Give me thine
honor, which is my power; and also a third part of the hosts of heaven
turned he away from me because of their agency;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:37">29:37</span></span> And they
were thrust down, and thus came the devil and his angels;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:38">29:38</span></span> And,
behold, there is a place prepared for them from the beginning, which
place is hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:39">29:39</span></span> And it
must needs be that the devil should tempt the children of men, or they
could not be agents unto themselves; for if they never should have
bitter they could not know the sweet—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:40">29:40</span></span>
Wherefore, it came to pass that the devil tempted Adam, and he partook
of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment, wherein he
became subject to the will of the devil, because he yielded unto
temptation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:41">29:41</span></span>
Wherefore, I, the Lord God, caused that he should be cast out from the
Garden of Eden, from my presence, because of his transgression, wherein
he became spiritually dead, which is the first death, even that same
death which is the last death, which is spiritual, which shall be
pronounced upon the wicked when I shall say: Depart, ye cursed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:42">29:42</span></span> But,
behold, I say unto you that I, the Lord God, gave unto Adam and unto his
seed, that they should not die as to the temporal death, until I, the
Lord God, should send forth angels to declare unto them repentance and
redemption, through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:43">29:43</span></span> And thus
did I, the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation—that by
his natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life,
even as many as would believe;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:44">29:44</span></span> And they
that believe not unto eternal damnation; for they cannot be redeemed
from their spiritual fall, because they repent not;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:45">29:45</span></span> For they
love darkness rather than light, and their deeds are evil, and they
receive their wages of whom they list to obey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:46">29:46</span></span> But
behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the
foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:47">29:47</span></span>
Wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt
little children, until they begin to become accountable before me;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:48">29:48</span></span> For it is
given unto them even as I will, according to mine own pleasure, that
great things may be required at the hand of their fathers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:49">29:49</span></span> And,
again, I say unto you, that whoso having knowledge, have I not commanded
to repent?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_29:50">29:50</span></span> And he
that hath no understanding, it remaineth in me to do according as it is
written. And now I declare no more unto you at this time. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. Revelation through Joseph Smith to David Whitmer, Peter
Whitmer, Jr., and John Whitmer, Fayette, New York, September
1830.](dc030)
