[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc051)  [Next](dc053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 52. Revelation through Joseph Smith, to the elders of the Church, Kirtland, Ohio, June 7, 1831. * History of the Church* 1:175-79.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:1">52:1</span></span> Behold,
thus saith the Lord unto the elders whom he hath called and chosen in
these last days, by the voice of his Spirit—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:2">52:2</span></span> Saying: I,
the Lord, will make known unto you what I will that ye shall do from
this time until the next conference, which shall be held in Missouri,
upon the land which I will consecrate unto my people, which are a
remnant of Jacob, and those who are heirs according to the covenant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:3">52:3</span></span> Wherefore,
verily I say unto you, let my servants Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney
Rigdon take their journey as soon as preparations can be made to leave
their homes, and journey to the land of Missouri.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:4">52:4</span></span> And
inasmuch as they are faithful unto me, it shall be made known unto them
what they shall do;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:5">52:5</span></span> And it
shall also, inasmuch as they are faithful, be made known unto them the
land of your inheritance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:6">52:6</span></span> And
inasmuch as they are not faithful, they shall be cut off, even as I
will, as seemeth me good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:7">52:7</span></span> And again,
verily I say unto you, let my servant Lyman Wight and my servant John
Corrill take their journey speedily;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:8">52:8</span></span> And also my
servant John Murdock, and my servant Hyrum Smith, take their journey
unto the same place by the way of Detroit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:9">52:9</span></span> And let
them journey from thence preaching the word by the way, saying none
other things than that which the prophets and apostles have written, and
that which is taught them by the Comforter through the prayer of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:10">52:10</span></span> Let them
go two by two, and thus let them preach by the way in every
congregation, baptizing by water, and the laying on of the hands by the
water's side.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:11">52:11</span></span> For thus
saith the Lord, I will cut my work short in righteousness, for the days
come that I will send forth judgment unto victory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:12">52:12</span></span> And let
my servant Lyman Wight beware, for Satan desireth to sift him as chaff.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:13">52:13</span></span> And
behold, he that is faithful shall be made ruler over many things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:14">52:14</span></span> And
again, I will give unto you a pattern in all things, that ye may not be
deceived; for Satan is abroad in the land, and he goeth forth deceiving
the nations—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:15">52:15</span></span> Wherefore
he that prayeth, whose spirit is contrite, the same is accepted of me if
he obey mine ordinances.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:16">52:16</span></span> He that
speaketh, whose spirit is contrite, whose language is meek and edifieth,
the same is of God if he obey mine ordinances.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:17">52:17</span></span> And
again, he that trembleth under my power shall be made strong, and shall
bring forth fruits of praise and wisdom, according to the revelations
and truths which I have given you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:18">52:18</span></span> And
again, he that is overcome and bringeth not forth fruits, even according
to this pattern, is not of me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:19">52:19</span></span>
Wherefore, by this pattern ye shall know the spirits in all cases under
the whole heavens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:20">52:20</span></span> And the
days have come; according to men's faith it shall be done unto them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:21">52:21</span></span> Behold,
this commandment is given unto all the elders whom I have chosen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:22">52:22</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Thomas B. Marsh and my
servant Ezra Thayre take their journey also, preaching the word by the
way unto this same land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:23">52:23</span></span> And
again, let my servant Isaac Morley and my servant Ezra Booth take their
journey, also preaching the word by the way unto this same land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:24">52:24</span></span> And
again, let my servants Edward Partridge and Martin Harris take their
journey with my servants Sidney Rigdon and Joseph Smith, Jun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:25">52:25</span></span> Let my
servants David Whitmer and Harvey Whitlock also take their journey, and
preach by the way unto this same land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:26">52:26</span></span> And let
my servants Parley P. Pratt and Orson Pratt take their journey, and
preach by the way, even unto this same land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:27">52:27</span></span> And let
my servants Solomon Hancock and Simeon Carter also take their journey
unto this same land, and preach by the way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:28">52:28</span></span> Let my
servants Edson Fuller and Jacob Scott also take their journey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:29">52:29</span></span> Let my
servants Levi W. Hancock and Zebedee Coltrin also take their journey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:30">52:30</span></span> Let my
servants Reynolds Cahoon and Samuel H. Smith also take their journey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:31">52:31</span></span> Let my
servants Wheeler Baldwin and William Carter also take their journey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:32">52:32</span></span> And let
my servants Newel Knight and Selah J. Griffin both be ordained, and also
take their journey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:33">52:33</span></span> Yea,
verily I say, let all these take their journey unto one place, in their
several courses, and one man shall not build upon another's foundation,
neither journey in another's track.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:34">52:34</span></span> He that
is faithful, the same shall be kept and blessed with much fruit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:35">52:35</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, let my servants Joseph Wakefield and Solomon
Humphrey take their journey into the eastern lands;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:36">52:36</span></span> Let them
labor with their families, declaring none other things than the prophets
and apostles, that which they have seen and heard and most assuredly
believe, that the prophecies may be fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:37">52:37</span></span> In
consequence of transgression, let that which was bestowed upon Heman
Basset be taken from him, and placed upon the head of Simonds Ryder.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:38">52:38</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, let Jared Carter be ordained a priest, and
also George James be ordained a priest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:39">52:39</span></span> Let the
residue of the elders watch over the churches, and declare the word in
the regions round about them; and let them labor with their own hands
that there be no idolatry nor wickedness practised.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:40">52:40</span></span> And
remember in all things the poor and the needy, the sick and the
afflicted, for he that doeth not these things, the same is not my
disciple.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:41">52:41</span></span> And
again, let my servants Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon and Edward
Partridge take with them a recommend from the church. And let there be
one obtained for my servant Oliver Cowdery also.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:42">52:42</span></span> And thus,
even as I have said, if ye are faithful ye shall assemble yourselves
together to rejoice upon the land of Missouri, which is the land of your
inheritance, which is now the land of your enemies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:43">52:43</span></span> But,
behold, I, the Lord, will hasten the city in its time, and will crown
the faithful with joy and with rejoicing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_52:44">52:44</span></span> Behold, I
am Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and I will lift them up at the last
day. Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 53. Revelation through Joseph Smith to Algernon Sidney Gilbert,
Kirtland, Ohio, June 1831.](dc053)
