[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc055)  [Next](dc057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 56. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, June 1831. * History of the Church* 1:186-88.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:1">56:1</span></span> Hearken, O
ye people who profess my name, saith the Lord your God; for behold, mine
anger is kindled against the rebellious, and they shall know mine arm
and mine indignation, in the day of visitation and of wrath upon the
nations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:2">56:2</span></span> And he that
will not take up his cross and follow me, and keep my commandments, the
same shall not be saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:3">56:3</span></span> Behold, I,
the Lord, command; and he that will not obey shall be cut off in mine
own due time, after I have commanded and the commandment is broken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:4">56:4</span></span> Wherefore
I, the Lord, command and revoke, as it seemeth me good; and all this to
be answered upon the heads of the rebellious, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:5">56:5</span></span> Wherefore,
I revoke the commandment which was given unto my servants Thomas B.
Marsh and Ezra Thayre, and give a new commandment unto my servant
Thomas, that he shall take up his journey speedily to the land of
Missouri, and my servant Selah J. Griffin shall also go with him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:6">56:6</span></span> For behold,
I revoke the commandment which was given unto my servants Selah J.
Griffin and Newel Knight, in consequence of the stiffneckedness of my
people which are in Thompson, and their rebellions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:7">56:7</span></span> Wherefore,
let my servant Newel Knight remain with them; and as many as will go may
go, that are contrite before me, and be led by him to the land which I
have appointed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:8">56:8</span></span> And again,
verily I say unto you, that my servant Ezra Thayre must repent of his
pride, and of his selfishness, and obey the former commandment which I
have given him concerning the place upon which he lives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:9">56:9</span></span> And if he
will do this, as there shall be no divisions made upon the land, he
shall be appointed still to go to the land of Missouri;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:10">56:10</span></span> Otherwise
he shall receive the money which he has paid, and shall leave the place,
and shall be cut off out of my church, saith the Lord God of hosts;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:11">56:11</span></span> And
though the heaven and the earth pass away, these words shall not pass
away, but shall be fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:12">56:12</span></span> And if my
servant Joseph Smith, Jun., must needs pay the money, behold, I, the
Lord, will pay it unto him again in the land of Missouri, that those of
whom he shall receive may be rewarded again according to that which they
do;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:13">56:13</span></span> For
according to that which they do they shall receive, even in lands for
their inheritance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:14">56:14</span></span> Behold,
thus saith the Lord unto my people—you have many things to do and to
repent of; for behold, your sins have come up unto me, and are not
pardoned, because you seek to counsel in your own ways.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:15">56:15</span></span> And your
hearts are not satisfied. And ye obey not the truth, but have pleasure
in unrighteousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:16">56:16</span></span> Wo unto
you rich men, that will not give your substance to the poor, for your
riches will canker your souls; and this shall be your lamentation in the
day of visitation, and of judgment, and of indignation: The harvest is
past, the summer is ended, and my soul is not saved!

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:17">56:17</span></span> Wo unto
you poor men, whose hearts are not broken, whose spirits are not
contrite, and whose bellies are not satisfied, and whose hands are not
stayed from laying hold upon other men's goods, whose eyes are full of
greediness, and who will not labor with your own hands!

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:18">56:18</span></span> But
blessed are the poor who are pure in heart, whose hearts are broken, and
whose spirits are contrite, for they shall see the kingdom of God coming
in power and great glory unto their deliverance; for the fatness of the
earth shall be theirs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:19">56:19</span></span> For
behold, the Lord shall come, and his recompense shall be with him, and
he shall reward every man, and the poor shall rejoice;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_56:20">56:20</span></span> And their
generations shall inherit the earth from generation to generation,
forever and ever. And now I make an end of speaking unto you. Even so.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 57. Revelation through Joseph Smith, in Zion, Jackson County,
Missouri, July 20, 1831.](dc057)
