[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc057)  [Next](dc059.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 58. Revelation through Joseph Smith, in Zion, Jackson County, Missouri, August 1, 1831. * History of the Church* 1:190-95.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:1">58:1</span></span> Hearken, O
ye elders of my church, and give ear to my word, and learn of me what I
will concerning you, and also concerning this land unto which I have
sent you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:2">58:2</span></span> For verily
I say unto you, blessed is he that keepeth my commandments, whether in
life or in death; and he that is faithful in tribulation, the reward of
the same is greater in the kingdom of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:3">58:3</span></span> Ye cannot
behold with your natural eyes, for the present time, the design of your
God concerning those things which shall come hereafter, and the glory
which shall follow after much tribulation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:4">58:4</span></span> For after
much tribulation come the blessings. Wherefore the day cometh that ye
shall be crowned with much glory; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at
hand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:5">58:5</span></span> Remember
this, which I tell you before, that you may lay it to heart, and receive
that which is to follow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:6">58:6</span></span> Behold,
verily I say unto you, for this cause I have sent you—that you might be
obedient, and that your hearts might be prepared to bear testimony of
the things which are to come;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:7">58:7</span></span> And also
that you might be honored in laying the foundation, and in bearing
record of the land upon which the Zion of God shall stand;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:8">58:8</span></span> And also
that a feast of fat things might be prepared for the poor; yea, a feast
of fat things, of wine on the lees well refined, that the earth may know
that the mouths of the prophets shall not fail;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:9">58:9</span></span> Yea, a
supper of the house of the Lord, well prepared, unto which all nations
shall be invited.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:10">58:10</span></span> First,
the rich and the learned, the wise and the noble;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:11">58:11</span></span> And after
that cometh the day of my power; then shall the poor, the lame, and the
blind, and the deaf, come in unto the marriage of the Lamb, and partake
of the supper of the Lord, prepared for the great day to come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:12">58:12</span></span> Behold,
I, the Lord, have spoken it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:13">58:13</span></span> And that
the testimony might go forth from Zion, yea, from the mouth of the city
of the heritage of God—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:14">58:14</span></span> Yea, for
this cause I have sent you hither, and have selected my servant Edward
Partridge, and have appointed unto him his mission in this land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:15">58:15</span></span> But if he
repent not of his sins, which are unbelief and blindness of heart, let
him take heed lest he fall.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:16">58:16</span></span> Behold
his mission is given unto him, and it shall not be given again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:17">58:17</span></span> And whoso
standeth in this mission is appointed to be a judge in Israel, like as
it was in ancient days, to divide the lands of the heritage of God unto
his children;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:18">58:18</span></span> And to
judge his people by the testimony of the just, and by the assistance of
his counselors, according to the laws of the kingdom which are given by
the prophets of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:19">58:19</span></span> For
verily I say unto you, my law shall be kept on this land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:20">58:20</span></span> Let no
man think he is ruler; but let God rule him that judgeth, according to
the counsel of his own will, or, in other words, him that counseleth or
sitteth upon the judgment seat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:21">58:21</span></span> Let no
man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the laws of God hath
no need to break the laws of the land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:22">58:22</span></span>
Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right
it is to reign, and subdues all enemies under his feet.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:23">58:23</span></span> Behold,
the laws which ye have received from my hand are the laws of the church,
and in this light ye shall hold them forth. Behold, here is wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:24">58:24</span></span> And now,
as I spake concerning my servant Edward Partridge, this land is the land
of his residence, and those whom he has appointed for his counselors;
and also the land of the residence of him whom I have appointed to keep
my storehouse;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:25">58:25</span></span>
Wherefore, let them bring their families to this land, as they shall
counsel between themselves and me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:26">58:26</span></span> For
behold, it is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that
is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise
servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:27">58:27</span></span> Verily I
say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things
of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:28">58:28</span></span> For the
power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch
as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:29">58:29</span></span> But he
that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a
commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the
same is damned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:30">58:30</span></span> Who am I
that made man, saith the Lord, that will hold him guiltless that obeys
not my commandments?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:31">58:31</span></span> Who am I,
saith the Lord, that have promised and have not fulfilled?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:32">58:32</span></span> I command
and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:33">58:33</span></span> Then they
say in their hearts: This is not the work of the Lord, for his promises
are not fulfilled. But wo unto such, for their reward lurketh beneath,
and not from above.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:34">58:34</span></span> And now I
give unto you further directions concerning this land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:35">58:35</span></span> It is
wisdom in me that my servant Martin Harris should be an example unto the
church, in laying his moneys before the bishop of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:36">58:36</span></span> And also,
this is a law unto every man that cometh unto this land to receive an
inheritance; and he shall do with his moneys according as the law
directs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:37">58:37</span></span> And it is
wisdom also that there should be lands purchased in Independence, for
the place of the storehouse, and also for the house of the printing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:38">58:38</span></span> And other
directions concerning my servant Martin Harris shall be given him of the
Spirit, that he may receive his inheritance as seemeth him good;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:39">58:39</span></span> And let
him repent of his sins, for he seeketh the praise of the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:40">58:40</span></span> And also
let my servant William W. Phelps stand in the office to which I have
appointed him, and receive his inheritance in the land;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:41">58:41</span></span> And also
he hath need to repent, for I, the Lord, am not well pleased with him,
for he seeketh to excel, and he is not sufficiently meek before me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:42">58:42</span></span> Behold,
he who has repented of his sins, the same is forgiven, and I, the Lord,
remember them no more.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:43">58:43</span></span> By this
ye may know if a man repenteth of his sins—behold, he will confess them
and forsake them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:44">58:44</span></span> And now,
verily, I say concerning the residue of the elders of my church, the
time has not yet come, for many years, for them to receive their
inheritance in this land, except they desire it through the prayer of
faith, only as it shall be appointed unto them of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:45">58:45</span></span> For,
behold, they shall push the people together from the ends of the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:46">58:46</span></span>
Wherefore, assemble yourselves together; and they who are not appointed
to stay in this land, let them preach the gospel in the regions round
about; and after that let them return to their homes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:47">58:47</span></span> Let them
preach by the way, and bear testimony of the truth in all places, and
call upon the rich, the high and the low, and the poor to repent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:48">58:48</span></span> And let
them build up churches, inasmuch as the inhabitants of the earth will
repent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:49">58:49</span></span> And let
there be an agent appointed by the voice of the church, unto the church
in Ohio, to receive moneys to purchase lands in Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:50">58:50</span></span> And I
give unto my servant Sidney Rigdon a commandment, that he shall write a
description of the land of Zion, and a statement of the will of God, as
it shall be made known by the Spirit unto him;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:51">58:51</span></span> And an
epistle and subscription, to be presented unto all the churches to
obtain moneys, to be put into the hands of the bishop, of himself or the
agent, as seemeth him good or as he shall direct, to purchase lands for
an inheritance for the children of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:52">58:52</span></span> For,
behold, verily I say unto you, the Lord willeth that the disciples and
the children of men should open their hearts, even to purchase this
whole region of country, as soon as time will permit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:53">58:53</span></span> Behold,
here is wisdom. Let them do this lest they receive none inheritance,
save it be by the shedding of blood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:54">58:54</span></span> And
again, inasmuch as there is land obtained, let there be workmen sent
forth of all kinds unto this land, to labor for the saints of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:55">58:55</span></span> Let all
these things be done in order; and let the privileges of the lands be
made known from time to time, by the bishop or the agent of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:56">58:56</span></span> And let
the work of the gathering be not in haste, nor by flight; but let it be
done as it shall be counseled by the elders of the church at the
conferences, according to the knowledge which they receive from time to
time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:57">58:57</span></span> And let
my servant Sidney Rigdon consecrate and dedicate this land, and the spot
for the temple, unto the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:58">58:58</span></span> And let a
conference meeting be called; and after that let my servants Sidney
Rigdon and Joseph Smith, Jun., return, and also Oliver Cowdery with
them, to accomplish the residue of the work which I have appointed unto
them in their own land, and the residue as shall be ruled by the
conferences.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:59">58:59</span></span> And let
no man return from this land except he bear record by the way, of that
which he knows and most assuredly believes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:60">58:60</span></span> Let that
which has been bestowed upon Ziba Peterson be taken from him; and let
him stand as a member in the church, and labor with his own hands, with
the brethren, until he is sufficiently chastened for all his sins; for
he confesseth them not, and he thinketh to hide them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:61">58:61</span></span> Let the
residue of the elders of this church, who are coming to this land, some
of whom are exceedingly blessed even above measure, also hold a
conference upon this land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:62">58:62</span></span> And let
my servant Edward Partridge direct the conference which shall be held by
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:63">58:63</span></span> And let
them also return, preaching the gospel by the way, bearing record of the
things which are revealed unto them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:64">58:64</span></span> For,
verily, the sound must go forth from this place into all the world, and
unto the uttermost parts of the earth—the gospel must be preached unto
every creature, with signs following them that believe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_58:65">58:65</span></span> And
behold the Son of Man cometh. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 59. Revelation through Joseph Smith, in Zion, Jackson County,
Missouri, August 7, 1831.](dc059.md)
