[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc060)  [Next](dc062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 61. Revelation through Joseph Smith, on the bank of the Missouri River, McIlwaine's Bend, August 12, 1831. * History of the Church* 1:202-5.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:1">61:1</span></span> Behold, and
hearken unto the voice of him who has all power, who is from everlasting
to everlasting, even Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:2">61:2</span></span> Behold,
verily thus saith the Lord unto you, O ye elders of my church, who are
assembled upon this spot, whose sins are now forgiven you, for I, the
Lord, forgive sins, and am merciful unto those who confess their sins
with humble hearts;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:3">61:3</span></span> But verily
I say unto you, that it is not needful for this whole company of mine
elders to be moving swiftly upon the waters, whilst the inhabitants on
either side are perishing in unbelief.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:4">61:4</span></span>
Nevertheless, I suffered it that ye might bear record; behold, there are
many dangers upon the waters, and more especially hereafter;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:5">61:5</span></span> For I, the
Lord, have decreed in mine anger many destructions upon the waters; yea,
and especially upon these waters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:6">61:6</span></span>
Nevertheless, all flesh is in mine hand, and he that is faithful among
you shall not perish by the waters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:7">61:7</span></span> Wherefore,
it is expedient that my servant Sidney Gilbert and my servant William W.
Phelps be in haste upon their errand and mission.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:8">61:8</span></span>
Nevertheless, I would not suffer that ye should part until you were
chastened for all your sins, that you might be one, that you might not
perish in wickedness;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:9">61:9</span></span> But now,
verily I say, it behooveth me that ye should part. Wherefore let my
servants Sidney Gilbert and William W. Phelps take their former company,
and let them take their journey in haste that they may fill their
mission, and through faith they shall overcome;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:10">61:10</span></span> And
inasmuch as they are faithful they shall be preserved, and I, the Lord,
will be with them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:11">61:11</span></span> And let
the residue take that which is needful for clothing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:12">61:12</span></span> Let my
servant Sidney Gilbert take that which is not needful with him, as you
shall agree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:13">61:13</span></span> And now,
behold, for your good I gave unto you a commandment concerning these
things; and I, the Lord, will reason with you as with men in days of
old.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:14">61:14</span></span> Behold,
I, the Lord, in the beginning blessed the waters; but in the last days,
by the mouth of my servant John, I cursed the waters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:15">61:15</span></span>
Wherefore, the days will come that no flesh shall be safe upon the
waters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:16">61:16</span></span> And it
shall be said in days to come that none is able to go up to the land of
Zion upon the waters, but he that is upright in heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:17">61:17</span></span> And, as
I, the Lord, in the beginning cursed the land, even so in the last days
have I blessed it, in its time, for the use of my saints, that they may
partake the fatness thereof.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:18">61:18</span></span> And now I
give unto you a commandment that what I say unto one I say unto all,
that you shall forewarn your brethren concerning these waters, that they
come not in journeying upon them, lest their faith fail and they are
caught in snares;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:19">61:19</span></span> I, the
Lord, have decreed, and the destroyer rideth upon the face thereof, and
I revoke not the decree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:20">61:20</span></span> I, the
Lord, was angry with you yesterday, but today mine anger is turned away.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:21">61:21</span></span>
Wherefore, let those concerning whom I have spoken, that should take
their journey in haste—again I say unto you, let them take their journey
in haste.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:22">61:22</span></span> And it
mattereth not unto me, after a little, if it so be that they fill their
mission, whether they go by water or by land; let this be as it is made
known unto them according to their judgments hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:23">61:23</span></span> And now,
concerning my servants, Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Oliver
Cowdery, let them come not again upon the waters, save it be upon the
canal, while journeying unto their homes; or in other words they shall
not come upon the waters to journey, save upon the canal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:24">61:24</span></span> Behold,
I, the Lord, have appointed a way for the journeying of my saints; and
behold, this is the way—that after they leave the canal they shall
journey by land, inasmuch as they are commanded to journey and go up
unto the land of Zion;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:25">61:25</span></span> And they
shall do like unto the children of Israel, pitching their tents by the
way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:26">61:26</span></span> And,
behold, this commandment you shall give unto all your brethren.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:27">61:27</span></span>
Nevertheless, unto whom is given power to command the waters, unto him
it is given by the Spirit to know all his ways;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:28">61:28</span></span>
Wherefore, let him do as the Spirit of the living God commandeth him,
whether upon the land or upon the waters, as it remaineth with me to do
hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:29">61:29</span></span> And unto
you is given the course for the saints, or the way for the saints of the
camp of the Lord, to journey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:30">61:30</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, my servants, Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith,
Jun., and Oliver Cowdery, shall not open their mouths in the
congregations of the wicked until they arrive at Cincinnati;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:31">61:31</span></span> And in
that place they shall lift up their voices unto God against that people,
yea, unto him whose anger is kindled against their wickedness, a people
who are well-nigh ripened for destruction.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:32">61:32</span></span> And from
thence let them journey for the congregations of their brethren, for
their labors even now are wanted more abundantly among them than among
the congregations of the wicked.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:33">61:33</span></span> And now,
concerning the residue, let them journey and declare the word among the
congregations of the wicked, inasmuch as it is given;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:34">61:34</span></span> And
inasmuch as they do this they shall rid their garments, and they shall
be spotless before me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:35">61:35</span></span> And let
them journey together, or two by two, as seemeth them good, only let my
servant Reynolds Cahoon, and my servant Samuel H. Smith, with whom I am
well pleased, be not separated until they return to their homes, and
this for a wise purpose in me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:36">61:36</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, and what I say unto one I say unto all, be of
good cheer, little children; for I am in your midst, and I have not
forsaken you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:37">61:37</span></span> And
inasmuch as you have humbled yourselves before me, the blessings of the
kingdom are yours.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:38">61:38</span></span> Gird up
your loins and be watchful and be sober, looking forth for the coming of
the Son of Man, for he cometh in an hour you think not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_61:39">61:39</span></span> Pray
always that you enter not into temptation, that you may abide the day of
his coming, whether in life or in death. Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 62. Revelation through Joseph Smith, on the bank of the Missouri
River Chariton, Missouri, August 13, 1831.](dc062.md)
