[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc062)  [Next](dc064.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 63. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, August 1831. * History of the Church* 1:206-11.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:1">63:1</span></span> Hearken, O
ye people, and open your hearts and give ear from afar; and listen, you
that call yourselves the people of the Lord, and hear the word of the
Lord and his will concerning you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:2">63:2</span></span> Yea,
verily, I say, hear the word of him whose anger is kindled against the
wicked and rebellious;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:3">63:3</span></span> Who willeth
to take even them whom he will take, and preserveth in life them whom he
will preserve;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:4">63:4</span></span> Who
buildeth up at his own will and pleasure; and destroyeth when he
pleases, and is able to cast the soul down to hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:5">63:5</span></span> Behold, I,
the Lord, utter my voice, and it shall be obeyed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:6">63:6</span></span> Wherefore,
verily I say, let the wicked take heed, and let the rebellious fear and
tremble; and let the unbelieving hold their lips, for the day of wrath
shall come upon them as a whirlwind, and all flesh shall know that I am
God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:7">63:7</span></span> And he that
seeketh signs shall see signs, but not unto salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:8">63:8</span></span> Verily, I
say unto you, there are those among you who seek signs, and there have
been such even from the beginning;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:9">63:9</span></span> But,
behold, faith cometh not by signs, but signs follow those that believe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:10">63:10</span></span> Yea,
signs come by faith, not by the will of men, nor as they please, but by
the will of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:11">63:11</span></span> Yea,
signs come by faith, unto mighty works, for without faith no man
pleaseth God; and with whom God is angry he is not well pleased;
wherefore, unto such he showeth no signs, only in wrath unto their
condemnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:12">63:12</span></span>
Wherefore, I, the Lord, am not pleased with those among you who have
sought after signs and wonders for faith, and not for the good of men
unto my glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:13">63:13</span></span>
Nevertheless, I give commandments, and many have turned away from my
commandments and have not kept them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:14">63:14</span></span> There
were among you adulterers and adulteresses; some of whom have turned
away from you, and others remain with you that hereafter shall be
revealed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:15">63:15</span></span> Let such
beware and repent speedily, lest judgment shall come upon them as a
snare, and their folly shall be made manifest, and their works shall
follow them in the eyes of the people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:16">63:16</span></span> And
verily I say unto you, as I have said before, he that looketh on a woman
to lust after her, or if any shall commit adultery in their hearts, they
shall not have the Spirit, but shall deny the faith and shall fear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:17">63:17</span></span>
Wherefore, I, the Lord, have said that the fearful, and the unbelieving,
and all liars, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie, and the
whoremonger, and the sorcerer, shall have their part in that lake which
burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:18">63:18</span></span> Verily I
say, that they shall not have part in the first resurrection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:19">63:19</span></span> And now
behold, I, the Lord, say unto you that ye are not justified, because
these things are among you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:20">63:20</span></span>
Nevertheless, he that endureth in faith and doeth my will, the same
shall overcome, and shall receive an inheritance upon the earth when the
day of transfiguration shall come;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:21">63:21</span></span> When the
earth shall be transfigured, even according to the pattern which was
shown unto mine apostles upon the mount; of which account the fulness ye
have not yet received.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:22">63:22</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, that as I said that I would make known my will
unto you, behold I will make it known unto you, not by the way of
commandment, for there are many who observe not to keep my commandments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:23">63:23</span></span> But unto
him that keepeth my commandments I will give the mysteries of my
kingdom, and the same shall be in him a well of living water, springing
up unto everlasting life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:24">63:24</span></span> And now,
behold, this is the will of the Lord your God concerning his saints,
that they should assemble themselves together unto the land of Zion, not
in haste, lest there should be confusion, which bringeth pestilence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:25">63:25</span></span> Behold,
the land of Zion—I, the Lord, hold it in mine own hands;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:26">63:26</span></span>
Nevertheless, I, the Lord, render unto Caesar the things which are
Caesar's.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:27">63:27</span></span>
Wherefore, I the Lord will that you should purchase the lands, that you
may have advantage of the world, that you may have claim on the world,
that they may not be stirred up unto anger.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:28">63:28</span></span> For Satan
putteth it into their hearts to anger against you, and to the shedding
of blood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:29">63:29</span></span>
Wherefore, the land of Zion shall not be obtained but by purchase or by
blood, otherwise there is none inheritance for you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:30">63:30</span></span> And if by
purchase, behold you are blessed;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:31">63:31</span></span> And if by
blood, as you are forbidden to shed blood, lo, your enemies are upon
you, and ye shall be scourged from city to city, and from synagogue to
synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:32">63:32</span></span> I, the
Lord, am angry with the wicked; I am holding my Spirit from the
inhabitants of the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:33">63:33</span></span> I have
sworn in my wrath, and decreed wars upon the face of the earth, and the
wicked shall slay the wicked, and fear shall come upon every man;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:34">63:34</span></span> And the
saints also shall hardly escape; nevertheless, I, the Lord, am with
them, and will come down in heaven from the presence of my Father and
consume the wicked with unquenchable fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:35">63:35</span></span> And
behold, this is not yet, but by and by.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:36">63:36</span></span>
Wherefore, seeing that I, the Lord, have decreed all these things upon
the face of the earth, I will that my saints should be assembled upon
the land of Zion;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:37">63:37</span></span> And that
every man should take righteousness in his hands and faithfulness upon
his loins, and lift a warning voice unto the inhabitants of the earth;
and declare both by word and by flight that desolation shall come upon
the wicked.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:38">63:38</span></span>
Wherefore, let my disciples in Kirtland arrange their temporal concerns,
who dwell upon this farm.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:39">63:39</span></span> Let my
servant Titus Billings, who has the care thereof, dispose of the land,
that he may be prepared in the coming spring to take his journey up unto
the land of Zion, with those that dwell upon the face thereof, excepting
those whom I shall reserve unto myself, that shall not go until I shall
command them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:40">63:40</span></span> And let
all the moneys which can be spared, it mattereth not unto me whether it
be little or much, be sent up unto the land of Zion, unto them whom I
have appointed to receive.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:41">63:41</span></span> Behold,
I, the Lord, will give unto my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., power that he
shall be enabled to discern by the Spirit those who shall go up unto the
land of Zion, and those of my disciples who shall tarry.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:42">63:42</span></span> Let my
servant Newel K. Whitney retain his store, or in other words, the store,
yet for a little season.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:43">63:43</span></span>
Nevertheless, let him impart all the money which he can impart, to be
sent up unto the land of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:44">63:44</span></span> Behold,
these things are in his own hands, let him do according to wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:45">63:45</span></span> Verily I
say, let him be ordained as an agent unto the disciples that shall
tarry, and let him be ordained unto this power;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:46">63:46</span></span> And now
speedily visit the churches, expounding these things unto them, with my
servant Oliver Cowdery. Behold, this is my will, obtaining moneys even
as I have directed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:47">63:47</span></span> He that
is faithful and endureth shall overcome the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:48">63:48</span></span> He that
sendeth up treasures unto the land of Zion shall receive an inheritance
in this world, and his works shall follow him, and also a reward in the
world to come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:49">63:49</span></span> Yea, and
blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth, when the
Lord shall come, and old things shall pass away, and all things become
new, they shall rise from the dead and shall not die after, and shall
receive an inheritance before the Lord, in the holy city.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:50">63:50</span></span> And he
that liveth when the Lord shall come, and hath kept the faith, blessed
is he; nevertheless, it is appointed to him to die at the age of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:51">63:51</span></span>
Wherefore, children shall grow up until they become old; old men shall
die; but they shall not sleep in the dust, but they shall be changed in
the twinkling of an eye.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:52">63:52</span></span>
Wherefore, for this cause preached the apostles unto the world the
resurrection of the dead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:53">63:53</span></span> These
things are the things that ye must look for; and, speaking after the
manner of the Lord, they are now nigh at hand, and in a time to come,
even in the day of the coming of the Son of Man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:54">63:54</span></span> And until
that hour there will be foolish virgins among the wise; and at that hour
cometh an entire separation of the righteous and the wicked; and in that
day will I send mine angels to pluck out the wicked and cast them into
unquenchable fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:55">63:55</span></span> And now
behold, verily I say unto you, I, the Lord, am not pleased with my
servant Sidney Rigdon; he exalted himself in his heart, and received not
counsel, but grieved the Spirit;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:56">63:56</span></span> Wherefore
his writing is not acceptable unto the Lord, and he shall make another;
and if the Lord receive it not, behold he standeth no longer in the
office to which I have appointed him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:57">63:57</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, those who desire in their hearts, in
meekness, to warn sinners to repentance, let them be ordained unto this
power.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:58">63:58</span></span> For this
is a day of warning, and not a day of many words. For I, the Lord, am
not to be mocked in the last days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:59">63:59</span></span> Behold, I
am from above, and my power lieth beneath. I am over all, and in all,
and through all, and search all things, and the day cometh that all
things shall be subject unto me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:60">63:60</span></span> Behold, I
am Alpha and Omega, even Jesus Christ.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:61">63:61</span></span>
Wherefore, let all men beware how they take my name in their lips—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:62">63:62</span></span> For
behold, verily I say, that many there be who are under this
condemnation, who use the name of the Lord, and use it in vain, having
not authority.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:63">63:63</span></span>
Wherefore, let the church repent of their sins, and I, the Lord, will
own them; otherwise they shall be cut off.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:64">63:64</span></span> Remember
that that which cometh from above is sacred, and must be spoken with
care, and by constraint of the Spirit; and in this there is no
condemnation, and ye receive the Spirit through prayer; wherefore,
without this there remaineth condemnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:65">63:65</span></span> Let my
servants, Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon, seek them a home, as
they are taught through prayer by the Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_63:66">63:66</span></span> These
things remain to overcome through patience, that such may receive a more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, otherwise, a greater
condemnation. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 64. Revelation through Joseph Smith to the elders of the Church,
Kirtland, Ohio, September 11, 1831.](dc064.md)
