[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc063)  [Next](dc065.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 64. Revelation through Joseph Smith to the elders of the Church, Kirtland, Ohio, September 11, 1831. * History of the Church* 1:211-14.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:1">64:1</span></span> Behold,
thus saith the Lord your God unto you, O ye elders of my church, hearken
ye and hear, and receive my will concerning you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:2">64:2</span></span> For verily
I say unto you, I will that ye should overcome the world; wherefore I
will have compassion upon you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:3">64:3</span></span> There are
those among you who have sinned; but verily I say, for this once, for
mine own glory, and for the salvation of souls, I have forgiven you your
sins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:4">64:4</span></span> I will be
merciful unto you, for I have given unto you the kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:5">64:5</span></span> And the
keys of the mysteries of the kingdom shall not be taken from my servant
Joseph Smith, Jun., through the means I have appointed, while he liveth,
inasmuch as he obeyeth mine ordinances.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:6">64:6</span></span> There are
those who have sought occasion against him without cause;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:7">64:7</span></span>
Nevertheless, he has sinned; but verily I say unto you, I, the Lord,
forgive sins unto those who confess their sins before me and ask
forgiveness, who have not sinned unto death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:8">64:8</span></span> My
disciples, in days of old, sought occasion against one another and
forgave not one another in their hearts; and for this evil they were
afflicted and sorely chastened.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:9">64:9</span></span> Wherefore,
I say unto you, that ye ought to forgive one another; for he that
forgiveth not his brother his trespasses standeth condemned before the
Lord; for there remaineth in him the greater sin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:10">64:10</span></span> I, the
Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to
forgive all men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:11">64:11</span></span> And ye
ought to say in your hearts—let God judge between me and thee, and
reward thee according to thy deeds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:12">64:12</span></span> And him
that repenteth not of his sins, and confesseth them not, ye shall bring
before the church, and do with him as the scripture saith unto you,
either by commandment or by revelation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:13">64:13</span></span> And this
ye shall do that God may be glorified—not because ye forgive not, having
not compassion, but that ye may be justified in the eyes of the law,
that ye may not offend him who is your lawgiver—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:14">64:14</span></span> Verily I
say, for this cause ye shall do these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:15">64:15</span></span> Behold,
I, the Lord, was angry with him who was my servant Ezra Booth, and also
my servant Isaac Morley, for they kept not the law, neither the
commandment;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:16">64:16</span></span> They
sought evil in their hearts, and I, the Lord, withheld my Spirit. They
condemned for evil that thing in which there was no evil; nevertheless I
have forgiven my servant Isaac Morley.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:17">64:17</span></span> And also
my servant Edward Partridge, behold, he hath sinned, and Satan seeketh
to destroy his soul; but when these things are made known unto them, and
they repent of the evil, they shall be forgiven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:18">64:18</span></span> And now,
verily I say that it is expedient in me that my servant Sidney Gilbert,
after a few weeks, shall return upon his business, and to his agency in
the land of Zion;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:19">64:19</span></span> And that
which he hath seen and heard may be made known unto my disciples, that
they perish not. And for this cause have I spoken these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:20">64:20</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, that my servant Isaac Morley may not be tempted
above that which he is able to bear, and counsel wrongfully to your
hurt, I gave commandment that his farm should be sold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:21">64:21</span></span> I will
not that my servant Frederick G. Williams should sell his farm, for I,
the Lord, will to retain a strong hold in the land of Kirtland, for the
space of five years, in the which I will not overthrow the wicked, that
thereby I may save some.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:22">64:22</span></span> And after
that day, I, the Lord, will not hold any guilty that shall go with an
open heart up to the land of Zion; for I, the Lord, require the hearts
of the children of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:23">64:23</span></span> Behold,
now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it
is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he
that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:24">64:24</span></span> For after
today cometh the burning—this is speaking after the manner of the
Lord—for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly
shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of
Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:25">64:25</span></span>
Wherefore, if ye believe me, ye will labor while it is called today.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:26">64:26</span></span> And it is
not meet that my servants, Newel K. Whitney and Sidney Gilbert, should
sell their store and their possessions here; for this is not wisdom
until the residue of the church, which remaineth in this place, shall go
up unto the land of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:27">64:27</span></span> Behold,
it is said in my laws, or forbidden, to get in debt to thine enemies;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:28">64:28</span></span> But
behold, it is not said at any time that the Lord should not take when he
please, and pay as seemeth him good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:29">64:29</span></span>
Wherefore, as ye are agents, ye are on the Lord's errand; and whatever
ye do according to the will of the Lord is the Lord's business.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:30">64:30</span></span> And he
hath set you to provide for his saints in these last days, that they may
obtain an inheritance in the land of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:31">64:31</span></span> And
behold, I, the Lord, declare unto you, and my words are sure and shall
not fail, that they shall obtain it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:32">64:32</span></span> But all
things must come to pass in their time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:33">64:33</span></span>
Wherefore, be not weary in well-doing, for ye are laying the foundation
of a great work. And out of small things proceedeth that which is great.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:34">64:34</span></span> Behold,
the Lord requireth the heart and a willing mind; and the willing and
obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:35">64:35</span></span> And the
rebellious shall be cut off out of the land of Zion, and shall be sent
away, and shall not inherit the land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:36">64:36</span></span> For,
verily I say that the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim,
wherefore they shall be plucked out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:37">64:37</span></span> Behold,
I, the Lord, have made my church in these last days like unto a judge
sitting on a hill, or in a high place, to judge the nations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:38">64:38</span></span> For it
shall come to pass that the inhabitants of Zion shall judge all things
pertaining to Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:39">64:39</span></span> And liars
and hypocrites shall be proved by them, and they who are not apostles
and prophets shall be known.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:40">64:40</span></span> And even
the bishop, who is a judge, and his counselors, if they are not faithful
in their stewardships shall be condemned, and others shall be planted in
their stead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:41">64:41</span></span> For,
behold, I say unto you that Zion shall flourish, and the glory of the
Lord shall be upon her;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:42">64:42</span></span> And she
shall be an ensign unto the people, and there shall come unto her out of
every nation under heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_64:43">64:43</span></span> And the
day shall come when the nations of the earth shall tremble because of
her, and shall fear because of her terrible ones. The Lord hath spoken
it. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 65. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Hiram, Ohio, October
1831.](dc065.md)
