[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc071)  [Next](dc073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 72. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, December 4, 1831. * History of the Church* 1:239-41.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:1">72:1</span></span> Hearken,
and listen to the voice of the Lord, O ye who have assembled yourselves
together, who are the high priests of my church, to whom the kingdom and
power have been given.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:2">72:2</span></span> For verily
thus saith the Lord, it is expedient in me for a bishop to be appointed
unto you, or of you, unto the church in this part of the Lord's
vineyard.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:3">72:3</span></span> And verily
in this thing ye have done wisely, for it is required of the Lord, at
the hand of every steward, to render an account of his stewardship, both
in time and in eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:4">72:4</span></span> For he who
is faithful and wise in time is accounted worthy to inherit the mansions
prepared for him of my Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:5">72:5</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, the elders of the church in this part of my vineyard shall
render an account of their stewardship unto the bishop, who shall be
appointed of me in this part of my vineyard.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:6">72:6</span></span> These
things shall be had on record, to be handed over unto the bishop in
Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:7">72:7</span></span> And the
duty of the bishop shall be made known by the commandments which have
been given, and the voice of the conference.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:8">72:8</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, my servant Newel K. Whitney is the man who shall
be appointed and ordained unto this power. This is the will of the Lord
your God, your Redeemer. Even so. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:9">72:9</span></span> The word of
the Lord, in addition to the law which has been given, making known the
duty of the bishop who has been ordained unto the church in this part of
the vineyard, which is verily this—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:10">72:10</span></span> To keep
the Lord's storehouse; to receive the funds of the church in this part
of the vineyard;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:11">72:11</span></span> To take
an account of the elders as before has been commanded; and to administer
to their wants, who shall pay for that which they receive, inasmuch as
they have wherewith to pay;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:12">72:12</span></span> That this
also may be consecrated to the good of the church, to the poor and
needy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:13">72:13</span></span> And he
who hath not wherewith to pay, an account shall be taken and handed over
to the bishop of Zion, who shall pay the debt out of that which the Lord
shall put into his hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:14">72:14</span></span> And the
labors of the faithful who labor in spiritual things, in administering
the gospel and the things of the kingdom unto the church, and unto the
world, shall answer the debt unto the bishop in Zion;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:15">72:15</span></span> Thus it
cometh out of the church, for according to the law every man that cometh
up to Zion must lay all things before the bishop in Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:16">72:16</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, that as every elder in this part of the vineyard
must give an account of his stewardship unto the bishop in this part of
the vineyard—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:17">72:17</span></span> A
certificate from the judge or bishop in this part of the vineyard, unto
the bishop in Zion, rendereth every man acceptable, and answereth all
things, for an inheritance, and to be received as a wise steward and as
a faithful laborer;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:18">72:18</span></span> Otherwise
he shall not be accepted of the bishop of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:19">72:19</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, let every elder who shall give an account unto
the bishop of the church in this part of the vineyard be recommended by
the church or churches, in which he labors, that he may render himself
and his accounts approved in all things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:20">72:20</span></span> And
again, let my servants who are appointed as stewards over the literary
concerns of my church have claim for assistance upon the bishop or
bishops in all things—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:21">72:21</span></span> That the
revelations may be published, and go forth unto the ends of the earth;
that they also may obtain funds which shall benefit the church in all
things;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:22">72:22</span></span> That they
also may render themselves approved in all things, and be accounted as
wise stewards.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:23">72:23</span></span> And now,
behold, this shall be an ensample for all the extensive branches of my
church, in whatsoever land they shall be established. And now I make an
end of my sayings. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:24">72:24</span></span> A few
words in addition to the laws of the kingdom, respecting the members of
the church—they that are appointed by the Holy Spirit to go up unto
Zion, and they who are privileged to go up unto Zion—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:25">72:25</span></span> Let them
carry up unto the bishop a certificate from three elders of the church,
or a certificate from the bishop;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_72:26">72:26</span></span> Otherwise
he who shall go up unto the land of Zion shall not be accounted as a
wise steward. This is also an ensample. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 73. Revelation to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, Hiram, Ohio,
January 10, 1832.](dc073.md)
