[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc075)  [Next](dc077.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 76. A vision given to Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon, Hiram, Ohio, February 16, 1832. * History of the Church* 1:245-52.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:1">76:1</span></span> Hear, O ye
heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice ye inhabitants thereof, for
the Lord is God, and beside him there is no Savior.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:2">76:2</span></span> Great is
his wisdom, marvelous are his ways, and the extent of his doings none
can find out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:3">76:3</span></span> His
purposes fail not, neither are there any who can stay his hand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:4">76:4</span></span> From
eternity to eternity he is the same, and his years never fail.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:5">76:5</span></span> For thus
saith the Lord—I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear
me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in
truth unto the end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:6">76:6</span></span> Great shall
be their reward and eternal shall be their glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:7">76:7</span></span> And to them
will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom
from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the
good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:8">76:8</span></span> Yea, even
the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show
them, even the things of many generations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:9">76:9</span></span> And their
wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and
before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding
of the prudent shall come to naught.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:10">76:10</span></span> For by my
Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto
them the secrets of my will—yea, even those things which eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:11">76:11</span></span> We,
Joseph Smith, Jun., and Sidney Rigdon, being in the Spirit on the
sixteenth day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and thirty-two—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:12">76:12</span></span> By the
power of the Spirit our eyes were opened and our understandings were
enlightened, so as to see and understand the things of God—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:13">76:13</span></span> Even
those things which were from the beginning before the world was, which
were ordained of the Father, through his Only Begotten Son, who was in
the bosom of the Father, even from the beginning;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:14">76:14</span></span> Of whom
we bear record; and the record which we bear is the fulness of the
gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the Son, whom we saw and with whom we
conversed in the heavenly vision.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:15">76:15</span></span> For while
we were doing the work of translation, which the Lord had appointed unto
us, we came to the twenty-ninth verse of the fifth chapter of John,
which was given unto us as follows—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:16">76:16</span></span> Speaking
of the resurrection of the dead, concerning those who shall hear the
voice of the Son of Man:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:17">76:17</span></span> And shall
come forth; they who have done good in the resurrection of the just; and
they who have done evil, in the resurrection of the unjust.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:18">76:18</span></span> Now this
caused us to marvel, for it was given unto us of the Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:19">76:19</span></span> And while
we meditated upon these things, the Lord touched the eyes of our
understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone
round about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:20">76:20</span></span> And we
beheld the glory of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and
received of his fulness;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:21">76:21</span></span> And saw
the holy angels, and them who are sanctified before his throne,
worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him forever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:22">76:22</span></span> And now,
after the many testimonies which have been given of him, this is the
testimony, last of all, which we give of him: That he lives!

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:23">76:23</span></span> For we
saw him, even on the right hand of God; and we heard the voice bearing
record that he is the Only Begotten of the Father—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:24">76:24</span></span> That by
him, and through him, and of him, the worlds are and were created, and
the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:25">76:25</span></span> And this
we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in authority
in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom
the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father, was thrust down
from the presence of God and the Son,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:26">76:26</span></span> And was
called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of
the morning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:27">76:27</span></span> And we
beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen, even a son of the morning!

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:28">76:28</span></span> And while
we were yet in the Spirit, the Lord commanded us that we should write
the vision; for we beheld Satan, that old serpent, even the devil, who
rebelled against God, and sought to take the kingdom of our God and his
Christ—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:29">76:29</span></span>
Wherefore, he maketh war with the saints of God, and encompasseth them
round about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:30">76:30</span></span> And we
saw a vision of the sufferings of those with whom he made war and
overcame, for thus came the voice of the Lord unto us:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:31">76:31</span></span> Thus
saith the Lord concerning all those who know my power, and have been
made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves through the power of the
devil to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my power—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:32">76:32</span></span> They are
they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that it had been
better for them never to have been born;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:33">76:33</span></span> For they
are vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil
and his angels in eternity;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:34">76:34</span></span>
Concerning whom I have said there is no forgiveness in this world nor in
the world to come—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:35">76:35</span></span> Having
denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the
Only Begotten Son of the Father, having crucified him unto themselves
and put him to an open shame.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:36">76:36</span></span> These are
they who shall go away into the lake of fire and brimstone, with the
devil and his angels—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:37">76:37</span></span> And the
only ones on whom the second death shall have any power;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:38">76:38</span></span> Yea,
verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the
Lord, after the sufferings of his wrath.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:39">76:39</span></span> For all
the rest shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead, through
the triumph and the glory of the Lamb, who was slain, who was in the
bosom of the Father before the worlds were made.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:40">76:40</span></span> And this
is the gospel, the glad tidings, which the voice out of the heavens bore
record unto us—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:41">76:41</span></span> That he
came into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to
bear the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it
from all unrighteousness;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:42">76:42</span></span> That
through him all might be saved whom the Father had put into his power
and made by him;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:43">76:43</span></span> Who
glorifies the Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those
sons of perdition who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:44">76:44</span></span>
Wherefore, he saves all except them—they shall go away into everlasting
punishment, which is endless punishment, which is eternal punishment, to
reign with the devil and his angels in eternity, where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched, which is their torment—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:45">76:45</span></span> And the
end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their torment, no man knows;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:46">76:46</span></span> Neither
was it revealed, neither is, neither will be revealed unto man, except
to them who are made partakers thereof;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:47">76:47</span></span>
Nevertheless, I, the Lord, show it by vision unto many, but straightway
shut it up again;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:48">76:48</span></span>
Wherefore, the end, the width, the height, the depth, and the misery
thereof, they understand not, neither any man except those who are
ordained unto this condemnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:49">76:49</span></span> And we
heard the voice, saying: Write the vision, for lo, this is the end of
the vision of the sufferings of the ungodly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:50">76:50</span></span> And again
we bear record—for we saw and heard, and this is the testimony of the
gospel of Christ concerning them who shall come forth in the
resurrection of the just—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:51">76:51</span></span> They are
they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and
were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water
in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:52">76:52</span></span> That by
keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all
their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of
him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:53">76:53</span></span> And who
overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which
the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:54">76:54</span></span> They are
they who are the church of the Firstborn.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:55">76:55</span></span> They are
they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:56">76:56</span></span> They are
they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of
his glory;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:57">76:57</span></span> And are
priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was
after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten
Son.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:58">76:58</span></span>
Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:59">76:59</span></span>
Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and
Christ is God's.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:60">76:60</span></span> And they
shall overcome all things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:61">76:61</span></span>
Wherefore, let no man glory in man, but rather let him glory in God, who
shall subdue all enemies under his feet.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:62">76:62</span></span> These
shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:63">76:63</span></span> These are
they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall come in the clouds of
heaven to reign on the earth over his people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:64">76:64</span></span> These are
they who shall have part in the first resurrection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:65">76:65</span></span> These are
they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:66">76:66</span></span> These are
they who are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God,
the heavenly place, the holiest of all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:67">76:67</span></span> These are
they who have come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general
assembly and church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:68">76:68</span></span> These are
they whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ are the
judge of all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:69">76:69</span></span> These are
they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of
his own blood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:70">76:70</span></span> These are
they whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun, even
the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the
firmament is written of as being typical.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:71">76:71</span></span> And
again, we saw the terrestrial world, and behold and lo, these are they
who are of the terrestrial, whose glory differs from that of the church
of the Firstborn who have received the fulness of the Father, even as
that of the moon differs from the sun in the firmament.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:72">76:72</span></span> Behold,
these are they who died without law;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:73">76:73</span></span> And also
they who are the spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited,
and preached the gospel unto them, that they might be judged according
to men in the flesh;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:74">76:74</span></span> Who
received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards
received it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:75">76:75</span></span> These are
they who are honorable men of the earth, who were blinded by the
craftiness of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:76">76:76</span></span> These are
they who receive of his glory, but not of his fulness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:77">76:77</span></span> These are
they who receive of the presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of
the Father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:78">76:78</span></span>
Wherefore, they are bodies terrestrial, and not bodies celestial, and
differ in glory as the moon differs from the sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:79">76:79</span></span> These are
they who are not valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore, they
obtain not the crown over the kingdom of our God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:80">76:80</span></span> And now
this is the end of the vision which we saw of the terrestrial, that the
Lord commanded us to write while we were yet in the Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:81">76:81</span></span> And
again, we saw the glory of the telestial, which glory is that of the
lesser, even as the glory of the stars differs from that of the glory of
the moon in the firmament.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:82">76:82</span></span> These are
they who received not the gospel of Christ, neither the testimony of
Jesus.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:83">76:83</span></span> These are
they who deny not the Holy Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:84">76:84</span></span> These are
they who are thrust down to hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:85">76:85</span></span> These are
they who shall not be redeemed from the devil until the last
resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have finished
his work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:86">76:86</span></span> These are
they who receive not of his fulness in the eternal world, but of the
Holy Spirit through the ministration of the terrestrial;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:87">76:87</span></span> And the
terrestrial through the ministration of the celestial.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:88">76:88</span></span> And also
the telestial receive it of the administering of angels who are
appointed to minister for them, or who are appointed to be ministering
spirits for them; for they shall be heirs of salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:89">76:89</span></span> And thus
we saw, in the heavenly vision, the glory of the telestial, which
surpasses all understanding;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:90">76:90</span></span> And no
man knows it except him to whom God has revealed it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:91">76:91</span></span> And thus
we saw the glory of the terrestrial which excels in all things the glory
of the telestial, even in glory, and in power, and in might, and in
dominion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:92">76:92</span></span> And thus
we saw the glory of the celestial, which excels in all things—where God,
even the Father, reigns upon his throne forever and ever;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:93">76:93</span></span> Before
whose throne all things bow in humble reverence, and give him glory
forever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:94">76:94</span></span> They who
dwell in his presence are the church of the Firstborn; and they see as
they are seen, and know as they are known, having received of his
fulness and of his grace;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:95">76:95</span></span> And he
makes them equal in power, and in might, and in dominion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:96">76:96</span></span> And the
glory of the celestial is one, even as the glory of the sun is one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:97">76:97</span></span> And the
glory of the terrestrial is one, even as the glory of the moon is one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:98">76:98</span></span> And the
glory of the telestial is one, even as the glory of the stars is one;
for as one star differs from another star in glory, even so differs one
from another in glory in the telestial world;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:99">76:99</span></span> For these
are they who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:100">76:100</span></span> These
are they who say they are some of one and some of another—some of Christ
and some of John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of
Esaias, and some of Isaiah, and some of Enoch;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:101">76:101</span></span> But
received not the gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the
prophets, neither the everlasting covenant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:102">76:102</span></span> Last of
all, these all are they who will not be gathered with the saints, to be
caught up unto the church of the Firstborn, and received into the cloud.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:103">76:103</span></span> These
are they who are liars, and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers,
and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:104">76:104</span></span> These
are they who suffer the wrath of God on earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:105">76:105</span></span> These
are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:106">76:106</span></span> These
are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty God,
until the fulness of times, when Christ shall have subdued all enemies
under his feet, and shall have perfected his work;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:107">76:107</span></span> When he
shall deliver up the kingdom, and present it unto the Father, spotless,
saying: I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone, even the
wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:108">76:108</span></span> Then
shall he be crowned with the crown of his glory, to sit on the throne of
his power to reign forever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:109">76:109</span></span> But
behold, and lo, we saw the glory and the inhabitants of the telestial
world, that they were as innumerable as the stars in the firmament of
heaven, or as the sand upon the seashore;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:110">76:110</span></span> And
heard the voice of the Lord saying: These all shall bow the knee, and
every tongue shall confess to him who sits upon the throne forever and
ever;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:111">76:111</span></span> For
they shall be judged according to their works, and every man shall
receive according to his own works, his own dominion, in the mansions
which are prepared;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:112">76:112</span></span> And
they shall be servants of the Most High; but where God and Christ dwell
they cannot come, worlds without end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:113">76:113</span></span> This is
the end of the vision which we saw, which we were commanded to write
while we were yet in the Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:114">76:114</span></span> But
great and marvelous are the works of the Lord, and the mysteries of his
kingdom which he showed unto us, which surpass all understanding in
glory, and in might, and in dominion;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:115">76:115</span></span> Which
he commanded us we should not write while we were yet in the Spirit, and
are not lawful for man to utter;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:116">76:116</span></span> Neither
is man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and
understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those
who love him, and purify themselves before him;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:117">76:117</span></span> To whom
he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:118">76:118</span></span> That
through the power and manifestation of the Spirit, while in the flesh,
they may be able to bear his presence in the world of glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_76:119">76:119</span></span> And to
God and the Lamb be glory, and honor, and dominion forever and ever.
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 77. Revelation to Joseph Smith, Hiram, Ohio, March 1832.](dc077.md)
