[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc077)  [Next](dc079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Revelation through Joseph Smith, Hiram, Ohio, March 1832. * History of the Church* 1:255-57.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:1">78:1</span></span> The Lord
spake unto Joseph Smith, Jun., saying: Hearken unto me, saith the Lord
your God, who are ordained unto the high priesthood of my church, who
have assembled yourselves together;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:2">78:2</span></span> And listen
to the counsel of him who has ordained you from on high, who shall speak
in your ears the words of wisdom, that salvation may be unto you in that
thing which you have presented before me, saith the Lord God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:3">78:3</span></span> For verily
I say unto you, the time has come, and is now at hand; and behold, and
lo, it must needs be that there be an organization of my people, in
regulating and establishing the affairs of the storehouse for the poor
of my people, both in this place and in the land of Zion—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:4">78:4</span></span> For a
permanent and everlasting establishment and order unto my church, to
advance the cause, which ye have espoused, to the salvation of man, and
to the glory of your Father who is in heaven;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:5">78:5</span></span> That you
may be equal in the bonds of heavenly things, yea, and earthly things
also, for the obtaining of heavenly things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:6">78:6</span></span> For if ye
are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly
things;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:7">78:7</span></span> For if you
will that I give unto you a place in the celestial world, you must
prepare yourselves by doing the things which I have commanded you and
required of you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:8">78:8</span></span> And now,
verily thus saith the Lord, it is expedient that all things be done unto
my glory, by you who are joined together in this order;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:9">78:9</span></span> Or, in
other words, let my servant Newel K. Whitney and my servant Joseph
Smith, Jun., and my servant Sidney Rigdon sit in council with the saints
which are in Zion;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:10">78:10</span></span> Otherwise
Satan seeketh to turn their hearts away from the truth, that they become
blinded and understand not the things which are prepared for them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:11">78:11</span></span>
Wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, to prepare and organize
yourselves by a bond or everlasting covenant that cannot be broken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:12">78:12</span></span> And he
who breaketh it shall lose his office and standing in the church, and
shall be delivered over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of
redemption.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:13">78:13</span></span> Behold,
this is the preparation wherewith I prepare you, and the foundation, and
the ensample which I give unto you, whereby you may accomplish the
commandments which are given you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:14">78:14</span></span> That
through my providence, notwithstanding the tribulation which shall
descend upon you, that the church may stand independent above all other
creatures beneath the celestial world;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:15">78:15</span></span> That you
may come up unto the crown prepared for you, and be made rulers over
many kingdoms, saith the Lord God, the Holy One of Zion, who hath
established the foundations of Adam-ondi-Ahman;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:16">78:16</span></span> Who hath
appointed Michael your prince, and established his feet, and set him
upon high, and given unto him the keys of salvation under the counsel
and direction of the Holy One, who is without beginning of days or end
of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:17">78:17</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, ye are little children, and ye have not as yet
understood how great blessings the Father hath in his own hands and
prepared for you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:18">78:18</span></span> And ye
cannot bear all things now; nevertheless, be of good cheer, for I will
lead you along. The kingdom is yours and the blessings thereof are
yours, and the riches of eternity are yours.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:19">78:19</span></span> And he
who receiveth all things with thankfulness shall be made glorious; and
the things of this earth shall be added unto him, even an hundred fold,
yea, more.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:20">78:20</span></span>
Wherefore, do the things which I have commanded you, saith your
Redeemer, even the Son Ahman, who prepareth all things before he taketh
you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:21">78:21</span></span> For ye
are the church of the Firstborn, and he will take you up in a cloud, and
appoint every man his portion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_78:22">78:22</span></span> And he
that is a faithful and wise steward shall inherit all things. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 79. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Hiram, Ohio, March
1832.](dc079)
