[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc081)  [Next](dc083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 82. Revelation to Joseph Smith, Jackson County, Missouri, April 26, 1832. * History of the Church* 1:267-69.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:1">82:1</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, my servants, that inasmuch as you have forgiven
one another your trespasses, even so I, the Lord, forgive you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:2">82:2</span></span>
Nevertheless, there are those among you who have sinned exceedingly;
yea, even all of you have sinned; but verily I say unto you, beware from
henceforth, and refrain from sin, lest sore judgments fall upon your
heads.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:3">82:3</span></span> For of him
unto whom much is given much is required; and he who sins against the
greater light shall receive the greater condemnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:4">82:4</span></span> Ye call
upon my name for revelations, and I give them unto you; and inasmuch as
ye keep not my sayings, which I give unto you, ye become transgressors;
and justice and judgment are the penalty which is affixed unto my law.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:5">82:5</span></span> Therefore,
what I say unto one I say unto all: Watch, for the adversary spreadeth
his dominions, and darkness reigneth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:6">82:6</span></span> And the
anger of God kindleth against the inhabitants of the earth; and none
doeth good, for all have gone out of the way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:7">82:7</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, I, the Lord, will not lay any sin to your charge;
go your ways and sin no more; but unto that soul who sinneth shall the
former sins return, saith the Lord your God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:8">82:8</span></span> And again,
I say unto you, I give unto you a new commandment, that you may
understand my will concerning you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:9">82:9</span></span> Or, in
other words, I give unto you directions how you may act before me, that
it may turn to you for your salvation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:10">82:10</span></span> I, the
Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye
have no promise.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:11">82:11</span></span>
Therefore, verily I say unto you, that it is expedient for my servants
Edward Partridge and Newel K. Whitney, A. Sidney Gilbert and Sidney
Rigdon, and my servant Joseph Smith, and John Whitmer and Oliver
Cowdery, and W. W. Phelps and Martin Harris to be bound together by a
bond and covenant that cannot be broken by transgression, except
judgment shall immediately follow, in your several stewardships—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:12">82:12</span></span> To manage
the affairs of the poor, and all things pertaining to the bishopric both
in the land of Zion and in the land of Kirtland;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:13">82:13</span></span> For I
have consecrated the land of Kirtland in mine own due time for the
benefit of the saints of the Most High, and for a stake to Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:14">82:14</span></span> For Zion
must increase in beauty, and in holiness; her borders must be enlarged;
her stakes must be strengthened; yea, verily I say unto you, Zion must
arise and put on her beautiful garments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:15">82:15</span></span>
Therefore, I give unto you this commandment, that ye bind yourselves by
this covenant, and it shall be done according to the laws of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:16">82:16</span></span> Behold,
here is wisdom also in me for your good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:17">82:17</span></span> And you
are to be equal, or in other words, you are to have equal claims on the
properties, for the benefit of managing the concerns of your
stewardships, every man according to his wants and his needs, inasmuch
as his wants are just—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:18">82:18</span></span> And all
this for the benefit of the church of the living God, that every man may
improve upon his talent, that every man may gain other talents, yea,
even an hundred fold, to be cast into the Lord's storehouse, to become
the common property of the whole church—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:19">82:19</span></span> Every man
seeking the interest of his neighbor, and doing all things with an eye
single to the glory of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:20">82:20</span></span> This
order I have appointed to be an everlasting order unto you, and unto
your successors, inasmuch as you sin not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:21">82:21</span></span> And the
soul that sins against this covenant, and hardeneth his heart against
it, shall be dealt with according to the laws of my church, and shall be
delivered over to the buffetings of Satan until the day of redemption.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:22">82:22</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, and this is wisdom, make unto yourselves friends
with the mammon of unrighteousness, and they will not destroy you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:23">82:23</span></span> Leave
judgment alone with me, for it is mine and I will repay. Peace be with
you; my blessings continue with you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_82:24">82:24</span></span> For even
yet the kingdom is yours, and shall be forever, if you fall not from
your steadfastness. Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 83. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Independence, Missouri,
April 30, 1832.](dc083)
