[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc097)  [Next](dc099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 98. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, August 6, 1833. * History of the Church* 1:403-6.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:1">98:1</span></span> Verily I
say unto you my friends, fear not, let your hearts be comforted; yea,
rejoice evermore, and in everything give thanks;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:2">98:2</span></span> Waiting
patiently on the Lord, for your prayers have entered into the ears of
the Lord of Sabaoth, and are recorded with this seal and testament—the
Lord hath sworn and decreed that they shall be granted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:3">98:3</span></span> Therefore,
he giveth this promise unto you, with an immutable covenant that they
shall be fulfilled; and all things wherewith you have been afflicted
shall work together for your good, and to my name's glory, saith the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:4">98:4</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you concerning the laws of the land, it is my will
that my people should observe to do all things whatsoever I command
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:5">98:5</span></span> And that
law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that principle of
freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to all mankind,
and is justifiable before me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:6">98:6</span></span> Therefore,
I, the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my church, in befriending
that law which is the constitutional law of the land;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:7">98:7</span></span> And as
pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than this, cometh
of evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:8">98:8</span></span> I, the Lord
God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed; and the law also
maketh you free.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:9">98:9</span></span>
Nevertheless, when the wicked rule the people mourn.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:10">98:10</span></span>
Wherefore, honest men and wise men should be sought for diligently, and
good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold; otherwise whatsoever
is less than these cometh of evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:11">98:11</span></span> And I
give unto you a commandment, that ye shall forsake all evil and cleave
unto all good, that ye shall live by every word which proceedeth forth
out of the mouth of God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:12">98:12</span></span> For he
will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon precept; and I
will try you and prove you herewith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:13">98:13</span></span> And whoso
layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it
again, even life eternal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:14">98:14</span></span>
Therefore, be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my
heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you
will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found
worthy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:15">98:15</span></span> For if ye
will not abide in my covenant ye are not worthy of me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:16">98:16</span></span>
Therefore, renounce war and proclaim peace, and seek diligently to turn
the hearts of the children to their fathers, and the hearts of the
fathers to the children;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:17">98:17</span></span> And
again, the hearts of the Jews unto the prophets, and the prophets unto
the Jews; lest I come and smite the whole earth with a curse, and all
flesh be consumed before me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:18">98:18</span></span> Let not
your hearts be troubled; for in my Father's house are many mansions, and
I have prepared a place for you; and where my Father and I am, there ye
shall be also.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:19">98:19</span></span> Behold,
I, the Lord, am not well pleased with many who are in the church at
Kirtland;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:20">98:20</span></span> For they
do not forsake their sins, and their wicked ways, the pride of their
hearts, and their covetousness, and all their detestable things, and
observe the words of wisdom and eternal life which I have given unto
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:21">98:21</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, that I, the Lord, will chasten them and will do whatsoever
I list, if they do not repent and observe all things whatsoever I have
said unto them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:22">98:22</span></span> And again
I say unto you, if ye observe to do whatsoever I command you, I, the
Lord, will turn away all wrath and indignation from you, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:23">98:23</span></span> Now, I
speak unto you concerning your families—if men will smite you, or your
families, once, and ye bear it patiently and revile not against them,
neither seek revenge, ye shall be rewarded;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:24">98:24</span></span> But if ye
bear it not patiently, it shall be accounted unto you as being meted out
as a just measure unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:25">98:25</span></span> And
again, if your enemy shall smite you the second time, and you revile not
against your enemy, and bear it patiently, your reward shall be an
hundred fold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:26">98:26</span></span> And
again, if he shall smite you the third time, and ye bear it patiently,
your reward shall be doubled unto you four-fold;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:27">98:27</span></span> And these
three testimonies shall stand against your enemy if he repent not, and
shall not be blotted out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:28">98:28</span></span> And now,
verily I say unto you, if that enemy shall escape my vengeance, that he
be not brought into judgment before me, then ye shall see to it that ye
warn him in my name, that he come no more upon you, neither upon your
family, even your children's children unto the third and fourth
generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:29">98:29</span></span> And then,
if he shall come upon you or your children, or your children's children
unto the third and fourth generation, I have delivered thine enemy into
thine hands;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:30">98:30</span></span> And then
if thou wilt spare him, thou shalt be rewarded for thy righteousness;
and also thy children and thy children's children unto the third and
fourth generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:31">98:31</span></span>
Nevertheless, thine enemy is in thine hands; and if thou rewardest him
according to his works thou art justified; if he has sought thy life,
and thy life is endangered by him, thine enemy is in thine hands and
thou art justified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:32">98:32</span></span> Behold,
this is the law I gave unto my servant Nephi, and thy fathers, Joseph,
and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, and all mine ancient prophets and
apostles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:33">98:33</span></span> And
again, this is the law that I gave unto mine ancients, that they should
not go out unto battle against any nation, kindred, tongue, or people,
save I, the Lord, commanded them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:34">98:34</span></span> And if
any nation, tongue, or people should proclaim war against them, they
should first lift a standard of peace unto that people, nation, or
tongue;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:35">98:35</span></span> And if
that people did not accept the offering of peace, neither the second nor
the third time, they should bring these testimonies before the Lord;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:36">98:36</span></span> Then I,
the Lord, would give unto them a commandment, and justify them in going
out to battle against that nation, tongue, or people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:37">98:37</span></span> And I,
the Lord, would fight their battles, and their children's battles, and
their children's children's, until they had avenged themselves on all
their enemies, to the third and fourth generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:38">98:38</span></span> Behold,
this is an ensample unto all people, saith the Lord your God, for
justification before me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:39">98:39</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, if after thine enemy has come upon thee
the first time, he repent and come unto thee praying thy forgiveness,
thou shalt forgive him, and shalt hold it no more as a testimony against
thine enemy—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:40">98:40</span></span> And so on
unto the second and third time; and as oft as thine enemy repenteth of
the trespass wherewith he has trespassed against thee, thou shalt
forgive him, until seventy times seven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:41">98:41</span></span> And if he
trespass against thee and repent not the first time, nevertheless thou
shalt forgive him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:42">98:42</span></span> And if he
trespass against thee the second time, and repent not, nevertheless thou
shalt forgive him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:43">98:43</span></span> And if he
trespass against thee the third time, and repent not, thou shalt also
forgive him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:44">98:44</span></span> But if he
trespass against thee the fourth time thou shalt not forgive him, but
shalt bring these testimonies before the Lord; and they shall not be
blotted out until he repent and reward thee four-fold in all things
wherewith he has trespassed against thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:45">98:45</span></span> And if he
do this, thou shalt forgive him with all thine heart; and if he do not
this, I, the Lord, will avenge thee of thine enemy an hundred-fold;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:46">98:46</span></span> And upon
his children, and upon his children's children of all them that hate me,
unto the third and fourth generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:47">98:47</span></span> But if
the children shall repent, or the children's children, and turn to the
Lord their God, with all their hearts and with all their might, mind,
and strength, and restore four-fold for all their trespasses wherewith
they have trespassed, or wherewith their fathers have trespassed, or
their fathers' fathers, then thine indignation shall be turned away;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_98:48">98:48</span></span> And
vengeance shall no more come upon them, saith the Lord thy God, and
their trespasses shall never be brought any more as a testimony before
the Lord against them. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 99. Revelation through Joseph Smith to John Murdock, August 1832,
Hiram, Ohio.](dc099)
