[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc096)  [Next](dc098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 97. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, August 2, 1833. * History of the Church* 1:400-402.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:1">97:1</span></span> Verily I
say unto you my friends, I speak unto you with my voice, even the voice
of my Spirit, that I may show unto you my will concerning your brethren
in the land of Zion, many of whom are truly humble and are seeking
diligently to learn wisdom and to find truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:2">97:2</span></span> Verily,
verily I say unto you, blessed are such, for they shall obtain; for I,
the Lord, show mercy unto all the meek, and upon all whomsoever I will,
that I may be justified when I shall bring them unto judgment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:3">97:3</span></span> Behold, I
say unto you, concerning the school in Zion, I, the Lord, am well
pleased that there should be a school in Zion, and also with my servant
Parley P. Pratt, for he abideth in me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:4">97:4</span></span> And
inasmuch as he continueth to abide in me he shall continue to preside
over the school in the land of Zion until I shall give unto him other
commandments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:5">97:5</span></span> And I will
bless him with a multiplicity of blessings, in expounding all scriptures
and mysteries to the edification of the school, and of the church in
Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:6">97:6</span></span> And to the
residue of the school, I, the Lord, am willing to show mercy;
nevertheless, there are those that must needs be chastened, and their
works shall be made known.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:7">97:7</span></span> The ax is
laid at the root of the trees; and every tree that bringeth not forth
good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. I, the Lord, have
spoken it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:8">97:8</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, all among them who know their hearts are honest, and are
broken, and their spirits contrite, and are willing to observe their
covenants by sacrifice—yea, every sacrifice which I, the Lord, shall
command—they are accepted of me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:9">97:9</span></span> For I, the
Lord, will cause them to bring forth as a very fruitful tree which is
planted in a goodly land, by a pure stream, that yieldeth much precious
fruit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:10">97:10</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, that it is my will that a house should be built unto me in
the land of Zion, like unto the pattern which I have given you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:11">97:11</span></span> Yea, let
it be built speedily, by the tithing of my people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:12">97:12</span></span> Behold,
this is the tithing and the sacrifice which I, the Lord, require at
their hands, that there may be a house built unto me for the salvation
of Zion—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:13">97:13</span></span> For a
place of thanksgiving for all saints, and for a place of instruction for
all those who are called to the work of the ministry in all their
several callings and offices;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:14">97:14</span></span> That they
may be perfected in the understanding of their ministry, in theory, in
principle, and in doctrine, in all things pertaining to the kingdom of
God on the earth, the keys of which kingdom have been conferred upon
you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:15">97:15</span></span> And
inasmuch as my people build a house unto me in the name of the Lord, and
do not suffer any unclean thing to come into it, that it be not defiled,
my glory shall rest upon it;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:16">97:16</span></span> Yea, and
my presence shall be there, for I will come into it, and all the pure in
heart that shall come into it shall see God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:17">97:17</span></span> But if it
be defiled I will not come into it, and my glory shall not be there; for
I will not come into unholy temples.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:18">97:18</span></span> And, now,
behold, if Zion do these things she shall prosper, and spread herself
and become very glorious, very great, and very terrible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:19">97:19</span></span> And the
nations of the earth shall honor her, and shall say: Surely Zion is the
city of our God, and surely Zion cannot fall, neither be moved out of
her place, for God is there, and the hand of the Lord is there;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:20">97:20</span></span> And he
hath sworn by the power of his might to be her salvation and her high
tower.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:21">97:21</span></span>
Therefore, verily, thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is
Zion—THE PURE IN HEART; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the
wicked shall mourn.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:22">97:22</span></span> For
behold, and lo, vengeance cometh speedily upon the ungodly as the
whirlwind; and who shall escape it?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:23">97:23</span></span> The
Lord's scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report
thereof shall vex all people; yea, it shall not be stayed until the Lord
come;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:24">97:24</span></span> For the
indignation of the Lord is kindled against their abominations and all
their wicked works.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:25">97:25</span></span>
Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things
whatsoever I have commanded her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:26">97:26</span></span> But if
she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her
according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with
plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:27">97:27</span></span>
Nevertheless, let it be read this once to her ears, that I, the Lord,
have accepted of her offering; and if she sin no more none of these
things shall come upon her;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_97:28">97:28</span></span> And I
will bless her with blessings, and multiply a multiplicity of blessings
upon her, and upon her generations forever and ever, saith the Lord your
God. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 98. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, August 6,
1833.](dc098.md)
