[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc100)  [Next](dc102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 101. Revelation to Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, December 16, 1833. * History of the Church* 1:458-64.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:1">101:1</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, concerning your brethren who have been afflicted, and
persecuted, and cast out from the land of their inheritance—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:2">101:2</span></span> I, the
Lord, have suffered the affliction to come upon them, wherewith they
have been afflicted, in consequence of their transgressions;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:3">101:3</span></span> Yet I
will own them, and they shall be mine in that day when I shall come to
make up my jewels.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:4">101:4</span></span>
Therefore, they must needs be chastened and tried, even as Abraham, who
was commanded to offer up his only son.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:5">101:5</span></span> For all
those who will not endure chastening, but deny me, cannot be sanctified.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:6">101:6</span></span> Behold, I
say unto you, there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and
strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these
things they polluted their inheritances.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:7">101:7</span></span> They were
slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the
Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in
the day of their trouble.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:8">101:8</span></span> In the
day of their peace they esteemed lightly my counsel; but, in the day of
their trouble, of necessity they feel after me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:9">101:9</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, notwithstanding their sins, my bowels are filled with
compassion towards them. I will not utterly cast them off; and in the
day of wrath I will remember mercy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:10">101:10</span></span> I have
sworn, and the decree hath gone forth by a former commandment which I
have given unto you, that I would let fall the sword of mine indignation
in behalf of my people; and even as I have said, it shall come to pass.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:11">101:11</span></span> Mine
indignation is soon to be poured out without measure upon all nations;
and this will I do when the cup of their iniquity is full.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:12">101:12</span></span> And in
that day all who are found upon the watch-tower, or in other words, all
mine Israel, shall be saved.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:13">101:13</span></span> And
they that have been scattered shall be gathered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:14">101:14</span></span> And all
they who have mourned shall be comforted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:15">101:15</span></span> And all
they who have given their lives for my name shall be crowned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:16">101:16</span></span>
Therefore, let your hearts be comforted concerning Zion; for all flesh
is in mine hands; be still and know that I am God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:17">101:17</span></span> Zion
shall not be moved out of her place, notwithstanding her children are
scattered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:18">101:18</span></span> They
that remain, and are pure in heart, shall return, and come to their
inheritances, they and their children, with songs of everlasting joy, to
build up the waste places of Zion—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:19">101:19</span></span> And all
these things that the prophets might be fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:20">101:20</span></span> And,
behold, there is none other place appointed than that which I have
appointed; neither shall there be any other place appointed than that
which I have appointed, for the work of the gathering of my saints—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:21">101:21</span></span> Until
the day cometh when there is found no more room for them; and then I
have other places which I will appoint unto them, and they shall be
called stakes, for the curtains or the strength of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:22">101:22</span></span> Behold,
it is my will, that all they who call on my name, and worship me
according to mine everlasting gospel, should gather together, and stand
in holy places;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:23">101:23</span></span> And
prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil of the
covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the earth, shall
be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:24">101:24</span></span> And
every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of the field, or
of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the sea, that dwells upon
all the face of the earth, shall be consumed;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:25">101:25</span></span> And
also that of element shall melt with fervent heat; and all things shall
become new, that my knowledge and glory may dwell upon all the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:26">101:26</span></span> And in
that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of
all flesh, shall cease from before my face.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:27">101:27</span></span> And in
that day whatsoever any man shall ask, it shall be given unto him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:28">101:28</span></span> And in
that day Satan shall not have power to tempt any man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:29">101:29</span></span> And
there shall be no sorrow because there is no death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:30">101:30</span></span> In that
day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as
the age of a tree;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:31">101:31</span></span> And
when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall
be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his
rest shall be glorious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:32">101:32</span></span> Yea,
verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall
reveal all things—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:33">101:33</span></span> Things
which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the
earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:34">101:34</span></span> Things
most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath,
things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:35">101:35</span></span> And all
they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though
they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they
partake of all this glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:36">101:36</span></span>
Wherefore, fear not even unto death; for in this world your joy is not
full, but in me your joy is full.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:37">101:37</span></span>
Therefore, care not for the body, neither the life of the body; but care
for the soul, and for the life of the soul.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:38">101:38</span></span> And
seek the face of the Lord always, that in patience ye may possess your
souls, and ye shall have eternal life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:39">101:39</span></span> When
men are called unto mine everlasting gospel, and covenant with an
everlasting covenant, they are accounted as the salt of the earth and
the savor of men;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:40">101:40</span></span> They
are called to be the savor of men; therefore, if that salt of the earth
lose its savor, behold, it is thenceforth good for nothing only to be
cast out and trodden under the feet of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:41">101:41</span></span> Behold,
here is wisdom concerning the children of Zion, even many, but not all;
they were found transgressors, therefore they must needs be chastened—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:42">101:42</span></span> He that
exalteth himself shall be abased, and he that abaseth himself shall be
exalted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:43">101:43</span></span> And
now, I will show unto you a parable, that you may know my will
concerning the redemption of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:44">101:44</span></span> A
certain nobleman had a spot of land, very choice; and he said unto his
servants: Go ye unto my vineyard, even upon this very choice piece of
land, and plant twelve olive-trees;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:45">101:45</span></span> And set
watchmen round about them, and build a tower, that one may overlook the
land round about, to be a watchman upon the tower, that mine olive-trees
may not be broken down when the enemy shall come to spoil and take upon
themselves the fruit of my vineyard.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:46">101:46</span></span> Now,
the servants of the nobleman went and did as their lord commanded them,
and planted the olive-trees, and built a hedge round about, and set
watchmen, and began to build a tower.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:47">101:47</span></span> And
while they were yet laying the foundation thereof, they began to say
among themselves: And what need hath my lord of this tower?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:48">101:48</span></span> And
consulted for a long time, saying among themselves: What need hath my
lord of this tower, seeing this is a time of peace?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:49">101:49</span></span> Might
not this money be given to the exchangers? For there is no need of these
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:50">101:50</span></span> And
while they were at variance one with another they became very slothful,
and they hearkened not unto the commandments of their lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:51">101:51</span></span> And the
enemy came by night, and broke down the hedge; and the servants of the
nobleman arose and were affrighted, and fled; and the enemy destroyed
their works, and broke down the olive-trees.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:52">101:52</span></span> Now,
behold, the nobleman, the lord of the vineyard, called upon his
servants, and said unto them, Why! what is the cause of this great evil?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:53">101:53</span></span> Ought
ye not to have done even as I commanded you, and—after ye had planted
the vineyard, and built the hedge round about, and set watchmen upon the
walls thereof—built the tower also, and set a watchman upon the tower,
and watched for my vineyard, and not have fallen asleep, lest the enemy
should come upon you?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:54">101:54</span></span> And
behold, the watchman upon the tower would have seen the enemy while he
was yet afar off; and then ye could have made ready and kept the enemy
from breaking down the hedge thereof, and saved my vineyard from the
hands of the destroyer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:55">101:55</span></span> And the
lord of the vineyard said unto one of his servants: Go and gather
together the residue of my servants, and take all the strength of mine
house, which are my warriors, my young men, and they that are of middle
age also among all my servants, who are the strength of mine house, save
those only whom I have appointed to tarry;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:56">101:56</span></span> And go
ye straightway unto the land of my vineyard, and redeem my vineyard; for
it is mine; I have bought it with money.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:57">101:57</span></span>
Therefore, get ye straightway unto my land; break down the walls of mine
enemies; throw down their tower, and scatter their watchmen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:58">101:58</span></span> And
inasmuch as they gather together against you, avenge me of mine enemies,
that by and by I may come with the residue of mine house and possess the
land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:59">101:59</span></span> And the
servant said unto his lord: When shall these things be?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:60">101:60</span></span> And he
said unto his servant: When I will; go ye straightway, and do all things
whatsoever I have commanded you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:61">101:61</span></span> And
this shall be my seal and blessing upon you—a faithful and wise steward
in the midst of mine house, a ruler in my kingdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:62">101:62</span></span> And his
servant went straightway, and did all things whatsoever his lord
commanded him; and after many days all things were fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:63">101:63</span></span> Again,
verily I say unto you, I will show unto you wisdom in me concerning all
the churches, inasmuch as they are willing to be guided in a right and
proper way for their salvation—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:64">101:64</span></span> That
the work of the gathering together of my saints may continue, that I may
build them up unto my name upon holy places; for the time of harvest is
come, and my word must needs be fulfilled.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:65">101:65</span></span>
Therefore, I must gather together my people, according to the parable of
the wheat and the tares, that the wheat may be secured in the garners to
possess eternal life, and be crowned with celestial glory, when I shall
come in the kingdom of my Father to reward every man according as his
work shall be;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:66">101:66</span></span> While
the tares shall be bound in bundles, and their bands made strong, that
they may be burned with unquenchable fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:67">101:67</span></span>
Therefore, a commandment I give unto all the churches, that they shall
continue to gather together unto the places which I have appointed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:68">101:68</span></span>
Nevertheless, as I have said unto you in a former commandment, let not
your gathering be in haste, nor by flight; but let all things be
prepared before you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:69">101:69</span></span> And in
order that all things be prepared before you, observe the commandment
which I have given concerning these things—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:70">101:70</span></span> Which
saith, or teacheth, to purchase all the lands with money, which can be
purchased for money, in the region round about the land which I have
appointed to be the land of Zion, for the beginning of the gathering of
my saints;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:71">101:71</span></span> All the
land which can be purchased in Jackson county, and the counties round
about, and leave the residue in mine hand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:72">101:72</span></span> Now,
verily I say unto you, let all the churches gather together all their
moneys; let these things be done in their time, but not in haste; and
observe to have all things prepared before you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:73">101:73</span></span> And let
honorable men be appointed, even wise men, and send them to purchase
these lands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:74">101:74</span></span> And the
churches in the eastern countries, when they are built up, if they will
hearken unto this counsel they may buy lands and gather together upon
them; and in this way they may establish Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:75">101:75</span></span> There
is even now already in store sufficient, yea, even an abundance, to
redeem Zion, and establish her waste places, no more to be thrown down,
were the churches, who call themselves after my name, willing to hearken
to my voice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:76">101:76</span></span> And
again I say unto you, those who have been scattered by their enemies, it
is my will that they should continue to importune for redress, and
redemption, by the hands of those who are placed as rulers and are in
authority over you—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:77">101:77</span></span>
According to the laws and constitution of the people, which I have
suffered to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and
protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:78">101:78</span></span> That
every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to futurity,
according to the moral agency which I have given unto him, that every
man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of judgment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:79">101:79</span></span>
Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to
another.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:80">101:80</span></span> And for
this purpose have I established the Constitution of this land, by the
hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and redeemed
the land by the shedding of blood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:81">101:81</span></span> Now,
unto what shall I liken the children of Zion? I will liken them unto the
parable of the woman and the unjust judge, for men ought always to pray
and not to faint, which saith—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:82">101:82</span></span> There
was in a city a judge which feared not God, neither regarded man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:83">101:83</span></span> And
there was a widow in that city, and she came unto him, saying: Avenge me
of mine adversary.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:84">101:84</span></span> And he
would not for a while, but afterward he said within himself: Though I
fear not God, nor regard man, yet because this widow troubleth me I will
avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:85">101:85</span></span> Thus
will I liken the children of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:86">101:86</span></span> Let
them importune at the feet of the judge;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:87">101:87</span></span> And if
he heed them not, let them importune at the feet of the governor;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:88">101:88</span></span> And if
the governor heed them not, let them importune at the feet of the
president;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:89">101:89</span></span> And if
the president heed them not, then will the Lord arise and come forth out
of his hiding place, and in his fury vex the nation;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:90">101:90</span></span> And in
his hot displeasure, and in his fierce anger, in his time, will cut off
those wicked, unfaithful, and unjust stewards, and appoint them their
portion among hypocrites, and unbelievers;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:91">101:91</span></span> Even in
outer darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:92">101:92</span></span> Pray
ye, therefore, that their ears may be opened unto your cries, that I may
be merciful unto them, that these things may not come upon them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:93">101:93</span></span> What I
have said unto you must needs be, that all men may be left without
excuse;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:94">101:94</span></span> That
wise men and rulers may hear and know that which they have never
considered;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:95">101:95</span></span> That I
may proceed to bring to pass my act, my strange act, and perform my
work, my strange work, that men may discern between the righteous and
the wicked, saith your God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:96">101:96</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, it is contrary to my commandment and my will that
my servant Sidney Gilbert should sell my storehouse, which I have
appointed unto my people, into the hands of mine enemies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:97">101:97</span></span> Let not
that which I have appointed be polluted by mine enemies, by the consent
of those who call themselves after my name;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:98">101:98</span></span> For
this is a very sore and grievous sin against me, and against my people,
in consequence of those things which I have decreed and which are soon
to befall the nations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:99">101:99</span></span>
Therefore, it is my will that my people should claim, and hold claim
upon that which I have appointed unto them, though they should not be
permitted to dwell thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:100">101:100</span></span>
Nevertheless, I do not say they shall not dwell thereon; for inasmuch as
they bring forth fruit and works meet for my kingdom they shall dwell
thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101:101">101:101</span></span> They
shall build, and another shall not inherit it; they shall plant
vineyards, and they shall eat the fruit thereof. Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 102. Minutes of the organization of the first high council of the
Church, Kirtland, Ohio, February 17, 1834.](dc102)
