[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc106)  [Next](dc108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 107. Revelation on priesthood, given through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, dated March 28, 1835. * History of the Church* 2:209-17.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:1">107:1</span></span> There
are, in the church, two priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and
Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:2">107:2</span></span> Why the
first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was
such a great high priest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:3">107:3</span></span> Before
his day it was called *the Holy* *Priesthood, after the* *Order of the
Son of God.*

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:4">107:4</span></span> But out
of respect or reverence to the name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the
too frequent repetition of his name, they, the church, in ancient days,
called that priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:5">107:5</span></span> All other
authorities or offices in the church are appendages to this priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:6">107:6</span></span> But there
are two divisions or grand heads—one is the Melchizedek Priesthood, and
the other is the Aaronic or Levitical Priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:7">107:7</span></span> The
office of an elder comes under the priesthood of Melchizedek.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:8">107:8</span></span> The
Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of presidency, and has power and
authority over all the offices in the church in all ages of the world,
to administer in spiritual things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:9">107:9</span></span> The
Presidency of the High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, have
a right to officiate in all the offices in the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:10">107:10</span></span> High
priests after the order of the Melchizedek Priesthood have a right to
officiate in their own standing, under the direction of the presidency,
in administering spiritual things, and also in the office of an elder,
priest (of the Levitical order), teacher, deacon, and member.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:11">107:11</span></span> An
elder has a right to officiate in his stead when the high priest is not
present.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:12">107:12</span></span> The
high priest and elder are to administer in spiritual things, agreeable
to the covenants and commandments of the church; and they have a right
to officiate in all these offices of the church when there are no higher
authorities present.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:13">107:13</span></span> The
second priesthood is called the Priesthood of Aaron, because it was
conferred upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:14">107:14</span></span> Why it
is called the lesser priesthood is because it is an appendage to the
greater, or the Melchizedek Priesthood, and has power in administering
outward ordinances.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:15">107:15</span></span> The
bishopric is the presidency of this priesthood, and holds the keys or
authority of the same.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:16">107:16</span></span> No man
has a legal right to this office, to hold the keys of this priesthood,
except he be a literal descendant of Aaron.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:17">107:17</span></span> But as
a high priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to officiate
in all the lesser offices, he may officiate in the office of bishop when
no literal descendant of Aaron can be found, provided he is called and
set apart and ordained unto this power by the hands of the Presidency of
the Melchizedek Priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:18">107:18</span></span> The
power and authority of the higher, or Melchizedek Priesthood, is to hold
the keys of all the spiritual blessings of the church—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:19">107:19</span></span> To have
the privilege of receiving the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, to
have the heavens opened unto them, to commune with the general assembly
and church of the Firstborn, and to enjoy the communion and presence of
God the Father, and Jesus the mediator of the new covenant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:20">107:20</span></span> The
power and authority of the lesser, or Aaronic Priesthood, is to hold the
keys of the ministering of angels, and to administer in outward
ordinances, the letter of the gospel, the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins, agreeable to the covenants and commandments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:21">107:21</span></span> Of
necessity there are presidents, or presiding officers growing out of, or
appointed of or from among those who are ordained to the several offices
in these two priesthoods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:22">107:22</span></span> Of the
Melchizedek Priesthood, three Presiding High Priests, chosen by the
body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the
confidence, faith, and prayer of the church, form a quorum of the
Presidency of the Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:23">107:23</span></span> The
twelve traveling councilors are called to be the Twelve Apostles, or
special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the world—thus differing
from other officers in the church in the duties of their calling.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:24">107:24</span></span> And
they form a quorum, equal in authority and power to the three presidents
previously mentioned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:25">107:25</span></span> The
Seventy are also called to preach the gospel, and to be especial
witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world—thus differing from
other officers in the church in the duties of their calling.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:26">107:26</span></span> And
they form a quorum, equal in authority to that of the Twelve special
witnesses or Apostles just named.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:27">107:27</span></span> And
every decision made by either of these quorums must be by the unanimous
voice of the same; that is, every member in each quorum must be agreed
to its decisions, in order to make their decisions of the same power or
validity one with the other—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:28">107:28</span></span> A
majority may form a quorum when circumstances render it impossible to be
otherwise—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:29">107:29</span></span> Unless
this is the case, their decisions are not entitled to the same blessings
which the decisions of a quorum of three presidents were anciently, who
were ordained after the order of Melchizedek, and were righteous and
holy men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:30">107:30</span></span> The
decisions of these quorums, or either of them, are to be made in all
righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long
suffering, and in faith, and virtue, and knowledge, temperance,
patience, godliness, brotherly kindness and charity;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:31">107:31</span></span> Because
the promise is, if these things abound in them they shall not be
unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:32">107:32</span></span> And in
case that any decision of these quorums is made in unrighteousness, it
may be brought before a general assembly of the several quorums, which
constitute the spiritual authorities of the church; otherwise there can
be no appeal from their decision.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:33">107:33</span></span> The
Twelve are a Traveling Presiding High Council, to officiate in the name
of the Lord, under the direction of the Presidency of the Church,
agreeable to the institution of heaven; to build up the church, and
regulate all the affairs of the same in all nations, first unto the
Gentiles and secondly unto the Jews.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:34">107:34</span></span> The
Seventy are to act in the name of the Lord, under the direction of the
Twelve or the traveling high council, in building up the church and
regulating all the affairs of the same in all nations, first unto the
Gentiles and then to the Jews;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:35">107:35</span></span> The
Twelve being sent out, holding the keys, to open the door by the
proclamation of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and first unto the Gentiles
and then unto the Jews.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:36">107:36</span></span> The
standing high councils, at the stakes of Zion, form a quorum equal in
authority in the affairs of the church, in all their decisions, to the
quorum of the presidency, or to the traveling high council.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:37">107:37</span></span> The
high council in Zion form a quorum equal in authority in the affairs of
the church, in all their decisions, to the councils of the Twelve at the
stakes of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:38">107:38</span></span> It is
the duty of the traveling high council to call upon the Seventy, when
they need assistance, to fill the several calls for preaching and
administering the gospel, instead of any others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:39">107:39</span></span> It is
the duty of the Twelve, in all large branches of the church, to ordain
evangelical ministers, as they shall be designated unto them by
revelation—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:40">107:40</span></span> The
order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father to
son, and rightly belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed,
to whom the promises were made.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:41">107:41</span></span> This
order was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in
the following manner:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:42">107:42</span></span> From
Adam to Seth, who was ordained by Adam at the age of sixty-nine years,
and was blessed by him three years previous to his (Adam's) death, and
received the promise of God by his father, that his posterity should be
the chosen of the Lord, and that they should be preserved unto the end
of the earth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:43">107:43</span></span> Because
he (Seth) was a perfect man, and his likeness was the express likeness
of his father, insomuch that he seemed to be like unto his father in all
things, and could be distinguished from him only by his age.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:44">107:44</span></span> Enos
was ordained at the age of one hundred and thirty-four years and four
months, by the hand of Adam.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:45">107:45</span></span> God
called upon Cainan in the wilderness in the fortieth year of his age;
and he met Adam in journeying to the place Shedolamak. He was
eighty-seven years old when he received his ordination.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:46">107:46</span></span>
Mahalaleel was four hundred and ninety-six years and seven days old when
he was ordained by the hand of Adam, who also blessed him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:47">107:47</span></span> Jared
was two hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam,
who also blessed him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:48">107:48</span></span> Enoch
was twenty-five years old when he was ordained under the hand of Adam;
and he was sixty-five and Adam blessed him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:49">107:49</span></span> And he
saw the Lord, and he walked with him, and was before his face
continually; and he walked with God three hundred and sixty-five years,
making him four hundred and thirty years old when he was translated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:50">107:50</span></span>
Methuselah was one hundred years old when he was ordained under the hand
of Adam.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:51">107:51</span></span> Lamech
was thirty-two years old when he was ordained under the hand of Seth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:52">107:52</span></span> Noah
was ten years old when he was ordained under the hand of Methuselah.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:53">107:53</span></span> Three
years previous to the death of Adam, he called Seth, Enos, Cainan,
Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, and Methuselah, who were all high priests,
with the residue of his posterity who were righteous, into the valley of
Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there bestowed upon them his last blessing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:54">107:54</span></span> And the
Lord appeared unto them, and they rose up and blessed Adam, and called
him Michael, the prince, the archangel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:55">107:55</span></span> And the
Lord administered comfort unto Adam, and said unto him: I have set thee
to be at the head; a multitude of nations shall come of thee, and thou
art a prince over them forever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:56">107:56</span></span> And
Adam stood up in the midst of the congregation; and, notwithstanding he
was bowed down with age, being full of the Holy Ghost, predicted
whatsoever should befall his posterity unto the latest generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:57">107:57</span></span> These
things were all written in the book of Enoch, and are to be testified of
in due time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:58">107:58</span></span> It is
the duty of the Twelve, also, to ordain and set in order all the other
officers of the church, agreeable to the revelation which says:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:59">107:59</span></span> To the
church of Christ in the land of Zion, in addition to the church laws
respecting church business—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:60">107:60</span></span> Verily,
I say unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts, there must needs be presiding
elders to preside over those who are of the office of an elder;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:61">107:61</span></span> And
also priests to preside over those who are of the office of a priest;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:62">107:62</span></span> And
also teachers to preside over those who are of the office of a teacher,
in like manner, and also the deacons—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:63">107:63</span></span>
Wherefore, from deacon to teacher, and from teacher to priest, and from
priest to elder, severally as they are appointed, according to the
covenants and commandments of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:64">107:64</span></span> Then
comes the High Priesthood, which is the greatest of all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:65">107:65</span></span>
Wherefore, it must needs be that one be appointed of the High Priesthood
to preside over the priesthood, and he shall be called President of the
High Priesthood of the Church;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:66">107:66</span></span> Or, in
other words, the Presiding High Priest over the High Priesthood of the
Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:67">107:67</span></span> From
the same comes the administering of ordinances and blessings upon the
church, by the laying on of the hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:68">107:68</span></span>
Wherefore, the office of a bishop is not equal unto it; for the office
of a bishop is in administering all temporal things;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:69">107:69</span></span>
Nevertheless a bishop must be chosen from the High Priesthood, unless he
is a literal descendant of Aaron;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:70">107:70</span></span> For
unless he is a literal descendant of Aaron he cannot hold the keys of
that priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:71">107:71</span></span>
Nevertheless, a high priest, that is, after the order of Melchizedek,
may be set apart unto the ministering of temporal things, having a
knowledge of them by the Spirit of truth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:72">107:72</span></span> And
also to be a judge in Israel, to do the business of the church, to sit
in judgment upon transgressors upon testimony as it shall be laid before
him according to the laws, by the assistance of his counselors, whom he
has chosen or will choose among the elders of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:73">107:73</span></span> This is
the duty of a bishop who is not a literal descendant of Aaron, but has
been ordained to the High Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:74">107:74</span></span> Thus
shall he be a judge, even a common judge among the inhabitants of Zion,
or in a stake of Zion, or in any branch of the church where he shall be
set apart unto this ministry, until the borders of Zion are enlarged and
it becomes necessary to have other bishops or judges in Zion or
elsewhere.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:75">107:75</span></span> And
inasmuch as there are other bishops appointed they shall act in the same
office.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:76">107:76</span></span> But a
literal descendant of Aaron has a legal right to the presidency of this
priesthood, to the keys of this ministry, to act in the office of bishop
independently, without counselors, except in a case where a President of
the High Priesthood, after the order of Melchizedek, is tried, to sit as
a judge in Israel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:77">107:77</span></span> And the
decision of either of these councils, agreeable to the commandment which
says:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:78">107:78</span></span> Again,
verily, I say unto you, the most important business of the church, and
the most difficult cases of the church, inasmuch as there is not
satisfaction upon the decision of the bishop or judges, it shall be
handed over and carried up unto the council of the church, before the
Presidency of the High Priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:79">107:79</span></span> And the
Presidency of the council of the High Priesthood shall have power to
call other high priests, even twelve, to assist as counselors; and thus
the Presidency of the High Priesthood and its counselors shall have
power to decide upon testimony according to the laws of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:80">107:80</span></span> And
after this decision it shall be had in remembrance no more before the
Lord; for this is the highest council of the church of God, and a final
decision upon controversies in spiritual matters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:81">107:81</span></span> There
is not any person belonging to the church who is exempt from this
council of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:82">107:82</span></span> And
inasmuch as a President of the High Priesthood shall transgress, he
shall be had in remembrance before the common council of the church, who
shall be assisted by twelve counselors of the High Priesthood;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:83">107:83</span></span> And
their decision upon his head shall be an end of controversy concerning
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:84">107:84</span></span> Thus,
none shall be exempted from the justice and the laws of God, that all
things may be done in order and in solemnity before him, according to
truth and righteousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:85">107:85</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, the duty of a president over the office of
a deacon is to preside over twelve deacons, to sit in council with them,
and to teach them their duty, edifying one another, as it is given
according to the covenants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:86">107:86</span></span> And
also the duty of the president over the office of the teachers is to
preside over twenty-four of the teachers, and to sit in council with
them, teaching them the duties of their office, as given in the
covenants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:87">107:87</span></span> Also
the duty of the president over the Priesthood of Aaron is to preside
over forty-eight priests, and sit in council with them, to teach them
the duties of their office, as is given in the covenants—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:88">107:88</span></span> This
president is to be a bishop; for this is one of the duties of this
priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:89">107:89</span></span> Again,
the duty of the president over the office of elders is to preside over
ninety-six elders, and to sit in council with them, and to teach them
according to the covenants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:90">107:90</span></span> This
presidency is a distinct one from that of the seventy, and is designed
for those who do not travel into all the world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:91">107:91</span></span> And
again, the duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is
to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:92">107:92</span></span> Behold,
here is wisdom; yea, to be a seer, a revelator, a translator, and a
prophet, having all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of
the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:93">107:93</span></span> And it
is according to the vision showing the order of the Seventy, that they
should have seven presidents to preside over them, chosen out of the
number of the seventy;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:94">107:94</span></span> And the
seventh president of these presidents is to preside over the six;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:95">107:95</span></span> And
these seven presidents are to choose other seventy besides the first
seventy to whom they belong, and are to preside over them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:96">107:96</span></span> And
also other seventy, until seven times seventy, if the labor in the
vineyard of necessity requires it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:97">107:97</span></span> And
these seventy are to be traveling ministers, unto the Gentiles first and
also unto the Jews.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:98">107:98</span></span> Whereas
other officers of the church, who belong not unto the Twelve, neither to
the Seventy, are not under the responsibility to travel among all
nations, but are to travel as their circumstances shall allow,
notwithstanding they may hold as high and responsible offices in the
church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:99">107:99</span></span>
Wherefore, now let every man learn his duty, and to act in the office in
which he is appointed, in all diligence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107:100">107:100</span></span> He
that is slothful shall not be counted worthy to stand, and he that
learns not his duty and shows himself not approved shall not be counted
worthy to stand. Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 108. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Kirtland, Ohio, December
26, 1835.](dc108)
