[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc103)  [Next](dc105.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 104. Revelation to Joseph Smith, April 23, 1834. * History of the Church* 2:54-60.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:1">104:1</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, my friends, I give unto you counsel, and a commandment,
concerning all the properties which belong to the order which I
commanded to be organized and established, to be a united order, and an
everlasting order for the benefit of my church, and for the salvation of
men until I come—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:2">104:2</span></span> With
promise immutable and unchangeable, that inasmuch as those whom I
commanded were faithful they should be blessed with a multiplicity of
blessings;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:3">104:3</span></span> But
inasmuch as they were not faithful they were nigh unto cursing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:4">104:4</span></span>
Therefore, inasmuch as some of my servants have not kept the
commandment, but have broken the covenant through covetousness, and with
feigned words, I have cursed them with a very sore and grievous curse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:5">104:5</span></span> For I,
the Lord, have decreed in my heart, that inasmuch as any man belonging
to the order shall be found a transgressor, or, in other words, shall
break the covenant with which ye are bound, he shall be cursed in his
life, and shall be trodden down by whom I will;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:6">104:6</span></span> For I,
the Lord, am not to be mocked in these things—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:7">104:7</span></span> And all
this that the innocent among you may not be condemned with the unjust;
and that the guilty among you may not escape; because I, the Lord, have
promised unto you a crown of glory at my right hand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:8">104:8</span></span>
Therefore, inasmuch as you are found transgressors, you cannot escape my
wrath in your lives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:9">104:9</span></span> Inasmuch
as ye are cut off for transgression, ye cannot escape the buffetings of
Satan until the day of redemption.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:10">104:10</span></span> And I
now give unto you power from this very hour, that if any man among you,
of the order, is found a transgressor and repenteth not of the evil,
that ye shall deliver him over unto the buffetings of Satan; and he
shall not have power to bring evil upon you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:11">104:11</span></span> It is
wisdom in me; therefore, a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall
organize yourselves and appoint every man his stewardship;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:12">104:12</span></span> That
every man may give an account unto me of the stewardship which is
appointed unto him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:13">104:13</span></span> For it
is expedient that I, the Lord, should make every man accountable, as a
steward over earthly blessings, which I have made and prepared for my
creatures.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:14">104:14</span></span> I, the
Lord, stretched out the heavens, and built the earth, my very handiwork;
and all things therein are mine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:15">104:15</span></span> And it
is my purpose to provide for my saints, for all things are mine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:16">104:16</span></span> But it
must needs be done in mine own way; and behold this is the way that I,
the Lord, have decreed to provide for my saints, that the poor shall be
exalted, in that the rich are made low.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:17">104:17</span></span> For the
earth is full, and there is enough and to spare; yea, I prepared all
things, and have given unto the children of men to be agents unto
themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:18">104:18</span></span>
Therefore, if any man shall take of the abundance which I have made, and
impart not his portion, according to the law of my gospel, unto the poor
and the needy, he shall, with the wicked, lift up his eyes in hell,
being in torment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:19">104:19</span></span> And
now, verily I say unto you, concerning the properties of the order—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:20">104:20</span></span> Let my
servant Sidney Rigdon have appointed unto him the place where he now
resides, and the lot of the tannery for his stewardship, for his support
while he is laboring in my vineyard, even as I will, when I shall
command him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:21">104:21</span></span> And let
all things be done according to the counsel of the order, and united
consent or voice of the order, which dwell in the land of Kirtland.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:22">104:22</span></span> And
this stewardship and blessing, I, the Lord, confer upon my servant
Sidney Rigdon for a blessing upon him, and his seed after him;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:23">104:23</span></span> And I
will multiply blessings upon him, inasmuch as he will be humble before
me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:24">104:24</span></span> And
again, let my servant Martin Harris have appointed unto him, for his
stewardship, the lot of land which my servant John Johnson obtained in
exchange for his former inheritance, for him and his seed after him;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:25">104:25</span></span> And
inasmuch as he is faithful, I will multiply blessings upon him and his
seed after him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:26">104:26</span></span> And let
my servant Martin Harris devote his moneys for the proclaiming of my
words, according as my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., shall direct.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:27">104:27</span></span> And
again, let my servant Frederick G. Williams have the place upon which he
now dwells.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:28">104:28</span></span> And let
my servant Oliver Cowdery have the lot which is set off joining the
house, which is to be for the printing office, which is lot number one,
and also the lot upon which his father resides.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:29">104:29</span></span> And let
my servants Frederick G. Williams and Oliver Cowdery have the printing
office and all things that pertain unto it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:30">104:30</span></span> And
this shall be their stewardship which shall be appointed unto them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:31">104:31</span></span> And
inasmuch as they are faithful, behold I will bless, and multiply
blessings upon them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:32">104:32</span></span> And
this is the beginning of the stewardship which I have appointed them,
for them and their seed after them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:33">104:33</span></span> And,
inasmuch as they are faithful, I will multiply blessings upon them and
their seed after them, even a multiplicity of blessings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:34">104:34</span></span> And
again, let my servant John Johnson have the house in which he lives, and
the inheritance, all save the ground which has been reserved for the
building of my houses, which pertains to that inheritance, and those
lots which have been named for my servant Oliver Cowdery.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:35">104:35</span></span> And
inasmuch as he is faithful, I will multiply blessings upon him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:36">104:36</span></span> And it
is my will that he should sell the lots that are laid off for the
building up of the city of my saints, inasmuch as it shall be made known
to him by the voice of the Spirit, and according to the counsel of the
order, and by the voice of the order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:37">104:37</span></span> And
this is the beginning of the stewardship which I have appointed unto
him, for a blessing unto him and his seed after him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:38">104:38</span></span> And
inasmuch as he is faithful, I will multiply a multiplicity of blessings
upon him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:39">104:39</span></span> And
again, let my servant Newel K. Whitney have appointed unto him the
houses and lot where he now resides, and the lot and building on which
the mercantile establishment stands, and also the lot which is on the
corner south of the mercantile establishment, and also the lot on which
the ashery is situated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:40">104:40</span></span> And all
this I have appointed unto my servant Newel K. Whitney for his
stewardship, for a blessing upon him and his seed after him, for the
benefit of the mercantile establishment of my order which I have
established for my stake in the land of Kirtland.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:41">104:41</span></span> Yea,
verily, this is the stewardship which I have appointed unto my servant
N. K. Whitney, even this whole mercantile establishment, him and his
agent, and his seed after him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:42">104:42</span></span> And
inasmuch as he is faithful in keeping my commandments, which I have
given unto him, I will multiply blessings upon him and his seed after
him, even a multiplicity of blessings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:43">104:43</span></span> And
again, let my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., have appointed unto him the
lot which is laid off for the building of my house, which is forty rods
long and twelve wide, and also the inheritance upon which his father now
resides;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:44">104:44</span></span> And
this is the beginning of the stewardship which I have appointed unto
him, for a blessing upon him, and upon his father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:45">104:45</span></span> For
behold, I have reserved an inheritance for his father, for his support;
therefore he shall be reckoned in the house of my servant Joseph Smith,
Jun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:46">104:46</span></span> And I
will multiply blessings upon the house of my servant Joseph Smith, Jun.,
inasmuch as he is faithful, even a multiplicity of blessings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:47">104:47</span></span> And
now, a commandment I give unto you concerning Zion, that you shall no
longer be bound as a united order to your brethren of Zion, only on this
wise—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:48">104:48</span></span> After
you are organized, you shall be called the United Order of the Stake of
Zion, the City of Kirtland. And your brethren, after they are organized,
shall be called the United Order of the City of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:49">104:49</span></span> And
they shall be organized in their own names, and in their own name; and
they shall do their business in their own name, and in their own names;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:50">104:50</span></span> And you
shall do your business in your own name, and in your own names.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:51">104:51</span></span> And
this I have commanded to be done for your salvation, and also for their
salvation, in consequence of their being driven out and that which is to
come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:52">104:52</span></span> The
covenants being broken through transgression, by covetousness and
feigned words—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:53">104:53</span></span>
Therefore, you are dissolved as a united order with your brethren, that
you are not bound only up to this hour unto them, only on this wise, as
I said, by loan as shall be agreed by this order in council, as your
circumstances will admit and the voice of the council direct.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:54">104:54</span></span> And
again, a commandment I give unto you concerning your stewardship which I
have appointed unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:55">104:55</span></span> Behold,
all these properties are mine, or else your faith is vain, and ye are
found hypocrites, and the covenants which ye have made unto me are
broken;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:56">104:56</span></span> And if
the properties are mine, then ye are stewards; otherwise ye are no
stewards.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:57">104:57</span></span> But,
verily I say unto you, I have appointed unto you to be stewards over
mine house, even stewards indeed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:58">104:58</span></span> And for
this purpose I have commanded you to organize yourselves, even to print
my words, the fulness of my scriptures, the revelations which I have
given unto you, and which I shall, hereafter, from time to time give
unto you—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:59">104:59</span></span> For the
purpose of building up my church and kingdom on the earth, and to
prepare my people for the time when I shall dwell with them, which is
nigh at hand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:60">104:60</span></span> And ye
shall prepare for yourselves a place for a treasury, and consecrate it
unto my name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:61">104:61</span></span> And ye
shall appoint one among you to keep the treasury, and he shall be
ordained unto this blessing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:62">104:62</span></span> And
there shall be a seal upon the treasury, and all the sacred things shall
be delivered into the treasury; and no man among you shall call it his
own, or any part of it, for it shall belong to you all with one accord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:63">104:63</span></span> And I
give it unto you from this very hour; and now see to it, that ye go to
and make use of the stewardship which I have appointed unto you,
exclusive of the sacred things, for the purpose of printing these sacred
things as I have said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:64">104:64</span></span> And the
avails of the sacred things shall be had in the treasury, and a seal
shall be upon it; and it shall not be used or taken out of the treasury
by any one, neither shall the seal be loosed which shall be placed upon
it, only by the voice of the order, or by commandment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:65">104:65</span></span> And
thus shall ye preserve the avails of the sacred things in the treasury,
for sacred and holy purposes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:66">104:66</span></span> And
this shall be called the sacred treasury of the Lord; and a seal shall
be kept upon it that it may be holy and consecrated unto the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:67">104:67</span></span> And
again, there shall be another treasury prepared, and a treasurer
appointed to keep the treasury, and a seal shall be placed upon it;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:68">104:68</span></span> And all
moneys that you receive in your stewardships, by improving upon the
properties which I have appointed unto you, in houses, or in lands, or
in cattle, or in all things save it be the holy and sacred writings,
which I have reserved unto myself for holy and sacred purposes, shall be
cast into the treasury as fast as you receive moneys, by hundreds, or by
fifties, or by twenties, or by tens, or by fives.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:69">104:69</span></span> Or in
other words, if any man among you obtain five dollars let him cast them
into the treasury; or if he obtain ten, or twenty, or fifty, or an
hundred, let him do likewise;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:70">104:70</span></span> And let
not any among you say that it is his own; for it shall not be called
his, nor any part of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:71">104:71</span></span> And
there shall not any part of it be used, or taken out of the treasury,
only by the voice and common consent of the order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:72">104:72</span></span> And
this shall be the voice and common consent of the order—that any man
among you say to the treasurer: I have need of this to help me in my
stewardship—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:73">104:73</span></span> If it
be five dollars, or if it be ten dollars, or twenty, or fifty, or a
hundred, the treasurer shall give unto him the sum which he requires to
help him in his stewardship—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:74">104:74</span></span> Until
he be found a transgressor, and it is manifest before the council of the
order plainly that he is an unfaithful and an unwise steward.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:75">104:75</span></span> But so
long as he is in full fellowship, and is faithful and wise in his
stewardship, this shall be his token unto the treasurer that the
treasurer shall not withhold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:76">104:76</span></span> But in
case of transgression, the treasurer shall be subject unto the council
and voice of the order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:77">104:77</span></span> And in
case the treasurer is found an unfaithful and an unwise steward, he
shall be subject to the council and voice of the order, and shall be
removed out of his place, and another shall be appointed in his stead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:78">104:78</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, concerning your debts—behold it is my will
that you shall pay all your debts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:79">104:79</span></span> And it
is my will that you shall humble yourselves before me, and obtain this
blessing by your diligence and humility and the prayer of faith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:80">104:80</span></span> And
inasmuch as you are diligent and humble, and exercise the prayer of
faith, behold, I will soften the hearts of those to whom you are in
debt, until I shall send means unto you for your deliverance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:81">104:81</span></span>
Therefore write speedily to New York and write according to that which
shall be dictated by my Spirit; and I will soften the hearts of those to
whom you are in debt, that it shall be taken away out of their minds to
bring affliction upon you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:82">104:82</span></span> And
inasmuch as ye are humble and faithful and call upon my name, behold, I
will give you the victory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:83">104:83</span></span> I give
unto you a promise, that you shall be delivered this once out of your
bondage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:84">104:84</span></span>
Inasmuch as you obtain a chance to loan money by hundreds, or thousands,
even until you shall loan enough to deliver yourself from bondage, it is
your privilege.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:85">104:85</span></span> And
pledge the properties which I have put into your hands, this once, by
giving your names by common consent or otherwise, as it shall seem good
unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104:86">104:86</span></span> I give
unto you this privilege, this once; and behold, if you proceed to do the
things which I have laid before you, according to my commandments, all
these things are mine, and ye are my stewards, and the master will not
suffer his house to be broken up. Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 105. Revelation through Joseph Smith, on Fishing River, Missouri,
June 22, 1834.](dc105.md)
