[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc108)  [Next](dc110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 109. Prayer offered at the dedication of the temple at Kirtland, Ohio, March 27, 1836. * History of the Church* 2:420-26.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:1">109:1</span></span> Thanks be
to thy name, O Lord God of Israel, who keepest covenant and showest
mercy unto thy servants who walk uprightly before thee, with all their
hearts—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:2">109:2</span></span> Thou who
hast commanded thy servants to build a house to thy name in this place
\[Kirtland\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:3">109:3</span></span> And now
thou beholdest, O Lord, that thy servants have done according to thy
commandment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:4">109:4</span></span> And now
we ask thee, Holy Father, in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son of thy
bosom, in whose name alone salvation can be administered to the children
of men, we ask thee, O Lord, to accept of this house, the workmanship of
the hands of us, thy servants, which thou didst command us to build.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:5">109:5</span></span> For thou
knowest that we have done this work through great tribulation; and out
of our poverty we have given of our substance to build a house to thy
name, that the Son of Man might have a place to manifest himself to his
people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:6">109:6</span></span> And as
thou hast said in a revelation, given to us, calling us thy friends,
saying—Call your solemn assembly, as I have commanded you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:7">109:7</span></span> And as
all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of
wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom, seek
learning even by study and also by faith;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:8">109:8</span></span> Organize
yourselves; prepare every needful thing, and establish a house, even a
house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of
learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:9">109:9</span></span> That your
incomings may be in the name of the Lord, that your outgoings may be in
the name of the Lord, that all your salutations may be in the name of
the Lord, with uplifted hands unto the Most High—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:10">109:10</span></span> And
now, Holy Father, we ask thee to assist us, thy people, with thy grace,
in calling our solemn assembly, that it may be done to thine honor and
to thy divine acceptance;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:11">109:11</span></span> And in
a manner that we may be found worthy, in thy sight, to secure a
fulfilment of the promises which thou hast made unto us, thy people, in
the revelations given unto us;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:12">109:12</span></span> That
thy glory may rest down upon thy people, and upon this thy house, which
we now dedicate to thee, that it may be sanctified and consecrated to be
holy, and that thy holy presence may be continually in this house;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:13">109:13</span></span> And
that all people who shall enter upon the threshold of the Lord's house
may feel thy power, and feel constrained to acknowledge that thou hast
sanctified it, and that it is thy house, a place of thy holiness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:14">109:14</span></span> And do
thou grant, Holy Father, that all those who shall worship in this house
may be taught words of wisdom out of the best books, and that they may
seek learning even by study, and also by faith, as thou hast said;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:15">109:15</span></span> And
that they may grow up in thee, and receive a fulness of the Holy Ghost,
and be organized according to thy laws, and be prepared to obtain every
needful thing;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:16">109:16</span></span> And
that this house may be a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of
faith, a house of glory and of God, even thy house;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:17">109:17</span></span> That
all the incomings of thy people, into this house, may be in the name of
the Lord;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:18">109:18</span></span> That
all their outgoings from this house may be in the name of the Lord;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:19">109:19</span></span> And
that all their salutations may be in the name of the Lord, with holy
hands, uplifted to the Most High;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:20">109:20</span></span> And
that no unclean thing shall be permitted to come into thy house to
pollute it;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:21">109:21</span></span> And
when thy people transgress, any of them, they may speedily repent and
return unto thee, and find favor in thy sight, and be restored to the
blessings which thou hast ordained to be poured out upon those who shall
reverence thee in thy house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:22">109:22</span></span> And we
ask thee, Holy Father, that thy servants may go forth from this house
armed with thy power, and that thy name may be upon them, and thy glory
be round about them, and thine angels have charge over them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:23">109:23</span></span> And
from this place they may bear exceedingly great and glorious tidings, in
truth, unto the ends of the earth, that they may know that this is thy
work, and that thou hast put forth thy hand, to fulfil that which thou
hast spoken by the mouths of the prophets, concerning the last days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:24">109:24</span></span> We ask
thee, Holy Father, to establish the people that shall worship, and
honorably hold a name and standing in this thy house, to all generations
and for eternity;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:25">109:25</span></span> That no
weapon formed against them shall prosper; that he who diggeth a pit for
them shall fall into the same himself;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:26">109:26</span></span> That no
combination of wickedness shall have power to rise up and prevail over
thy people upon whom thy name shall be put in this house;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:27">109:27</span></span> And if
any people shall rise against this people, that thine anger be kindled
against them;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:28">109:28</span></span> And if
they shall smite this people thou wilt smite them; thou wilt fight for
thy people as thou didst in the day of battle, that they may be
delivered from the hands of all their enemies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:29">109:29</span></span> We ask
thee, Holy Father, to confound, and astonish, and to bring to shame and
confusion, all those who have spread lying reports abroad, over the
world, against thy servant or servants, if they will not repent, when
the everlasting gospel shall be proclaimed in their ears;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:30">109:30</span></span> And
that all their works may be brought to naught, and be swept away by the
hail, and by the judgments which thou wilt send upon them in thine
anger, that there may be an end to lyings and slanders against thy
people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:31">109:31</span></span> For
thou knowest, O Lord, that thy servants have been innocent before thee
in bearing record of thy name, for which they have suffered these
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:32">109:32</span></span>
Therefore we plead before thee for a full and complete deliverance from
under this yoke;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:33">109:33</span></span> Break
it off, O Lord; break it off from the necks of thy servants, by thy
power, that we may rise up in the midst of this generation and do thy
work.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:34">109:34</span></span> O
Jehovah, have mercy upon this people, and as all men sin forgive the
transgressions of thy people, and let them be blotted out forever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:35">109:35</span></span> Let the
anointing of thy ministers be sealed upon them with power from on high.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:36">109:36</span></span> Let it
be fulfilled upon them, as upon those on the day of Pentecost; let the
gift of tongues be poured out upon thy people, even cloven tongues as of
fire, and the interpretation thereof.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:37">109:37</span></span> And let
thy house be filled, as with a rushing mighty wind, with thy glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:38">109:38</span></span> Put
upon thy servants the testimony of the covenant, that when they go out
and proclaim thy word they may seal up the law, and prepare the hearts
of thy saints for all those judgments thou art about to send, in thy
wrath, upon the inhabitants of the earth, because of their
transgressions, that thy people may not faint in the day of trouble.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:39">109:39</span></span> And
whatsoever city thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city
receive their testimony, let thy peace and thy salvation be upon that
city; that they may gather out of that city the righteous, that they may
come forth to Zion, or to her stakes, the places of thine appointment,
with songs of everlasting joy;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:40">109:40</span></span> And
until this be accomplished, let not thy judgments fall upon that city.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:41">109:41</span></span> And
whatsoever city thy servants shall enter, and the people of that city
receive not the testimony of thy servants, and thy servants warn them to
save themselves from this untoward generation, let it be upon that city
according to that which thou hast spoken by the mouths of thy prophets.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:42">109:42</span></span> But
deliver thou, O Jehovah, we beseech thee, thy servants from their hands,
and cleanse them from their blood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:43">109:43</span></span> O Lord,
we delight not in the destruction of our fellow men; their souls are
precious before thee;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:44">109:44</span></span> But thy
word must be fulfilled. Help thy servants to say, with thy grace
assisting them: Thy will be done, O Lord, and not ours.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:45">109:45</span></span> We know
that thou hast spoken by the mouth of thy prophets terrible things
concerning the wicked, in the last days—that thou wilt pour out thy
judgments, without measure;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:46">109:46</span></span>
Therefore, O Lord, deliver thy people from the calamity of the wicked;
enable thy servants to seal up the law, and bind up the testimony, that
they may be prepared against the day of burning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:47">109:47</span></span> We ask
thee, Holy Father, to remember those who have been driven by the
inhabitants of Jackson county, Missouri, from the lands of their
inheritance, and break off, O Lord, this yoke of affliction that has
been put upon them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:48">109:48</span></span> Thou
knowest, O Lord, that they have been greatly oppressed and afflicted by
wicked men; and our hearts flow out with sorrow because of their
grievous burdens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:49">109:49</span></span> O Lord,
how long wilt thou suffer this people to bear this affliction, and the
cries of their innocent ones to ascend up in thine ears, and their blood
come up in testimony before thee, and not make a display of thy
testimony in their behalf?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:50">109:50</span></span> Have
mercy, O Lord, upon the wicked mob, who have driven thy people, that
they may cease to spoil, that they may repent of their sins if
repentance is to be found;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:51">109:51</span></span> But if
they will not, make bare thine arm, O Lord, and redeem that which thou
didst appoint a Zion unto thy people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:52">109:52</span></span> And if
it cannot be otherwise, that the cause of thy people may not fail before
thee may thine anger be kindled, and thine indignation fall upon them,
that they may be wasted away, both root and branch, from under heaven;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:53">109:53</span></span> But
inasmuch as they will repent, thou art gracious and merciful, and wilt
turn away thy wrath when thou lookest upon the face of thine Anointed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:54">109:54</span></span> Have
mercy, O Lord, upon all the nations of the earth; have mercy upon the
rulers of our land; may those principles, which were so honorably and
nobly defended, namely, the Constitution of our land, by our fathers, be
established forever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:55">109:55</span></span>
Remember the kings, the princes, the nobles, and the great ones of the
earth, and all people, and the churches, all the poor, the needy, and
afflicted ones of the earth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:56">109:56</span></span> That
their hearts may be softened when thy servants shall go out from thy
house, O Jehovah, to bear testimony of thy name; that their prejudices
may give way before the truth, and thy people may obtain favor in the
sight of all;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:57">109:57</span></span> That
all the ends of the earth may know that we, thy servants, have heard thy
voice, and that thou hast sent us;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:58">109:58</span></span> That
from among all these, thy servants, the sons of Jacob, may gather out
the righteous to build a holy city to thy name, as thou hast commanded
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:59">109:59</span></span> We ask
thee to appoint unto Zion other stakes besides this one which thou hast
appointed, that the gathering of thy people may roll on in great power
and majesty, that thy work may be cut short in righteousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:60">109:60</span></span> Now
these words, O Lord, we have spoken before thee, concerning the
revelations and commandments which thou hast given unto us, who are
identified with the Gentiles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:61">109:61</span></span> But
thou knowest that thou hast a great love for the children of Jacob, who
have been scattered upon the mountains for a long time, in a cloudy and
dark day.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:62">109:62</span></span> We
therefore ask thee to have mercy upon the children of Jacob, that
Jerusalem, from this hour, may begin to be redeemed;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:63">109:63</span></span> And the
yoke of bondage may begin to be broken off from the house of David;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:64">109:64</span></span> And the
children of Judah may begin to return to the lands which thou didst give
to Abraham, their father.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:65">109:65</span></span> And
cause that the remnants of Jacob, who have been cursed and smitten
because of their transgression, be converted from their wild and savage
condition to the fulness of the everlasting gospel;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:66">109:66</span></span> That
they may lay down their weapons of bloodshed, and cease their
rebellions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:67">109:67</span></span> And may
all the scattered remnants of Israel, who have been driven to the ends
of the earth, come to a knowledge of the truth, believe in the Messiah,
and be redeemed from oppression, and rejoice before thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:68">109:68</span></span> O Lord,
remember thy servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., and all his afflictions and
persecutions—how he has covenanted with Jehovah, and vowed to thee, O
Mighty God of Jacob—and the commandments which thou hast given unto him,
and that he hath sincerely striven to do thy will.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:69">109:69</span></span> Have
mercy, O Lord, upon his wife and children, that they may be exalted in
thy presence, and preserved by thy fostering hand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:70">109:70</span></span> Have
mercy upon all their immediate connections, that their prejudices may be
broken up and swept away as with a flood; that they may be converted and
redeemed with Israel, and know that thou art God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:71">109:71</span></span>
Remember, O Lord, the presidents, even all the presidents of thy church,
that thy right hand may exalt them, with all their families, and their
immediate connections, that their names may be perpetuated and had in
everlasting remembrance from generation to generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:72">109:72</span></span>
Remember all thy church, O Lord, with all their families, and all their
immediate connections, with all their sick and afflicted ones, with all
the poor and meek of the earth; that the kingdom, which thou hast set up
without hands, may become a great mountain and fill the whole earth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:73">109:73</span></span> That
thy church may come forth out of the wilderness of darkness, and shine
forth fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with
banners;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:74">109:74</span></span> And be
adorned as a bride for that day when thou shalt unveil the heavens, and
cause the mountains to flow down at thy presence, and the valleys to be
exalted, the rough places made smooth; that thy glory may fill the
earth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:75">109:75</span></span> That
when the trump shall sound for the dead, we shall be caught up in the
cloud to meet thee, that we may ever be with the Lord;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:76">109:76</span></span> That
our garments may be pure, that we may be clothed upon with robes of
righteousness, with palms in our hands, and crowns of glory upon our
heads, and reap eternal joy for all our sufferings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:77">109:77</span></span> O Lord
God Almighty, hear us in these our petitions, and answer us from heaven,
thy holy habitation, where thou sittest enthroned, with glory, honor,
power, majesty, might, dominion, truth, justice, judgment, mercy, and an
infinity of fulness, from everlasting to everlasting.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:78">109:78</span></span> O hear,
O hear, O hear us, O Lord! And answer these petitions, and accept the
dedication of this house unto thee, the work of our hands, which we have
built unto thy name;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:79">109:79</span></span> And
also this church, to put upon it thy name. And help us by the power of
thy Spirit, that we may mingle our voices with those bright, shining
seraphs around thy throne, with acclamations of praise, singing Hosanna
to God and the Lamb!

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109:80">109:80</span></span> And let
these, thine anointed ones, be clothed with salvation, and thy saints
shout aloud for joy. Amen, and Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 110. Visions given to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery in the
temple at Kirtland, Ohio, April 3, 1836.](dc110.md)
