[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc111)  [Next](dc113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 112. Revelation through Joseph Smith to Thomas B. Marsh, Kirtland, Ohio, July 23, 1837. * History of the Church* 2:499-501.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:1">112:1</span></span> Verily
thus saith the Lord unto you my servant Thomas: I have heard thy
prayers; and thine alms have come up as a memorial before me, in behalf
of those, thy brethren, who were chosen to bear testimony of my name and
to send it abroad among all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, and
ordained through the instrumentality of my servants,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:2">112:2</span></span> Verily I
say unto you, there have been some few things in thine heart and with
thee with which I, the Lord, was not well pleased.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:3">112:3</span></span>
Nevertheless, inasmuch as thou hast abased thyself thou shalt be
exalted; therefore, all thy sins are forgiven thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:4">112:4</span></span> Let thy
heart be of good cheer before my face; and thou shalt bear record of my
name, not only unto the Gentiles, but also unto the Jews; and thou shalt
send forth my word unto the ends of the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:5">112:5</span></span> Contend
thou, therefore, morning by morning; and day after day let thy warning
voice go forth; and when the night cometh let not the inhabitants of the
earth slumber, because of thy speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:6">112:6</span></span> Let thy
habitation be known in Zion, and remove not thy house; for I, the Lord,
have a great work for thee to do, in publishing my name among the
children of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:7">112:7</span></span>
Therefore, gird up thy loins for the work. Let thy feet be shod also,
for thou art chosen, and thy path lieth among the mountains, and among
many nations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:8">112:8</span></span> And by
thy word many high ones shall be brought low, and by thy word many low
ones shall be exalted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:9">112:9</span></span> Thy voice
shall be a rebuke unto the transgressor; and at thy rebuke let the
tongue of the slanderer cease its perverseness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:10">112:10</span></span> Be thou
humble; and the Lord thy God shall lead thee by the hand, and give thee
answer to thy prayers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:11">112:11</span></span> I know
thy heart, and have heard thy prayers concerning thy brethren. Be not
partial towards them in love above many others, but let thy love be for
them as for thyself; and let thy love abound unto all men, and unto all
who love my name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:12">112:12</span></span> And
pray for thy brethren of the Twelve. Admonish them sharply for my name's
sake, and let them be admonished for all their sins, and be ye faithful
before me unto my name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:13">112:13</span></span> And
after their temptations, and much tribulation, behold, I, the Lord, will
feel after them, and if they harden not their hearts, and stiffen not
their necks against me, they shall be converted, and I will heal them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:14">112:14</span></span> Now, I
say unto you, and what I say unto you, I say unto all the Twelve: Arise
and gird up your loins, take up your cross, follow me, and feed my
sheep.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:15">112:15</span></span> Exalt
not yourselves; rebel not against my servant Joseph; for verily I say
unto you, I am with him, and my hand shall be over him; and the keys
which I have given unto him, and also to youward, shall not be taken
from him till I come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:16">112:16</span></span> Verily
I say unto you, my servant Thomas, thou art the man whom I have chosen
to hold the keys of my kingdom, as pertaining to the Twelve, abroad
among all nations—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:17">112:17</span></span> That
thou mayest be my servant to unlock the door of the kingdom in all
places where my servant Joseph, and my servant Sidney, and my servant
Hyrum, cannot come;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:18">112:18</span></span> For on
them have I laid the burden of all the churches for a little season.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:19">112:19</span></span>
Wherefore, whithersoever they shall send you, go ye, and I will be with
you; and in whatsoever place ye shall proclaim my name an effectual door
shall be opened unto you, that they may receive my word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:20">112:20</span></span>
Whosoever receiveth my word receiveth me, and whosoever receiveth me,
receiveth those, the First Presidency, whom I have sent, whom I have
made counselors for my name's sake unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:21">112:21</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, that whosoever ye shall send in my name, by the
voice of your brethren, the Twelve, duly recommended and authorized by
you, shall have power to open the door of my kingdom unto any nation
whithersoever ye shall send them—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:22">112:22</span></span>
Inasmuch as they shall humble themselves before me, and abide in my
word, and hearken to the voice of my Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:23">112:23</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, darkness covereth the earth, and gross darkness
the minds of the people, and all flesh has become corrupt before my
face.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:24">112:24</span></span> Behold,
vengeance cometh speedily upon the inhabitants of the earth, a day of
wrath, a day of burning, a day of desolation, of weeping, of mourning,
and of lamentation; and as a whirlwind it shall come upon all the face
of the earth, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:25">112:25</span></span> And
upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith
the Lord;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:26">112:26</span></span> First
among those among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my
name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst
of my house, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:27">112:27</span></span>
Therefore, see to it that ye trouble not yourselves concerning the
affairs of my church in this place, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:28">112:28</span></span> But
purify your hearts before me; and then go ye into all the world, and
preach my gospel unto every creature who has not received it;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:29">112:29</span></span> And he
that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believeth
not, and is not baptized, shall be damned.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:30">112:30</span></span> For
unto you, the Twelve, and those, the First Presidency, who are appointed
with you to be your counselors and your leaders, is the power of this
priesthood given, for the last days and for the last time, in the which
is the dispensation of the fulness of times.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:31">112:31</span></span> Which
power you hold, in connection with all those who have received a
dispensation at any time from the beginning of the creation;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:32">112:32</span></span> For
verily I say unto you, the keys of the dispensation, which ye have
received, have come down from the fathers, and last of all, being sent
down from heaven unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:33">112:33</span></span> Verily
I say unto you, behold how great is your calling. Cleanse your hearts
and your garments, lest the blood of this generation be required at your
hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112:34">112:34</span></span> Be
faithful until I come, for I come quickly; and my reward is with me to
recompense every man according as his work shall be. I am Alpha and
Omega. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 113. Joseph Smith's answers to questions on the writings of
Isaiah, March 1838.](dc113)
