[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc120)  [Next](dc122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 121. Prayer and prophecies written by Joseph Smith while a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, March 20, 1839. * History of the Church* 3:289-300.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:1">121:1</span></span> O God,
where art thou? And where is the pavilion that covereth thy hiding
place?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:2">121:2</span></span> How long
shall thy hand be stayed, and thine eye, yea thy pure eye, behold from
the eternal heavens the wrongs of thy people and of thy servants, and
thine ear be penetrated with their cries?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:3">121:3</span></span> Yea, O
Lord, how long shall they suffer these wrongs and unlawful oppressions,
before thine heart shall be softened toward them, and thy bowels be
moved with compassion toward them?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:4">121:4</span></span> O Lord
God Almighty, maker of heaven, earth, and seas, and of all things that
in them are, and who controllest and subjectest the devil, and the dark
and benighted dominion of Sheol—stretch forth thy hand; let thine eye
pierce; let thy pavilion be taken up; let thy hiding place no longer be
covered; let thine ear be inclined; let thine heart be softened, and thy
bowels moved with compassion toward us.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:5">121:5</span></span> Let thine
anger be kindled against our enemies; and, in the fury of thine heart,
with thy sword avenge us of our wrongs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:6">121:6</span></span> Remember
thy suffering saints, O our God; and thy servants will rejoice in thy
name forever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:7">121:7</span></span> My son,
peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be
but a small moment;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:8">121:8</span></span> And then,
if thou endure it well, God shall exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph
over all thy foes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:9">121:9</span></span> Thy
friends do stand by thee, and they shall hail thee again with warm
hearts and friendly hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:10">121:10</span></span> Thou
art not yet as Job; thy friends do not contend against thee, neither
charge thee with transgression, as they did Job.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:11">121:11</span></span> And
they who do charge thee with transgression, their hope shall be blasted,
and their prospects shall melt away as the hoar frost melteth before the
burning rays of the rising sun;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:12">121:12</span></span> And
also that God hath set his hand and seal to change the times and
seasons, and to blind their minds, that they may not understand his
marvelous workings; that he may prove them also and take them in their
own craftiness;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:13">121:13</span></span> Also
because their hearts are corrupted, and the things which they are
willing to bring upon others, and love to have others suffer, may come
upon themselves to the very uttermost;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:14">121:14</span></span> That
they may be disappointed also, and their hopes may be cut off;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:15">121:15</span></span> And not
many years hence, that they and their posterity shall be swept from
under heaven, saith God, that not one of them is left to stand by the
wall.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:16">121:16</span></span> Cursed
are all those that shall lift up the heel against mine anointed, saith
the Lord, and cry they have sinned when they have not sinned before me,
saith the Lord, but have done that which was meet in mine eyes, and
which I commanded them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:17">121:17</span></span> But
those who cry transgression do it because they are the servants of sin,
and are the children of disobedience themselves.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:18">121:18</span></span> And
those who swear falsely against my servants, that they might bring them
into bondage and death—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:19">121:19</span></span> Wo unto
them; because they have offended my little ones they shall be severed
from the ordinances of mine house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:20">121:20</span></span> Their
basket shall not be full, their houses and their barns shall perish, and
they themselves shall be despised by those that flattered them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:21">121:21</span></span> They
shall not have right to the priesthood, nor their posterity after them
from generation to generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:22">121:22</span></span> It had
been better for them that a millstone had been hanged about their necks,
and they drowned in the depth of the sea.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:23">121:23</span></span> Wo unto
all those that discomfort my people, and drive, and murder, and testify
against them, saith the Lord of Hosts; a generation of vipers shall not
escape the damnation of hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:24">121:24</span></span> Behold,
mine eyes see and know all their works, and I have in reserve a swift
judgment in the season thereof, for them all;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:25">121:25</span></span> For
there is a time appointed for every man, according as his works shall
be.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:26">121:26</span></span> God
shall give unto you knowledge by his Holy Spirit, yea, by the
unspeakable gift of the Holy Ghost, that has not been revealed since the
world was until now;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:27">121:27</span></span> Which
our forefathers have awaited with anxious expectation to be revealed in
the last times, which their minds were pointed to by the angels, as held
in reserve for the fulness of their glory;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:28">121:28</span></span> A time
to come in the which nothing shall be withheld, whether there be one God
or many gods, they shall be manifest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:29">121:29</span></span> All
thrones and dominions, principalities and powers, shall be revealed and
set forth upon all who have endured valiantly for the gospel of Jesus
Christ.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:30">121:30</span></span> And
also, if there be bounds set to the heavens or to the seas, or to the
dry land, or to the sun, moon, or stars—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:31">121:31</span></span> All the
times of their revolutions, all the appointed days, months, and years,
and all the days of their days, months, and years, and all their
glories, laws, and set times, shall be revealed in the days of the
dispensation of the fulness of times—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:32">121:32</span></span>
According to that which was ordained in the midst of the Council of the
Eternal God of all other gods before this world was, that should be
reserved unto the finishing and the end thereof, when every man shall
enter into his eternal presence and into his immortal rest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:33">121:33</span></span> How
long can rolling waters remain impure? What power shall stay the
heavens? As well might man stretch forth his puny arm to stop the
Missouri river in its decreed course, or to turn it up stream, as to
hinder the Almighty from pouring down knowledge from heaven upon the
heads of the Latter-day Saints.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:34">121:34</span></span> Behold,
there are many called, but few are chosen. And why are they not chosen?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:35">121:35</span></span> Because
their hearts are set so much upon the things of this world, and aspire
to the honors of men, that they do not learn this one lesson—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:36">121:36</span></span> That
the rights of the priesthood are inseparably connected with the powers
of heaven, and that the powers of heaven cannot be controlled nor
handled only upon the principles of righteousness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:37">121:37</span></span> That
they may be conferred upon us, it is true; but when we undertake to
cover our sins, or to gratify our pride, our vain ambition, or to
exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the souls of the
children of men, in any degree of unrighteousness, behold, the heavens
withdraw themselves; the Spirit of the Lord is grieved; and when it is
withdrawn, Amen to the priesthood or the authority of that man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:38">121:38</span></span> Behold,
ere he is aware, he is left unto himself, to kick against the pricks, to
persecute the saints, and to fight against God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:39">121:39</span></span> We have
learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of
almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose,
they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:40">121:40</span></span> Hence
many are called, but few are chosen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:41">121:41</span></span> No
power or influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the
priesthood, only by persuasion, by long-suffering, by gentleness and
meekness, and by love unfeigned;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:42">121:42</span></span> By
kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall greatly enlarge the soul
without hypocrisy, and without guile—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:43">121:43</span></span>
Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and
then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou
hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:44">121:44</span></span> That he
may know that thy faithfulness is stronger than the cords of death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:45">121:45</span></span> Let thy
bowels also be full of charity towards all men, and to the household of
faith, and let virtue garnish thy thoughts unceasingly; then shall thy
confidence wax strong in the presence of God; and the doctrine of the
priesthood shall distil upon thy soul as the dews from heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121:46">121:46</span></span> The
Holy Ghost shall be thy constant companion, and thy scepter an
unchanging scepter of righteousness and truth; and thy dominion shall be
an everlasting dominion, and without compulsory means it shall flow unto
thee forever and ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 122. The word of the Lord to Joseph Smith while a prisoner in the
jail at Liberty, Missouri, March 1839.](dc122)
