[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc126)  [Next](dc128.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 127. Letter from Joseph Smith to the Saints at Nauvoo, Illinois, September 1, 1842. * History of the Church* 5:142-44.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:1">127:1</span></span> Forasmuch
as the Lord has revealed unto me that my enemies, both in Missouri and
this State, were again in the pursuit of me; and inasmuch as they pursue
me without a cause, and have not the least shadow or coloring of justice
or right on their side in the getting up of their prosecutions against
me; and inasmuch as their pretensions are all founded in falsehood of
the blackest dye, I have thought it expedient and wisdom in me to leave
the place for a short season, for my own safety and the safety of this
people. I would say to all those with whom I have business, that I have
left my affairs with agents and clerks who will transact all business in
a prompt and proper manner, and will see that all my debts are canceled
in due time, by turning out property, or otherwise, as the case may
require, or as the circumstances may admit of. When I learn that the
storm is fully blown over, then I will return to you again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:2">127:2</span></span> And as
for the perils which I am called to pass through, they seem but a small
thing to me, as the envy and wrath of man have been my common lot all
the days of my life; and for what cause it seems mysterious, unless I
was ordained from before the foundation of the world for some good end,
or bad, as you may choose to call it. Judge ye for yourselves. God
knoweth all these things, whether it be good or bad. But nevertheless,
deep water is what I am wont to swim in. It all has become a second
nature to me; and I feel, like Paul, to glory in tribulation; for to
this day has the God of my fathers delivered me out of them all, and
will deliver me from henceforth; for behold, and lo, I shall triumph
over all my enemies, for the Lord God hath spoken it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:3">127:3</span></span> Let all
the saints rejoice, therefore, and be exceedingly glad; for Israel's God
is their God, and he will mete out a just recompense of reward upon the
heads of all their oppressors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:4">127:4</span></span> And
again, verily thus saith the Lord: Let the work of my temple, and all
the works which I have appointed unto you, be continued on and not
cease; and let your diligence, and your perseverance, and patience, and
your works be redoubled, and you shall in nowise lose your reward, saith
the Lord of Hosts. And if they persecute you, so persecuted they the
prophets and righteous men that were before you. For all this there is a
reward in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:5">127:5</span></span> And
again, I give unto you a word in relation to the baptism for your dead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:6">127:6</span></span> Verily,
thus saith the Lord unto you concerning your dead: When any of you are
baptized for your dead, let there be a recorder, and let him be
eye-witness of your baptisms; let him hear with his ears, that he may
testify of a truth, saith the Lord;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:7">127:7</span></span> That in
all your recordings it may be recorded in heaven; whatsoever you bind on
earth, may be bound in heaven; whatsoever you loose on earth, may be
loosed in heaven;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:8">127:8</span></span> For I am
about to restore many things to the earth, pertaining to the priesthood,
saith the Lord of Hosts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:9">127:9</span></span> And
again, let all the records be had in order, that they may be put in the
archives of my holy temple, to be held in remembrance from generation to
generation, saith the Lord of Hosts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:10">127:10</span></span> I will
say to all the saints, that I desired, with exceedingly great desire, to
have addressed them from the stand on the subject of baptism for the
dead, on the following Sabbath. But inasmuch as it is out of my power to
do so, I will write the word of the Lord from time to time, on that
subject, and send it to you by mail, as well as many other things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:11">127:11</span></span> I now
close my letter for the present, for the want of more time; for the
enemy is on the alert, and as the Savior said, the prince of this world
cometh, but he hath nothing in me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127:12">127:12</span></span> Behold,
my prayer to God is that you all may be saved. And I subscribe myself
your servant in the Lord, prophet and seer of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints. JOSEPH SMITH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 128. Letter from Joseph Smith to The Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, Nauvoo, Illinois, September 6, 1842.](dc128.md)
