[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc121)  [Next](dc123.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 122. The word of the Lord to Joseph Smith while a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, March 1839. * History of the Church* 3:300-301.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122:1">122:1</span></span> The ends
of the earth shall inquire after thy name, and fools shall have thee in
derision, and hell shall rage against thee;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122:2">122:2</span></span> While the
pure in heart, and the wise, and the noble, and the virtuous, shall seek
counsel, and authority, and blessings constantly from under thy hand.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122:3">122:3</span></span> And thy
people shall never be turned against thee by the testimony of traitors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122:4">122:4</span></span> And
although their influence shall cast thee into trouble, and into bars and
walls, thou shalt be had in honor; and but for a small moment and thy
voice shall be more terrible in the midst of thine enemies than the
fierce lion, because of thy righteousness; and thy God shall stand by
thee forever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122:5">122:5</span></span> If thou
art called to pass through tribulation; if thou art in perils among
false brethren; if thou art in perils among robbers; if thou art in
perils by land or by sea;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122:6">122:6</span></span> If thou
art accused with all manner of false accusations; if thine enemies fall
upon thee; if they tear thee from the society of thy father and mother
and brethren and sisters; and if with a drawn sword thine enemies tear
thee from the bosom of thy wife, and of thine offspring, and thine elder
son, although but six years of age, shall cling to thy garments, and
shall say, My father, my father, why can't you stay with us? O, my
father, what are the men going to do with you? and if then he shall be
thrust from thee by the sword, and thou be dragged to prison, and thine
enemies prowl around thee like wolves for the blood of the lamb;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122:7">122:7</span></span> And if
thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and
the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep;
if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become
thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements
combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell
shall gape open the mouth wide after thee, know thou, my son, that all
these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122:8">122:8</span></span> The Son
of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122:9">122:9</span></span>
Therefore, hold on thy way, and the priesthood shall remain with thee;
for their bounds are set, they cannot pass. Thy days are known, and thy
years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do,
for God shall be with you forever and ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 123. The duty of the Saints toward their persecutors as set forth
by Joseph Smith while a prisoner in the jail at Liberty, Missouri, March
1839.](dc123.md)
