[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc123)  [Next](dc125.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index.md)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 124. Revelation to Joseph Smith, Nauvoo, Illinois, January 19, 1841. * History of the Church* 4:274-86.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:1">124:1</span></span> Verily,
thus saith the Lord unto you, my servant Joseph Smith, I am well pleased
with your offering and acknowledgments, which you have made; for unto
this end have I raised you up, that I might show forth my wisdom through
the weak things of the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:2">124:2</span></span> Your
prayers are acceptable before me; and in answer to them I say unto you,
that you are now called immediately to make a solemn proclamation of my
gospel, and of this stake which I have planted to be a cornerstone of
Zion, which shall be polished with the refinement which is after the
similitude of a palace.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:3">124:3</span></span> This
proclamation shall be made to all the kings of the world, to the four
corners thereof, to the honorable president-elect, and the high-minded
governors of the nation in which you live, and to all the nations of the
earth scattered abroad.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:4">124:4</span></span> Let it be
written in the spirit of meekness and by the power of the Holy Ghost,
which shall be in you at the time of the writing of the same;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:5">124:5</span></span> For it
shall be given you by the Holy Ghost to know my will concerning those
kings and authorities, even what shall befall them in a time to come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:6">124:6</span></span> For,
behold, I am about to call upon them to give heed to the light and glory
of Zion, for the set time has come to favor her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:7">124:7</span></span> Call ye,
therefore, upon them with loud proclamation, and with your testimony,
fearing them not, for they are as grass, and all their glory as the
flower thereof which soon falleth, that they may be left also without
excuse—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:8">124:8</span></span> And that
I may visit them in the day of visitation, when I shall unveil the face
of my covering, to appoint the portion of the oppressor among
hypocrites, where there is gnashing of teeth, if they reject my servants
and my testimony which I have revealed unto them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:9">124:9</span></span> And
again, I will visit and soften their hearts, many of them for your good,
that ye may find grace in their eyes, that they may come to the light of
truth, and the Gentiles to the exaltation or lifting up of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:10">124:10</span></span> For the
day of my visitation cometh speedily, in an hour when ye think not of;
and where shall be the safety of my people, and refuge for those who
shall be left of them?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:11">124:11</span></span> Awake,
O kings of the earth! Come ye, O, come ye, with your gold and your
silver, to the help of my people, to the house of the daughters of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:12">124:12</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Robert B. Thompson help you
to write this proclamation, for I am well pleased with him, and that he
should be with you;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:13">124:13</span></span> Let
him, therefore, hearken to your counsel, and I will bless him with a
multiplicity of blessings; let him be faithful and true in all things
from henceforth, and he shall be great in mine eyes;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:14">124:14</span></span> But let
him remember that his stewardship will I require at his hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:15">124:15</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, blessed is my servant Hyrum Smith; for I,
the Lord, love him because of the integrity of his heart, and because he
loveth that which is right before me, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:16">124:16</span></span> Again,
let my servant John C. Bennett help you in your labor in sending my word
to the kings and people of the earth, and stand by you, even you my
servant Joseph Smith, in the hour of affliction; and his reward shall
not fail if he receive counsel.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:17">124:17</span></span> And for
his love he shall be great, for he shall be mine if he do this, saith
the Lord. I have seen the work which he hath done, which I accept if he
continue, and will crown him with blessings and great glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:18">124:18</span></span> And
again, I say unto you that it is my will that my servant Lyman Wight
should continue in preaching for Zion, in the spirit of meekness,
confessing me before the world; and I will bear him up as on eagles'
wings; and he shall beget glory and honor to himself and unto my name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:19">124:19</span></span> That
when he shall finish his work I may receive him unto myself, even as I
did my servant David Patten, who is with me at this time, and also my
servant Edward Partridge, and also my aged servant Joseph Smith, Sen.,
who sitteth with Abraham at his right hand, and blessed and holy is he,
for he is mine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:20">124:20</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, my servant George Miller is without guile;
he may be trusted because of the integrity of his heart; and for the
love which he has to my testimony I, the Lord, love him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:21">124:21</span></span> I
therefore say unto you, I seal upon his head the office of a bishopric,
like unto my servant Edward Partridge, that he may receive the
consecrations of mine house, that he may administer blessings upon the
heads of the poor of my people, saith the Lord. Let no man despise my
servant George, for he shall honor me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:22">124:22</span></span> Let my
servant George, and my servant Lyman, and my servant John Snider, and
others, build a house unto my name, such a one as my servant Joseph
shall show unto them, upon the place which he shall show unto them also.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:23">124:23</span></span> And it
shall be for a house for boarding, a house that strangers may come from
afar to lodge therein; therefore let it be a good house, worthy of all
acceptation, that the weary traveler may find health and safety while he
shall contemplate the word of the Lord; and the corner-stone I have
appointed for Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:24">124:24</span></span> This
house shall be a healthful habitation if it be built unto my name, and
if the governor which shall be appointed unto it shall not suffer any
pollution to come upon it. It shall be holy, or the Lord your God will
not dwell therein.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:25">124:25</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, let all my saints come from afar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:26">124:26</span></span> And
send ye swift messengers, yea, chosen messengers, and say unto them:
Come ye, with all your gold, and your silver, and your precious stones,
and with all your antiquities; and with all who have knowledge of
antiquities, that will come, may come, and bring the box-tree, and the
fir-tree, and the pine-tree, together with all the precious trees of the
earth;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:27">124:27</span></span> And
with iron, with copper, and with brass, and with zinc, and with all your
precious things of the earth; and build a house to my name, for the Most
High to dwell therein.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:28">124:28</span></span> For
there is not a place found on earth that he may come to and restore
again that which was lost unto you, or which he hath taken away, even
the fulness of the priesthood.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:29">124:29</span></span> For a
baptismal font there is not upon the earth, that they, my saints, may be
baptized for those who are dead—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:30">124:30</span></span> For
this ordinance belongeth to my house, and cannot be acceptable to me,
only in the days of your poverty, wherein ye are not able to build a
house unto me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:31">124:31</span></span> But I
command you, all ye my saints, to build a house unto me; and I grant
unto you a sufficient time to build a house unto me; and during this
time your baptisms shall be acceptable unto me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:32">124:32</span></span> But
behold, at the end of this appointment your baptisms for your dead shall
not be acceptable unto me; and if you do not these things at the end of
the appointment ye shall be rejected as a church, with your dead, saith
the Lord your God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:33">124:33</span></span> For
verily I say unto you, that after you have had sufficient time to build
a house to me, wherein the ordinance of baptizing for the dead
belongeth, and for which the same was instituted from before the
foundation of the world, your baptisms for your dead cannot be
acceptable unto me;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:34">124:34</span></span> For
therein are the keys of the holy priesthood ordained, that you may
receive honor and glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:35">124:35</span></span> And
after this time, your baptisms for the dead, by those who are scattered
abroad, are not acceptable unto me, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:36">124:36</span></span> For it
is ordained that in Zion, and in her stakes, and in Jerusalem, those
places which I have appointed for refuge, shall be the places for your
baptisms for your dead.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:37">124:37</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, how shall your washings be acceptable unto
me, except ye perform them in a house which you have built to my name?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:38">124:38</span></span> For,
for this cause I commanded Moses that he should build a tabernacle, that
they should bear it with them in the wilderness, and to build a house in
the land of promise, that those ordinances might be revealed which had
been hid from before the world was.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:39">124:39</span></span>
Therefore, verily I say unto you, that your anointings, and your
washings, and your baptisms for the dead, and your solemn assemblies,
and your memorials for your sacrifices by the sons of Levi, and for your
oracles in your most holy places wherein you receive conversations, and
your statutes and judgments, for the beginning of the revelations and
foundation of Zion, and for the glory, honor, and endowment of all her
municipals, are ordained by the ordinance of my holy house, which my
people are always commanded to build unto my holy name.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:40">124:40</span></span> And
verily I say unto you, let this house be built unto my name, that I may
reveal mine ordinances therein unto my people;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:41">124:41</span></span> For I
deign to reveal unto my church things which have been kept hid from
before the foundation of the world, things that pertain to the
dispensation of the fulness of times.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:42">124:42</span></span> And I
will show unto my servant Joseph all things pertaining to this house,
and the priesthood thereof, and the place whereon it shall be built.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:43">124:43</span></span> And ye
shall build it on the place where you have contemplated building it, for
that is the spot which I have chosen for you to build it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:44">124:44</span></span> If ye
labor with all your might, I will consecrate that spot that it shall be
made holy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:45">124:45</span></span> And if
my people will hearken unto my voice, and unto the voice of my servants
whom I have appointed to lead my people, behold, verily I say unto you,
they shall not be moved out of their place.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:46">124:46</span></span> But if
they will not hearken to my voice, nor unto the voice of these men whom
I have appointed, they shall not be blest, because they pollute mine
holy grounds, and mine holy ordinances, and charters, and my holy words
which I give unto them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:47">124:47</span></span> And it
shall come to pass that if you build a house unto my name, and do not do
the things that I say, I will not perform the oath which I make unto
you, neither fulfil the promises which ye expect at my hands, saith the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:48">124:48</span></span> For
instead of blessings, ye, by your own works, bring cursings, wrath,
indignation, and judgments upon your own heads, by your follies, and by
all your abominations, which you practise before me, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:49">124:49</span></span> Verily,
verily, I say unto you, that when I give a commandment to any of the
sons of men to do a work unto my name, and those sons of men go with all
their might and with all they have to perform that work, and cease not
their diligence, and their enemies come upon them and hinder them from
performing that work, behold, it behooveth me to require that work no
more at the hands of those sons of men, but to accept of their
offerings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:50">124:50</span></span> And the
iniquity and transgression of my holy laws and commandments I will visit
upon the heads of those who hindered my work, unto the third and fourth
generation, so long as they repent not, and hate me, saith the Lord God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:51">124:51</span></span>
Therefore, for this cause have I accepted the offerings of those whom I
commanded to build up a city and a house unto my name, in Jackson
county, Missouri, and were hindered by their enemies, saith the Lord
your God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:52">124:52</span></span> And I
will answer judgment, wrath, and indignation, wailing, and anguish, and
gnashing of teeth upon their heads, unto the third and fourth
generation, so long as they repent not, and hate me, saith the Lord your
God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:53">124:53</span></span> And
this I make an example unto you, for your consolation concerning all
those who have been commanded to do a work and have been hindered by the
hands of their enemies, and by oppression, saith the Lord your God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:54">124:54</span></span> For I
am the Lord your God, and will save all those of your brethren who have
been pure in heart, and have been slain in the land of Missouri, saith
the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:55">124:55</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, I command you again to build a house to my
name, even in this place, that you may prove yourselves unto me that ye
are faithful in all things whatsoever I command you, that I may bless
you, and crown you with honor, immortality, and eternal life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:56">124:56</span></span> And now
I say unto you, as pertaining to my boarding house which I have
commanded you to build for the boarding of strangers, let it be built
unto my name, and let my name be named upon it, and let my servant
Joseph and his house have place therein, from generation to generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:57">124:57</span></span> For
this anointing have I put upon his head, that his blessing shall also be
put upon the head of his posterity after him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:58">124:58</span></span> And as
I said unto Abraham concerning the kindreds of the earth, even so I say
unto my servant Joseph: In thee and in thy seed shall the kindred of the
earth be blessed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:59">124:59</span></span>
Therefore, let my servant Joseph and his seed after him have place in
that house, from generation to generation, forever and ever, saith the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:60">124:60</span></span> And let
the name of that house be called Nauvoo House; and let it be a
delightful habitation for man, and a resting-place for the weary
traveler, that he may contemplate the glory of Zion, and the glory of
this, the corner-stone thereof;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:61">124:61</span></span> That he
may receive also the counsel from those whom I have set to be as plants
of renown, and as watchmen upon her walls.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:62">124:62</span></span> Behold,
verily I say unto you, let my servant George Miller, and my servant
Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my servant Peter Haws,
organize themselves, and appoint one of them to be a president over
their quorum for the purpose of building that house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:63">124:63</span></span> And
they shall form a constitution, whereby they may receive stock for the
building of that house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:64">124:64</span></span> And
they shall not receive less than fifty dollars for a share of stock in
that house, and they shall be permitted to receive fifteen thousand
dollars from any one man for stock in that house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:65">124:65</span></span> But
they shall not be permitted to receive over fifteen thousand dollars
stock from any one man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:66">124:66</span></span> And
they shall not be permitted to receive under fifty dollars for a share
of stock from any one man in that house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:67">124:67</span></span> And
they shall not be permitted to receive any man, as a stockholder in this
house, except the same shall pay his stock into their hands at the time
he receives stock;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:68">124:68</span></span> And in
proportion to the amount of stock he pays into their hands he shall
receive stock in that house; but if he pays nothing into their hands he
shall not receive any stock in that house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:69">124:69</span></span> And if
any pay stock into their hands it shall be for stock in that house, for
himself, and for his generation after him, from generation to
generation, so long as he and his heirs shall hold that stock, and do
not sell or convey the stock away out of their hands by their own free
will and act, if you will do my will, saith the Lord your God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:70">124:70</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, if my servant George Miller, and my
servant Lyman Wight, and my servant John Snider, and my servant Peter
Haws, receive any stock into their hands, in moneys, or in properties
wherein they receive the real value of moneys, they shall not
appropriate any portion of that stock to any other purpose, only in that
house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:71">124:71</span></span> And if
they do appropriate any portion of that stock anywhere else, only in
that house, without the consent of the stockholder, and do not repay
fourfold for the stock which they appropriate anywhere else, only in
that house, they shall be accursed, and shall be moved out of their
place, saith the Lord God; for I, the Lord, am God, and cannot be mocked
in any of these things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:72">124:72</span></span> Verily
I say unto you, let my servant Joseph pay stock into their hands for the
building of that house, as seemeth him good; but my servant Joseph
cannot pay over fifteen thousand dollars stock in that house, nor under
fifty dollars; neither can any other man, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:73">124:73</span></span> And
there are others also who wish to know my will concerning them, for they
have asked it at my hands.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:74">124:74</span></span>
Therefore, I say unto you concerning my servant Vinson Knight, if he
will do my will let him put stock into that house for himself, and for
his generation after him, from generation to generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:75">124:75</span></span> And let
him lift up his voice long and loud, in the midst of the people, to
plead the cause of the poor and the needy; and let him not fail, neither
let his heart faint; and I will accept of his offerings, for they shall
not be unto me as the offerings of Cain, for he shall be mine, saith the
Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:76">124:76</span></span> Let his
family rejoice and turn away their hearts from affliction; for I have
chosen him and anointed him, and he shall be honored in the midst of his
house, for I will forgive all his sins, saith the Lord. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:77">124:77</span></span> Verily
I say unto you, let my servant Hyrum put stock into that house as
seemeth him good, for himself and his generation after him, from
generation to generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:78">124:78</span></span> Let my
servant Isaac Galland put stock into that house; for I, the Lord, love
him for the work he hath done, and will forgive all his sins; therefore,
let him be remembered for an interest in that house from generation to
generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:79">124:79</span></span> Let my
servant Isaac Galland be appointed among you, and be ordained by my
servant William Marks, and be blessed of him, to go with my servant
Hyrum to accomplish the work that my servant Joseph shall point out to
them, and they shall be greatly blessed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:80">124:80</span></span> Let my
servant William Marks pay stock into that house, as seemeth him good,
for himself and his generation, from generation to generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:81">124:81</span></span> Let my
servant Henry G. Sherwood pay stock into that house, as seemeth him
good, for himself and his seed after him, from generation to generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:82">124:82</span></span> Let my
servant William Law pay stock into that house, for himself and his seed
after him, from generation to generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:83">124:83</span></span> If he
will do my will let him not take his family unto the eastern lands, even
unto Kirtland; nevertheless, I, the Lord, will build up Kirtland, but I,
the Lord, have a scourge prepared for the inhabitants thereof.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:84">124:84</span></span> And
with my servant Almon Babbitt, there are many things with which I am not
pleased; behold, he aspireth to establish his counsel instead of the
counsel which I have ordained, even that of the Presidency of my Church;
and he setteth up a golden calf for the worship of my people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:85">124:85</span></span> Let no
man go from this place who has come here essaying to keep my
commandments.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:86">124:86</span></span> If they
live here let them live unto me; and if they die let them die unto me;
for they shall rest from all their labors here, and shall continue their
works.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:87">124:87</span></span>
Therefore, let my servant William put his trust in me, and cease to fear
concerning his family, because of the sickness of the land. If ye love
me, keep my commandments; and the sickness of the land shall redound to
your glory.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:88">124:88</span></span> Let my
servant William go and proclaim my everlasting gospel with a loud voice,
and with great joy, as he shall be moved upon by my Spirit, unto the
inhabitants of Warsaw, and also unto the inhabitants of Carthage, and
also unto the inhabitants of Burlington, and also unto the inhabitants
of Madison, and await patiently and diligently for further instructions
at my general conference, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:89">124:89</span></span> If he
will do my will let him from henceforth hearken to the counsel of my
servant Joseph, and with his interest support the cause of the poor, and
publish the new translation of my holy word unto the inhabitants of the
earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:90">124:90</span></span> And if
he will do this I will bless him with a multiplicity of blessings, that
he shall not be forsaken, nor his seed be found begging bread.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:91">124:91</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, let my servant William be appointed,
ordained, and anointed, as counselor unto my servant Joseph, in the room
of my servant Hyrum, that my servant Hyrum may take the office of
Priesthood and Patriarch, which was appointed unto him by his father, by
blessing and also by right;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:92">124:92</span></span> That
from henceforth he shall hold the keys of the patriarchal blessings upon
the heads of all my people,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:93">124:93</span></span> That
whoever he blesses shall be blessed, and whoever he curses shall be
cursed; that whatsoever he shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven;
and whatsoever he shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:94">124:94</span></span> And
from this time forth I appoint unto him that he may be a prophet, and a
seer, and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant Joseph;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:95">124:95</span></span> That he
may act in concert also with my servant Joseph; and that he shall
receive counsel from my servant Joseph, who shall show unto him the keys
whereby he may ask and receive, and be crowned with the same blessing,
and glory, and honor, and priesthood, and gifts of the priesthood, that
once were put upon him that was my servant Oliver Cowdery;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:96">124:96</span></span> That my
servant Hyrum may bear record of the things which I shall show unto him,
that his name may be had in honorable remembrance from generation to
generation, forever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:97">124:97</span></span> Let my
servant William Law also receive the keys by which he may ask and
receive blessings; let him be humble before me, and be without guile,
and he shall receive of my Spirit, even the Comforter, which shall
manifest unto him the truth of all things, and shall give him, in the
very hour, what he shall say.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:98">124:98</span></span> And
these signs shall follow him—he shall heal the sick, he shall cast out
devils, and shall be delivered from those who would administer unto him
deadly poison;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:99">124:99</span></span> And he
shall be led in paths where the poisonous serpent cannot lay hold upon
his heel, and he shall mount up in the imagination of his thoughts as
upon eagles' wings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:100">124:100</span></span> And
what if I will that he should raise the dead, let him not withhold his
voice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:101">124:101</span></span>
Therefore, let my servant William cry aloud and spare not, with joy and
rejoicing, and with hosannas to him that sitteth upon the throne forever
and ever, saith the Lord your God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:102">124:102</span></span>
Behold, I say unto you, I have a mission in store for my servant
William, and my servant Hyrum, and for them alone; and let my servant
Joseph tarry at home, for he is needed. The remainder I will show unto
you hereafter. Even so. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:103">124:103</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, if my servant Sidney will serve me and be
counselor unto my servant Joseph, let him arise and come up and stand in
the office of his calling, and humble himself before me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:104">124:104</span></span> And
if he will offer unto me an acceptable offering, and acknowledgments,
and remain with my people, behold, I, the Lord your God, will heal him
that he shall be healed; and he shall lift up his voice again on the
mountains, and be a spokesman before my face.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:105">124:105</span></span> Let
him come and locate his family in the neighborhood in which my servant
Joseph resides.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:106">124:106</span></span> And
in all his journeyings let him lift up his voice as with the sound of a
trump, and warn the inhabitants of the earth to flee the wrath to come.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:107">124:107</span></span> Let
him assist my servant Joseph, and also let my servant William Law assist
my servant Joseph, in making a solemn proclamation unto the kings of the
earth, even as I have before said unto you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:108">124:108</span></span> If my
servant Sidney will do my will, let him not remove his family unto the
eastern lands, but let him change their habitation, even as I have said.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:109">124:109</span></span>
Behold, it is not my will that he shall seek to find safety and refuge
out of the city which I have appointed unto you, even the city of
Nauvoo.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:110">124:110</span></span>
Verily I say unto you, even now, if he will hearken unto my voice, it
shall be well with him. Even so. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:111">124:111</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, let my servant Amos Davies pay stock into
the hands of those whom I have appointed to build a house for boarding,
even the Nauvoo House.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:112">124:112</span></span> This
let him do if he will have an interest; and let him hearken unto the
counsel of my servant Joseph, and labor with his own hands that he may
obtain the confidence of men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:113">124:113</span></span> And
when he shall prove himself faithful in all things that shall be
entrusted unto his care, yea, even a few things, he shall be made ruler
over many;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:114">124:114</span></span> Let
him therefore abase himself that he may be exalted. Even so. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:115">124:115</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, if my servant Robert D. Foster will obey
my voice, let him build a house for my servant Joseph, according to the
contract which he has made with him, as the door shall be open to him
from time to time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:116">124:116</span></span> And
let him repent of all his folly, and clothe himself with charity; and
cease to do evil, and lay aside all his hard speeches;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:117">124:117</span></span> And
pay stock also into the hands of the quorum of the Nauvoo House, for
himself and for his generation after him, from generation to generation;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:118">124:118</span></span> And
hearken unto the counsel of my servants Joseph, and Hyrum, and William
Law, and unto the authorities which I have called to lay the foundation
of Zion; and it shall be well with him forever and ever. Even so. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:119">124:119</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, let no man pay stock to the quorum of the
Nauvoo House unless he shall be a believer in the Book of Mormon, and
the revelations I have given unto you, saith the Lord your God;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:120">124:120</span></span> For
that which is more or less than this cometh of evil, and shall be
attended with cursings and not blessings, saith the Lord your God. Even
so. Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:121">124:121</span></span> And
again, verily I say unto you, let the quorum of the Nauvoo House have a
just recompense of wages for all their labors which they do in building
the Nauvoo House; and let their wages be as shall be agreed among
themselves, as pertaining to the price thereof.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:122">124:122</span></span> And
let every man who pays stock bear his proportion of their wages, if it
must needs be, for their support, saith the Lord; otherwise, their
labors shall be accounted unto them for stock in that house. Even so.
Amen.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:123">124:123</span></span>
Verily I say unto you, I now give unto you the officers belonging to my
Priesthood, that ye may hold the keys thereof, even the Priesthood which
is after the order of Melchizedek, which is after the order of mine Only
Begotten Son.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:124">124:124</span></span>
First, I give unto you Hyrum Smith to be a patriarch unto you, to hold
the sealing blessings of my church, even the Holy Spirit of promise,
whereby ye are sealed up unto the day of redemption, that ye may not
fall notwithstanding the hour of temptation that may come upon you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:125">124:125</span></span> I
give unto you my servant Joseph to be a presiding elder over all my
church, to be a translator, a revelator, a seer, and prophet.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:126">124:126</span></span> I
give unto him for counselors my servant Sidney Rigdon and my servant
William Law, that these may constitute a quorum and First Presidency, to
receive the oracles for the whole church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:127">124:127</span></span> I
give unto you my servant Brigham Young to be a president over the Twelve
traveling council;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:128">124:128</span></span> Which
Twelve hold the keys to open up the authority of my kingdom upon the
four corners of the earth, and after that to send my word to every
creature.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:129">124:129</span></span> They
are Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Orson Hyde, William
Smith, John Taylor, John E. Page, Wilford Woodruff, Willard Richards,
George A. Smith;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:130">124:130</span></span> David
Patten I have taken unto myself; behold, his priesthood no man taketh
from him; but, verily I say unto you, another may be appointed unto the
same calling.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:131">124:131</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, I give unto you a high council, for the
corner-stone of Zion—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:132">124:132</span></span>
Namely, Samuel Bent, Henry G. Sherwood, George W. Harris, Charles C.
Rich, Thomas Grover, Newel Knight, David Dort, Dunbar Wilson—Seymour
Brunson I have taken unto myself; no man taketh his priesthood, but
another may be appointed unto the same priesthood in his stead; and
verily I say unto you, let my servant Aaron Johnson be ordained unto
this calling in his stead—David Fullmer, Alpheus Cutler, William
Huntington.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:133">124:133</span></span> And
again, I give unto you Don C. Smith to be a president over a quorum of
high priests;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:134">124:134</span></span> Which
ordinance is instituted for the purpose of qualifying those who shall be
appointed standing presidents or servants over different stakes
scattered abroad;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:135">124:135</span></span> And
they may travel also if they choose, but rather be ordained for standing
presidents; this is the office of their calling, saith the Lord your
God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:136">124:136</span></span> I
give unto him Amasa Lyman and Noah Packard for counselors, that they may
preside over the quorum of high priests of my church, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:137">124:137</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, I give unto you John A. Hicks, Samuel Williams,
and Jesse Baker, which priesthood is to preside over the quorum of
elders, which quorum is instituted for standing ministers; nevertheless
they may travel, yet they are ordained to be standing ministers to my
church, saith the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:138">124:138</span></span> And
again, I give unto you Joseph Young, Josiah Butterfield, Daniel Miles,
Henry Herriman, Zera Pulsipher, Levi Hancock, James Foster, to preside
over the quorum of seventies;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:139">124:139</span></span> Which
quorum is instituted for traveling elders to bear record of my name in
all the world, wherever the traveling high council, mine apostles, shall
send them to prepare a way before my face.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:140">124:140</span></span> The
difference between this quorum and the quorum of elders is that one is
to travel continually, and the other is to preside over the churches
from time to time; the one has the responsibility of presiding from time
to time, and the other has no responsibility of presiding, saith the
Lord your God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:141">124:141</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, I give unto you Vinson Knight, Samuel H. Smith,
and Shadrach Roundy, if he will receive it, to preside over the
bishopric; a knowledge of said bishopric is given unto you in the book
of Doctrine and Covenants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:142">124:142</span></span> And
again, I say unto you, Samuel Rolfe and his counselors for priests, and
the president of the teachers and his counselors, and also the president
of the deacons and his counselors, and also the president of the stake
and his counselors.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:143">124:143</span></span> The
above offices I have given unto you, and the keys thereof, for helps and
for governments, for the work of the ministry and the perfecting of my
saints.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:144">124:144</span></span> And a
commandment I give unto you, that you should fill all these offices and
approve of those names which I have mentioned, or else disapprove of
them at my general conference;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_124:145">124:145</span></span> And
that ye should prepare rooms for all these offices in my house when you
build it unto my name, saith the Lord your God. Even so. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 125. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Nauvoo, Illinois, March
1841.](dc125.md)
