[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mormonism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dc132)  [Next](dc134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/142548638X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_mor.jpg)](index)  
*Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter-Day
Saints*, at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 133. Revelation through Joseph Smith, Hiram, Ohio, November 3, 1831. * History of the Church* 1:229-34.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:1">133:1</span></span> Hearken,
O ye people of my church, saith the Lord your God, and hear the word of
the Lord concerning you—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:2">133:2</span></span> The Lord
who shall suddenly come to his temple; the Lord who shall come down upon
the world with a curse to judgment; yea, upon all the nations that
forget God, and upon all the ungodly among you.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:3">133:3</span></span> For he
shall make bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations, and all the
ends of the earth shall see the salvation of their God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:4">133:4</span></span>
Wherefore, prepare ye, prepare ye, O my people; sanctify yourselves;
gather ye together, O ye people of my church, upon the land of Zion, all
you that have not been commanded to tarry.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:5">133:5</span></span> Go ye out
from Babylon. Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:6">133:6</span></span> Call your
solemn assemblies, and speak often one to another. And let every man
call upon the name of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:7">133:7</span></span> Yea,
verily I say unto you again, the time has come when the voice of the
Lord is unto you: Go ye out of Babylon; gather ye out from among the
nations, from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:8">133:8</span></span> Send
forth the elders of my church unto the nations which are afar off; unto
the islands of the sea; send forth unto foreign lands; call upon all
nations, first upon the Gentiles, and then upon the Jews.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:9">133:9</span></span> And
behold, and lo, this shall be their cry, and the voice of the Lord unto
all people: Go ye forth unto the land of Zion, that the borders of my
people may be enlarged, and that her stakes may be strengthened, and
that Zion may go forth unto the regions round about.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:10">133:10</span></span> Yea,
let the cry go forth among all people: Awake and arise and go forth to
meet the Bridegroom; behold and lo, the Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to
meet him. Prepare yourselves for the great day of the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:11">133:11</span></span> Watch,
therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:12">133:12</span></span> Let
them, therefore, who are among the Gentiles flee unto Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:13">133:13</span></span> And let
them who be of Judah flee unto Jerusalem, unto the mountains of the
Lord's house.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:14">133:14</span></span> Go ye
out from among the nations, even from Babylon, from the midst of
wickedness, which is spiritual Babylon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:15">133:15</span></span> But
verily, thus saith the Lord, let not your flight be in haste, but let
all things be prepared before you; and he that goeth, let him not look
back lest sudden destruction shall come upon him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:16">133:16</span></span> Hearken
and hear, O ye inhabitants of the earth. Listen, ye elders of my church
together, and hear the voice of the Lord; for he calleth upon all men,
and he commandeth all men everywhere to repent.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:17">133:17</span></span> For
behold, the Lord God hath sent forth the angel crying through the midst
of heaven, saying: Prepare ye the way of the Lord, and make his paths
straight, for the hour of his coming is nigh—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:18">133:18</span></span> When
the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and
forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their
foreheads.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:19">133:19</span></span>
Wherefore, prepare ye for the coming of the Bridegroom; go ye, go ye out
to meet him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:20">133:20</span></span> For
behold, he shall stand upon the mount of Olivet, and upon the mighty
ocean, even the great deep, and upon the islands of the sea, and upon
the land of Zion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:21">133:21</span></span> And he
shall utter his voice out of Zion, and he shall speak from Jerusalem,
and his voice shall be heard among all people;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:22">133:22</span></span> And it
shall be a voice as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a
great thunder, which shall break down the mountains, and the valleys
shall not be found.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:23">133:23</span></span> He
shall command the great deep, and it shall be driven back into the north
countries, and the islands shall become one land;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:24">133:24</span></span> And the
land of Jerusalem and the land of Zion shall be turned back into their
own place, and the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it
was divided.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:25">133:25</span></span> And the
Lord, even the Savior, shall stand in the midst of his people, and shall
reign over all flesh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:26">133:26</span></span> And
they who are in the north countries shall come in remembrance before the
Lord; and their prophets shall hear his voice, and shall no longer stay
themselves; and they shall smite the rocks, and the ice shall flow down
at their presence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:27">133:27</span></span> And an
highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:28">133:28</span></span> Their
enemies shall become a prey unto them,

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:29">133:29</span></span> And in
the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the
parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:30">133:30</span></span> And
they shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of
Ephraim, my servants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:31">133:31</span></span> And the
boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:32">133:32</span></span> And
there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by
the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:33">133:33</span></span> And
they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:34">133:34</span></span> Behold,
this is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel,
and the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:35">133:35</span></span> And
they also of the tribe of Judah, after their pain, shall be sanctified
in holiness before the Lord, to dwell in his presence day and night,
forever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:36">133:36</span></span> And
now, verily saith the Lord, that these things might be known among you,
O inhabitants of the earth, I have sent forth mine angel flying through
the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel, who hath appeared
unto some and hath committed it unto man, who shall appear unto many
that dwell on the earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:37">133:37</span></span> And
this gospel shall be preached unto every nation, and kindred, and
tongue, and people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:38">133:38</span></span> And the
servants of God shall go forth, saying with a loud voice: Fear God and
give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:39">133:39</span></span> And
worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains
of waters—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:40">133:40</span></span> Calling
upon the name of the Lord day and night, saying: O that thou wouldst
rend the heavens, that thou wouldst come down, that the mountains might
flow down at thy presence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:41">133:41</span></span> And it
shall be answered upon their heads; for the presence of the Lord shall
be as the melting fire that burneth, and as the fire which causeth the
waters to boil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:42">133:42</span></span> O Lord,
thou shalt come down to make thy name known to thine adversaries, and
all nations shall tremble at thy presence—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:43">133:43</span></span> When
thou doest terrible things, things they look not for;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:44">133:44</span></span> Yea,
when thou comest down, and the mountains flow down at thy presence, thou
shalt meet him who rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, who remembereth
thee in thy ways.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:45">133:45</span></span> For
since the beginning of the world have not men heard nor perceived by the
ear, neither hath any eye seen, O God, besides thee, how great things
thou hast prepared for him that waiteth for thee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:46">133:46</span></span> And it
shall be said: Who is this that cometh down from God in heaven with dyed
garments; yea, from the regions which are not known, clothed in his
glorious apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength?

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:47">133:47</span></span> And he
shall say: I am he who spake in righteousness, mighty to save.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:48">133:48</span></span> And the
Lord shall be red in his apparel, and his garments like him that
treadeth in the wine-vat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:49">133:49</span></span> And so
great shall be the glory of his presence that the sun shall hide his
face in shame, and the moon shall withhold its light, and the stars
shall be hurled from their places.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:50">133:50</span></span> And his
voice shall be heard: I have trodden the wine-press alone, and have
brought judgment upon all people; and none were with me;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:51">133:51</span></span> And I
have trampled them in my fury, and I did tread upon them in mine anger,
and their blood have I sprinkled upon my garments, and stained all my
raiment; for this was the day of vengeance which was in my heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:52">133:52</span></span> And now
the year of my redeemed is come; and they shall mention the loving
kindness of their Lord, and all that he has bestowed upon them according
to his goodness, and according to his loving kindness, forever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:53">133:53</span></span> In all
their afflictions he was afflicted. And the angel of his presence saved
them; and in his love, and in his pity, he redeemed them, and bore them,
and carried them all the days of old;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:54">133:54</span></span> Yea,
and Enoch also, and they who were with him; the prophets who were before
him; and Noah also, and they who were before him; and Moses also, and
they who were before him;

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:55">133:55</span></span> And
from Moses to Elijah, and from Elijah to John, who were with Christ in
his resurrection, and the holy apostles, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
shall be in the presence of the Lamb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:56">133:56</span></span> And the
graves of the saints shall be opened; and they shall come forth and
stand on the right hand of the Lamb, when he shall stand upon Mount
Zion, and upon the holy city, the New Jerusalem; and they shall sing the
song of the Lamb, day and night forever and ever.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:57">133:57</span></span> And for
this cause, that men might be made partakers of the glories which were
to be revealed, the Lord sent forth the fulness of his gospel, his
everlasting covenant, reasoning in plainness and simplicity—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:58">133:58</span></span> To
prepare the weak for those things which are coming on the earth, and for
the Lord's errand in the day when the weak shall confound the wise, and
the little one become a strong nation, and two shall put their tens of
thousands to flight.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:59">133:59</span></span> And by
the weak things of the earth the Lord shall thrash the nations by the
power of his Spirit.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:60">133:60</span></span> And for
this cause these commandments were given; they were commanded to be kept
from the world in the day that they were given, but now are to go forth
unto all flesh—

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:61">133:61</span></span> And
this according to the mind and will of the Lord, who ruleth over all
flesh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:62">133:62</span></span> And
unto him that repenteth and sanctifieth himself before the Lord shall be
given eternal life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:63">133:63</span></span> And
upon them that hearken not to the voice of the Lord shall be fulfilled
that which was written by the prophet Moses, that they should be cut off
from among the people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:64">133:64</span></span> And
also that which was written by the prophet Malachi: For, behold, the day
cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all that
do wickedly, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn them
up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor
branch.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:65">133:65</span></span>
Wherefore, this shall be the answer of the Lord unto them:

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:66">133:66</span></span> In that
day when I came unto mine own, no man among you received me, and you
were driven out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:67">133:67</span></span> When I
called again there was none of you to answer; yet my arm was not
shortened at all that I could not redeem, neither my power to deliver.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:68">133:68</span></span> Behold,
at my rebuke I dry up the sea. I make the rivers a wilderness; their
fish stink, and die for thirst.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:69">133:69</span></span> I
clothe the heavens with blackness, and make sackcloth their covering.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:70">133:70</span></span> And
this shall ye have of my hand—ye shall lie down in sorrow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:71">133:71</span></span> Behold,
and lo, there are none to deliver you; for ye obeyed not my voice when I
called to you out of the heavens; ye believed not my servants, and when
they were sent unto you ye received them not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:72">133:72</span></span>
Wherefore, they sealed up the testimony and bound up the law, and ye
were delivered over unto darkness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:73">133:73</span></span> These
shall go away into outer darkness, where there is weeping, and wailing,
and gnashing of teeth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133:74">133:74</span></span> Behold
the Lord your God hath spoken it. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 134. A declaration of belief regarding governments and laws,
adopted at a general assembly of the Church, Kirtland, Ohio, August 17,
1835.](dc134)
