[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ida09)  [Next](ida11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGNEU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Atlantida (L'Atlantide)*, by Pierre Benoit, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

#### AWAKENING AT AHAGGAR

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> was broad daylight when I opened my
eyes. I thought at once of Morhange. I could not see him, but I heard
him, close by, giving little grunts of surprise.

I called to him. He ran to me.

"Then they didn't tie you up?" I asked.

"I beg your pardon. They did. But they did it badly; I managed to get
free."

"You might have untied me, too," I remarked crossly.

"What good would it have done? I should only have waked you up. And I
thought that your first word would be to call me. There, that's done."

I reeled as I tried to stand on my feet.

Morhange smiled.

"We might have spent the whole night smoking and drinking and not been
in a worse state," he said. "Anyhow, that Eg-Anteouen with his hasheesh
is a fine rascal."

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," I corrected.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

I rubbed my hand over my forehead.

"Where are we?"

"My dear boy," Morhange replied, "since I awakened from the
extraordinary nightmare which is mixed up with the smoky cave and the
lamp-lit stairway of the Arabian Nights, I have been going from surprise
to surprise, from confusion to confusion. Just look around you."

I rubbed my eyes and stared. Then I seized my friend's hand.

"Morhange," I begged, "tell me if we are still dreaming."

We were in a round room, perhaps fifty feet in diameter, and of about
the same height, lighted by a great window opening on a sky of intense
blue.

Swallows flew back and forth, outside, giving quick, joyous cries.

The floor, the incurving walls and the ceiling were of a kind of veined
marble like porphyry, panelled with a strange metal, paler than gold,
darker than silver, clouded just then by the early morning mist that
came in through the window in great puffs.

I staggered toward this window, drawn by the freshness of the breeze and
the sunlight which was chasing away my dreams, and I leaned my elbows on
the balustrade.

I could not restrain a cry of delight.

I was standing on a kind of balcony, cut into the

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

flank of a mountain, overhanging an abyss. Above me, blue sky; below
appeared a veritable earthly paradise hemmed in on all sides by
mountains that formed a continuous and impassable wall about it. A
garden lay spread out down there. The palm trees gently swayed their
great fronds. At their feet was a tangle of the smaller trees which grow
in an oasis under their protection: almonds, lemons, oranges, and many
others which I could not distinguish from that height. A broad blue
stream, fed by a waterfall, emptied into a charming lake, the waters of
which had the marvellous transparency which comes in high altitudes.
Great birds flew in circles over this green hollow; I could see in the
lake the red flash of a flamingo.

The peaks of the mountains which towered on all sides were completely
covered with snow.

The blue stream, the green palms, the golden fruit, and above it all,
the miraculous snow, all this bathed in that limpid air, gave such an
impression of beauty, of purity, that my poor human strength could no
longer stand the sight of it. I laid my forehead on the balustrade,
which, too, was covered with that heavenly snow, and began to cry like a
baby.

Morhange was behaving like another child. But he had awakened before I
had, and doubtless had had time to grasp, one by one, all these details
whose fantastic *ensemble* staggered me.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

He laid his hand on my shoulder and gently pulled me back into the room.

"You haven't seen anything yet," he said. "Look! Look!"

"Morhange!"

"Well, old man, what do you want me to do about it? Look!"

I had just realized that the strange room was furnished—God forgive
me—in the European fashion. There were indeed, here and there, round
leather Tuareg cushions, brightly colored blankets from Gafsa, rugs from
Kairouan, and Caramani hangings which, at that moment, I should have
dreaded to draw aside. But a half-open panel in the wall showed a
bookcase crowded with books. A whole row of photographs of masterpieces
of ancient art were hung on the walls. Finally there was a table almost
hidden under its heap of papers, pamphlets, books. I thought I should
collapse at seeing a recent number of the *Archaeological Review*.

I looked at Morhange. He was looking at me, and suddenly a mad laugh
seized us and doubled us up for a good minute.

"I do not know," Morhange finally managed to say, "whether or not we
shall regret some day our little excursion into Ahaggar. But admit, in
the meantime, that it promises to be rich in unexpected adventures. That
unforgettable guide who puts us to sleep just to distract us from the
unpleasantness of

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

caravan life and who lets me experience, in the best of good faith, the
far-famed delights of hasheesh: that fantastic night ride, and, to cap
the climax, this cave of a Nureddin who must have received the education
of the Athenian Bersot at the French *Ecole Normale*—all this is enough,
on my word, to upset the wits of the best balanced."

"What do I think, my poor friend? Why, just what you yourself think. I
don't understand it at all, not at all. What you politely call my
learning is not worth a cent. And why shouldn't I be all mixed up? This
living in caves amazes me. Pliny speaks of the natives living in caves,
seven days’ march southwest of the country of the Amantes, and twelve
days to the westward of the great Syrte. Herodotus says also that the
Garamentes used to go out in their chariots to hunt the cave-dwelling
Ethiopians. But here we are in Ahaggar, in the midst of the Targa
country, and the best authorities tell us that the Tuareg never have
been willing to live in caves. Duveyrier is precise on that point. And
what is this, I ask you, but a cave turned into a workroom, with
pictures of the Venus de Medici and the Apollo Sauroctone on the walls?
I tell you that it is enough to drive you mad."

And Morhange threw himself on a couch and began to roar with laughter
again.

"See," I said, "this is Latin."

I had picked up several scattered papers from the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

work-table in the middle of the room. Morhange took them from my hands
and devoured them greedily. His face expressed unbounded stupefaction.

"Stranger and stranger, my boy. Someone here is composing, with much
citation of texts, a dissertation on the Gorgon Islands: *de Gorgonum
insulis*. Medusa, according to him, was a Libyan savage who lived near
Lake Triton, our present Chott Melhrir, and it is there that Perseus . .
. Ah!"

Morhange's words choked in his throat. A sharp, shrill voice pierced the
immense room.

"Gentlemen, I beg you, let my papers alone." I turned toward the
newcomer.

One of the Caramani curtains was drawn aside, and the most unexpected of
persons came in. Resigned as we were to unexpected events, the
improbability of this sight exceeded anything our imaginations could
have devised.

On the threshold stood a little bald-headed man with a pointed sallow
face half hidden by an enormous pair of green spectacles and a pepper
and salt beard. No shirt was visible, but an impressive broad red
cravat. He wore white trousers. Red leather slippers furnished the only
Oriental suggestion of his costume.

He wore, not without pride, the rosette of an officer of the Department
of Education.

He collected the papers which Morhange had dropped in his amazement,
counted them, arranged

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

them; then, casting a peevish glance at us, he struck a copper gong.

The portiere was raised again. A huge white Targa entered. I seemed to
recognize him as one of the genii of the cave. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)

"Ferradji," angrily demanded the little officer of the Department of
Education, "why were these gentlemen brought into the library?"

The Targa bowed respectfully.

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh came back sooner than we expected," he replied, "and
last night the embalmers had not yet finished. They brought them here in
the meantime," and he pointed to us.

"Very well, you may go," snapped the little man. Ferradji backed toward
the door. On the threshold, he stopped and spoke again:

"I was to remind you, sir, that dinner is served." "All right. Go
along."

And the little man seated himself at the desk and began to finger the
papers feverishly.

I do not know why, but a mad feeling of exasperation seized me. I walked
toward him.

"Sir," I said, "my friend and I do not know where we are nor who you
are. We can see only that you

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

are French, since you are wearing one of the highest honorary
decorations of our country. You may have made the same observation on
your part," I added, indicating the slender red ribbon which I wore on
my vest.

He looked at me in contemptuous surprise. "Well, sir?"

"Well, sir, the negro who just went out pronounced the name of
Cegheir-ben-Cheikh, the name of a brigand, a bandit, one of the
assassins of Colonel Flatters. Are you acquainted with that detail,
sir?"

The little man surveyed me coldly and shrugged his shoulders.

"Certainly. But what difference do you suppose that makes to me?"

"What!" I cried, beside myself with rage. "Who are you, anyway?"

"Sir," said the little old man with comical dignity, turning to
Morhange, "I call you to witness the strange manners of your companion.
I am here in my own house and I do not allow . . ."

"You must excuse my comrade, sir," said Morhange, stepping forward. "He
is not a man of letters, as you are. These young lieutenants are
hot-headed, you know. And besides, you can understand why both of us are
not as calm as might be desired."

I was furious and on the point of disavowing these strangely humble
words of Morhange. But a glance

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

showed me that there was as much irony as surprise in his expression.

"I know indeed that most officers are brutes," grumbled the little old
man. "But that is no reason. . ."

"I am only an officer myself," Morhange went on, in an even humbler
tone, "and if ever I have been sensible to the intellectual inferiority
of that class, I assure you that it was just now in glancing—I beg your
pardon for having taken the liberty to do so in glancing over the
learned pages which you devote to the passionate story of Medusa,
according to Procles of Carthage, cited by Pausanias."

A laughable surprise spread over the features of the little old man. He
hastily wiped his spectacles. "What!" he finally cried.

"It is indeed unfortunate, in this matter," Morhange continued
imperturbably, "that we are not in possession of the curious
dissertation devoted to this burning question by Statius Sebosus, a work
which we know only through Pliny and which . . ."

"You know Statius Sebosus?"

"And which my master, the geographer Berlioux . . ."

"You knew Berlioux—you were his pupil?" stammered the little man with
the decoration.

"I have had that honor," replied Morhange, very coldly.

"But, but, sir, then you have heard mentioned, you

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

are familiar with the question, the problem of Atlantis?"

"Indeed I am not unacquainted with the works of Lagneau, Ploix, Arbois
de Jubainville," said Morhange frigidly.

"My God!" The little man was going through extraordinary contortions.
"Sir—Captain, how happy I am, how many excuses. . . ."

Just then, the portiére was raised. Ferradji appeared again.

"Sir, they want me to tell you that unless you come, they will begin
without you."

"I am coming, I am coming. Say, Ferradji, that we will be there in a
moment. Why, sir, if I had foreseen . . . It is extraordinary . . . to
find an officer who knows Proclés of Carthage and Arbois de Jubainville.
Again . . . But I must introduce myself. I am Etienne Le Mesge, Fellow
of the University."

"Captain Morhange," said my companion. I stepped forward in my turn.

"Lieutenant de Saint-Avit. It is a fact, sir, that I am very likely to
confuse Arbois of Carthage with Proclés de Jubainville. Later, I shall
have to see about filling up those gaps. But just now, I should like to
know where we are, if we are free, and if not, what occult power holds
us. You have the appearance, sir, of being sufficiently at home in this
house to be able to enlighten us upon this point,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

which I must confess, I weakly consider of the first importance."

M. Le Mesge looked at me. A rather malevolent smile twitched the corners
of his mouth. He opened his lips. . . .

A gong sounded impatiently.

"In good time, gentlemen, I will tell you. I will explain everything. .
. . But now you see that we must hurry. It is time for lunch and our
fellow diners will get tired of waiting."

"Our fellow diners?"

"There are two of them," M. Le Mesge explained. "We three constitute the
European personnel of the house, that is, the fixed personnel," he
seemed to feel obliged to add, with his disquieting smile. "Two strange
fellows, gentlemen, with whom, doubtless, you will care to have as
little to do as possible. One is a churchman, narrow-minded, though a
Protestant. The other is a man of the world gone astray, an old fool."

"Pardon," I said, "but it must have been he whom I heard last night. He
was gambling: with you and the minister, doubtless?"

M. Le Mesge made a gesture of offended dignity.

"The idea! With me, sir? It is with the Tuareg that he plays. He teaches
them every game imaginable. There, that is he who is striking the gong
to hurry us up. It is half past nine, and the *Salle de Trente et
Quarante* opens at ten o'clock. Let us

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

hurry. I suppose that anyway you will not be averse to a little
refreshment."

"Indeed we shall not refuse," Morhange replied.

We followed M. Le Mesge along a long winding corridor with frequent
steps. The passage was dark. But at intervals rose-colored night lights
and incense burners were placed in niches cut into the solid rock. The
passionate Oriental scents perfumed the darkness and contrasted
strangely with the cold air of the snowy peaks.

From time to time, a white Targa, mute and expressionless as a phantom,
would pass us and we would hear the clatter of his slippers die away
behind us.

M. Le Mesge stopped before a heavy door covered with the same pale metal
which I had noticed on the walls of the library. He opened it and stood
aside to let us pass.

Although the dining room which we entered had little in common with
European dining rooms, I have known many which might have envied its
comfort. Like the library, it was lighted by a great window. But I
noticed that it had an outside exposure, while that of the library
overlooked the garden in the center of the crown of mountains.

No center table and none of those barbaric pieces of furniture that we
call chairs. But a great number of buffet tables of gilded wood, like
those of Venice, heavy hangings of dull and subdued colors, and
cushions,

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tuareg or
Tunisian. In the center was a huge mat on which a feast was placed in
finely woven baskets among silver pitchers and copper basins filled with
perfumed water. The sight of it filled me with childish satisfaction.

M. Le Mesge stepped forward and introduced us to the two persons who
already had taken their places on the mat.

"Mr. Spardek," he said; and by that simple phrase I understood how far
our host placed himself above vain human titles.

The Reverend Mr. Spardek, of Manchester, bowed reservedly and asked our
permission to keep on his tall, wide-brimmed hat. He was a dry, cold
man, tall and thin. He ate in pious sadness, enormously.

"Monsieur Bielowsky," said M. Le Mesge, introducing us to the second
guest.

"Count Casimir Bielowsky, Hetman of Jitomir," the latter corrected with
perfect good humor as he stood up to shake hands.

I felt at once a certain liking for the Hetman of Jitomir who was a
perfect example of an old beau. His chocolate-coloured hair was parted
in the center (later I found out that the Hetman dyed it with a
concoction of *khol*) . He had magnificent whiskers, also
chocolate-coloured, in the style of the Emperor Francis Joseph. His nose
was undeniably a little red, but so fine, so aristocratic. His hands
were

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

marvelous. It took some thought to place the date of the style of the
count's costume, bottle green with yellow facings, ornamented with a
huge seal of silver and enamel. The recollection of a portrait of the
Duke de Morny made me decide on 1860 or 1862; and the further chapters
of this story will show that I was not far wrong.

The count made me sit down beside him. One of his first questions was to
demand if I ever cut fives. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

"That depends on how I feel," I replied.

"Well said. I have not done so since 1866. I swore off. A row. The devil
of a party. One day at Walewski's. I cut fives. Naturally I wasn't
worrying any. The other had a four. 'Idiot!' cried the little Baron de
Chaux Gisseux who was laying staggering sums on my table. I hurled a
bottle of champagne at his head. He ducked. It was Marshal Baillant who
got the bottle. A scene! The matter was fixed up because we were both
Free Masons. The Emperor made me promise not to cut fives again. I have
kept my promise. But there are moments when it is hard. . . ."

He added in a voice steeped in melancholy:

"Try a little of this Ahaggar, 1880. Excellent vintage. It is I,
Lieutenant, who instructed these people in the uses of the juice of the
vine. The vine of the palm trees is very good when it is properly
fermented, but it gets insipid in the long run."

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

It was powerful, that Ahaggar 1880. We sipped it from large silver
goblets. It was fresh as Rhine wine, dry as the wine of the Hermitage.
And then, suddenly, it brought back recollections of the burning wines
of Portugal; it seemed sweet, fruity, an admirable wine, I tell you.

That wine crowned the most perfect of luncheons. There were few meats,
to be sure; but those few were remarkably seasoned. Profusion of cakes,
pancakes served with honey, fragrant fritters, cheese-cakes of sour milk
and dates. And everywhere, in great enamel platters or wicker jars,
fruit, masses of fruit, figs, dates, pistachios, jujubes, pomegranates,
apricots, huge bunches of grapes, larger than those which bent the
shoulders of the Hebrews in the land of Canaan, heavy watermelons cut in
two, showing their moist, red pulp and their rows of black seeds.

I had scarcely finished one of these beautiful iced fruits, when M. Le
Mesge rose.

"Gentlemen, if you are ready," he said to Morhange and me.

"Get away from that old dotard as soon as you can," whispered the Hetman
of Jitomir to me. "The party of *Trente et Quarante* will begin soon.
You shall see. You shall see. We go it even harder than at Cora
Pearl's."

"Gentlemen," repeated M. Le Mesge in his dry tone.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

We followed him. When the three of us were back again in the library, he
said, addressing me:

"You, sir, asked a little while ago what occult power holds you here.
Your manner was threatening, and I should have refused to comply had it
not been for your friend, whose knowledge enables him to appreciate
better than you the value of the revelations I am about to make to you."

He touched a spring in the side of the wall. A cupboard appeared,
stuffed with books. He took one.

"You are both of you," continued M. Le Mesge, "in the power of a woman.
This woman, the sultaness, the queen, the absolute sovereign of Ahaggar,
is called Antinea. Don't start, M. Morhange, you will soon understand."

He opened the book and read this sentence:

"'I must warn you before I take up the subject matter: do not be
surprised to hear me call the barbarians by Greek names.'

'What is that book?" stammered Morhange, whose pallor terrified me.

"This book," M. Le Mesge replied very slowly, weighing his words, with
an extraordinary expression of triumph, "is the greatest, the most
beautiful, the most secret, of the dialogues of Plato; it is the Critias
of Atlantis."

"The Critias? But it is unfinished," murmured Morhange.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

"It is unfinished in France, in Europe, everywhere else," said M. Le
Mesge, "but it is finished here. Look for yourself at this copy."

"But what connection," repeated Morhange, while his eyes traveled avidly
over the pages, "what connection can there be between this dialogue,
complete,—yes, it seems to me complete—what connection with this woman,
Antinea? Why should it be in her possession?"

"Because," replied the little man imperturbably, "this book is her
patent of nobility, her *Almanach de Gotha*, in a sense, do you
understand? Because it established her prodigious genealogy: because she
is. . ."

"Because she is?" repeated Morhange.

"Because she is the grand daughter of Neptune, the last descendant of
the Atlantides."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[119:1](ida10.htm#fr_8) The negro serfs among the
Tuareg are generally called "white Tuareg." While the nobles are clad in
blue cotton robes, the serfs wear white robes, hence their name of
"white Tuareg." See, in this connection, Duveyrier: *les Tuareg du
Nord*, page 292. (Note by M. Leroux.)

<span id="fn_9"></span>[126:1](ida10.htm#fr_9) *Tirer à cinq*, a card
game played only for very high stakes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Atlantis](ida11)
