[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ida20)  [Next](ida22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGNEU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Atlantida (L'Atlantide)*, by Pierre Benoit, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

### CHAPTER XIX

#### THE TANEZRUFT

<span class="smallcaps">During</span> the first hour of our flight, the
great mehari of Cegheir-ben-Cheikh carried us at a mad pace. We covered
at least five leagues. With fixed eyes, I guided the beast toward the
gour which the Targa had pointed out, its ridge becoming higher and
higher against the paling sky.

The speed caused a little breeze to whistle in our ears. Great tufts of
*retem*, like fleshless skeletons, were tossed to right and left.

I heard the voice of Tanit-Zerga whispering:

"Stop the camel."

At first I did not understand.

"Stop him," she repeated.

Her hand pulled sharply at my right arm.

I obeyed. The camel slackened his pace with very bad grace.

"Listen," she said.

At first I heard nothing. Then a very slight noise, a dry rustling
behind us.

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

"Stop the camel," Tanit-Zerga commanded. "It is not worth while to make
him kneel."

A little gray creature bounded on the camel. The mehari set out again at
his best speed.

"Let him go," said Tanit-Zerga. "Galé has jumped on."

I felt a tuft of bristly hair under my arm. The mongoose had followed
our footsteps and rejoined us. I heard the quick panting of the brave
little creature becoming gradually slower and slower.

"I am happy," murmured Tanit-Zerga.

 

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had not been mistaken. We reached the *gour* as the
sun rose. I looked back. The Atakor was nothing more than a monstrous
chaos amid the night mists which trailed the dawn. It was no longer
possible to pick out from among the nameless peaks, the one on which
Antinea was still weaving her passionate plots.

You know what the Tanezruft is, the "plain of plains," abandoned,
uninhabitable, the country of hunger and thirst. We were then starting
on the part of the desert which Duveyrier calls the Tasili of the south,
and which figures on the maps of the Minister of Public Works under this
attractive title: "Rocky plateau, without water, without vegetation,
inhospitable for man and beast."

Nothing, unless parts of the Kalahari, is more frightful than this rocky
desert. Oh, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

did not exaggerate in saying that no one would dream of following us
into that country.

Great patches of oblivion still refused to clear away. Memories chased
each other incoherently about my head. A sentence came back to me
textually: "It seemed to Dick that he had never, since the beginning of
original darkness, done anything at all save jolt through the air." I
gave a little laugh. "In the last few hours," I thought, "I have been
heaping up literary situations. A while ago, a hundred feet above the
ground, I was Fabrice of *La Chartreuse de Parme* beside his Italian
dungeon. Now, here on my camel, I am Dick of *The Light That Failed*,
crossing the desert to meet his companions in arms." I chuckled again;
then shuddered. I thought of the preceding night, of the Orestes of
*Andromaque* who agreed to sacrifice Pyrrhus. A literary situation
indeed. . . .

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had reckoned eight days to get to the wooded country
of the Awellimiden, forerunners of the grassy steppes of the Soudan. He
knew well the worth of his beast. Tanit-Zerga had suddenly given him a
name, *El Mellen*, the white one, for the magnificent mehari had an
almost spotless coat. Once he went two days without eating, merely
picking up here and there a branch of an acacia tree whose hideous white
spines, four inches long, filled me with fear for our friend's
oesophagus. The wells marked out by Cegheir-ben-Cheikh were

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

indeed at the indicated spots, but we found nothing in them but a
burning yellow mud. It was enough for the camel, enough so that at the
end of the fifth day, thanks to prodigious self-control, we had used up
only one of our two water skins. Then we believed ourselves safe.

Near one of these muddy puddles, I succeeded that day in shooting down a
little straight-horned desert gazelle. Tanit-Zerga skinned the beast and
we regaled ourselves with a delicious haunch. Meantime, little Galé, who
never ceased prying about the cracks in the rocks during our mid-day
halts in the heat, discovered an *ourane*, a sand crocodile, five feet
long, and made short work of breaking his neck. She ate so much she
could not budge. It cost us a pint of water to help her digestion. We
gave it with good grace, for we were happy. Tanit-Zerga did not say so,
but her joy at knowing that I was thinking no more of the woman in the
gold diadem and the emeralds was apparent. And really, during those
days, I hardly thought of her. I thought only of the torrid heat to be
avoided, of the water skins which, if you wished to drink fresh water,
had to be left for an hour in a cleft in the rocks; of the intense joy
which seized you when you raised to your lips a leather goblet brimming
with that life-saving water. . . . I can say this with authority, with
good authority, indeed; passion, spiritual or physical, is a thing for
those who have eaten and drunk and rested.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

It was five o'clock in the afternoon. The frightful heat was slackening.
We had left a kind of rocky crevice where we had had a little nap.
Seated on a huge rock, we were watching the reddening west.

I spread out the roll of paper on which Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had marked
the stages of our journey as far as the road from the Soudan. I realized
again with joy that his itinerary was exact and that I had followed it
scrupulously.

"The evening of the day after to-morrow," I said, "we shall be setting
out on the stage which will take us, by the next dawn, to the waters at
Telemsi. Once there, we shall not have to worry any more about water."

Tanit-Zerga's eyes danced in her thin face.

"And Gâo?" she asked.

"We will be only a week from the Niger. And Cegheir-ben-Cheikh said that
at Telemsi, one reached a road overhung with mimosa."

"I know the mimosa," she said. "They are the little yellow balls that
melt in your hand. But I like the caper flowers better. You will come
with me to Gâo. My father, Sonni-Askia, was killed, as I told you, by
the Awellimiden. But my people must have rebuilt the villages. They are
used to that. You will see how you will be received."

"I will go, Tanit-Zerga, I promise you. But you also, you must promise
me . . ."

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

"What? Oh, I guess. You must take me for a little fool if you believe me
capable of speaking of things which might make trouble for my friend."

She looked at me as she spoke. Privation and great fatigue had chiselled
the brown face where her great eyes shone. . . . Since then, I have had
time to assemble the maps and compasses, and to fix forever the spot
where, for the first time, I understood the beauty of Tanit-Zerga's
eyes.

There was a deep silence between us. It was she who broke it.

"Night is coming. We must eat so as to leave as soon as possible."

She stood up and went toward the rocks.

Almost immediately, I heard her calling in an anguished voice that sent
a chill through me.

"Come! Oh, come see!"

With a bound, I was at her side.

"The camel," she murmured. "The camel!"

I looked, and a deadly shudder seized me.

Stretched out at full length, on the other side of the rocks, his pale
flanks knotted up by convulsive spasms, *El Mellen* lay in anguish.

I need not say that we rushed to him in feverish haste. Of what *El
Mellen* was dying, I did not know, I never have known. All the mehara
are that way. They are at once the most enduring and the most delicate
of beasts. They will travel for six months across the most frightful
deserts, with

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

little food, without water, and seem only the better for it. Then, one
day when nothing is the matter, they stretch out and give you the slip
with disconcerting ease.

When Tanit-Zerga and I saw that there was nothing more to do, we stood
there without a word, watching his slackening spasms. When he breathed
his last, we felt that our life, as well as his, had gone.

It was Tanit-Zerga who spoke first.

"How far are we from the Soudan road?" she asked.

"We are a hundred and twenty miles from the springs of Telemsi," I
replied. "We could make thirty miles by going toward Ifrouane, but the
wells are not marked on that route."

"Then we must walk toward the springs of Telemsi," she said. "A hundred
and twenty miles, that makes seven days?"

"Seven days at the least, Tanit-Zerga."

"How far is it to the first well?"

"Thirty-five miles."

The little girl's face contracted somewhat. But she braced up quickly.

"We must set out at once."

"Set out on foot, Tanit-Zerga!"

She stamped her foot. I marveled to see her so strong.

"We must go," she repeated. "We are going to

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

eat and drink and make Galé eat and drink, for we cannot carry all the
tins, and the water skin is so heavy that we should not get three miles
if we tried to carry it. We will put a little water in one of the tins
after emptying it through a little hole. That will be enough for
to-night's stage, which will be eighteen miles without water. To-morrow
we will set out for another eighteen miles and we will reach the wells
marked on the paper by Cegheir-ben-Cheikh."

"Oh," I murmured sadly, "if my shoulder were only not this way, I could
carry the water skin." "It is as it is," said Tanit-Zerga.

"You will take your carbine and two tins of meat. I shall take two more
and the one filled with water. Come. We must leave in an hour if we wish
to cover the eighteen miles. You know that when the sun is up, the rocks
are so hot we cannot walk."

I leave you to imagine in what sad silence we passed that hour which we
had begun so happily and confidently. Without the little girl, I believe
I should have seated myself upon a rock and waited. Galé only was happy.

"We must not let her eat too much," said Tanit-Zerga. "She would not be
able to follow us. And to-morrow she must work. If she catches another
*ourane*, it will be for us."

 

You have walked in the desert. You know how

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

terrible the first hours of the night are. When the moon comes up, huge
and yellow, a sharp dust seems to rise in suffocating clouds. You move
your jaws mechanically as if to crush the dust that finds its way into
your throat like fire. Then usually a kind of lassitude, of drowsiness,
follows. You walk without thinking. You forget where you are walking.
You remember only when you stumble. Of course you stumble often. But
anyway it is bearable. "The night is ending," you say, "and with it the
march. All in all, I am less tired than at the beginning." The night
ends, but then comes the most terrible hour of all. You are perishing of
thirst and shaking with cold. All the fatigue comes back at once. The
horrible breeze which precedes the dawn is no comfort. Quite the
contrary. Every time you stumble, you say, "The next misstep will be the
last."

That is what people feel and say even when they know that in a few hours
they will have a good rest with food and water.

I was suffering terribly. Every step jolted my poor shoulder. At one
time, I wanted to stop, to sit down. Then I looked at Tanit-Zerga. She
was walking ahead with her eyes almost closed. Her expression was an
indefinable one of mingled suffering and determination. I closed my own
eyes and went on.

Such was the first stage. At dawn we stopped in

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

a hollow in the rocks. Soon the heat forced us to rise to seek a deeper
one. Tanit-Zerga did not eat. Instead, she swallowed a little of her
half can of water. She lay drowsy all day. Galé ran about our rock
giving plaintive little cries.

I am not going to tell you about the second march. It was more horrible
than anything you can imagine. I suffered all that it is humanly
possible to suffer in the desert. But already I began to observe with
infinite pity that my man's strength was outlasting the nervous force of
my little companion. The poor child walked on without saying a word,
chewing feebly one corner of her *haik* which she had drawn over her
face. Galé followed.

The well toward which we were dragging ourselves was indicated on
Cegheir-ben-Cheikh's paper by the one word *Tissaririn*. *Tissaririn* is
the plural of *Tissarirt* and means "two isolated trees."

Day was dawning when finally I saw the two trees, two gum trees. Hardly
a league separated us from them. I gave a cry of joy.

"Courage, Tanit-Zerga, there is the well."

She drew her veil aside and I saw the poor anguished little face.

"So much the better," she murmured, "because otherwise . . ."

She could not even finish the sentence.

We finished the last half mile almost at a run.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

We already saw the hole, the opening of the well.

Finally we reached it.

It was empty.

 

It is a strange sensation to be dying of thirst. At first the suffering
is terrible. Then, gradually, it becomes less. You become partly
unconscious. Ridiculous little things about your life occur to you, fly
about you like mosquitoes. I began to remember my history composition
for the entrance examination of Saint-Cyr, "The Campaign of Marengo."
Obstinately I repeated to myself, "I have already said that the battery
unmasked by Marmont at the moment of Kellerman's charge included
eighteen pieces. . . . No, I remember now, it was only twelve pieces. I
am sure it was twelve pieces."

I kept on repeating:

"Twelve pieces."

Then I fell into a sort of coma.

I was recalled from it by feeling a red-hot iron on my forehead. I
opened my eyes. Tanit-Zerga was bending over me. It was her hand which
burnt so.

"Get up," she said. "We must go on."

"Go on, Tanit-Zerga i The desert is on fire. The sun is at the zenith.
It is noon."

"We must go on," she repeated.

Then I saw that she was delirious.

She was standing erect. Her *haik* had fallen to

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

the ground and little Galé, rolled up in a ball, was asleep on it.

Bareheaded, indifferent to the frightful sunlight, she kept repeating:

"We must go on."

A little sense came back to me.

"Cover your head, Tanit-Zerga, cover your head."

"Come," she repeated. "Let's go. Gâo is over there, not far away. I can
feel it. I want to see Gâo again."

I made her sit down beside me in the shadow of a rock. I realized that
all strength had left her. The wave of pity that swept over me, brought
back my senses.

"Gâo is just over there, isn't it?" she asked. Her gleaming eyes became
imploring.

"Yes, dear little girl. Gâo is there. But for God's sake lie down. The
sun is fearful."

"Oh, Gâo, Gâo!" she repeated. "I know very well that I shall see Gâo
again."

She sat up. Her fiery little hands gripped mine. "Listen. I must tell
you so you can understand how I know I shall see Gâo again."

"Tanit-Zerga, be quiet, my little girl, be quiet."

"No, I must tell you. A long time ago, on the bank of the river where
there is water, at Gâo, where my father was a prince, there was . . .
Well, one day, one feast day, there came from the interior

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

of the country an old magician, dressed in skins and feathers, with a
mask and a pointed head-dress, with castanets, and two serpents in a
bag. On the village square, where all our people formed in a circle, he
danced the *boussadilla*. I was in the first row, and because I had a
necklace of pink tourmaline, he quickly saw that I was the daughter of a
chief. So he spoke to me of the past, of the great Mandingue Empire over
which my grandfathers had ruled, of our enemies, the fierce Kountas, of
everything, and finally he said:

"'Have no fear, little girl.'

"Then he said again, 'Do not be afraid. Evil days may be in store for
you, but what does that matter? For one day you will see Gâo gleaming on
the horizon, no longer a servile Gâo reduced to the rank of a little
negro town, but the splendid Gâo of other days, the great capital of the
country of the blacks, Gâo reborn, with its mosque of seven towers and
fourteen cupolas of turquoise, with its houses with cool courts, its
fountains, its watered gardens, all blooming with great red and white
flowers. . . . That will be for you the hour of deliverance and of
royalty.'"

Tanit-Zerga was standing up. All about us, on our heads, the sun blazed
on the *hamada*, burning it white.

Suddenly the child stretched out her arms. She gave a terrible cry.

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

"Gâo! There is Gâo!"

I looked at her.

"Gâo," she repeated.. "Oh, I know it well! There are the trees and the
fountains, the cupolas and the towers, the palm trees, the great red and
white flowers. Gâo . . ."

Indeed, along the shimmering horizon rose a fantastic city with mighty
buildings that towered, tier on tier, until they formed a rainbow.
Wide-eyed, we stood and watched the terrible mirage quiver feverishly
before us.

"Gâo!" I cried. "Gâo!"

And almost immediately I uttered another cry, of sorrow and of horror.
Tanit-Zerga's little hand relaxed in mine. I had just time to catch the
child in my arms and hear her murmur as in a whisper:

"And then that will be the day of deliverance. The day of deliverance
and of royalty."

 

Several hours later I took the knife with which we had skinned the
desert gazelle and, in the sand at the foot of the rock where
Tanit-Zerga had given up her spirit, I made a little hollow where she
was to rest.

When everything was ready, I wanted to look once more at that dear
little face. Courage failed me for a moment. . . . Then I quickly drew
the haik over the brown face and laid the body of the child in the
hollow.

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

I had reckoned without Galé.

The eyes of the mongoose had not left me during the whole time that I
was about my sad duty. When she heard the first handfuls of sand fall on
the haik, she gave a sharp cry. I looked at her and saw her ready to
spring, her eyes darting fire.

"Galé!" I implored; and I tried to stroke her.

She bit my hand and then leapt into the grave and began to dig, throwing
the sand furiously aside.

I tried three times to chase her away. I felt that I should never finish
my task and that, even if I did, Galé would stay there and disinter the
body.

My carbine lay at my feet. A shot drew echoes from the immense empty
desert. A moment later, Galé also slept her last sleep, curled up, as I
so often had seen her, against the neck of her mistress.

When the surface showed nothing more than a little mound of trampled
sand, I rose staggering and started off aimlessly into the desert,
toward the south.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Circle Is Complete](ida22)
