<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](nop08)  [Next](nop10) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Numbers, Their Occult Power and Mystic Virtues*, by W. Wynn Westcott,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

### THE TRIAD. 3.

<span class="smallcaps">Photius</span> observes that the Triad is the
first odd number in energy, is the first perfect number, and is a middle
and analogy.

The Pythagoreans referred it to Physiology; it is the cause of all that
has the triple dimension.

It is also the cause of good counsel, intelligence, and knowledge, and
is a Mistress of Music, mistress also of Geometry, possesses authority
in whatever pertains to Astronomy and the nature and knowledge of the
heavenly bodies, connects and leads them into effects.

Every virtue also is suspended from it, and proceeds from it.

In Mythology it is referred by Nicomachus to:

1\. Saturn, Time, past, present, and future. 2. Latona. 3. The Horn of
Amalthea, the nurse of Jupiter. 4. Polyhymnia, among the Muses.

Number being more increased by multiplication than it is by addition,
the number 3 is, properly speaking, the first number, as neither the
Dyad nor Monad are so increased.

It is a "Middle and Analogy," because all comparisons consist of three
terms, at least; and analogies were called by the ancients "middles."

It was considered the Mistress of Geometry because the triangle is the
principal of Figures.

With. regard to the Heavenly bodies, the number Three is important;
there are 3 quaternions of the celestial signs, the fixed, the movable,
and the common.

In every Zodiacal sign also there are 3 faces, and 3

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

decans, and 3 Lords of their Triplicity; and among the planets there are
3 Fortunes and 3 Infortunes; according to the Chaldeans also, there are
3 Ethereal words prior to the sphere of our Fixed Stars.

On account of the perfection of the Triad, oracles were delivered from a
Tripod, as is related of the Oracle at Delphi.

With regard to Music, 3 is said to be Mistress, because Harmony contains
3 symphonies, the Diapason, the Diapente, and the Diatessaron.

Ezekiel xiv. v. 14 mentions 3 men who saw a creation, destruction, and a
restoration; Noah of the whole world, Daniel of the Jewish world
Jerusalem, and Job of his. personal world.

Note the Hindoo Trinity of Brahma, who consists of Brahma, Vishnu, and
Siva; Creator, Preserver, and Changer: in India each has still a special
sect of worshippers, who mark themselves with particular emblems; the
Vaishnavas are much the most numerous.

The living were of old called "the 3 times blessed" (the dead 4 times
blessed).

There were Three cities of Refuge on the East side of the Jordan: Bezer,
Ramoth Gilead, and Gozan; and Three on the West: Hebron, Shechem, and
Kedesh Naphtali.

Three Fates: Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos.

   „    Furies: Tisiphone, Alecto, Megæra.

   „    Graces: Euphrosyne, Aglaia, Thalia, says Hesiod.

   „    Judges of Hades: Minos, Æacus, Rhadamanthus.

   „    Horæ: Hesiod says they were Eunomia (Order), Dike (Justice),
Eirene (Peace).

Jupiter's thunder is "triformis." Hecate is always called "triple."

Neptune's spear is a trident, and so has Siva the Trisula.

Pluto's dog Cerberus had 3 heads.

There were Three founders of the Roman Empire: Romulus, B.C. 753,
Camillus, B.C. 389, expelled the Gauls; and Caius Marius, B.C. 102, who
overthrew the hordes of Cambrians and Teutons.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

The Jewish Rabbis say that the Sword of Death has 3 drops of Gall, one
drops in the mouth and the man dies, from the second comes the pallor of
death, and the third turns the carcase to dust. See Purchas, "The
Pilgrimage," 1613.

A letter Yod within an equilateral triangle was a symbol of the
ineffable name Jehovah and was so used by the Jews. The moderns have
pointed out that this form suggests the idea that they knew something of
a Triune God. Other monograms of Jehovah were also triple; thus 3 rays,
and the Shin, and three yods in a triangle.

Under the number 3 also we may in passing mention the Royal Arch sign,
the "Triple Tau," three T's united: the manner of its explanation, and
the ideas which it represents, are not fit matters for description in
his work. Note also 3 stones of the arch, 3 Principals and 3 Sojourners;
3 Veils; and in the Craft Lodges, 3 officers, 3 degrees, 3
perambulations.

In the Roman Cultus, the number 3 is of constant occurrence, as for
example see Virgil, Eclogue 8, The Pharmaceutria; the priests used a
cord of 3 coloured strands, and an image was carried 3 times round an
altar.

"Terna tibi hæc primum triplici diversa colore."

The Druids also paid a constant respect to this number; and even their
poems are noted as being composed in Triads. It is not necessary here to
enlarge upon the transcendent importance of the Christian Trinity. In
old paintings we often see a Trinity of Jesus with John and Mary.

In the "Timæus" of Plato, the Divine Triad is called Theos—God,
Logos—The Word, and Psyche—the Soul. Indeed it is impossible to study
any single system of worship throughout the world, without being struck
by the peculiar persistence of the triple number in regard to divinity;
whether as a group of deities, a triformed or 3-headed god, a Mysterious
Triunity, a deity of 3 powers, or a family relationship of 3 Persons,
such as the Father, Mother and Son of the Egyptians, Osiris, Isis and
Horus.

And again in the various faiths we see the chief Dignity

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

given in turn to each person of the Triad: some rejoice in the
patriarchal Unity, some in the greater glory of the Son, and others
again lavish all their adoration on the Great Mother; even in trinities
of coequal males, each has his own special worshippers; note this
especially among the Hindoos, where for example the followers of Vishnu
are called Vaishnavas: to complicate matters too, in this case each
deity has his female potency or sakti, and these also have their own
adherents.

Under this notice of the Triad we may refer to the emblem of the Isle of
Man, three legs united at the hips; this is supposed to have been
derived from Sicilian Mariners at an early date, for the same emblem is
found at Palermo in Sicily, and this design is there to be seen on an
old public building. Sicily was anciently named Trinacria, from its
three promontories.

Three is a notable number in the mythology of the Norseman: the great
Ash-tree Yggdrasil supported the world; it had three roots; one extended
into Asgard, the abode of the Gods; one into Jotenheim, the home of the
Giants, and the third into Nifleheim, the region of the Unknown. The
three Norns (Fates) attend to the root in Asgard: they were Urda—the
past; Verdandi—the present; and Skulda—the future.

 

The Talmuds are crowded with quaint conceits concerning the Triad, and
many are very curious.

The ancient Hebrews said there are three night watches, in the first the
ass brays, in the second the dog barks, in the third the mother suckles
her infant and converses with her husband.

He who three times daily repeats the 114th Psalm is sure of future
happiness.

Three precious gifts were given to the Jews; the Law of Moses, the Land
of Israel, and Paradise.

In three sorts of dreams there is truth; the last dream of the morning,
the dream which is also dreamed by a neighbour, and a dream twice
repeated.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

Three things calm a man; melody, scenery and sweet scent: and three
things improve a man; a fine house, a handsome wife, and good furniture.

He who is born on the Third day of the week will be rich and amorous.

Three despise their fellows; cooks, fortune-tellers and dogs.

Three love their fellows; proselytes, slaves and ravens.

Three persons live a life which is no life; he who lives at another
man's table, he who is ruled by his wife, and he who is incapable from
bodily affliction.

Orthodox Jews were very particular about the cuttings from the nails; a
pious man buries them, an orderly man burns them, but he who throws them
away is wicked; for if a woman step over them, mischance may follow.
Moed Katon, 18. 1. The nails should be trimmed on a Friday and never on
a Thursday.

There are three keys which God keeps to himself, and which no man can
gain nor use; the key of life, the key of rain and the key of the
resuscitation of the dead. Taanith, 2; 1 and 2.

The Jewish butcher of Kosher meat must use three knives; one to
slaughter the animal, another to cut it up, and a third to remove the
suet which was unlawful food; as pork is.

Three acolytes must attend the High Priest when he went in to worship;
one at his right, one at his left, and one had to hold up the gems on
the train of his vestment.

There are three parts of a man. The father gives the white parts, bones,
nails, brain and the whites of the eyes; the mother gives the red parts,
skin, flesh, etc.: while God gives the breath, soul, mind and senses.

The Sanhedrim could order as a punishment three degrees of
Excommunication—separation for an undefined time, exclusion for 60 days,
and execration for 30 days. Moed Katon, 17. 1.

The name of Adam is of three letters, A, D and M: these are the initials
of Adam, David and Messiah, and the Soul of the first passed to David
and then to the Messiah. Nishmath Chajim, 152. 2.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

The Soul of Cain passed to Jethro, his spirit into Korah, and his body
to an Egyptian. Yalkut Reuben, 9. 18. 24.

The Soul of Eve passed to Sarah, to Hannah the Shunamite, and then to
the widow of Zarepta. The Soul of Rahab passed to Heber the Kenite. The
Soul of Jael passed to Eli. Some Souls of pious Jews pass into the
persons of the Gentiles, so that they shall plead for Israel. Some evil
Hebrew souls have passed into animals, as that of Ishmael into the
she-ass of Balaam, and later into the ass of Rabbi Pinchas ben Yair. The
Soul of a slanderer may be transmigrated into a stone, so as to become
silent; and the Soul of a murderer into water. Emeh Hemelech, 153. 1. 2.

 

There are three causes of dropsy, depending on diseases of the breast,
the liver and the kidneys.

There are three forms of coma, that is insensibility; due to brain
injury, brain disease and brain poisoning.

There are three modes of death, beginning either at the brain, the lungs
or the heart. Bichat, Physiologie.

One Zodiacal Sign, that of Scorpio, has three emblems; the eagle in the
highest symbolism, the snake, and the scorpion in evil aspects only.

Astrologic Natal Figures are often erroneous by reason of the alleged
moment of birth being incorrect: there are three modes of Rectification,
two are ancient, the Animodar of Ptolemy and the Trutine of Hermes; and
there is one modern method, the Natal Epoch of W. R. Old.

In both the Old and the New Testaments we find the Day was divided into
three day watches and four night watches. The mediæval occultists
divided the days into Planetary hours, the scheme of alternation
occupied a week, 7 days × 24 hours= 168 hours, so 168 hours are
divisible among the Seven Planets, each day beginning with its own
different one; see Harleian MSS. 6483, and "The Herbal," Culpepper,
1814.

There is also another scheme in which the planets are related to a
six-hour period by Ragon and Blavatsky.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

Among the Brahmins there were three great Vedas; three Margas or ways of
salvation; three Gunas, the Satva, quiescence; Rajas, desire; and Tamas,
decay. Three Lokas, Swarga, Bhumi and Patala; heaven, earth and hell.
Three Jewels of wisdom, the Tri-ratnas; Buddha, Dharma and Sanga. The
three Fires being the three aspects of the human soul, Atma, Buddhi and
Manas. There were three prongs of the trident, and three eyes in the
forehead of Siva. Note also the 3-syllabled Holy Word <span
class="smallcaps">Aum</span>.

At the Oblation of the Elements in the Celtic Church, 3 drops of Wine
and 3 drops of water were poured into the chalice. In the present
Christian Church we notice 3 crossings with water at Baptism, 3 Creeds;
the Banns of Marriage are published 3 times; and a Bishop in benediction
makes the sign of the Cross 3 times.

In Roman Catholic churches, the Angelus Bell is rung three times a day,
a peal of 3 times 3 for the heavenly hierarchies of angels: Pope John
XXII. ordered that the faithful should say 3 *Aves* on each occasion.

In civil life the usher of a court 3 times repeats the warning Oyez,
Oyez, Oyez, which word means "hear" or "listen."

Note also the emblem of the Irish nation, the Shamrock, which has a
three-lobed leaf, the *Oxalis acefosella*.

The Trigrams of Fo-hi should be studied in "The Yi-King," a book of
Ancient China said to have been the production of King Wan and his son,
Kau. The great Confucius wrote a supplement to it. This book is a
mystical work on Symbolism referring to Cosmogony, to Man, and to the
purposes of life. The initial symbols are the Yang, male, and the Yin,
female. Then follow 8 trigrams, formed of emblematical lines; they
are:—khien, tui, li, chan, sien, khan, kan and kwan; each expressed by
figures of one long and two short lines. Some say that one Fo-Hi
invented these symbols. A later Mystic expanded the system into 64
figures, each composed of 6 lines of whole and half lines. With these
were associated two diagrams formed of circles, named the "River Horse,"
and the "Writing of

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lo": these will
repay the contemplation of modern occultists. Yang, male, is also
associated with Heaven, the Sun, Light and 25 the total of the odd
units. Yin, female, with the Moon, the Earth, darkness and the number
30, the total of the even numbers to ten. See "Sacred Books of the
East"; "The Yi-King."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Three and A Half, 3½](nop10)

</div>
