[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](spe03)  [Next](spe05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

\[*An asterisk is prefixed to all the newly written paragraphs
throughout the work*.\]

# INTRODUCTION

A GENERAL ARRANGEMENT OF THE POPULAR SPORTS, PASTIMES, AND MILITARY
GAMES, TOGETHER WITH THE VARIOUS SPECTACLES OF MIRTH OR SPLENDOUR,
EXHIBITED PUBLICLY OR PRIVATELY, FOR THE SAKE OF AMUSEMENT, AT DIFFERENT
PERIODS IN ENGLAND.

Object of the Work, to describe the Pastimes and trace their Origin--The
Romans in Britain--The Saxons--The Normans--Tournaments and
Jousts--Other Sports of the Nobility, and the Citizens and
Yeomen--Knightly Accomplishments--Esquireship--Military Sports
patronised by the Ladies--Decline of such Exercises and of
Chivalry--Military Exercises under Henry the Seventh and under Henry the
Eighth--Princely Exercises under James the First--Revival of
Learning--Recreations of the Sixteenth Century--Old Sports of the
Citizens of London--Modern Pastimes of the Londoners--Cotswold and
Cornish Games--Splendour of the ancient Kings and Nobility--Royal and
noble Entertainments--Civic Shows--"Merry England "--Setting out of
Pageants--Processions of Queen Mary and King Philip of Spain in
London--Chester Pageants--Public Shows of the Sixteenth Century--Queen
Elizabeth at Kenelworth Castle--The Master of the Revels--Rope-dancing,
tutored Animals, and Puppet-shows--Minstrelsy, Bell-ringing,
etc.--Baiting of Animals--Pastimes formerly on Sundays--Royal
Interference with them--Dice and Cards--Regulation of Gaming for Money
by Richard Cœur de Lion, etc.--Statutes against Cards, Ball-play,
etc.--Archery succeeded by Bowling--Modern Gambling--Ladies' Pastimes
Needle-work--Dancing and Chess-play--Ladies' Recreations in the
Fourteenth Century--The Author's Labours--Character of the Engravings.

OBJECT OF THE WORK.--In order to form a just estimation of the character
of any particular people, it is absolutely necessary to investigate the
Sports and Pastimes most generally prevalent among them. War, policy,
and other contingent circumstances, may effectually place men, at
different times, in different points of view, but, when we follow them
into their retirements, where no disguise is necessary, we are most
likely to see them in their true state, and may best judge of their
natural dispositions. Unfortunately, all the information that remains
respecting the ancient inhabitants of this island is derived from
foreign writers partially acquainted with them as a people, and totally
ignorant of their domestic customs and amusements; the silence,
therefore, of the contemporary historians on these important subjects
leaves us without the power of tracing them with the least degree of
certainty; and as it is my intention, in the following pages, to confine
myself as much as possible to positive intelligence, I shall studiously
endeavour to avoid all controversial and conjectural arguments. I mean
also to treat upon such pastimes only as have been practised in this
country; but as many of them originated on the continent, certain
digressions, by way of illustration, must necessarily occur; these,
however, I shall make it my business to render as concise as the nature
of the subject will permit them to be.

THE ROMANS IN BRITAIN.--We learn, from the imperfect hints of ancient

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

history, that, when the Romans first invaded Britain, her inhabitants
were a bold, active, and warlike people, tenacious of their native
liberty, and capable of bearing great fatigue; to which they were
probably inured by an early education, and constant pursuit of such
amusements as best suited the profession of a soldier; including
hunting, running, leaping, swimming, and other exertions requiring
strength and agility of body. Perhaps the skill which the natives of
Devonshire and Cornwall retain to the present day, in hurling and
wrestling, may properly be considered as a vestige of British activity.
After the Romans had conquered Britain, they impressed such of the young
men as were able to bear arms for foreign service, and enervated the
spirit of the people by the importation of their own luxurious manners
and habits; so that the latter part of the British history exhibits to
our view a slothful and effeminate race of men, totally divested of that
martial disposition, and love of freedom, which so strongly marked the
character of their pro-genitors; and their amusements, no doubt, partook
of the same weakness and puerility. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

THE SAXONS.--The arrival of the Saxons forms a new epoch in the annals
of this country. These military mercenaries came professedly to assist
the Britons against their incessant tormentors the Picts and the
Caledonians; but no sooner had they established their footing in the
land, than they invited more of their countrymen to join them, and
turning their arms against their wretched employers, became their most
dangerous and most inexorable enemies, and in process of time obtained
full possession of the largest and best part of the island; whence arose
a great change in the form of government, laws, manners, customs, and
habits of the people.

The sportive exercises and pastimes practised by the Saxons appear to
have been such as were common among the ancient northern nations; and
most of them consisted of robust exercises. In an old Chronicle of
Norway, <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) we find it recorded of Olaf
Tryggeson, a king of that country, that he was stronger and more nimble
than any man in his dominions. He could climb up the rock Smalserhorn,
and fix his shield upon the top of it; he could walk round the out-side
of a boat upon the oars, while the men were rowing; he could play with
three darts, alternately throwing them in the air, and always kept two
of them up, while he held the third in one of his hands; he was
ambidexter, and could

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

cast two darts at once; he excelled all the men of his time in shooting
with the bow; and he had no equal in swimming. In one achievement this
monarch was outdone by the Anglo-Saxon gleeman, represented on the
twenty-first plate, who adds an equal number of balls to those knives or
daggers. The Norman minstrel Tallefer, before the commencement of the
battle at Hastings, cast his lance into the air three times, and caught
it by the head in such a surprising manner, that the English thought it
was done by the power of enchantment. Another northern hero, whose name
was Kolson, boasts of nine accomplishments in which he was well skilled:
"I know," says he, "how to play at chess; I can engrave Runic letters; I
am expert at my book; I know how to handle the tools of the smith; I can
traverse the snow on skates of wood; I excel in shooting with the bow; I
use the oar with facility; I can sing to the harp; and I compose
verses." <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) The reader will, I doubt not,
anticipate me in my observation, that the acquirements of Kolson
indicate a much more liberal education than those of the Norwegian
monarch; it must, however, be observed, that Kolson lived in an age
posterior to him; and also, that he made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land,
which may probably account in great measure for his literary
qualifications. Yet, we are well assured that learning did not form any
prominent feature in the education of a young nobleman during the Saxon
government: it is notorious, that Alfred the Great was twelve years of
age before he learned to read; and that he owed his knowledge of letters
to accident, rather than to the intention of his tutors. A book adorned
with paintings in the hands of his mother attracted his notice, and he
expressed his desire to have it; she promised to comply with his request
on condition that he learned to read it, which it seems he did; and this
trifling incident laid the groundwork of his future scholarship. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4)

Indeed, it is not by any means surprising, under the Saxon government,
when the times were generally very turbulent, and the existence of peace
exceedingly precarious, and when the personal exertions of the opulent
were so often necessary for the preservation of their lives and
property, that such exercises as inured the body to fatigue, and biassed
the mind to military pursuits, should have constituted the chief part of
a young nobleman's education: accordingly, we find that hunting,
hawking, leaping, running, wrestling, casting of darts, and other
pastimes which necessarily required great exertions of bodily strength,
were taught them in their adolescence. These amusements engrossed the
whole of their attention, every one striving to excel his fellow; for
hardiness, strength, and valour, out-balanced, in the public estimation,
the accomplishments of the mind; and therefore literature, which
flourishes best in tranquillity and retirement, was considered as a
pursuit unworthy the notice of a soldier, and only requisite in the
gloomy recesses of the cloister.

Among the vices of the Anglo-Saxons may be reckoned their propensity to

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

gaming, and especially with the dice, which they derived from their
ancestors; for Tacitus <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) assures us that
the ancient Germans would not only hazard all their wealth, but even
stake their liberty, upon the turn of the dice; "and he who loses," says
the author, "submits to servitude, though younger and stronger than his
antagonist, and patiently permits himself to be bound, and sold in the
market; and this madness they dignify by the name of honour." Chess was
also a favourite game with the Saxons; and likewise backgammon, said to
have been invented about the tenth century. It appears moreover, that a
large portion of the night was appropriated to the pursuit of these
sedentary amusements. In the reign of Canute the Dane, this practice was
sanctioned by the example of royalty, and followed by the nobility.
Bishop Ætheric, having obtained admission to Canute about midnight upon
some urgent business, found the king engaged with his courtiers at play,
some at dice, and some at chess. <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) The
clergy, however, were prohibited from playing at games of chance, by the
ecclesiastical canons established in the reign of Edgar.

THE NORMANS.--The popular sports and pastimes, prevalent at the close of
the Saxon era, do not appear to have been subjected to any material
change by the coming of the Normans: it is true, indeed, that the elder
William and his immediate successors restricted the privileges of the
chase, and imposed great penalties on those who presumed to destroy the
game in the royal forests, without a proper licence. By these
restrictions the general practice of hunting was much confined, but by
no means prohibited in certain districts, and especially to persons of
opulence who possessed extensive territories of their own.

TOURNAMENTS AND JOUSTS.--Among the pastimes introduced by the Norman
nobility, none engaged the general attention more than the tournaments
and the jousts. The tournament, in its original institution, was a
martial conflict, in which the combatants engaged without any animosity,
merely to exhibit their strength and dexterity; but, at the same time,
engaged in great numbers to represent a battle. The joust was when two
knights, and no more, were opposed to each other at one time. These
amusements, in the middle ages, which may properly enough be dominated
the ages of chivalry, were in high repute among the nobility of Europe,
and produced in reality much of the pomp and gallantry that we find
recorded with poetical exaggeration in the legends of knight-errantry. I
met with a passage in a satirical poem among the Harleian MSS. of the
thirteenth century, <span id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7) which strongly
marks the prevalence of this taste in the times alluded to. It may be
thus rendered in English:

"If wealth, sir knight, perchance be thine,  
In tournaments you're bound to shine:  
Refuse--and all the world will swear  
You are not worth a rotten pear."

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

OTHER SPORTS OF THE NOBILITY, AND THE CITIZENS AND YEOMEN.--While the
principles of chivalry continued in fashion, the education of a nobleman
was confined to those principles, and every regulation necessary to
produce an accomplished knight was put into practice. In order fully to
investigate these particulars, we may refer to the romances of the
middle ages; and, generally speaking, dependence may be placed upon
their information. The authors of these fictitious histories never
looked beyond the customs of their own country; and whenever the subject
called for a representation of remote magnificence, they depicted such
scenes of splendour as were familiar to them: hence it is, that
Alexander the Great, in his legendary life, receives the education of a
Norman baron, and becomes expert in hawking, hunting, and other
amusements coincident with the time in which the writer lived. Our early
poets have fallen into the same kind of anachronism; and Chaucer
himself, in the Knight's Tale, speaking of the rich array and furniture
of the palace of Theseus, forgets that he was a Grecian prince of great
antiquity, and describes the large hall belonging to an English
nobleman, with the guests seated at table, probably as he had frequently
seen them, entertained with singing, dancing, and other acts of
minstrelsy, their hawks being placed upon perches over their heads, and
their hounds lying round about upon the pavement below. The two last
lines of the poem just referred to are peculiarly applicable to the
manners of the time in which the poet lived, when no man of consequence
travelled abroad without his hawk and his hounds. In the early
delineations, the nobility are frequently represented seated at table,
with their hawks upon their heads. Chaucer says,

"Ne what hawkes sytten on perchen above,  
Ne what houndes lyggen on the flour adoun."

\[paragraph continues\] The picture is perfect, when referred to his own
time; but bears not the least analogy to Athenian grandeur. In the
romance called *The Knight of the Swan*, it is said of Ydain, Duchess of
Roulyon, that she caused her three sons to be brought up in "all maner
of good operacyons, vertues, and maners; and when in their adolescence
they were somwhat comen to the age of strengthe, they," their tutors,
"began to practyse them in shootinge with their bow and arbelstre, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) to playe with the sword and buckeler, to
runne, to just, to playe with a poll-axe, and to wrestle; and they began
to bear harneys, to runne horses, and to approve them, as desyringe to
be good and faythful knightes to susteyne the faith of God." We are not,
however, to conceive that martial exercises in general were confined to
the education of young noblemen: the sons of citizens and yeomen had
also their sports resembling military combats. Those practised at an
early period by the young Londoners seem to have been

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

derived from the Romans; they consisted of various attacks and
evolutions performed on horseback, the youth being armed with shields
and pointless lances, resembling the ludus Trojæ, or Troy game,
described by Virgil. These amusements, according to Fitz Stephen, who
lived in the reign of Henry II., were appropriated to the season of
Lent; but at other times they exercised themselves with archery,
fighting with clubs and bucklers, and running at the quintain; and in
the winter, when the frost set in, they would go upon the ice, and run
against each other with poles, in imitation of lances, in a joust; and
frequently one or both-were beaten down, "not always without hurt; for
some break their arms, and some their legs; but youth," says my author,
"emulous of glory, seeks these exercises preparatory against the time
that war shall demand their presence." The like kind of pastimes, no
doubt, were practised by the young men in other parts of the kingdom.

KNIGHTLY ACCOMPLISHMENTS.--The mere management of arms, though
essentially requisite, was not sufficient of itself to form an
accomplished knight in the times of chivalry; it was necessary for him
to be endowed with beauty, as well as with strength and agility of body;
he ought to be skilled in music, to dance gracefully, to run with
swiftness, to excel in wrestling, to ride well, and to perform every
other exercise befitting his situation. To these were to be added
urbanity of manners, strict adherence to the truth, and invincible
courage. Hunting and hawking skilfully were also acquirements that he
was obliged to possess, and which were usually taught him as soon as he
was able to endure the fatigue that they required. Hence it is said of
Sir Tristram, a fictitious character held forth as the mirror of
chivalry in the romance entitled *The Death of Arthur*, that "he learned
to be an harper, passing all other, that there was none such called in
any countrey: and so in harping and on instruments of musike he applied
himself in his youth for to learne, and after as he growed in might and
strength he laboured ever in hunting and hawking, so that we read of no
gentlemen who more, or so, used himself therein; and he began good
measures of blowing blasts of venery, and chase, and of all manner of
vermains; and all these terms have we yet of hunting and hawking; and
therefore the book of venery, and of hawking and hunting, is called the
Boke of Sir Tristram." In a succeeding part of the same romance, King
Arthur thus addresses the knight: "For all manner of hunting thou
bearest the prize; and of all measures of blowing thou art the beginner,
and of all the termes of hunting and hawking thou art the
beginner." <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) We are also informed that
Sir Tristram had previously learned the language of France, knew all the
principles of courtly behaviour, and was skilful in the various
requisites of knighthood.

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Another ancient romance says of its hero, "He
every day was provyd in dauncyng and in songs that the ladies coulde
think were convenable for a nobleman to conne; but in every thinge he
passed all them that were there. The king for to assaie him, made justes
and turnies; and no man did so well as he, in runnyng, playing at the
pame, <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) shotyng, and castyng of the
barre, ne found he his maister." <span id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11)

ESQUIRESHIP.--The laws of chivalry required that every knight should
pass through two offices: the first was a page; and, at the age of
fourteen he was admitted an esquire. The office of the esquire consisted
of several departments; the esquire for the body, the esquire of the
chamber, the esquire of the stable, and the carving esquire; the latter
stood in the hall at dinner, carved the different dishes, and
distributed them to the guests. Several of the inferior officers had
also their respective esquires. <span id="fr_12"></span>[3](#fn_12)
Ipomydon, a king's son and heir, in the romance that bears his name,
written probably at the commencement of the fourteenth century, is
regularly taught the duties of an esquire, previous to his receiving the
honours of knighthood; and for this purpose his father committed him to
the care of a "learned and courteous knight called Sir ’Tholomew." Our
author speaks on this subject in the following manner:

"’Tholomew a clerke he toke,  
That taught the child uppon the boke  
Bothe to synge and to rede;  
And after he taught hym other dede.  
Afterward, to serve in halle  
Both to grete and to smalle;  
Before the kynge mete to kerve;  
Hye and low fayre to serve.  
Both of howndes and hawkis game,  
After, he taught hym all; and same,  
In sea, in feld, and eke in ryvere;  
In woode to chase the wild dere,  
And in feld to ryde a stede;  
That all men had joy of his dede." <span id="fr_13"></span>[4](#fn_13)

Here we find reading mentioned; which, however, does not appear to have
been of any great importance in the middle ages, and is left out in the
*Geste of King Horne*, another metrical romance, <span
id="fr_14"></span>[5](#fn_14) which seems to be rather more ancient than
the former. Young Horne is placed under the tuition of Athelbrus, the
king's steward, who is commanded to teach him the mysteries of hawking
and hunting, to play upon the harp,

"Ant toggen o’ the harpe  
With his nayles sharpe,"

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

to carve at the royal table, and to present the cup to the king when he
sat at meat, with every other service fitting for him to know. The
monarch concludes his injunctions with a repetition of the charge to
instruct him in singing and music:

"Tech him of harp and of song."

And the manner in which the king's carver performed the duties of his
office is well described in the poem denominated "The Squyer of Lowe
Degree." <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

"There he araied him in scarlet red,  
And set a chaplet upon his hedde;  
A belte about his sydes two,  
With brode barres to and fro;  
A horne about his necke he caste;  
And forth he went at the laste,  
To do his office in the halle  
Among the lordes both greate and small.  
He toke a white yeard in his hand;  
Before the kynge than gan he stande;  
And sone he set hym on his knee,  
And served the kynge ryght royally  
With deynty meates that were dere.--  
--And, when the squyer had done so,  
He served them all to and fro.  
Eche man hym loved in honeste,  
Hye and lowe in their degre;  
So dyd the kyng "--etc.

MILITARY SPORTS PATRONISED BY LADIES.--Tournaments and jousts were
usually exhibited at coronations, royal marriages, and other occasions
of solemnity where pomp and pageantry were thought to be requisite. Our
historians abound with details of these celebrated pastimes. The reader
is referred to Froissart, Hall, Holinshed, Stow, Grafton, etc., who are
all of them very diffuse upon this subject; and in the second volume of
the *Manners and Customs of the English* are several curious
representations of these military combats both on horseback and on foot.

One great reason, and perhaps the most cogent of any, why the nobility
of the middle ages, nay, and even princes and kings, delighted so much
in the practice of tilting with each other, is, that on such occasions
they made their appearance with prodigious splendour, and had the
opportunity of displaying their accomplishments to the greatest
advantage. The ladies also were proud of seeing their professed
champions engaged in these arduous conflicts; and, perhaps, a glove or
riband from the hand of a favourite female might have inspired the
receiver with as zealous a wish for conquest, as the abstracted love of
glory; though in general, I presume, both these ideas were united; for a
knight divested of gallantry would have been considered as a recreant,
and unworthy of his profession.

DECLINE OF MILITARY EXERCISES.--When the military enthusiasm which

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

so strongly characterised the middle ages had subsided, and chivalry was
on the decline, a prodigious change took place in the nurture and
manners of the nobility. Violent exercises requiring the exertions of
muscular strength grew out of fashion with persons of rank, and of
course were consigned to the amusement of the vulgar; and the education
of the former became proportionably more soft and delicate. This example
of the nobility was soon followed by persons of less consequence; and
the neglect of military exercises prevailed so generally, that the
interference of the legislature was thought necessary, to prevent its
influence from being universally diffused, and to correct the bias of
the common mind; for, the vulgar readily acquiesced with the relaxation
of meritorious exertions, and fell into the vices of the times,
resorting to such games and recreations as promoted idleness and
dissipation.

DECLINE OF CHIVALRY.--The romantic notions of chivalry appear to have
lost their vigour towards the conclusion of the fifteenth century,
especially in this country, where a continued series of intestine
commotions employed the exertions of every man of property, and real
battles afforded but little leisure to exercise the mockery of war. It
is true, indeed, that tilts and tournaments with other splendid
exhibitions of military skill, were occasionally exercised, and with
great brilliancy, so far as pomp and finery contribute to make them
attractive, till the end of the succeeding century. These splendid
pastimes were encouraged by the sanction of royalty, and this sanction
was perfectly political; on the one hand, it gratified the vanity of the
nobility, and, on the other, it amused the populace, who, being
delighted with such shows of grandeur, were thereby diverted from
reflecting too deeply upon the grievances they sustained. It is,
however, certain that the jousts and tournaments of the latter ages,
with all their pomp, possessed but little of the primitive spirit of
chivalry.

MILITARY EXERCISES UNDER HENRY VII.--Henry VII. patronised the gentlemen
and officers of his court in the practice of military exercises. The
following extract may serve as a specimen of the manner in which they
were appointed to be performed: "Whereas it ever hath bene of old
antiquitie used in this realme of most noble fame, for all lustye
gentlemen to passe the delectable season of summer after divers manner
and sondry fashions of disports, as in hunting the red and fallowe deer
with houndes, greyhoundes, and the bowe; also in hawking with hawkes of
the Tower; and other pastimes right convenyent which were to long here
to rehearse. And bycause it is well knowen, that in the months of Maie
and June, all such disports be not conveniently prest and redye to be
executed; wherefore, in eschewing of idleness, the ground of all vice,"
and to promote such exercises as "shall be honourable, and also
healthfull and profitable to the body," we "beseech your most noble
highness to permit two gentlemen, assosyatying to them two other
gentlemen to be their aides," by "your gracious licence, to furnish
certain articles concerning the feates of armes hereafter
ensuinge":--"In the first place; On the

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

xxij<sup>th</sup> daye of Maie, there shall be a grene tree sett up in
the lawnde of Grenwich parke; whereuppon shall hange, by a grene lace, a
Vergescu <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) Blanke, in which white
shield it shalbe lawfull for any gentleman that will annswear this
chalenge ensewing to subscribe his name.--Secondly; The said two
gentlemen, with their two aides, shalbe redye on the xxiij<sup>th</sup>
daie of Maie, being Thursdaye, and on Mondaye thence next ensewinge, and
so everye Thursday and Monday untill the xx<sup>th</sup> daye of June,
armed for the foote, to annswear all gentlemen commers, at the feate
called the Barriers, with the Casting-speare, and the Targett, and with
the bastard-sword, <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17) after the manner
following, that is to saie, from vj of the clocke in the forenoone till
sixt of the clocke in the afternoone during the tyme.--Thirdly; And the
said two gentlemen, with their two aiders, or one of them, shall be
there redye at the said place, the daye and dayes before rehearsed, to
deliver any of the gentlemen answeares of one cast with the speare
bedded with the morne, <span id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18) and seven
strokes with the sword, point and edge rebated, without close, or
griping one another with handes, upon paine of punishment as the judges
for the time being shall thinke requisite.--Fourthly; And it shall not
be lawfull to the challengers, nor to the answearers, with the bastard
sword to give or offer any foyne <span id="fr_19"></span>[4](#fn_19) to
his match, upon paine of like punishment.--Fifthly; The challengers
shall bringe into the fielde, the said daies and tymes, all manner of
weapons concerning the said feates, that is to saie, casting speares
bedded with mornes, and bastard swords poynt and edge rebated, and the
answerers to have the first choice." <span id="fr_20"></span>[5](#fn_20)

\* The Harleian MS. just cited contains accounts of the proclamation and
articles of a tilting to be held at the palace of Richmond on the birth
of the Princess Mary, daughter of Henry VIII.; of a joust at Grenwich in
1516; and of a "Justinge, Tournay, and Fightinge at Barrier holden at
the Palace of Westminster," in 1540. <span id="fr_21"></span>[6](#fn_21)

MILITARY EXERCISES UNDER HENRY VIII.--Henry VIII. not only countenanced
the practice of military pastimes by permitting them to be exercised
without restraint, but also endeavoured to make them fashionable by his
own example. Hall assures us, that, even after his accession to the
throne, he continued daily to amuse himself in archery, casting of the
bar, wrestling or dancing, and frequently in tilting, tournaying,
fighting at the barriers with swords, and battle-axes, and such like
martial recreations, in most of which there were few that could excel
him. His leisure time he spent in playing at the recorders, flute, and
virginals, in setting of songs, singing and making of ballads. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[7](#fn_22) He was also exceedingly fond of hunting,
hawking, and other sports of the field; and indeed his example so far
prevailed, that hunting, hawking, riding the

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

great horse, charging dexterously with the lance at the tilt, leaping,
and running, were necessary accomplishments of a man of fashion. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) The pursuits and amusements of a nobleman
are placed in a different point of view by an author of the succeeding
century; <span id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24) who, describing the person
and manners of Charles, Lord Mountjoy, regent of Ireland, in 1599, says,
"He delighted in study, in gardens, in riding on a pad to take the aire,
in playing at shovelboard, at cardes, and in reading of play-bookes for
recreation, and especially in fishing and fish-ponds, seldome using any
other exercises, and using these rightly as pastimes, only for a short
and convenient time, and with great variety of change from one to the
other." The game of shovelboard, though now considered as exceedingly
vulgar, and practised by the lower classes of the people, was formerly
in great repute among the nobility and gentry; and few of their mansions
were without a shovelboard, which was a fashionable piece of furniture.
The great hall was usually the place for its reception.

PRINCELY EXERCISES UNDER JAMES I.--We are by no means in the dark
respecting the education of the nobility in the reign of James I.; we
have, from that monarch's own hand, a set of rules for the nurture and
conduct of an heir apparent to the throne, addressed to his eldest son
Henry, prince of Wales. From the third book of this remarkable
publication, entitled "ΒΑΣΙΛΙΟΚΟΝ ΔΩΡΟΝ, or, a Kinge's Christian Dutie
towards God," I shall select such parts as respect the recreations said
to be proper for the pursuit of a nobleman, without presuming to make
any alteration in the diction of the royal author.

"Certainly," he says, "bodily exercises and games are very commendable,
as well for bannishing of idleness, the mother of all vice; as for
making the body able and durable for travell, which is very necessarie
for a king. But from this court I debarre all rough and violent
exercises; as the foote-ball, meeter for lameing, than making able, the
users thereof; as likewise such tumbling trickes as only serve for
comœdians and balladines to win their bread with: but the exercises that
I would have you to use, although but moderately, not making a craft of
them, are, running, leaping, wrestling, fencing, dancing, and playing at
the caitch, or tennise, archerie, palle-malle, and such like other fair
and pleasant field-games. And the honourablest and most recommendable
games that yee can use on horseback; for, it becometh a prince best of
any man to be a faire and good horseman: use, therefore, to ride and
danton great and courageous horses;--and especially use such games on
horseback as may teach you to handle your arms thereon, such as the
tilt, the ring, and low-riding for handling of your sword.

"I cannot omit heere the hunting, namely, with running houndes, which is
the most honourable and noblest sort thereof; for it is a theivish forme
of hunting to shoote with gunnes and bowes; and greyhound hunting is not
so martial a game.

"As for hawkinge, I condemn it not; but I must praise it more sparingly,

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

because it neither resembleth the warres so neere as hunting doeth in
making a man hardie and skilfully ridden in all grounds, and is more
uncertain and subject to mischances; and, which is worst of all, is
there through an extreme stirrer up of the passions.

"As for sitting, or house pastimes--since they may at times supply the
roome which, being emptie, would be patent to pernicious idleness--I
will not therefore agree with the curiositie of some learned men of our
age in forbidding cardes, dice, and such like games of hazard: when it
is foule and stormie weather, then I say, may ye lawfully play at the
cardes or tables; for, as to diceing, I think it becometh best deboshed
souldiers to play at on the heads of their drums, being only ruled by
hazard, and subject to knavish cogging; and as for the chesse, I think
it over-fond, because it is over-wise and philosophicke a folly."

His majesty concludes this subject with the following good advice to his
son: "Beware in making your sporters your councellors, and delight not
to keepe ordinarily in your companie comœdians or balladines."

REVIVAL OF LEARNING.--The discontinuation of bodily exercises afforded a
proportionable quantity of leisure time for the cultivation of the mind;
so that the manners of mankind were softened by degrees, and learning,
which had been so long neglected, became fashionable, and was esteemed
an indispensable mark of a polite education. Yet some of the nobility
maintained for a long time the old prejudices in favour of the ancient
mode of nurture, and preferred exercise of the body to mental
endowments; such was the opinion of a person of high rank, who said to
Richard Pace, secretary to King Henry VIII., "It is enough for the sons
of noblemen to wind their horn and carry their hawke fair, and leave
study and learning to the children of meaner people." <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) Many of the pastimes that had been
countenanced by the nobility, and sanctioned by their example, in the
middle ages, grew into disrepute in modern times, and were condemned as
vulgar and unbecoming the notice of a gentleman. "Throwing the hammer
and wrestling," says Peacham, in his *Complete Gentleman*, published in
1622, "I hold them exercises not so well beseeming nobility, but rather
the soldiers in the camp and the prince's guard." On the contrary, Sir
William Forest, in his *Poesye of Princelye Practice*, a MS. in the
Royal Library, <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26) written in the year
1548, laying down the rules for the education of an heir apparent to the
crown, or prince of the blood royal, writes thus:

"So must a prince, at some convenient brayde,  
In featis of maistries bestowe some diligence:  
Too ryde, runne, leape, or caste by violence  
Stone, barre, or plummett, or suche other thinge,  
It not refusethe any prince or kynge."

\[paragraph continues\] However, I doubt not both these authors spoke
agreeably to the taste of the times in which they lived. Barclay, a more
early poetic writer, in his Eclogues

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

first published in 1508, has made a shepherd boast of his skill in
archery; to which he adds,

"I can dance the raye; I can both pipe and sing,  
If I were mery; I can both hurle and sling;  
I runne, I wrestle, I can well throwe the barre,  
No shepherd throweth the axeltree so farre;  
If I were mery, I could well leape and spring;  
I were a man mete to serve a prince or king."

RECREATIONS OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY.--Burton, in his *Anatomy of
Melancholy*, published in 1660, gives us a general view of the sports
most prevalent in the seventeenth century. "Cards, dice, hawkes, and
hounds," says he, "are rocks upon which men lose themselves, when they
are imprudently handled, and beyond their fortunes." And again, "Hunting
and hawking are honest recreations, and fit for some great men, but not
for every base inferior person, who, while they maintain their
faulkoner, and dogs, and hunting nags, their wealth runs away with their
hounds, and their fortunes fly away with their hawks." In another place
he speaks thus: "Ringing, bowling, shooting, playing with keel-pins,
tronks, coits, pitching of bars, hurling, wrestling, leaping, running,
fencing, mustering, swimming, playing with wasters, foils, foot-balls,
balowns, running at the quintain, and the like, are common recreations
of country folks; riding of great horses, running at rings, tilts and
tournaments, horse-races, and wild-goose chases, which are disports of
greater men, and good in themselves, though many gentlemen by such means
gallop quite out of their fortunes." Speaking of the Londoners, he says,
"They take pleasure to see some pageant or sight go by, as at a
coronation, wedding, and such like solemn niceties; to see an ambassador
or a prince received and entertained with masks, shows, and fireworks.
The country hath also his recreations, as May-games, feasts, fairs, and
wakes." The following pastimes he considers as common both in town and
country, namely, "bull-baitings and bear-baitings, in which our
countrymen and citizens greatly delight, and frequently use; dancers on
ropes, jugglers, comedies, tragedies, artillery gardens, and
cock-fighting." He then goes on: "Ordinary recreations we have in
winter, as cards, tables, dice, shovelboard, chess-play, the
philosopher's game, small trunks, shuttlecock, billiards, music, masks,
singing, dancing, ulegames, frolicks, jests, riddles, catches, cross
purposes, questions and commands, merry tales of errant knights, queens,
lovers, lords, ladies, giants, dwarfs, thieves, cheaters, witches,
fairies, goblins, and friars." To this catalogue he adds: "Dancing,
singing, masking, mumming, and stage-plays, are reasonable recreations,
if in season; as are May-games, wakes, and Whitson-ales, if not at
unseasonable hours, are justly permitted. Let them," that is, the common
people, "freely feast, sing, dance, have puppet-plays, hobby-horses,
tabers, crowds, <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) and bag-pipes": let
them "play at ball and barley-brakes"; and afterwards, "Plays, masks,
jesters, gladiators, tumblers, and jugglers, are to be winked at, lest
the people should do worse than attend them."

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

A character in the *Cornish Comedy*, written by George Powell, and acted
at Dorset Garden in 1696, says, "What is a gentleman without his
recreations? With these we endeavour to pass away that time which
otherwise would lie heavily upon our hands. Hawks, hounds, setting-dogs,
and cocks, with their appurtenances, are the true marks of a country
gentleman." This character is supposed to be a young heir just come to
his estate. "My cocks," says he, "are true cocks of the game--I make a
match of cock-fighting, and then an hundred or two pounds are soon won,
for I never fight a battle under."

OLD SPORTS OF THE CITIZENS OF LONDON.--In addition to the May-games,
morris-dancings, pageants and processions, which were commonly exhibited
throughout the kingdom in all great towns and cities, the Londoners had
peculiar and extensive privileges of hunting, hawking, and fishing; they
had also large portions of ground allotted to them in the vicinity of
the city for the practice of such pastimes as were not prohibited by the
government, and for those especially that were best calculated to render
them strong and healthy. We are told by Fitz Stephen, in the twelfth
century, that on the holidays during the summer season, the young men of
London exercised themselves in the fields with "leaping, shooting with
the bow, wrestling, casting the stone, playing with the ball, and
fighting with their shields." The last species of pastime, I believe, is
the same that Stow, in his *Survey of London*, calls "practising with
their wasters and bucklers"; which in his day was exercised by the
apprentices before the doors of their masters. The city damsels had also
their recreations on the celebration of these festivals, according to
the testimony of both the authors just mentioned. The first tells us
that they played upon citherns, <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) and
danced to the music; and as this amusement probably did not take place
before the close of the day, they were, it seems, occasionally permitted
to continue it by moonlight. We learn from the other, who wrote at the
distance of more than four centuries, that it was then customary for the
maidens, after evening prayers, to dance in the presence of their
masters and mistresses, while one of their companions played the measure
upon a timbrel; and, in order to stimulate them to pursue this exercise
with alacrity, the best dancers were rewarded with garlands, the prizes
being exposed to public view, "hanged athwart the street," says Stow,
during the whole of the performance. This recital calls to my mind a
passage in Spenser's "Epithalamium," wherein it appears that the dance
was sometimes accompanied with singing. It runs thus:

"--The damsels they delight,  
When they their timbrels smite,  
And thereunto dance and carol sweet."

LATER PASTIMES OF THE LONDONERS.--A general view of the pastimes
practised by the Londoners soon after the commencement of the eighteenth
century

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

occurs in Strype's edition of Stow's *Survey of London*, published in
1720. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) "The modern sports of the
citizens," says the editor, "besides drinking, are cock-fighting,
bowling upon greens, playing at tables, or backgammon, cards, dice, and
billiards; also musical entertainments, dancing, masks, balls,
stage-plays, and club-meetings, in the evenings; they sometimes ride out
on horse-back, and hunt with the lord-mayor's pack of dogs when the
common hunt goes out. The lower classes divert themselves at football,
wrestling, cudgels, nine-pins, shovelboard, cricket, stowball, ringing
of bells, quoits, pitching the bar, bull and bear baitings, throwing at
cocks," and, what is worst of all, "lying at ale-houses." To these are
added, by an author of later date, Maitland, in his *History of London*,
published in 1739, "Sailing, rowing, swimming and fishing, in the river
Thames, horse and foot races, leaping, archery, bowling in allies, and
skittles, tennice, chess, and draughts; and in the winter seating,
sliding, and shooting." Duck-hunting was also a favourite amusement, but
generally practised in the summer. The pastimes here enumerated were by
no means confined to the city of London, or its environs: the larger
part of them were in general practice throughout the kingdom.

COTSWOLD AND CORNISH GAMES.--Before I quit this division of my subject,
I shall mention the annual celebration of games upon Cotswold Hills, in
Gloucestershire, to which prodigious multitudes constantly resorted.
Robert Dover, an attorney, of Barton on the Heath, in the county of
Warwick, was forty years the chief director of these pastimes. They
consisted of wrestling, cudgel-playing, leaping, pitching the bar,
throwing the sledge, tossing the pike, with various other feats of
strength and activity; many of the country gentlemen hunted or coursed
the hare; and the women danced. A castle of boards was erected on this
occasion, from which guns were frequently discharged." Captain Dover
received permission from James I. to hold these sports; and he appeared
at their celebration in the very clothes which that monarch had formerly
worn, but with much more dignity in his air and aspect." <span
id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30) I do not mean to say that the Cotswold
games were invented, or even first established, by Captain Dover; on the
contrary, they seem to be of much higher origin, and are evidently
alluded to in the following lines by John Heywood the
epigrammatist: <span id="fr_31"></span>[3](#fn_31)

"He fometh like a bore, the beaste should seeme bolde,  
For he is as fierce as a lyon of Cotswolde."

\[paragraph continues\] Something of the same sort, I presume, was the
Carnival, kept every year, about the middle of July, upon Halgaver-moor,
near Bodmin in Cornwall; "resorted to by thousands of people," says
Heath, in his description of Cornwall, published in 1750. "The sports
and pastimes here held were so well liked by Charles II. when he touched
here in his way to Sicily, that he became a brother of the

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

jovial society. The custom of keeping this carnival is said to be as old
as the Saxons."

SPLENDOUR OF THE ANCIENT KINGS AND NOBILITY.--Paul Hentzner, a foreign
writer, who visited this country at the close of the sixteenth century,
says of the English, in his *Itinerary*, written in 1598, that they are
"serious like the Germans, lovers of show, liking to be followed
wherever they go by whole troops of servants, who wear their master's
arms in silver." This was no new propensity: the English nobility at all
times affected great parade, seldom appearing abroad without large
trains of servitors and retainers; and the lower classes of the people
delighted in gaudy shows, pageants, and processions.

If we go back to the times of the Saxons, we shall find that, soon after
their establishment in Britain, their monarchs assumed great state. Bede
tells us that Edwin, king of Northumberland, lived in much splendour,
never travelling without a numerous retinue; and when he walked in the
streets of his own capital, even in the times of peace, he had a
standard borne before him. This standard was of the kind called by the
Romans tufa, and by the English tuuf: it was made with feathers of
various colours in the form of a globe, and fastened upon a pole. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) It is unnecessary to multiply citations;
for which reason I shall only add another. Canute the Dane, who is said
to have been the richest and most magnificent prince of his time in
Europe, rarely appeared in public without being followed by a train of
three thousand horsemen, well mounted and completely armed. These
attendants, who were called house carls, formed a corps of body guards
or household troops, and were appointed for the honour and safety of
that prince's person. <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33) The examples
of royalty were followed by the nobility and persons of opulence.

In the middle ages, the love of show was carried to an extravagant
length; and as a man of fashion was nothing less than a man of letters,.
those studies that were best calculated to improve the mind were held in
little estimation.

ROYAL AND NOBLE ENTERTAINMENTS.--The courts of princes and the castles
of the great barons were daily crowded with numerous retainers, who were
always welcome to their masters' tables. The noblemen had their privy
counsellors, treasurers, marshals, constables, stewards, secretaries,
chaplains, heralds, pursuivants, pages, henchmen or guards, trumpeters,
and all the other officers of the royal court. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[3](#fn_34) To these may be added whole companies of
minstrels, mimics, jugglers, tumblers, rope-dancers, and players; and
especially on days of public festivity, when, in every one of the
apartments opened for the reception of the guests, were exhibited
variety of entertainments, according to the taste of the times, but in
which propriety had very little share; the whole forming a scene of
pompous confusion, where feasting, drinking, music, dancing, tumbling,
singing, and buffoonery, were jumbled together, and mirth excited too
often at the expense of common decency. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[4](#fn_35) If we turn to the third *Book of* 

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Fame*, a poem written by our own countryman
Chaucer, we shall find a perfect picture of these tumultuous court
entertainments, drawn, I doubt not, from reality, and perhaps without
any exaggeration. It may be thus expressed in modern language: Minstrels
of every kind were stationed in the receptacles for the guests; among
them were jesters, that related tales of mirth and of sorrow; excellent
players upon the harp, with others of inferior merit seated on various
seats below them, who mimicked their performances like apes to excite
laughter; behind them, at a great distance, was a prodigious number of
other minstrels, making a great sound with cornets, shaulms, flutes,
horns, pipes of various kinds, and some of them made with green
corn, <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) such as are used by shepherds'
boys; there were also Dutch pipers to assist those who chose to dance
either "love-dances, springs, or rayes," or any other new-devised
measures. Apart from these were stationed the trumpeters and players on
the clarion; and other seats were occupied by different musicians
playing variety of mirthful tunes. There were also present large
companies of jugglers, magicians, and tregetors, who exhibited
surprising tricks by the assistance of natural magic.

Vast sums of money were expended in support of these spectacles, by
which the estates of the nobility were consumed, and the public
treasuries often exhausted. But we shall have occasion to speak more
fully on this subject hereafter.

CIVIC SHOWS.--In London, pageants and displays, or triumphs, were
frequently required at the reception of foreign monarchs, or at the
processions of our own kings and queens through the city to Westminster
previous to their coronation, or at their return from abroad, and on
various other occasions; besides such as occurred at stated times, as
the lord mayor's show, the setting of the midsummer watch, and the like.
A considerable number of different artificers were kept, at the city's
expense, to furnish the machinery for the pageants, and to decorate
them. Stow tells us that, in his memory, great part of Leaden Hall was
appropriated to the purpose of painting and depositing the pageants for
the use of the city.

The want of elegance and propriety, so glaringly evident in these
temporary exhibitions, was supplied, or attempted to be supplied, by a
tawdry resemblance of splendour. The fronts of the houses in the streets
through which the processions passed were covered with rich adornments
of tapestry, arras, and cloth of gold; the chief magistrates and most
opulent citizens usually appeared on horseback in sumptuous habits and
joined the cavalcade; while the ringing of bells, the sound of music
from various quarters, and the shouts of the populace, nearly stunned
the ears of the spectators. At certain distances, in places appointed
for the purpose, the pageants were erected, which were temporary
buildings representing castles, palaces, gardens, rocks, or forests, as
the occasion required, where nymphs, fawns, satyrs, gods, goddesses,
angels, and

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

devils, appeared in company with giants, savages, dragons, saints,
knights, buffoons, and dwarfs, surrounded by minstrels and choristers;
the heathen mythology, the legends of Chivalry and Christian divinity,
were ridiculously jumbled together, without meaning; and the exhibition
usually concluded with dull pedantic harangues, exceedingly tedious, and
replete with the grossest adulation. The giants especially were
favourite performers in the pageants; they also figured away with great
applause in the pages of romance; and, together with dragons and
necromancers, were created by the authors for the sole purpose of
displaying the prowess of their heroes, whose business it was to destroy
them.

Some faint traces of the processional parts of these exhibitions were
retained at London in the lord mayor's show about twenty or thirty years
ago; <span id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) but the pageants and orations
have been long discontinued, and the show itself is so much contracted
that it is in reality altogether unworthy of such an appellation.

\* MERRY ENGLAND.--Outside military pastimes, and the sports of princes,
or of noblemen, and gentlefolk at large, it must not be forgotten that
the townsmen had many an opportunity of amusement and enjoyment after
their own heart. In pre-Reformation days their feasts and frolics and
plays were usually associated with, or at all events somewhat slightly
allied to the observances of religion. In his chapter on "Gilds and
Misteries," Mr J. A. Wylie, the historian of Henry IV., gives a vivid
and faithful picture of this side of town gild life of the fifteenth
century:--

"England was then 'Merry England,' and sad and sober pleasure was not
the people's creed. The brethren did not put in their weekly shot merely
to dole groats to pittancers, or help the bedrid and brokelegged, or
find poor scholars to school, or dower poor girls, or burn their
soul-candles round the corpse of a dead brother, or follow at his
forthbringing and ’terment. Such duties were soon relegated to
chaplains, who were paid and lodged at the cost of the gild. The
gildsmen lived for mirth, joy, sweetness, courtesy and merry disports.
Once every year came the Gild-day, usually on a Sunday or one of the
greater feasts, when the brethren, fairly and honestly arrayed in their
new hoods, gowns, and cloaks, in livery suit of murrey, crimson, white,
or green, would assemble at daybreak, and form up in the house or hall
of their craft. In front rode the beadle or crier, in scarlet tabard or
demigown. Next came the pipers, trumpers, corners, clarioners,
cornemusers, shalmusers, and other minstrelsy, clad in verdulet, rayed
plunket, or russet motley; and then the craftsmen, mounted or a-foot,
moving in procession through the streets to the church where their
chantry was appointed. They carried with them a huge wax serge,
sometimes weighing fifty pounds, to burn before the shrine of their
saint. Then began the morn-speech, communion, or speaking together,
which was usually held in the church while the mass was proceeding,
where the year's accounts were squared, the gild

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

chattels were laid on the checker, points were promulgated, defaulters
announced, new members enrolled, and the Master, Skevins, Proctors,
Dean, Clerk, Summoner, and other officers elected for the coming year.
Hence they returned to the hall for the general feast, otherwise known
as the drink, the meat, or the mangery. The walls would be hung with
hallings of stained worsted, and dight with birch boughs, and the floor
over-strawed with mats, or a litter of sedge and rushes, that swarmed
with the quick beasts that tickle men o’ nights. The benches were fit
with gay bankers, before tables set on trestle-trees spread with
board-cloths of clean nap. On these was laid a garnish of pewter or
treen, together with the masers and silver spoons bequeathed by brethren
since dead. Men and women alike brought their beaker of ale, and the
poor received their share of the good things by the custom of the day.
Each member was required to bring his wife or his lass, and the sick
brother or sister had still to pay his score, though he might have his
bottle of ale and his mess of kitchen stuff sent to his own house if he
wished. If any disturbed the fellowship with brabbling or high language,
the Dean delivered him the yard \[of scourging\], or fined him in two
pounds of wax, to be paid in to the light-silver. The cook was often a
brother of the gild, and skilled waferers were always to be had for a
price. When all had washed and wiped, the Graceman placed them in a row
with his silver wand, and the Clerk stood up and called 'Peace,' while
prayers were said for England and the Church.

\* "The feast began with good bread and brown ale. Then came the bruets,
joints, worts, gruel aillies and other pottage, the big meat, the lamb
tarts and capon pasties, the cockentrice or double roast (i.e. griskin
and pullet stitched with thread, or great and small birds stewed
together), and served in a silver posnet or pottinger, the charlets,
chewets, collops, mammenies, mortreus, and other such toothsome
entremets of meat served in gobbets and sod in ale, wine, milk, eggs,
sugar, honey, marrow, spices, and verjuice made from grapes or crabs.
Then came the subtleties, daintily worked like pigeons, curlews, or
popinjays in sugar and paste, painted in gold and silver, with mottoes
coming out of their bills; and after them the spiced cake-bread, the
Frenchbread, the pastelades, doucets, dariols, flauns, pain-puffs,
rastons, and blancmanges, with cherries, drajes, blandrells, and cheese,
and a standing cup of good wine left by some former brother to drink him
every year to mind.

\* "When the cloth was up and the boards were drawn, came the
merrymaking and the hoy-trolly-lolly. They laughed and cried at the
jester's bourds, or the gitener's glee; they watched the tregetoners
sleight, or they diced and raffled, while the sautryours and other
minstrels harped, piped, gitterned, flutted, and fitheled a merry fit
aloft. As they left the hall they gathered about the leapers and
tumblers, or thronged the bearward and the apeward to enjoy the grins,
mous, and gambols of their darlings, or formed a ring about the
bear-stake to see the baiting with the dogs. Or the summer afternoon
would be spent in running a bull, when the poor brute's skin was daubed
with smear,

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

its tail cut, and its horns sawn off, the sport being to goad it with
dogs and sticks and see who could get near enough to cut a few hairs
from its grease back.

\* "But the great diversion of our forefathers was mumming. Give them
but free air and an antic guise, and they would mask and mime with all
the seriousness of children at play. Every mistery must have its riding,
and every gild its procession. At Beverley, on St Helen's Day, the
gildsmen dressed up a boy as a queen to represent the saint. One old man
marched before her with a cross, and another with a spade; the music
played up, and the brethren and sistern followed the parade to church.
At Candelmas, a man in woman's dress represented the Virgin Mary, and
carried 'what might seem' a baby in his arms, Joseph and Simeon walked
behind him, and two angels carrying a heavy candlestick, with
twenty-four wax lights. At York they showed the Vices and Virtues by
means of the petitions in the Lord's Prayer, or they acted out the
articles of the Creed, while the gildsmen in their livery rode with the
players on the route. At Leicester the images of St Martin and the
Virgin were borne through the streets with music and singing, twelve of
the gildsmen making up as the Apostles, each with his name stuck in his
cap. At Norwich, on St George's Day, they chose their George and a man
to bear his sword and be his carver; two of the brethren bore the banner
and two 'the wax,' and the rest rode with them in their livery round the
town. The Norwich peltyers (skinners) dressed up 'a knave-child
innocent,' with a large candle in his hand, and led him through the city
to the minster, 'betwyxen two good men,' in memory of St William, the
boy martyr, to foster hatred against the Jews. At Canterbury, every 6th
of July, at the city march, a cart was drawn about the streets, showing
a boy vested as 'Bishop Becket' struck down before an altar by four
other children, who played the knights; and as the martyr fell beneath
their blows, real blood was spurted on his forehead from a leather bag,
which was carried in reserve for use at a given signal. At Cambridge,
the scholars of Michaelhouse played a comedy in masks, beards, and
embroidered cloaks. In London, the brethren of the fraternity of SS.
Fabian and Sebastian carried 'the Branch' springing from the root of
Jesse, dressed out with lighted candles, to the church of St Bololph,
Aldersgate. On St Nicholas Eve (Dec. 5th), the chorister boys in every
cathedral, and probably in every collegiate and parish church where
singing boys were found, elected one of their number to be their
'Barne-Bishop,' or 'St Nicholas Bishop,' and to rule the services of the
church, in mitre, ring, gloves, cope, surplice, rochet, and full
pontificals. He rode or strutted about the streets with his crozier
borne before him, blessing the crowd, and collecting their pennies in a
glove, with his canons, chaplains, clerks, vergers, and candle-bearers
till Childermas.

\* "Each season brought its ales, its mayings-round-the-shaft, its
Piffany mummings, its Candelmas, Hochtide, and Yule; but Corpus Christi
was the feast of feasts, when the gildsmen carried torches, candles, and
banners around the

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Blessed Sacrament as it passed through the
streets, and all the town turned out at sunrise to watch the annual
play.

\* "They could play you gracious mysteries grounded in Scripture, such
as the story of the Children of Israel, or of Moses in Egypt, or legends
of the martyrdom of Saints Salenia and Feliciana, or of St Catherine of
Alexandria and the angels feeding her in her torture house, and smashing
the wheel like bruchel glass, or the miracles of St Nicholas, the hearer
of prayer, who sent the hand-some suitors in the very nick of time to
the poor but virtuous gentleman with the pretty penniless daughters, and
brought the little boys back to life after they had been cut up in the
pickle-butt by the naughty taverner. . . . Such exhibitions were usually
known in England as 'the miracles,' or 'the marvels,' and occasionally
'the mysteries'; we trace them wherever town records are preserved, and
they penetrated even to the remotest manor-house and the most secluded
village." <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)

SETTING OUT OF PAGEANTS.--In an old play, *The Historie of Promos and
Cassandra*, by George Whetstone, printed in 1578, <span
id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39) a carpenter, and others, employed in
preparing the pageants for a royal procession, are introduced. In one
part of the city the artificer is ordered "to set up the frames, and to
space out the rooms, that the Nine Worthies may be so instauled as best
to please the eye." The "Worthies" are thus named in an heraldical MS.
in the Harleian Library: <span id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40) "Duke
Jossua; Hector of Troy; kyng David; emperour Alexander; Judas Machabyes;
emperour Julyus Cæsar; kyng Arthur; emperour Charlemagne; and syr Guy of
Warwycke"; but the place of the latter was frequently, and I believe
originally, supplied by Godefroy, earl of Bologne: it appears, however,
that any of them might be changed at pleasure. Henry VIII. was made a
"Worthy" to please his daughter Mary, as we shall find a little further
on. In another part of the same play the carpenter is commanded to
"errect a stage, that the wayghtes <span id="fr_41"></span>[4](#fn_41)
in sight may stand"; one of the city gates was to be occupied by the
fowre Virtues, together with "a consort of music"; and one of the
pageants is thus whimsically described:

"They have Hercules of monsters conquering;  
Huge great giants, in a forrest, fighting  
With lions, bears, wolves, apes, foxes, and grayes,  
Baiards and brockes ------  
------Oh, these be wondrous frayes!"

\[paragraph continues\] The stage direction then requires the entry of
"Two men apparelled lyke greene men at the mayor's feast, with clubbs of
fyreworks"; whose office, we are told, was to keep a clear passage in
the street, "that the kyng and his trayne might pass with ease." In
another dramatic performance of later date, Green's *Tu Quoque*, or *the
City Gallant*, published in 1614, a city apprentice says, "By this
light, I doe not thinke but to be lord mayor of London before I die; and
have

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

three pageants carried before me, besides a ship and an unicorn." The
following passage occurs in Selden's *Table Talk*, under the article
Judge, "We see the pageants in Cheapside, the lions and the elephants;
but we do not see the men that carry them; we see the Judges look big
like lions; but we do not see who moves them."

PROCESSIONS OF QUEEN MARY AND KING PHILIP OF SPAIN IN LONDON.--In the
foregoing quotations, we have not the least necessity to make an
allowance for poetical licence: the historians of the time will justify
the poets, and perfectly clear them from any charge of exaggeration; and
especially Hall, Grafton, and Holinshed, who are exceedingly diffuse on
this and such like popular subjects. The latter has recorded a very
curious piece of pantomimical trickery exhibited at the time that the
Princess Mary went in procession through the city of London, the day
before her coronation:--At the upper end of Gracechurch Street there was
a pageant made by the Florentines; it was very high; and "on the top
thereof there stood foure pictures; and in the midst of them, and the
highest, there stood an angell, all in greene, with a trumpet in his
hand; and when the trumpetter who stood secretlie within the pageant,
did sound his trumpet, the angell did put his trumpet to his mouth, as
though it had been the same that had sounded." Holinshed, speaking of
the spectacles exhibited at London, when Philip king of Spain, with Mary
his consort, made their public entry in the city, calls them, in the
margin of his Chronicle, "the vaine pageants of London"; and he uses the
same epithet twice in the description immediately subsequent; "Now,"
says he, "as the king came to London, and as he entered at the
drawbridge, \[on London Bridge,\] there was a vaine great spectacle,
with two images representing two giants, the one named Corinens, and the
other Gog-magog, holding betweene them certeine Latin verses, which, for
the vaine ostentation of flatterye, I overpasse." He then adds: "From
the bridge they passed to the conduit in Gratious Street, which was
finely painted; and, among other things," there exhibited, "were the
Nine Worthies; of these King Henry VIII. was one. He was painted in
harnesse, having in one hand a sword, and in the other hand a booke,
whereupon was written Verbum Dei. He was also delivering, as it were,
the same booke to his sonne King Edward VI. who was painted in a corner
by him." <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)

The Nine Worthies appear to have been favourite characters, and were
often exhibited in the pageants; those mentioned in the preceding
passage were probably nothing more than images of wood or pasteboard.
These august personages were not, however, always degraded in this
manner, but, on the contrary, they were frequently personified by human
beings suitably habited, and sometimes mounted on horseback. They also
occasionally harangued the spectators as they passed in the procession.

CHESTER PAGEANTS.--The same species of shows, but probably not upon so
extensive a scale, were exhibited in other cities and large towns
throughout

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

the kingdom. I have now before me an ordinance for the mayor, aldermen,
and common councilmen of the city of Chester, to provide yearly for the
setting of the watch, on the eve of the festival of Saint John the
Baptist, a pageant, which is expressly said to be "according to ancient
custome," consisting of four giants, one unicorn, one dromedary, one
luce, one camel, one ass, one dragon, six hobby-horses, and sixteen
naked boys. This ordinance is dated April 26th, 1564. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) In another MS. of the same library, it is
said, "A.D. 1599, Henry Hardware, esq. the mayor, was a godly and
zealous man"; he caused "the gyauntes in the midsomer show to be
broken," and not to goe; "the devil in his feathers," alluding perhaps
to some fantastic representation not mentioned in the former ordinance,
"he put awaye, and the cuppes and cannes, and the dragon and the naked
boys." In a more modern hand it is added, "And he caused a man in
complete armour to go in their stead. He also caused the bull-ring to be
taken up," etc. But in the year 1601, John Ratclyffe, beer-brewer, being
mayor, "sett out the giaunts and midsommer show, as of oulde it was wont
to be kept." <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44) In the time of the
Commonwealth this spectacle was discontinued, and the giants, with the
beasts, were destroyed. At the restoration of Charles II. it was agreed
by the citizens to replace the pageant as usual, on the eve of the
festival of St John the Baptist, in 1661; and as the following
computation of the charges for the different parts of the show are
exceedingly curious, I shall lay them before the. reader without any
further apology. We are told that "all things were to be made new, by
reason the ould modells were all broken." The computist then proceeds:
"For finding all the materials, with the workmanship of the four great
giants, all to be made new, as neere as may be lyke as they were before,
at five pounds a giant the least that can be, and four men to carry them
at two shillings and six pence each." The materials for the composition
of these monsters are afterwards specified to be "hoops of various
magnitudes, and other productions of the cooper, deal boards, nails,
pasteboard, scaleboard paper of various sorts, with buckram, size cloth,
and old sheets for their bodies, sleeves, and shirts, which were to be
coloured." One pair of the "olde sheets" were provided to cover the
"father and mother giants." Another article specifies "three yards of
buckram for the mother's and daughter's hoods"; which seems to prove
that three of these stupendous pasteboard personages were the
representatives of females. There were "also tinsille, tinfoil, gold and
silver leaf, and colours of different kinds, with glue and paste in
abundance." Respecting the last article, a very ridiculous entry occurs
in the bill of charges, it runs thus: "For arsnick to put into the paste
to save the giants from being eaten by the rats, one shilling and
fourpence." But to go on with the estimate. "For the new making the city
mount, called the maior's mount, as auntiently it was, and for hreing of
bays for the same, and a man to carry it, three pounds six shillings and
eight pence." The bays mentioned in this and the succeeding article was
hung round the bottom of the frame, and extended to the ground, or

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

near it, to conceal the bearers. "For making anew the merchant mount, as
it aunciently was, with a ship to turn round, the hiring of the bays,
and five men to carry it, four pounds." The ship and new dressing it, is
charged at five shillings; it was probably made with pasteboard, which
seems to have been a principal article in the manufacturing of both the
moveable mountains; it was turned by means of a swivel attached to an
iron handle underneath the frame. In the bill of charges for "the
merchant's mount," is an entry of twenty pence paid to a joyner for
cutting the pasteboard into several images. "For making anew the
elephant and castell, and a Cupid," with his bow and arrows, "suitable
to it," the castle was covered with tinfoil, and the Cupid with skins,
so as to appear to be naked, "and also for two men to carry them, one
pound sixteen shillings and eight-pence. For making anew the four
beastes called the unicorne, the antelop, the flower-de-luce, and the
camell, one pound sixteen shillings and fourpence apiece, and for eight
men to carry them, sixteen shillings. For four hobby-horses, six
shillings and eight-pence apiece; and for four boys to carry them, four
shillings. For hance-staves, garlands, and balls, for the attendants
upon the mayor and sheriffs, one pound nineteen shillings. For makinge
anew the dragon, and for six naked boys to beat at it, one pound sixteen
shillings. For six morris-dancers, with a pipe and tabret, twenty
shillings."

The sports exhibited on occasions of solemnity did not terminate with
the pageants and processions; the evening was generally concluded with
festivity and diversions of various kinds to please the populace. These
amusements are well described in a few lines by an early dramatic poet,
whose name is not known; his performance is entitled *A pleasant and
stately Morall of the Three Lordes of London*, black letter, no
date: <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

-------Let nothing that's magnifical,  
Or that may tend to London's graceful state,  
Be unperformed, as showes and solemne feasts,  
Watches in armour, triumphes, cresset lights,  
Bonefires, belles, and peales of ordinaunce  
And pleasure. See that plaies be published,  
Mai-games and maskes, with mirth and minstrelsie,  
Pageants and school-feastes, beares and puppet-plaies."

The "cresset light" was a large lanthorn placed upon a long pole, and
carried upon men's shoulders. There is extant a copy of a letter from
Henry VII. to the mayor and aldermen of London, commanding them to make
bon-fires, and to show other marks of rejoicing in the city, when the
contract was ratified for the marriage of his daughter Mary with the
prince of Castile. <span id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46)

PUBLIC SHOWS IN THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.--These motley displays of pomp
and absurdity were highly relished by the nobility, and repeatedly
exhibited by them, on extraordinary occasions. For want of more rational
entertainments, they maintained for ages their popularity, and do not
appear to

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

have lost the smallest portion of their attraction by the frequency of
representation. Shows of this kind were never more fashionable than in
the sixteenth century, when they were generally encouraged by persons of
the highest rank, and exhibited with very little essential variation;
and especially during the reign of Henry VIII. His daughter Elizabeth
appears to have been equally pleased with this species of pageantry; and
therefore it was constantly provided for her amusement by the nobility
whom she visited from time to time, in her progresses or excursions to
various parts of the kingdom. <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) I
shall simply give the outlines of a succession of entertainments
contrived to divert her when she visited the Earl of Leicester at
Kenelworth Castle, and this shall serve as a specimen for the rest.

QUEEN ELIZABETH AT KENELWORTH.--Her majesty came thither on Saturday,
the ninth of July 1575; <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48) she was met
near the castle by a fictitious Sibyl, who promised peace and prosperity
to the country during her reign. Over the first gate of the castle there
stood six gigantic figures with trumpets, real trumpeters being
stationed behind them, who sounded as the queen approached. "By this
dumb show," says my author, "it was meant that in the daies of King
Arthur, men were of that stature; so that the castle of Kenelworth
should seem still to be kept by King Arthur's heirs and their servants."
Laneham says these figures were eight feet high. Upon her majesty
entering the gateway, the porter, in the character of Hercules, made an
oration and presented to her the keys. Being come into the base court, a
lady "came all over the pool, being so conveyed, that it seemed she had
gone upon the water; she was attended by two water nymphs, and calling
herself the Lady of the Lake, she addressed her majesty with a speech
prepared for the purpose." The queen then proceeded to the inner court,
and passed the bridge, which was railled on both sides, and the tops of
the posts were adorned with "sundry presents and gifts," as of wine,
corn, fruits, fishes, fowls, instruments of music, and weapons of war.
Laneham calls the adorned posts "well-proportioned pillars turned": he
tells us there were fourteen of them, seven on each side of the bridge;
on the first pair were birds of various kinds alive in cages, said to be
the presents of the god Silvanus; on the next pair were different sorts
of fruits in silver bowls, the gift of the goddess Pomona; on the third
pair were different kinds of grain in silver bowls, the gift of Ceres;
on the fourth, in silvered pots, were red and white wine with clusters
of grapes in a silver bowl, the gift of Bacchus; on the fifth were
fishes of various kinds in trays, the donation of Neptune; on the sixth
were weapons of war, the gift of Mars; and on the seventh, various
musical instruments, the presents of Apollo. The meaning of these
emblematical decorations was explained in a Latin speech delivered by
the author of it. Then an excellent band of music began to play

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

as her majesty entered the inner court, where she alighted from her
horse, and went upstairs to the apartments prepared for her.

On Sunday evening she was entertained with a grand display of fireworks,
as well in the air as upon the water.

On Monday, after a great hunting, she was met on her return by Gascoigne
the poet, so disguised as to represent a savage man, who paid her many
high-flown compliments in a kind of dialogue between himself and an
echo.

On Tuesday she was diverted with music, dancing, and an interlude upon
the water.

On Wednesday was another grand hunting.

On Thursday she was amused with a grand bear-beating, to which were
added tumbling and fire-works. Bear-beating and bull-beating were
fashionable at this period, and considered as proper pastimes for the
amusement of ladies of the highest rank. Elizabeth, though a woman,
possessed a masculine mind, and preferred, or affected to prefer, the
exercises of the chace and other recreations pursued by men, rather than
those usually appropriated to her sex.

On Friday, the weather being unfavourable, there were no open shows.

On Saturday there was dancing within the castle, and a country brideale,
with running at the quintain in the castle yard, and a pantomimical show
called "the Old Coventry Play of Hock Thursday," performed by persons
who came from Coventry for that purpose. In the evening a regular play
was acted, succeeded by a banquet and a masque.

On the Sunday there was no public spectacle.

On the Monday there was a hunting in the afternoon, and, on the queen's
return, she was entertained with another show upon the water, in which
appeared a person in the character of Arion, riding upon a dolphin
twenty-four feet in length; and he sung an admirable song, accompanied
with music performed by six musicians concealed in the belly of the
fish. Her majesty, it appears, was much pleased with this exhibition.
The person who entertained her majesty in the character of Arion is said
to have been Harry Goldingham, of whom the following anecdote is
related: "There was a spectacle presented to Queen Elizabeth upon the
water, and among others, Harry Goldingham was to represent Arion upon
the back of a dolphin; but finding his voice to be very hoarse and
unpleasant when he came to perform his part, he tears off his disguise,
and swears that he was none of Arion, not he, but even honest Harry
Goldingham; which blunt discovery pleased the queen better than if it
had gone thorough in the right way. Yet he could order his voice to an
instrument exceedingly well." <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)

On Tuesday the Coventry play was repeated, because the queen had not
seen the whole of it on Saturday.

On Wednesday, the twentieth of the same month, she departed from
Kenelworth.

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Various other pastimes were prepared upon this
occasion; but, for want of time and opportunity, they could not be
performed.

\* THE MASTER OF THE REVELS.--From very early days there was an official
of the English court termed the Master of the Revels. This was a
permanent office quite distinct from the one who had temporary control
over all Christmas or Epiphany merriment. It was his duty to superintend
and provide for plays, interludes, and every variety of entertainment,
apart from field sports, for the king's court. It was stated in 1660
that "the allowance of Playes, the ordering of Players and Playmakers,
and the Permission for Erecting of Playhouses, Hath time out of minde,
wherof the memory of man is not to the Contrary belonged to the Master
of his Majesties Office of the Revells." In 1544 Henry VIII. appointed,
by letters patent, Sir Thomas Cawardin, Knight, to this office, with an
annual fee of £10, and powers to appoint a deputy. Queen Elizabeth made
a like grant, in 1579, to Edmond Tilney, Esquire; King James in 1603 to
George Buck, Esquire, in 1613 to Sir John Ashley, and in 1622 to Ben.
Jonson; and Charles I., in 1629, jointly to Henry Herbert, Knight, and
Simon Thelwall, Esquire. Sir Henry Herbert and Mr Thelwall at the
Restoration claimed to exercise their office. This was resisted by
playwrights and others, with the result that various interesting
documents and statements were produced in support of their claims. In
these it was stated that the office originated in the days of the
Saxons; that "mountebanks, lotteries, clockwork motions, ordinary
motions, extra motions, dancing horses and mares, ropedancers, and
slights of hand" all required licenses from the Master of the Revels, as
well as "all Comedies, Tragedies, Poems, Ballads, half-sides,
drolleries, and all billes relating to jokes." Moreover, Edward Hayward,
gentleman, as deputy to Sir Henry Herbert, claimed to enjoy "all ancient
privileges at Court, the ordering of maskes in the Innes of Law, halls,
houses of great personages, and societies, all Balls, Dancing schooles,
and musick, except his Majesty's and the priviledges of the Corporation
touching freemen, if it extend soe farre; Pageantry and other publique
tryumphes, the rurall feasts called Wakes, where there is constant
revelling and musick, Cockpitts, fencing and fencing schooles, nocturnal
feasts, and banquettings in publique houses when attended with
minstrelsy, singing, and Dancing, together with the ordering of all
mommeries, fictions, Disguises, scenes, and masking attire, all which
(in the judgment of an able Lawyer) are within the verge and
comprehension of the Master of the Revells Patent from the words
*Jocorum, Revelorum, et Mascorum*."

\* The words of the original patent gave jurisdiction throughout the
whole kingdom of England, and Mr Hayward's claim for a very liberal
interpretation was apparently granted. On July 23rd, 1663, Mr Hayward,
in conjunction with Mr Poyntz, instructed Edward Thomas, one of the
messengers belonging to his Majesties office of the Revels, to proceed
to Bristol, with a view to the approaching fairs, and to acquaint the
mayor with the king's grant to them, and the Lord Chamberlain's mandate,
"touching musick, cockfightings, maskings,

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

prizes, stage-players, tumblers, vaulters, dancers on the ropes, such as
act, sett forth, shew or present any play, shew, motion, feats of
activity, or sights whatsoever." <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50)
Thomas was given power to grant temporary licenses to persons from Wales
or remote parts, who seldom or never came to London, but others were to
be required to take out licenses at the London office. Any presuming to
act or exhibit unlicensed, were to be taken into custody, and kept until
bound with good security to appear within ten days at the London office
under penalty of £20. In 1668, Charles II. appointed Alexander Stafford,
gentleman, Master of the Revels.

\* Various interesting particulars relative to the Master of the Revels
can be gleaned from the State Papers of the Public Record Office. There
are full accounts extant of the expenditure of Richard Gibson, Master of
the Revels, from 1509 to 1522, which show the extravagant character of
the mummings and disguisings at the court of the young king. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[2](#fn_51) Crimson, purple, blue, and yellow velvet;
cloth of gold of Venice; blue, green, white, black, yellow, and crimson
satin; blue, crimson, and yellow sarcenet; brabant cloth; crimson copper
tinsel of Bruges; cotton cloth; white fustian; gray furs; and ostrich
feathers were all used in the attiring of a single year. In February
1511, revels were held on a most costly scale in the house of Black
Friars, Ludgate, and in White Hall, Westminster. On New Year's Day and
Epiphany 1512, Gibson had the ordering of a pageant called "Dangerus
Fortress." In the following year the pageant was called "The Rydie
Mount," which was planted with broom to signify Plantaganet, and with
red and white roses. At the foot were six lords, above them six
minstrels, and at the entrance two armed men. It was drawn by two
"mighty woord wossys or wyld men," and after the descent of the lords,
the mount opened and showed six ladies. The six "lords" were the king,
Mr Brandon, Earl of Essex, Sir Henry Guildford, Mr Nevell, and Mr Thomas
Chene. The disguisings of Twelfth Night, 1514, cost the then great total
of £404, 6s. 9d. The Twelfth Night revel at Greenwich, in 1516, as
ordered by Gibson, was called "The Gardyn de Esperans." In 1520, a
mummery was held at Greenwich on New Year's Eve; Gibson had to prepare
dresses for fourteen persons. On January 5th, 1521, the king went "in
meskellyng apparell" by water to visit the Cardinal with nineteen
gentlemen. There were maskings on Shrove Monday and Shrove Tuesday,
1521, at Greenwich, in which the king took part; and he also played his
share in several maskings both at Greenwich and York Place in the
following year.

\* Queen Elizabeth's expenditure on revels, early in her reign,
outrivalled the extravagance of her father. From the first Christmas
after her accession down to April 1567, the provisions and payments made
by the Master of the Revels reached the then gigantic total of £4588,
1s. 10d. <span id="fr_52"></span>[3](#fn_52) Towards the end of the

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

reign the expenses under this head were but small. In May 1594 Edmund
Tilney, Master of the Revels, received a warrant of £311, 2s. 2d. for
wares delivered and works done in the office of the revels, and for
three years' wages of the officers. <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)
In January 1597 2200 was assigned to the Master for wares and works, and
three years' officers' wages; and also £66, 6s. 8d. yearly as
composition for defraying the charges of the office for plays only,
according to a rate of a late composition. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54)

\* In 1603 Sir George Buck succeeded to the Mastership of the Revels. On
July 10th, 1615, Sir George wrote to the Lord Chamberlain, saying that
the King had been pleased, at the Queen's intercession on behalf of
Samuel Danyell, to appoint a company of youths to perform comedies and
tragedies at Bristol, under the name of the Youths of Her Majesty's
Royal Chamber of Bristol; he had consented to it, without prejudice to
the rights of his office; but he reminded the Chamberlain that he had
received no wages for two years, and begged for payment of the
arrears. <span id="fr_55"></span>[3](#fn_55)

\* Sir Henry Herbert, the next Master of the Revels, got into rather
serious trouble in the summer of 1674, almost immediately after his
appointment, by licensing the poet Middleton's play *A Game at Chess*,
which was a thinly-veiled political attack on Spain, that gave great
umbrage to the Spanish ambassador. <span id="fr_56"></span>[4](#fn_56)
Sir Henry Herbert was confirmed in his office on the accession of
Charles I.

\* In 1631 the churchwardens and constables of Blackfriars, on behalf of
the whole parish, petitioned Bishop Laud to revive an order made by the
Council and the Corporation in June 1600, limiting the playhouses to one
each side of the Thames, and an order of 1619 suppressing the house in
Blackfriars. They tabulated their reasons, which were briefly as
follows: (1) hindrance to shop-keepers from great recourse to the plays,
especially of coaches, their goods being broken and beaten off their
stalls; (2) coaches so numerous in an afternoon that the inhabitants
could not take in their beer or coals; (3) the passage through Ludgate
and to the water was stopped; (4) if any fire occurred it could not be
quenched; (5) baptisms and burials often disturbed; and (6) persons of
honour and quality resident in the parish are restrained by the coaches
from ingress and egress. <span id="fr_57"></span>[5](#fn_57)

\* In May 1633, some strolling players visited Banbury. The mayor and
justices, suspecting them to be wandering rogues, if not more dangerous
persons, called on them for their license, they produced a patent which
they pretended to be granted by the crown, and also a commission from
the Master of the Revels. Believing these papers to be forgeries, or
wrongly obtained, they arrested the six men, examined them, and
committed them to prison, till the council's pleasure should be
signified. The patent and commission and examinations were forwarded to
London. The company had been acting, as they alleged, at Leicester,
Market Bosworth, Stratford, Meriden, and Solihull, and at Sir Thomas
Lucy's, and Sir William Spencer's. <span id="fr_58"></span>[6](#fn_58)

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

\* Sir Henry Herbert received £200, as Master of the Revels, in October
1660, together with a warrant to advance him yearly such sums as might
be needful for his office. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) The
official immediately under the master was termed the Yeoman of the
Revels; his salary was usually, £50 a year. In May 1661, one John
Tredeskyn was brought before Sir Henry Herbert charged with showing
"severall strainge cretures" without authority from the office of the
revels; but in the following month he obtained a royal warrant to
continue as before to show to all who wish it his "rare and ingenious
collection of rarities in art and nature," which had been for many years
exhibited by him and his father before him. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60) In July of the same year an order was made
for the suppression of all stage players, tumblers, rope dancers, and
showmen unless approved and authorised by the Master of the Revels, as
some persons had obtained recently commissions from the king, acted
plays and exhibited shows full of scandal, and abused their commissions
by selling or lending them.

\* George Jolly obtained a license from the revel office on January 1st,
1663, to raise a company of players for acting tragedies, comedies,
pastorals, and interludes, throughout England, provided they outstayed
not forty days in one place, and acted nothing offensive, nor in the
time of divine worship, nor at prohibited seasons. At the same time
general orders were issued that "what company soever, either stage
players, musicians, mountebanks, or such as go about with monsters and
strange sights," as had no authority confirmed by the Master of the
Revels, should have their commissions taken from them and sent to the
office. <span id="fr_61"></span>[3](#fn_61) In July of that year the
king empowered the mayor and sheriff and magistrates of Norwich, as he
understood that the meaner sort of people were diverted from their work
through the frequency of lotteries, puppet-shows, etc., to determine the
length of stay of such shows in the city notwithstanding any licenses
from the revel office. <span id="fr_62"></span>[4](#fn_62)

ROPE-DANCING, TUTORED ANIMALS, AND PUPPET-SHOWS.--Great delight was
taken in seeing men and animals perform such feats as appeared to be
entirely contrary to their nature; as, men and monkeys dancing upon
ropes, or walking upon wires; dogs dancing minuets, pigs arranging
letters so as to form words at their master's command; hares beating
drums, or birds firing off cannons. These exhibitions, for all of them
have in reality been brought to public view, are ridiculed by the
*Spectator*, in a paper dated the 3rd of April 1711. The author pretends
that he received the following letter from a show-man who resided near
Charing-Cross.

"Honoured Sir,--Having heard that this nation is a great encourager of
ingenuity, I have brought with me a rope-dancer that was caught in one
of the woods belonging to the great Mogul. He is by birth a monkey, but
swings upon a rope, takes a pipe of tobacco, and drinks a glass of ale,
like any reasonable

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

creature. <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) He gives great
satisfaction to the quality; and if they will make a subscription for
him, I will send for a brother of his out of Holland, that is a very
good tumbler; and also for another of the same family whom I design for
my merry-andrew, as being an excellent mimic, and the greatest droll in
the country where he now is. I hope to have this entertainment in
readiness for the next winter; and doubt not but it will please more
than the opera or the puppet-show. I will not say that a monkey is a
better man than some of the opera heroes; but certainly he is a better
representative of a man than any artificial composition of wood and
wire."

The latter part of this sarcasm relates to a feigned dispute for
seniority between Powel, a puppet-showman, who exhibited his wooden
heroes under the little piazza in Covent Garden, and the managers of the
Italian opera; which is mentioned in a preceding paper <span
id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64) to this effect: "The opera at the
Haymarket, and that under the little piazza of Covent Garden, are at
present the two leading diversions of the town; Powel professing in his
advertisements to set up Whittington and his Cat against Rinaldo and
Armida."--After some observations, which are not immediately to the
present purpose, the author proceeds: "I observe that Powel and the
undertakers of the opera had both of them the same thought, and I think
much about the same time, of introducing animals on their several
stages, though indeed with different success. The sparrows and
chaffinches at the Haymarket fly as yet very irregularly over the stage,
and instead of perching on the trees, and performing their parts, these
young actors either get into the galleries, or put out the candles;
whereas Powel has so well disciplined his pig, that in the first scene
he and Punch dance a minuet together. I am informed that Powel resolves
to excel his adversaries in their own way, and introduce larks into his
opera of Susanna, or Innocence betrayed; which will be exhibited next
week with a pair of new elders."

From the same source of information, in a subsequent paper, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[3](#fn_65) we may find a catalogue of the most
popular spectacles exhibited in London at the commencement of the last
century. Our author has introduced a projector, who produces a scheme
for an opera entitled *The Expedition of Alexander the Great*; and
proposes to bring in "all the remarkable shows about the town among the
scenes and decorations of his piece"; which is described in the
following manner: "This Expedition of Alexander opens with his
consulting the Oracle at Delphos; in which the Dumb Conjurer, who has
been visited by so many persons of quality of late years, is to be
introduced as telling his fortune; at the same time Clench of
Barnet <span id="fr_66"></span>[4](#fn_66) is represented in another
corner of the temple, as ringing the bells of Delphos for joy of his
arrival. The Tent of Darius is to be

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

peopled by the ingenious Mrs Salmon, where Alexander is to fall in love
with a piece of waxwork that represents the beautiful Statira. When
Alexander comes to that country in which, Quintus Curtius tells us, the
dogs were so exceedingly fierce, that they would not loose their hold,
though they were cut to pieces limb by limb, and that they would hang
upon their prey by their teeth when they had nothing but a mouth left,
there is to be a scene of Hockley in the Hole, in which are to be
represented all the diversions of that place, the Bull-Baiting only
excepted, which cannot possibly be exhibited in the theatre by reason of
the lowness of the roof. The several Woods in Asia, which Alexander must
be supposed to pass through, will give the audience a sight of Monkies
dancing upon ropes, with many other pleasantries of that ludicrous
species. At the same time, if there chance to be any strange animals in
town, whether birds or beasts, they may be either let loose among the
woods, or driven across the stage by some of the country people of Asia.
In the last Great Battle, Pinkethman is to personate king Porus upon an
Elephant, and is to be encountered by Powel, representing Alexander the
Great upon a Dromedary, which, nevertheless, he is desired to call by
the name of Bucephalus. On the close of this great Decisive Battle, when
the two Kings are thoroughly reconciled, to show the mutual friendship
and good correspondence that reigns between them, they both of them go
together to a puppet-show, in which the ingenious Mr Powel junior may
have an opportunity of displaying his whole art of machinery for the
diversion of the two monarchs." It is further added, that, "after the
reconciliation of these two kings, they might invite one another to
dinner, and either of them entertain his guest with the German artist,
Mr Pinkethman's Heathen Gods, or any of the like Diversions which shall
then chance to be in vogue."

The projector acknowledged the thought was not originally his own, but
that he had taken the hint from "several Performances he had seen upon
our stage; in one of which there was a Raree Show, in another a Ladder
Dance, and in others a posture or a moving picture with many curiosities
of the like nature."

MINSTRELSY, BELL-RINGING, ETC.--The people of this country in all ages
delighted in secular music, songs, and theatrical performances; <span
id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67) which is abundantly evident from the great
rewards they gave to the bards, the scalds, the gleemen, and the
minstrels, who were successively the favourites of the opulent, and the
idols of the vulgar. The continual encouragement given to these
professors of music, poetry, and pantomime, in process of time swelled
their numbers beyond all reasonable proportion, inflamed their pride,
increased their avarice, and corrupted their manners; so that at length
they lost the favour they had so long enjoyed among the higher classes
of society; and, the donations of the populace not being sufficient for
their support, they fell away from affluence to poverty, and wandered
about the country in a contemptible condition,

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

dependent upon the casual rewards they might occasionally pick up at
church-ales, wakes, and fairs.

Hentzner, who wrote at the conclusion of the sixteenth century, says,
"the English excel in dancing and music, for they are active and
lively." A little further on he adds, "they are vastly fond of great
noises that fill the ear, such as the firing of cannon, beating of
drums, and the ringing of bells; so that it is common for a number of
them that have got a glass in their heads to get up into some belfry and
ring the bells for hours together for the sake of exercise." <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) Polydore Vergil mentions another
remarkable singularity belonging to the English, who celebrated the
festival of Christmas with plays, masques, and magnificent spectacles,
together with games at dice and dancing, which, he tells us, was as
ancient as the year 1170, and not customary with other nations; <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69) and with respect to the Christmas prince,
or lord of the misrule, he was, as the same author informs us, a
personage almost peculiar to this country. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70)

BAITING OF ANIMALS.--It were well if these singularities were the only
vulnerable parts of the national character of our ancestors; but it must
be confessed that there are other pastimes which equally attracted their
attention, and manifested a great degree of barbarism, which will admit
of no just defence. Sir Richard Steele, reprobating the inhumanity of
throwing at cocks, makes these pertinent observations: "Some French
writers have represented this diversion of the common people much to our
disadvantage, and imputed it to a natural fierceness and cruelty of
temper, as they do some other entertainments peculiar to our nation; I
mean those elegant diversions of bull-baiting, and prize-fighting, with
the like ingenious recreations of the bear-garden. I wish I knew how to
answer this reproach which is cast upon us, and excuse the death of so
many innocent cocks, bulls, dogs, and bears, as have been set together
by the ears, or died an untimely death, only to make us sport." <span
id="fr_71"></span>[4](#fn_71)

PASTIMES FORMERLY ON SUNDAYS.--I know not of any objection that can have
more weight in the condemnation of these national barbarisms, than the
time usually appropriated for the exhibition of them; which, it seems,
was the after part of the Sunday. The same portion of time also was
allotted for the performance of plays, called, in the writings of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, "vaine playes and interludes
"; <span id="fr_72"></span>[5](#fn_72) to which are added, "dice and
card-playing, dancing, and other idle pastimes." Stephen Gosson, a very
zealous, if not a very correct writer, declaiming vehemently against
plays and players, says of the latter, "because they are permitted to
play every Sunday, they make four or five Sundayes at leaste every
weeke." <span id="fr_73"></span>[6](#fn_73) Nor is he less severe upon
those who frequented such amusements: "To celebrate the Sabbath," says
he, "they go to the theatres, and there keepe a general market of
bawdrie; by

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

which means," as he afterwards expresses himself, "they make the theatre
a place of assignation, and meet for worse purposes than merely seeing
the play." A contemporary writer, endeavouring to prove the impropriety
of an established form of prayer for the church service, among other
arguments, uses the following: "He," meaning the minister, "posteth it
over as fast as he can galloppe; for, eyther, he hath two places to
serve; or else there are some games to be playde in the afternoon, as
lying for the whetstone, heathenishe dauncing for the ring, a beare or a
bull to be baited, or else a jackanapes to ride on horsebacke, or an
interlude to be plaide; and, if no place else can be gotten, this
interlude must be playde in the church. We speak not of ringing after
mattins is done." <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) To what has been
said, I shall add the following verses, which made their appearance
rather earlier than either of the foregoing publications; and they
describe, with much accuracy I doubt not, the manner of spending the
Sunday afternoons according to the usage of that time: but it is proper
previously to observe, that such amusements on holidays were by no means
peculiar to the young gallants of this country, but equally practised
upon the continent.

"Now, when their dinner once is done, and that they well have fed,  
To play they go; to casting of the stone, to runne, or shoote;  
To tosse the light and windy ball aloft with hand or foote;  
Some others trie their skill in gonnes; some wrastell all the day;  
And some to schooles of fence do goe, to gaze upon the play;  
Another sort there is, that doe not love abroad to roame,  
But, for to passe their time at cardes, or tables, still at home." <span
id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75)

ROYAL INTERFERENCE WITH SUNDAY PASTIMES.--Citations to this purpose
might be made from infinity of pamphlets, written professedly against
the profanation of the Sabbath: it was certainly an evil that called
loudly for redress; and the pens of various writers, moral and
religious, as well of the clergy as the laity, have been employed for
that purpose. There are some few treatises on this subject that do
honour to their authors; but far the larger part of them are of a
different description, consisting of vehement and abusive declamations,
wherein the zeal of the writers is too frequently permitted to run at
random, without the least restraint from reason and moderation, and,
what is still worse, without that strict adherence to the truth which
the seriousness of the subject necessarily required. It must be granted,
however, that the continued remonstrances from the grave and religious
parts of the community were not without effect. In the twenty-second
year of the reign of Elizabeth, the magistrates of the city of London
obtained from the queen an edict, "that all heathenish playes and
interludes should be banished upon Sabbath days"; <span
id="fr_76"></span>[3](#fn_76) a but this restriction, I apprehend, was
confined to the jurisdiction of the lord mayor; for, it is certain that
such amusements were publicly exhibited in other districts, and
especially

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

at the Paris Garden in Southwark, a place where these sort of sports
were usually exhibited; and where three years afterwards a prodigious
concourse of people being assembled together on a Sunday afternoon, to
"see plays and a bear-baiting, the whole theatre gave way and fell to
the ground; by which accident many of the spectators were killed, and
more hurt." This lamentable misfortune was considered as a judgment from
God, and occasioned a general prohibition of all public pastimes on the
Sabbath-day. The wise successor of Elizabeth, on the other hand, thought
that the restrictions on the public sports were too generally and too
strictly applied, and especially in the country places; he therefore
published on the 24th of May 1618 the following declaration: "Whereas we
did justly, in our progresse through Lancashire, rebuke some puritanes
and precise people, in prohibiting and unlawfully punishing of our good
people for using their lawfull recreations and honest exercises on
Sundayes and other holy dayes, after the afternoone sermon or service:
It is our will, that after the end of divine service, our good people be
not disturbed, letted, or discouraged, from any lawful recreation, such
as dauncing, either for men or women; archery for men, leaping,
vaulting, or any other such harmless recreation; nor for having of
May-games, Whitson-ales, and morris-daunces, and the setting up of
May-poles, and other sports therewith used; so as the same be had in due
and convenient time, without impediment or neglect of divine service.
But withall, we doe here account still as prohibited, all unlawfull
games to be used upon Sundayes onely, as beare and bull-baitings,
interludes, and, at all times in the meaner sort of people by law
prohibited, bowling." This proclamation was renewed by Charles I. in the
eighth year of his reign; which occasioned many serious complaints from
the puritanical party; but, three years afterwards, a pamphlet was
published which defended the principles of the declaration; wherein the
author, who was a high churchman, endeavours to fine away the objections
of its opponents. In one part he says, "those recreations are the
meetest to be used, which give the best refreshment to the bodie, and
leave the least impression in the minde. In this respect, shooting,
leaping, pitching the barre, stool-ball, and the like, are rather to be
chosen than diceing or carding." This publication was immediately
answered by the other party, who certainly had the best end of the
argument, and were not sparing in their severity, but wounded the
ordinance itself through the sides of its defender. The more precise
writers objected not only to the profanation of the Sabbath, but to the
celebration of most of the established festivals and holidays, as we
find from the following verses of Neogeorgus:

"Their feastes, and all their holydayes they keep throughout the
yeare,  
Are full of vile idolatry, and heathen like appeare.  
I shew not here their daunces yet with filthy gestures mad,  
Nor other wanton sports that on the holydayes are had.  
In some place solemne sights and showes, and pageants faire are play’d  
With sundry sorts of maskers brave, in strange attire arrai’d."

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

DICE AND CARDS.--The Saxons and the Danes, as we have observed
already, <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) were much addicted to
gaming; and the same destructive propensity was equally prevalent among
the Normans. The evil consequences arising from the indulgence of this
pernicious pleasure have in all ages called loudly for reprehension, and
demanded at last the more powerful interference of the legislature. The
vice of gambling, however, is by no means peculiar to the people of this
country: its influence is universally diffused among mankind; and in
most nations the same strong measures that have been adopted here are
found to be absolutely necessary to prevent its extension beyond the
limits of subordination. Dice, and those games of chance dependent upon
them, have been most generally decried; and cards, in latter times, are
added to them as proper companions. Cards, when compared with dice, are
indeed of modern invention, and originally, I doubt not, were productive
only of innocent amusement; they were, however, soon converted into
instruments of gambling equally dangerous as the dice themselves, and
more enticing from the variety of changements they admit of, and the
pleasing mixture of chance with skill, which often gives the tyro an
advantage over the more experienced player; that is, supposing fair play
on both sides; but woeful experience has convinced many that this is not
always the case.

REGULATION OF GAMES FOR MONEY, BY RICHARD CŒUR DE LION, ETC.--Towards
the close of the twelfth century, we meet with a very curious edict
relative to gaming, and which shows how generally it even prevailed
among the lower classes of the people at that period. This edict was
established for the regulation of the Christian army under the command
of Richard I. of England and Philip of France, during the crusade in
1190: It prohibits any person in the army beneath the degree of a knight
from playing at any sort of game for money: knights and clergymen might
play for money, but no one of them was permitted to lose more than
twenty shillings in one whole day and night, under the penalty of one
hundred shillings, to be paid to the archbishops in the army; the two
monarchs had the privilege of playing for what they pleased; but their
attendants were restricted to the sum of twenty shillings; and, if they
exceeded, they were to be whipped naked through the army for three
days. <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78)

STATUTES AGAINST DICE, CARDS, BALL-PLAY, ETC.--The decrees established
by the council held at 'Worcester, in the twenty-fourth year of Henry
III., prohibited the clergy from playing at dice, or at cards: but
neither the one nor the other of these games are mentioned in the
succeeding penal statutes, before the twelfth year of Richard II., when
diceing is particularised, and expressly forbidden; though perhaps they
were both of them included under the general title of games of chance,
and dishonest games, mentioned in the proclamation of Edward III. which,
with other pastimes therein specified, were generally practised to the
great detriment of military exercises, and of archery in particular.

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

In the eleventh year of Henry VII. cards are first mentioned among the
games prohibited by the law; <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) and at
that time they seem to have been very generally used; for, the edict
expressly forbids the practice of card-playing to apprentices, excepting
the duration of the Christmas holidays, and then only in their masters'
houses. <span id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80) We learn from Stow, that
these holidays extended "from All-Hallows evening to the day after
Candlemasday, when," says the historian, "there was, among other sports,
playing at cards for counters, nailes, and points in every house, more
for pastime than for gain." <span id="fr_81"></span>[3](#fn_81) The
recreations prohibited by proclamation in the reign of Edward III.,
exclusive of the games of chance, are thus specified; throwing of
stones, <span id="fr_82"></span>[4](#fn_82) wood, or iron; playing at
hand-ball, foot-ball, club-ball, and cambucam, which I take to have been
a species of goff, and probably received its name from the crooked bat
with which it was played. These games, as before observed, were not
forbidden from any particular evil tendency in themselves, but because
they engrossed too much of the leisure and attention of the populace,
and diverted their minds from the pursuits of a more martial nature. I
should not forget to add, that "bull-baiting and cock-fighting" are
included with "other dishonest games as trivial and useless." In <span
id="fr_83"></span>[5](#fn_83) the reign of Edward IV. we find coits,
closh or claish, kayles or nine-pins, half-bowl, hand-in and hand-out,
with quick-borde, classed among the unlawful amusements; <span
id="fr_84"></span>[6](#fn_84) which list was considerably augmented in
the succeeding reigns, and especially in the eighteenth year of Henry
VIII., when bowling, loggating, playing at tennis, dice, cards and
tables, or back-gammon, were included. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[7](#fn_85)

In the preamble to the Parliamentary Statutes as early as the sixth year
of Edward III., there is a clause prohibiting of boys or others from
playing at barres, or snatch-hood, or any other improper games, in the
king's palace at Westminster during the sitting of the parliament;
neither might they, by striking, or otherwise, prevent any one from
passing peaceably about his business.

ARCHERY SUCCEEDED BY BOWLING.--The general decay of those manly and
spirited exercises, which formerly were practised in the vicinity of the
metropolis, has not arisen from any want of inclination in the people,
but from the want of places proper for the purpose; such as in times
past had been allotted to them are now covered with buildings, or shut
up by enclosures, so that, if it were not for skittles, dutch-pins,
four-corners, and the like pastimes, they would have no amusements for
the exercise of the body; and these amusements are only to be met with
in places belonging to common drinking-houses, for which reason their
play is seldom productive of much benefit, but more frequently becomes
the

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

prelude to drunkenness. This evil has been increasing for a long series
of years; and honest Stow laments the retrenchments of the grounds
appropriated for martial pastimes which had begun to take place in his
day. "Why," says he, "should I speak of the ancient exercises of the
long bow, by the citizens of this city, now almost clean left off and
forsaken? I over-pass it; for, by the means of closeing in of common
grounds, our archers, for want of room to shoot abroad, creep into
bowling-alleys and ordinarie diceing-houses neer home, where they have
room enough to hazard their money at unlawful games." <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) He also tells us, that "Northumberland
house, in the parish of St Katherine Coleman, belonging to Henry Percy,
Earl of Northumberland, in the thirty-third year of Henry the Sixth; but
of late, being deserted by that noble family, the gardens were converted
into bowling-alleys, and the other parts of the estate into
diceing-houses. But bowling-alleys and houses for the exercise of
diceing and other unlawful games are at this time so greatly increased
in the other parts of the city and its suburbs, that this parent spot,"
or, as he afterwards calls it, "the ancient and only patron of misrule,
is forsaken of its gamesters." And here we may add the following remark
from an author somewhat more ancient than Stow: <span
id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87) "common bowling-alleyes are privy mothes
that eat up the credit of many idle citizens, whose gaynes at home are
not able to weigh downe theyr losses abroad; whose shoppes are so farre
from maintaining their play, that theyr wives and children cry out for
bread, and go to bedde supperlesse ofte in the yeere." In another place,
his reflections are more general, and he exclaims, "Oh, what a wonderful
change is this! our wreastling at armies is turned to wallowing in
ladies' laps, our courage to cowardice, our running to royot, our bowes
into bowls, and our darts into dishes."

MODERN GAMBLING.--The evils complained of by these writers were then in
their infancy; they have in the present day (1801 attained to a gigantic
stature; and we may add to them E.O. tables, as also other tables for
gambling distinguished by the appellation of Rouge et Noir, Pharo-banks,
and many more fashionable novelties, equally as detrimental to morality,
and as equally destructive to the fortunes of those who pursue them, as
any of the recreations of the former times. Even horse-racing, which
anciently was considered as a liberal sport, and proper for the
amusement of a gentleman, has been of late years degraded into a
dangerous species of gambling, by no means the less deserving of
censure, because it is fashionable and countenanced by persons of the
highest rank and fortune. The good old Scotch poet little dreamed of
such an innovation, when he lamented that horse-racing was falling into
disrepute through the prevalency of games of chance. His words are
these:

"Halking, hunting, and swift horse running  
Are changit all in wrangus, wynning;  
There is no play but cartes and dyce," etc. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[3](#fn_88)

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

\* The warmth with which dice-playing and every form of gaming is
condemned in the writings of the Fathers and the later expounders of
Christianity is a sufficient proof of its prevalence throughout Europe.
With the introduction of cards in the fourteenth century, the flame of
gambling burnt with renewed ardour, and provoked fresh remonstrances
from the guardians of religion. In England gambling attained to an
extraordinary pitch in the reign of Henry VIII., the king being himself
an unscrupulous gamester; and the practice flourished under the highest
auspices during the reign of Elizabeth and James I. Sir Miles Partridge
threw dice with Henry VIII. for the great Jesus bells in "the tower of
St Paul's, London, and won them; but the ropes afterwards catched about
his neck, for in Edward the Sixth's days he was hanged for some criminal
offences." <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89)

\* Modern club gaming in England is said to date from 1777 or 1778. In a
pamphlet as to gambling by an M. P., published in 1784, it is stated
that thirty years before there was but one gaming club in the
metropolis, and the stakes very low, namely crowns or half-crowns, but
at that date the clubs were numerous, and the fashion of high stakes
generally prevalent. <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90)

\* *Roulette* or *Roly Poly* tables, so called from the balls used in
them, were introduced into England about 1739, and were first set up at
Tunbridge Wells.

\* The first English lottery named in history was drawn 1569. It
consisted of 400,000 lots at ten shillings each, and was drawn at the
west door of the Cathedral Church of St Paul's. The prizes were in
plate, and the profits to go to the repairing of the havens or ports of
the kingdom. Another state lottery was held in 1612, in favour of the
plantation of English colonists in Virginia; the chief prize, "4000
crowns in fair plate," was won by Thomas Sharplys, a London tailor. In
1680 a lottery was granted to supply the metropolis with water, and a
few years later the Government resorted to a huge lottery scheme to find
the war funds which resulted in the capture of Namur. From 1709 until
1824 lottery bills were in the programme of every session, the prizes
being generally paid in terminable annuities. This state gambling led to
an appalling amount of vice and misery as well as direct fraud. The last
public lottery in Great Britain was drawn in October 1826.

LADIES' PASTIMES--NEEDLE-WORK.--It now remains to say a few words in a
general way respecting the diversions of the English ladies. In the
early ages, our fair countrywomen employed a large portion of their time
in needlework and embroidery; and their acquirements in these elegant
accomplishments most probably afforded them little leisure for the
pursuits of trifling and useless amusements; but, though we are not
acquainted with the nature of their recreations, there is no reason to
suppose that they were unbecoming in themselves, or indulged beyond the
bounds of reason or decorum. I have already, on a former occasion,
particularly noticed the skilfulness of the Saxon and Norman ladies in
handling the needle, embroidering, and working in tapestry; and that
their performances

<span id="page_liv">p. liv</span>

were not only held in very high estimation at home, but were equally
prised upon the continent, where none were produced that could be placed
in competition with them. <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91)

DANCING AND CHESS PLAY.--Dancing was certainly an ancient and favourite
pastime with the women of this country: the maidens even in a state of
servitude claimed, as it were by established privilege, the license to
indulge themselves in this exercise on holidays and public festivals;
when it was usually performed in the presence of their masters and
mistresses.

In the middle ages, dice, chess, and afterwards tables, and cards, with
other sedentary games of chance and skill, were reckoned among the
female amusements; and the ladies also frequently joined with the men in
such pastimes, as we find it expressly declared in the metrical romance
of *Ipomydom*. The passage alluded to runs thus:

"When they had dyned, as I you saye,  
Lordes and ladyes yede to to playe;  
Some to tables, and some to chesse,  
With other gamys more or lesse." <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92)

In another poem, by Gower, <span id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93) a lover
asks his mistress, when she is tired of "dancing and caroling," if she
was willing to "play at chesse, or on the dyes to cast a chaunce."
Forrest, speaking in praise of Catharine of Arragon, first wife of Henry
VIII., says, that when she was young,

"With stoole and with needyl she was not to seeke,  
And other practiseings for ladyes meete;  
To pastyme at tables, tick tack or gleeke,  
Cardis and dyce"--etc. <span id="fr_94"></span>[4](#fn_94)

LADIES' RECREATIONS IN THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY.--The English ladies did
not always confine themselves to domestic pastimes, they sometimes
participated with the other sex in diversions of a more masculine
nature; and engaged with them in the sports of the field. These violent
exercises seem to have been rather unfashionable among them in the
seventeenth century; for Burton, in his *Anatomy of Melancholy*, speaks
of their pastimes as much better suited to the modesty and softness of
the sex. "The women," says he, "instead of laborious studies, have
curious needle-works, cutworks, spinning, bone-lace making, with other
pretty devices to adorn houses, cushions, carpets, stool-seats,"
etc. <span id="fr_95"></span>[5](#fn_95) Not but some of these masculine
females have occasionally made their appearance: and at the commencement
of the last century, it should seem that they were more commonly seen
than in Burton's time, which gave occasion for the following satirical
paper in one of the Spectators, <span id="fr_96"></span>[6](#fn_96)
written

<span id="page_lv">p. lv</span>

by Addison: "I have," says he, "very frequently the opportunity of
seeing a rural Andromache, who came up to town last winter, and is one
of the greatest foxhunters in the country; she talks of hounds and
horses, and makes nothing of leaping over a six-bar gate. If a man tells
her a waggish story, she gives him a push with her hand in jest, and
calls him an impudent dog; and, if her servant neglects his business,
threatens to kick him out of the house. I have heard her in her wrath
call a substantial tradesman a lousie cur; and I remember one day when
she could not think of the name of a person, she described him, in a
large company of men and ladies, by the fellow with the broad
shoulders."

THE AUTHOR'S \[JOSEPH STRUTT\] LABOURS--CHARACTER OF THE
ENGRAVINGS.--Having laid before my readers a general view of the sports
and pastimes of our ancestors, I shall proceed to arrange them under
their proper heads, and allot to each of them a separate elucidation.
The task in truth is extremely difficult; and many omissions, as well as
many errors, must of necessity occur in the prosecution of it; but none,
I hope, of any great magnitude, nor more than candour will overlook,
especially when it is recollected, that in a variety of instances, I
have been constrained to proceed without any guide, and explore, as it
were, the recesses of a trackless wilderness. I must also entreat the
reader to excuse the frequent quotations which he will meet with, which
in general I have given verbatim; and this I have done for his
satisfaction, as well as my own, judging it much fairer to stand upon
the authority of others than to arrogate to myself the least degree of
penetration to which I have no claim.

It is necessary to add, that the engravings, which constitute an
essential part of this work, are not the produce of modern invention,
neither do they contain a single figure that has not its proper
authority. Most of the originals are exceedingly ancient, and all the
copies are faithfully made without the least unnecessary deviation. As
specimens of the art of design they have nothing to recommend them to
the modern eye, but as portraitures of the manners and usages of our
ancestors, in times remote, they are exceedingly valuable, because they
not only elucidate many obsolete customs, but lead to the explanation of
several obscurities in the history of former ages.

*January* 1801.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xvi:1](spe04.htm#fr_1) "These remarks require
some qualification, as the knowledge of the long period of the Roman
occupation, as well as of the times immediately preceding their first
invasion, have become more accurately known in the last half of the
nineteenth century, through careful archæological investigation. The
later Celts used gold coinage, cultivated four sorts of grain, practised
the crafts of spinning and weaving, melted iron and wrought cunning
ornamented work in both iron and bronze; used the flesh of the red deer
and the roe for food, and their horns for many a useful purpose; and
domesticated the horse, ox, goat and dog. Such a people, as shown by the
investigations at Hunsbury Camp, Northampton, and elsewhere, would
certainly have some acquaintance with genuine sports and pastimes,
little as we may know of their nature. The excavations at Silchester,
and more particularly those conducted by the late General Pitt Rivers
among the Romanised British villages of Dorset and Wilts, also afford
evidence of a superior race, with higher acquirements than was supposed
to be the case at the time when these pages were first written, and of
their acquaintance with various breeds of dogs.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xvi:2](spe04.htm#fr_2) Pontoppidan's *History of
Norway*, p. 248.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xvii:1](spe04.htm#fr_3) Oläi. Worm. Lit. Run. p.
129; Bartholin. p. 420.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xvii:2](spe04.htm#fr_4) Asser. in Vit. Ælfredi.
b

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xviii:1](spe04.htm#fr_5) De Moribus Germ.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xviii:2](spe04.htm#fr_6) Hist. Ramsien. aped
Gale, vol. i. an. 85.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xviii:3](spe04.htm#fr_7) No. 2293, fol. rob.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xix:1](spe04.htm#fr_8) The cross-bow.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xx:1](spe04.htm#fr_9) *Morte Arthur*, translated
from the French by Sir Thomas Malory, knight, and first printed by
Caxton, A.D. 1481. "The English," says a writer of our own country, "are
so naturally inclined to pleasure, that there is no countrie wherein
gentlemen and lords have so many and so large parkes, only reserved for
the purpose of hunting." And again, "Our progenitors were so delighted
with hunting, that the parkes are nowe growne infinite in number, and
are thought to containe more fallow deere than all the Christian world
besides." *Itinerary of Fynes Moryson*, published in 1617, part iii.
book iii. cap. 3.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxi:1](spe04.htm#fr_10) Written also paume;
that is, hand-tennis.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxi:2](spe04.htm#fr_11) *Romance of Three
Kings' Sons and the King of Sicily*, Harl. MS. 326.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxi:3](spe04.htm#fr_12) *Mom. Anc. Cheval.*
tom. i. p. 16.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxi:4](spe04.htm#fr_13) Harl. MS. 2252, p. 54b.
It is a long poem, extending from p. 54 to p. 84, entitled *The Lyfe of
Ipomydone, Son to Ermones, King of Toyle* (Apulia).

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxi:5](spe04.htm#fr_14) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xxii:1](spe04.htm#fr_15) Printed by Copeland;
black letter, without date; Garrick's Collection, K. vol. ix.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xxiv:1](spe04.htm#fr_16) For *vierge eseu*, a
virgin shield, or a white shield, without any devices, such as was borne
by the tyros in chivalry who had not performed any memorable action.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xxiv:2](spe04.htm#fr_17) A sword without edge
or point.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[xxiv:3](spe04.htm#fr_18) That is, with hearts
without points, or blunted so that they could do no hurt.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[xxiv:4](spe04.htm#fr_19) Foyne, or loin,
signifies to push or thrust with the sword, instead of striking.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[xxiv:5](spe04.htm#fr_20) Harl. MS. 69, f. 56.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[xxiv:6](spe04.htm#fr_21) *Ibid*. ff. 4b, 16b,
18.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[xxiv:7](spe04.htm#fr_22) Hall, *Life of Henry
VIII*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxv:1](spe04.htm#fr_23) *Arte of Rhetorike* by
Tho. Wilson, fol. 67.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[xxv:2](spe04.htm#fr_24) Fynes Moryson's
*Itinerary*, published A.D. 1617.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[xxvi:1](spe04.htm#fr_25) *Biograph. Brit.* p.
1236.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[xxvi:2](spe04.htm#fr_26) No. 17 D. iii.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[xxvii:1](spe04.htm#fr_27) Crowd is an ancient
name for the violin.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[xxviii:1](spe04.htm#fr_28) The words of Fitz
Stephen are, *Puellarum cithara ducit chores, et pede libero pulsatur
tellus, usque imminente lunâ*. The word *cithara*, Stow renders, but I
think not justly, timbrels.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[xxix:1](spe04.htm#fr_29) vol. i. p. 259.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[xxix:2](spe04.htm#fr_30) *Aiken. Oxon.* ii.
col. 812; and see Grainger's *Biographical History*, vol. ii. p. 398.
8vo. "There is a good illustrated account of these Cotswold Games in
Chambers' *Book of Days*, i. 712.754.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[xxix:3](spe04.htm#fr_31) In his *Proverbs*,
part i. chap. 11.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[xxx:1](spe04.htm#fr_32) Bede, *Eccl. Hist.*
lib. ii. cap. 16.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[xxx:2](spe04.htm#fr_33) Henry's *Hist*. vol.
ii. lib. v. cap. 7.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[xxx:3](spe04.htm#fr_34) See the *Northumberland
Family-Book*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[xxx:4](spe04.htm#fr_35) Johan. Sarisburiensis,
lib. i. c. viii. p. 34.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[xxxi:1](spe04.htm#fr_36) Pypes made of greene
come are also mentioned in the *Romance of the Rose*.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[xxxii:1](spe04.htm#fr_37) \[Before 1801.\]

<span id="fn_38"></span>[xxxv:1](spe04.htm#fr_38) Wylie's *History of
England under Henry IV*., vol. iii. ch. 75.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[xxxv:2](spe04.htm#fr_39) Garrick's *Collection
of Old Plays*, H. vol. iii.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[xxxv:3](spe04.htm#fr_40) No. 2220, fol. 7.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxxv:4](spe04.htm#fr_41) Or waits, the band of
city minstrels.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xxxvi:1](spe04.htm#fr_42) Holinshed, vol. iii.
pp. 1091, 1120, etc.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xxxvii:1](spe04.htm#fr_43) No. 1968, f. 576.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xxxvii:2](spe04.htm#fr_44) Harl. MS. 2125.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xxxviii:1](spe04.htm#fr_45) Garrick's
*Collection of Old Plays*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xxxviii:2](spe04.htm#fr_46) Cotton MS. *Titus*,
B. i.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xxxix:1](spe04.htm#fr_47) The reader may find
accounts of most of these excursions in a work entitled *The Progresses
of Queen Elizabeth*, in two volumes 4to, published by Mr Nichols.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xxxix:2](spe04.htm#fr_48) This account is
chiefly taken from a small pamphlet called *Princely Pleasures at
Kenelworth Castle*. *Progresses*, vol. i.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xl:1](spe04.htm#fr_49) Harl. MSS. 6395,
entitled Merry Passages and Jests, art. 221.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xlii:1](spe04.htm#fr_50) A Collection of
Ancient Documents respecting the Office of Master of the Revels
(Halliwell), 1870, *passim*.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xlii:2](spe04.htm#fr_51) These are given with
much detail in *Letters and Papers, Hen. VIII*., vol. ii. pp. 1490-1518.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xlii:3](spe04.htm#fr_52) *Dom. State Papers,
Elizabeth*, vol. i. 47.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xliii:1](spe04.htm#fr_53) *Dom. State Papers,
Elizabeth*, vol. ccxlviii. 120.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xliii:2](spe04.htm#fr_54) *Ibid*. vol. cclxii.
18.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xliii:3](spe04.htm#fr_55) *Ibid*. *James I*.,
vol. ii. 12; vol. lxxxi. 12.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xliii:4](spe04.htm#fr_56) *Ibid*. *James I*.,
vol. clxxi. 64.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xliii:5](spe04.htm#fr_57) *Ibid*. *Charles I*.,
ccv. 32.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xliii:6](spe04.htm#fr_58) *Ibid*. *Charles I*.,
ccxxxviii. 32.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xliv:1](spe04.htm#fr_59) *Dom. State Papers,
Charles II*., vol. xvii.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xliv:2](spe04.htm#fr_60) 9 *Ibid*. xxxix. 110.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xliv:3](spe04.htm#fr_61) *Ibid*. lxvii. 2.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xliv:4](spe04.htm#fr_62) *Ibid*. xxvi. 61.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xlv:1](spe04.htm#fr_63) There actually was such
a monkey exhibited at that time near Charing Cross, but in the bills
which were given to the public he is called a Wild Hairy Man, and they
tell us he performed all that the *Spectator* relates concerning him;
but this subject is treated more fully in the body of the work.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xlv:2](spe04.htm#fr_64) *Spectator*, vol. i.
No. 14.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xlv:3](spe04.htm#fr_65) *Ibid*. vol. i. No. 31,
dated Thursday, April 5, 1711.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xlv:4](spe04.htm#fr_66) A man famous at that
time for imitating a variety of musical instruments with his voice, and,
among others, the bells.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xlvi:1](spe04.htm#fr_67) "To pass over griefe,"
says an author of our own, "the Italians sleepe, the English go to
playes, the Spaniards lament, and the Irish bowl," etc. Fynes Moryson's
*Itinerary*, in 1617, part book i. cap. 3.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xlvii:1](spe04.htm#fr_68) Hentzner's
*Itinerary*, pp. 88, 89.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xlvii:2](spe04.htm#fr_69) *Hist. Angl.* lib.
xiii.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xlvii:3](spe04.htm#fr_70) *De Rerum Invent*.
lib. v. cap, 2.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xlvii:4](spe04.htm#fr_71) *Tatler*, No. 134,
dated Thursday, Feb. 16, 1709.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[xlvii:5](spe04.htm#fr_72) See a pamphlet
written by John Northbrooke, published in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
without date.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[xlvii:6](spe04.htm#fr_73) *School of Abuse*,
published 1579.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[xlviii:1](spe04.htm#fr_74) *Admonition to
Parliament*, by Tho. Cartwright, published A.D. 1572.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[xlviii:2](spe04.htm#fr_75) *The Pope's
Kingdom*, book iv. translated from the Latin of Tho. Neogeorgus, by
Barnabe Googe, and dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, A.D. 1570.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[xlviii:3](spe04.htm#fr_76) John Field, is his
*Declaration of God's Judgment at Paris Garden*, published A. D. 1603,
fol. 9.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[l:1](spe04.htm#fr_77) See [p. xx](#page_xx).

<span id="fn_78"></span>[l:2](spe04.htm#fr_78) Benedict. Abbas, Vit.
Ric. I. edit. à Hearne, tom. ii. p. 610.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[li:1](spe04.htm#fr_79) An. 11, Hen. VII. cap.
2.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[li:2](spe04.htm#fr_80) No householder might
permit the games prohibited by the statute to be practised in their
houses, excepting on the holidays, as before specified, under the
penalty of six shillings and eight-pence for every offence.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[li:3](spe04.htm#fr_81) *Survey of London*, p.
79.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[li:4](spe04.htm#fr_82) *Pilam manualem,
pedinam, el bacculoream, et ad cambucam*, etc.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[li:5](spe04.htm#fr_83) Rot. Claus. 39 Ed. III.
m. 23.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[li:6](spe04.htm#fr_84) The magistrates are
commanded to seize upon the said tables, dice, cards, boules, closhes,
tennice-balls, etc., and to burn them.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[li:7](spe04.htm#fr_85) An. 17 Edw. II. cap. 3.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[lii:1](spe04.htm#fr_86) *Survey of London*, p.
85.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[lii:2](spe04.htm#fr_87) Stephen Gosson, in *The
School of Abuse*, 1579.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[lii:3](spe04.htm#fr_88) An old anonymous poem
"of Covetice," cited by Warton, *History of Poetry*, vol. ii. p. 316.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[liii:1](spe04.htm#fr_89) Harl. Misc.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[liii:2](spe04.htm#fr_90) Steinmetz *Gaming
Table* (1870) i. ch. vi.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[liv:1](spe04.htm#fr_91) In the *Manners and
Customs of the English*; the *Chronicle of England*; and more
particularly in the *View of the Dresses of the English*, vol. i. p. 73,
vol. ii. p. 140, etc.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[liv:2](spe04.htm#fr_92) Harl. MS. 2252.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[liv:3](spe04.htm#fr_93) *Confessio Amantis*.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[liv:4](spe04.htm#fr_94) Warton's *History of
English Poetry*, vol. iii. p. 311.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[liv:5](spe04.htm#fr_95) Part ii. sect. 2, cap.
4.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[liv:6](spe04.htm#fr_96) No. 55, A.D. 1711.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](spe05)
