[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index) 
[England](../eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](art103) 
[Next](art105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

An Arthurian Miscellany at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## "BEOWULF AND ARTHUR AS ENGLISH IDEALS"

### by

## SARAH F. McNARY

This essay first appeared in *Poet-Lore: A Quarterly of World
Literature* 6.2 (1894), 528-36.  
  
   THE race-ideal is the product of race possibility, moulded into form
by the shaping power which lies behind literature, and breathed into
life by the divine spark of imagination. In the childhood of the nation
the ideal has its birth. It struggles into life with the first urgings
of self-consciousness. It grows as the organism grows, waxing greater
and more spiritual as the light of imagination shines more gloriously
upon it, waning if that heavenly glow be put to baser uses, and
perishing utterly when the last faint glimmer fades into the light of
common day. To know the successive ideals of a person and of a people is
to know that man and race not only in actuality, but in possibility, --
to know the inmost recesses and the farthest outreachings of their
natures; for with every people, as with every person, a succession of
ideals appears, following the prevailing lines of trend in the nation's
history. In the midst of the changes there is a frequent recurrence of
one form, which establishes itself in time as the permanent national
ideal.  
   As the race-ideal makes its appearance at an early period, so the
earliest forms of literature remain the most fitting for its expression.
The epic, with its large opportunities, its endless vista of deeds, is
bounded only by the limits of a hero's life. If by its nature the epic
claims this place in literature, its origin gives it a double right to
claim the setting forth of the race-ideal as its inalienable function;
for the singers of the old lays, and the shapers of the epics, had no
original concepts to give to the world. They voiced the race-thought,
the collective consciousness of the people. So, too, the ideal which
sprang up in the old days, and had its roots in the very vitals of the
nation, struck an ever deeper hold by virtue of continually added
elements of strength. A character whose acts are plainly stamped upon
scientifically verified history, who is limited by his actual deeds, who
has defined himself to the world by his known relations to the real and
the practical, does not readily become the universal, enduring ideal of
a race; but if he looms up in the faint, far light of myth and legend,
if his potentiality stretches out into an infinity of achievement, he so
kindles the imagination that it gladly embraces him as the being in
which it would realize itself. The conscious portrayal of the type in
literature is of later beginnings and more rapid growth, -- the product
of an observing, analytical, scientific age, when imagination has begun
to run to seed.  
   In English literature two main streams -- the Celtic and the Teutonic
-- are plainly discernible, though their waters have been mingled for
many a century, and have been modified by the influx of many smaller
tributaries. To examine the head-waters of these streams, and to see
what they have contributed to the English ideal, is the purpose of this
paper.  
   Whether the 'Beowulf' had its origin in nature, myth, or
hero-worship, or sober history, or whether it is a combination of all
three, is the province of the scholar to determine. The adoption of any
one of these theories will not change the æsthetic or ethical aspect of
the poem in its present form, nor will it in any degree modify the
impress of Teutonism which it bears, the stamp of the Teutonic character
and ideals. An analysis of the elements of this character will show how
far the early ideal has been realized in the English people, and how
long it has endured.  
   Over the whole poem broods the thought of Wyrd. The atmosphere is
gray and misty, like the marsh home of Grendel, and through the grayness
go stalking the huge dim forms of the giants and *nickers* of the
northern cult. The gray gloom is a reflection of the conception these
folk had of life, as well as a picture of the natural scenery which they
daily looked upon. The conditions of life point always in the direction
of tragedy. There is, however, no disposition to sit down and weep over
the melancholy of it. Beowulf stands up bravely and looks the issue in
the face, -- Fate must be fought against, whatever the odds. Brave
before all else is this Beowulf, with the bravery of a young, strong,
unsoftened people, the physical courage which not only meets an enemy
unshrinkingly, but seeks him out to fight with him alone and weaponless.
This is the very rapture and madness of bravery, the apotheosis of
daring. It is almost imaginative -- rather, it so strips off and defies
imagination as to capture that quality by the abnegation of it.  
   The love of praise and the desire for glory breathing through every
utterance in the poem, are not the evidence of a vaulting ambition which
seeks its goal through crooked ways, but rather the unrestrained
outbreak of the longing for appreciated activity and power. Its root is
in the instinct for the ruder kind of self-expression, the impulse to
fight, to overcome obstacles by muscular force. Beowulf does not seek to
conceal his desire for praise. He boasts of his exploits with a child's
simplicity of enjoyment. His age is too far from civilization to have
attained the virtue of modesty and the vice of hypocrisy. In spite of
this large boastfulness, there is a temperance in his judgment of men
and things, which predicates balance of temperament and strong wisdom in
the race which produced him.  
   The spirit of loyalty that has already grown, in Beowulf's time, into
a racial institution, is strongly impressed upon the poem. The duty of
the *thegn* to his lord, a service resting upon sentiment as well as
upon necessity, is performed heartily. The germ of feudalism and the
prophecy of chivalry are here discovered, but it is only a germ as yet.
Scarcely a hint of the love sentiment is to be found anywhere. Woman is
seen in various relations, occupying always a position of dignity, and
inspiring those feelings of respect, that sense of her inviolability,
which is the great honor of the Teutonic race; but the tenderer feeling
that nourished feudalism into chivalry is quite beyond the pale of
Beowulf's experience.  
   In spite of the interpolations by a later Christian editor, the poem
is pagan and of the essence of paganism. The old fragment touching the
Passing of Scyld hints at the mystery of birth and death; but aside from
this there is no looking beyond that after-mystery, no dwelling upon the
possibilities of the hereafter. The whole work is an embodiment of the
idea of practicality. Beowulf died, not to establish a principle, but to
secure the golden hoard of the fire-drake, and therefore the funeral
dirge of this hero knells him out of the memory of men. The history of
Beowulf is the pathos of paganism and of the material. It has been said
that this is a half-finished epos, benumbed in the midst of its growth.
It lies frozen because it is the imperfect ideal of a single, unmixed
race; because it is wanting in elements that lay hold upon the higher
imagination; because it was never touched by that "natural magic," that
divine spark which is of the essence of immortality. But though Beowulf,
as a single concrete character, passed so early out of English thought,
the elements of his being passed into the English people, and he lives
to-day in enduring qualities. He appears in history and literature in
varied forms. He lives the free life of law-abiding lawlessness with
Robin Hood in Sherwood Forest. His loyalty breathes again in
Shakespeare's Faulconbridge, -- a loyalty deepened into reverence for
the kingly office, and into love of race and country. He reaches
England's heart through the kindly and kingly heartiness of Henry the
Fifth. He stirs the English blood to go over seas on adventure in the
great days of Elizabeth. He fights again with Nelson and the Iron Duke.
Was his struggle with the dragons all in vain, when a dragon-slayer is
patron saint of England? If Beowulf is no longer an ideal in the higher
sense, it is because he has been lived into a type.  
   The course of thought in Anglo-Saxon times was comparatively simple,
uniform, and continuous. The race was virtually a unit, in spite of
transfer of abode, conquest by continual fighting, and the introduction
of a new religion. The Germanic races are stable in quality, and do not
easily change. With the Norman Conquest came a new spirit with a new
people, -- a spirit of intellectual struggle and achievement, an impulse
to search for new ideas and forms of expression, and to assimilate them
with the old. The growing mind of the nation acquired an unwonted
freedom of movement, the result of which is seen in the onward sweep of
development of all phases of life. Then the literary ideals of the
English people began to grow up into lusty youth. If among them all one
can be found which appears and reappears; which out of small yet
vigorous beginnings grows and changes and develops as the nation
advances; which has in it an alluring element that haunts the
imagination of poets, and lives on in the affections of the common
people, -- this may be called the English ideal. Therefore it is that
Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'Historia Britonum' forms perhaps the most
significant achievement of the new time. This lover of legend and of
folk-lore gathered from old writers of prose and verse, from legend,
tradition, and myth, out of his own Celtic fancy as well, the tale of
the deeds of the British kings from the remotest times to his own day.
The richness of the Celtic material from which he drew, the intricate
mazes of fancy opened up by recent investigations of that material,
contrast strongly with the simpler forms of Teutonic legend. The
earliest Arthur, from one point of view, suffers by comparison with
Beowulf, for the morals in early Celtic literature will not always bear
examination. What, then, is the secret of the charm? It is nothing else
than the exuberance of the fancy, the brightness of the coloring, the
invitation to boundless imaginative expansion, the germ of morality in
the midst of unmorality, which gave it the possibility of endurance. The
old dreams and memories which the deeds of Arthur and the prophesies of
Merlin aroused in the conquered Celts, awakened into fresh stirrings and
hopes, a keener intellectual life for the new-born English; and the
Celts became conquerors of the Teutons in a higher sense than they knew,
for they gave a hero not to the English only, but to all the world as
well. It is beyond the province of this paper to trace the spread of the
story over France and Germany and elsewhere. England has the sole claim
upon our thought.  
   In the old Welsh tales Arthur appears, according to some scholars,
first as a culture hero, or personification of a nature myth, then as a
historic leader of the Britons, and conqueror of the Saxons in twelve
battles. Later, when the Charlemagne cycle had come into England to
influence British tradition, Arthur grew into a mighty king and
world-conqueror, supernaturally endowed and guarded. The splendors of
his court and the glorious achievements of his knights, the atmosphere
of the marvellous and of the mysterious, as well as of the chivalric and
the heroic, which surrounded him, fascinated England and France alike,
and reaches down to our own day.  
   Soon after Geoffrey, Alfred of Beverley wrote the tales in Latin,
Geoffrey Gannar put them into Anglo-Norman verse, and Wace followed with
the account of the Round Table. Then came Walter Map, who gathered other
tales into the Arthur cycle, added the Quest of the Graal, and thus
emphasized the element of mysticism, the soul of Christian
spiritualization.  
   It was Layamon who first brought Arthur into English verse, when, at
the beginning of the thirteenth century, he drew from the oral
traditions of the people on the borderland of Wales, united them with
English legends and traces of ancient Germanic myths, made a foundation
structure of the work of Wace, and built upon it a noble poem. In it
Arthur is made a larger, more poetic, more spiritual character, and the
stories about him are told with touches of fine imagination.  
   From this time rhymers and romancers were not long wanting, who told
the old tales in their own fashion. At last came Sir Thomas Mallory, to
put into strong prose the composite story, which holds one yet by the
deathless power of true romance. From this time the treatment of Arthur
in great poetry is not for the sake of the story only, but with the
distinct acceptance of the ideal significance of the character, the
product of centuries, from the age when the Celtic myths of Cloudland
had their birth. Spenser brings him into the realm of Faerie, as the
embodiment of the soul's ideal of itself. Divested of his old
surroundings, and separated from his fellowship of knights, he seems
unlike the Arthur we have known; but this shows in what fashion he has
established himself in English thought, and how much more than the hero
of myth, or legend, or romance, he has become. From this time he haunts
the imagination of English poets. For years Milton held in his mind the
Arthur cycle as the possible subject of his great epic, but was kept
from it by the stern bent of a genius which drew away from humanity to
deal with themes more remote and awful. Dryden contemplated the same
subject when he too dreamed, as every poet does, of writing an immortal
epic. And all the while 'Beowulf' lay covered with the dust of
centuries, and without the power of life to claim a place in living
literature.  
   Arthur has come into this century with a yet deeper significance.
With all the old romantic coloring, with the splendor and the beauty of
Celtic fancy, with the dash and daring of chivalric adventure, with the
softening of the old mysticism, and with the allegorical spiritualism of
Spenser humanized into flesh and blood, the King Arthur of Tennyson adds
to all this the nineteenth-century conception of the meaning of life.  
   We have then set side by side the rude yet dignified figure of the
Beowulf of the dim, half-savage age of continental Teutonism, and this
Arthur who belongs to all time and is claimed by all peoples. Beowulf
remains in his place because he is set in a narrower mould of
nationalism; but Arthur has gone beyond his primitive race and country
into a cosmopolitan realm. Beowulf towers and looms through the chill
gray mist of the marshes; but the warm passionate smoke of mystical
incense softens the noble and splendid figure of Arthur. Fate broods
over Beowulf; the Christian notion of sin and atonement vitalizes the
Arthurian literature. Merlin guides him with his counsel and occult
power, and the Lady of the Lake is his help; but the counsellor that
Beowulf knows best is the practical wisdom of his own mind. When a deed
is to be done, the firm, well-proved strength of his own body must
accomplish it; no mysterious hand holds out to him a supernatural
weapon. Arthur fights with a charmed sword, and is protected from hurt
by a magic talisman. In Beowulf is the magnifying of the practical; in
Arthur is the concrete presentment of spiritual symbol. In the old story
Arthur did not die, but sailed away to return again. In a deeper sense
he cannot die, for he has touched the infinite issues of life and death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Samor, Lord of the Bright City, by H. H. Milman \[1818\]](art105)
