[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar075) [Next](gbar077)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 76.

'I tell you for an example. There was a man who had three vineyards,
which he let out to three husbandmen. Because the first knew not how to
cultivate the vineyard the vineyard brought forth only leaves. The
second taught the third how the vines ought to be cultivated; and he
most excellently hearkened to his words; and he cultivated his, as he
told him, insomuch that the vineyard of the third bore much. But the
second left his vineyard uncultivated, spending his time solely in
talking. When the time was come for paying the rent to the lord of the
vineyard, the first said: "Lord, I know not how thy vineyard ought to be
cultivated: therefore I have not received any fruit this year."

'The lord answered: "O fool, dost thou dwell alone in the world, that
thou hast not asked counsel of my second vinedresser, who knoweth well
how to cultivate the land? Certain it is that thou shalt pay me."

'And having said this he condemned him to work in prison until he should
pay his lord; who moved with pity at his simplicity liberated him,
saying: "Begone, for I will not that thou work longer at my vineyard; it
is enough for thee that I give thee thy debt."

'The second came, to whom the lord said: "Welcome, my vinedresser! Where
are the fruits that thou owest me? Assuredly, since thou knowest well
how to prune the vines, the vineyard that I let out to thee must needs
have borne much fruit."

'The second answered: "O lord, thy vineyard is backward because I have
not pruned the wood nor worked up the soil; but the vineyard hath not
borne fruit, so I cannot pay thee."

'Whereupon the lord called the third and with wonder said: "Thou saidst
to me that this man, to whom I let out the second vineyard, taught thee
perfectly to cultivate the vineyard which I let out to thee. How then
can it be that the vineyard I let out to him should not have borne
fruit, seeing it is all one soil?"

'The third answered: "Lord, the vines are not cultivated by talking
only, but he needs must sweat a shirt every day who willeth to make it
bring forth its fruit. And how shall thy vineyard of thy vinedresser
bear fruit, O lord, if he doth naught but waste the time in talking?
Sure it is, O lord, that if he had put into practice his own words,
\[while\] I who cannot talk so much have given thee the rent for two
years, he would have given thee the rent of the vineyard for five
years."

'The lord was wroth, and said with scorn to the vinedresser: "And so
thou hast wrought a great work in not cutting away the wood and
levelling the vineyard, wherefore there is owing to thee a great
reward!" And having called his servants he had him beaten without any
mercy. And then he put him into prison under the keeping of a cruel
servant who beat him every day, and never was willing to set him free
for prayers of his friends.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar077)
