[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar216) [Next](gbar218)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 217.

The soldiers took Judas and bound him, not without derision. For he
truthfully denied that he was Jesus; and the soldiers, mocking him,
said: 'Sir, fear not, for we are come to make thee king of Israel, and
we have bound thee because we know that thou dost refuse the kingdom.'

Judas answered: 'Now have ye lost your senses! Ye are come to take Jesus
of Nazareth, with arms and lanterns as \[against\] a robber; and ye have
bound me that have guided you, to make me king!'

Then the soldiers lost their patience, and with blows and kicks they
began to flout Judas, and they led him with fury into Jerusalem.

John and Peter followed the soldiers afar off; and they affirmed to him
who writeth that they saw all the examination that was made of Judas by
the high priest, and by the council of the Pharisees, who were assembled
to put Jesus to death. Whereupon Judas spake many words of madness,
insomuch that every one was filled with laughter, believing that he was
really Jesus, and that for fear of death he was feigning madness.
Whereupon the scribes bound his eyes with a bandage, and mocking him
said: 'Jesus, prophet of the Nazarenes,' (for so they called them who
believed in Jesus), 'tell us, who was it that smote thee?' And they
buffeted him and spat in his face.

When it was morning there assembled the great council of scribes and
elders of the people; and the high priest with the Pharisees sought
false witness against Judas, believing him to be Jesus: and they found
not that which they sought. And why say I that the chief priests
believed Judas to be Jesus? Nay, all the disciples, with him who
writeth, believed it; and more, the poor virgin mother of Jesus, with
his kinsfolk and friends, believed it, insomuch that the sorrow of every
one was incredible. As God liveth, he who writeth forgot all that Jesus
had said: how that he should be taken up from the world, and that he
should suffer in a third person, and bthat he should not die until near
the end of the world. Wherefore he went with the mother of Jesus and
with John to the cross.

The high priest caused Judas to be brought before him bound, and asked
him of his disciples and his doctrine.

Whereupon Judas, as though beside himself, answered nothing to the
point. The high priest then adjured him by the living God of Israel that
he would tell him the truth.

Judas answered: 'I have told you that I am Judas Iscariot, who promised
to give into your hands Jesus the Nazarene; and ye, by what art I know
not, are beside yourselves, for ye will have it by every means that I am
Jesus.'

The high priest answered: 'O perverse seducer, thou hast deceived all
Israel, beginning from Galilee even unto Jerusalem here, with thy
doctrine and false miracles: and now thinkest thou to flee the merited
punishment that befitteth thee by feigning to be mad? As God liveth,
thou shalt not escape it!' And having said this he commanded his
servants to smite him with buffetings and kicks, so that his
understanding might come back into his head. The derision which he then
suffered at the hands of the high priest's servants is past belief. For
they zealously devised new inventions to give pleasure to the council.
So they attired him as a juggler, and so treated him with hands and feet
that it would have moved the very Canaanites to compassion if they had
beheld that sight.

But the chief priests and Pharisees and elders of the people had their
hearts so exasperated against Jesus that, believing Judas to be really
Jesus, they took delight in seeing him so treated.

Afterwards they led him bound to the governor, who secretly loved Jesus.
Whereupon he, thinking that Judas was Jesus, made him enter into his
chamber, and spake to him, asking him for what cause the chief priests
and the people had given him into his hands.

Judas answered: 'If I tell thee the truth, thou wilt not believe me; for
perchance thou art deceived as the (chief) priests and the Pharisees are
deceived.'

The governor answered (thinking that he wished to speak concerning the
Law): 'Now knowest thou not that I am not a Jew? But the (chief) priests
and the elders of thy people have given thee into my hand; wherefore
tell us the truth, that I may do what is just. For I have power to set
thee free and to put thee to death.'

Judas answered: 'Sir, believe me, if thou put me to death, thou shalt do
a great wrong, for thou shalt slay an innocent person; seeing that I am
Judas Iscariot, and not Jesus, who is a magician, and by his art hath so
transformed me.'

When he heard this the governor marvelled greatly, so that he sought to
set him at liberty. The governor therefore went out, and smiling said:
'In the one case, at least, this man is not worthy of death, but rather
of compassion.' 'This man saith,' said the governor, 'that he is not
Jesus, but a certain Judas who guided the soldiery to take Jesus, and he
saith that Jesus the Galilean hath by his art magic so transformed him.
Wherefore, if this be true, it were a great wrong to kill him, seeing
that he were innocent. But if he is Jesus and denieth that he is,
assuredly he hath lost his understanding, and it were impious to slay a
madman.'

Then the chief priests and elders of the people, with the scribes and
Pharisees, cried out with shouts, saying: 'He is Jesus of Nazareth, for
we know him; for if he were not the malefactor we would not have given
him into thy hands. Nor is he mad; but rather malignant, for with this
device he seeketh to escape from our hands, and the sedition that he
would stir up if he should escape would be worse than the former.'

Pilate (for such was the governor's name), in order to rid himself of
such a case, said: 'He is a Galilean, and Herod is King of Galilee:
wherefore it pertaineth not to me to judge such a case, so take ye him
to Herod.'

Accordingly they led Judas to Herod, who of a long time had desired that
Jesus should go to his house. But Jesus had never been willing to go to
his house, because Herod was a Gentile, and adored the false and lying
gods, living after the manner of unclean Gentiles. Now when Judas had
been led thither, Herod asked him of many things, to which Judas gave
answers not to the purpose, denying that he was Jesus.

Then Herod mocked him, with all his court, and caused him to be clad in
white as the fools are clad, and sent him back to Pilate, saying to him,
'Do not fail in justice to the people of Israel!'

And this Herod wrote, because the chief priests and scribes and the
Pharisees had given him a good quantity of money. The governor having
heard that this was so from a servant of Herod, in order that he also
might gain some money, feigned that he desired to set Judas at liberty.
Whereupon he caused him to be scourged by his slaves, who were paid by
the scribes to slay him under the scourges. But God, who had decreed the
issue, reserved Judas for the cross, in order that he might suffer that
horrible death to which he had sold another. He did not suffer Judas to
die under the scourges, notwithstanding that the soldiers scourged him
so grievously that his body rained blood. Thereupon, in mockery they
clad him in an old purple garment, saying: 'It is fitting to our new
king to clothe him and crown him': so they gathered thorns and made a
crown, like those of gold and precious stones which kings wear on their
heads. And this crown of thorns they placed upon Judas' head, putting in
his hand a reed for scepter, and they made him sit in a high place. And
the soldiers came before him, bowing down in mockery, saluting him as
King of the Jews. And they held out their hands to receive gifts, such
as new kings are accustomed to give; and receiving nothing they smote
Judas, saying: 'Now, how art thou crowned, foolish king, if thou wilt
not pay thy soldiers and servants?'

The chief priests with the scribes and Pharisees, seeing that Judas died
not by the scourges, and fearing lest Pilate should set him at liberty,
made a gift of money to the governor, who having received it gave Judas
to the scribes and Pharisees as guilty unto death. Whereupon they
condemned two robbers with him to the death of the cross.

So they led him to Mount Calvary, where they used to hang malefactors,
and there they crucified him naked, for the greater ignominy.

Judas truly did nothing else but cry out: 'God, why hast thou forsaken
me, seeing the malefactor hath escaped and I die unjustly?'

Verily I say that the voice, the face, and the person of Judas were so
like to Jesus, that his disciples and believers entirely believed that
he was Jesus; wherefore some departed from the doctrine of Jesus,
believing that Jesus had been a false prophet, and that by art magic he
had done the miracles which he did: for Jesus had said that he should
not die till near the end of the world; for that at that time he should
be taken away from the world.

But they that stood firm in the doctrine of Jesus were so encompassed
with sorrow, seeing him die who was entirely like to Jesus, that they
remembered not what Jesus had said. And so in company with the mother of
Jesus they went to Mount Calvary, and were not only present at the death
of Judas, weeping continually, but by means of Nicodemus and Joseph of
Abarimathia they obtained from the governor the body of Judas to bury
it. Whereupon, they took him down from the cross with such weeping as
assuredly no one would believe, and buried him in the new sepulchre of
Joseph; having wrapped him up in an hundred pounds of precious
ointments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar218)
