[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar094) [Next](gbar096)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 95.

Accordingly the governor and the priest and the king prayed Jesus that
in order to quiet the people he should mount up into a lofty place and
speak to the people. Then went up Jesus on to one of the twelve stones
which Joshua made the twelve tribes take up from the midst of Jordan,
when all Israel passed over there dry shod; and he said with a loud
voice: 'Let our priest go up into a high place whence he may confirm my
words.' Thereupon the priest went up thither; to whom Jesus said
distinctly, so that every one might hear: 'It is written in the
testament and covenant of the living God that our God hath no beginning,
neither shall he ever have an end.'

The priest answered: 'Even so is it written therein.'

Jesus said: 'It is written there that our God by his word alone hath
created all things.'

'Even so it is,' said the priest.

Jesus said: 'It is written there that God is invisible and hidden from
the mind of man, seeing he is incorporeal and uncomposed, without
variableness.'

'So it is, truly,' said the priest.

Jesus said: 'It is written there how that the heaven of heavens cannot
contain him, seeing that our God is infinite.'

'So said Solomon the prophet,' said the priest. 'O Jesus.'

Said Jesus: 'It is written there that God hath no need, forasmuch as he
eateth not, sleepeth not, and suffereth not from any deficiency.'

'So is it,' said the priest.

Said Jesus: 'It is written there that our God is everywhere, and that
there is not any other god but he, who striketh down and maketh whole,
and doeth all that pleaseth him.'

'So is it written.' replied the priest.

Then Jesus, having lifted up his hands, said: 'Lord our God, this is my
faith wherewith I shall come to thy judgement: in testimony against
every one that shall believe the contrary. And turning himself towards
the people, he said: 'Repent, for from all that of which the priest hath
said that it is written in the book of Moses, the covenant of God for
ever, ye may perceive your sin; for that I am a visible man and a morsel
of clay that walketh upon the earth, mortal as are other men. And I have
had a beginning, and shall have an end, and \[am\] such that I cannot
create a fly over again.'

Thereupon the people raised their voices weeping, and said: 'We have
sinned, Lord our God, against thee; have mercy upon us.' And they prayed
Jesus, every one, that he would pray for the safety of the holy city,
that our God in his anger should not give it over to be trodden down of
the nations. Thereupon Jesus, having lifted up his hands, prayed for the
holy city and for the people of God, every one crying: 'So be it.'
'Amen.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar096)
