[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar089) [Next](gbar091)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 90.

When the prayer was done, his disciples again drew near to Jesus, and he
opened his mouth and said: 'Draw near, John, for to-day will I speak
unto thee of all that thou hast asked. Faith is a seal whereby God
sealeth his elect: which seal he gave to his messenger, at whose hands
every one that is elect hath received faith. For even as God is one, so
is the faith one. Wherefore God, having created before all things his
messenger, gave to him before aught else the faith which is as it were a
likeness of God and of all that God hath done and said. And so the
faithful by faith seeth all things, better than one seeth with his eyes;
because the eyes can err; nay they do almost always err; but faith
erreth never, for it hath for foundation God and his word. Believe me
that by faith are saved all the elect of God. And it is certain that
without faith it is impossible for anyone to please God. Wherefore Satan
seeketh not to bring to naught fasting and prayer, alms and pilgrimages,
nay rather he inciteth unbelievers thereto, for he taketh pleasure in
seeing man work without receiving pay. But he taketh pains with all
diligence to bring faith to nought, wherefore faith ought especially to
be guarded with diligence, and the safest course will be to abandon the
"Wherefore," seeing that the "Wherefore" drove men out of Paradise and
changed Satan from a most beautiful angel into a horrible devil.'

Then said John: 'Now, how shall we abandon the "Wherefore" seeing that
it is the gate of knowledge?'

Jesus answered: 'Nay, rather the "Wherefore" is the gate of hell.'

Thereupon John kept silence, when Jesus added: 'When thou knowest that
God hath said a thing, who art thou, O man, that thou shouldst say,
forsooth, "Wherefore hath thou so said, O God: wherefore hast thou so
done?" Shall the earthen vessel, perchance say to its maker: "Wherefore
hast thou made me to hold water and not to contain balsam?" Verily I say
unto you, it is necessary against every temptation to strengthen
yourself with this word, saying "God hath so said": "So hath God done":
"God so willeth"; for so doing thou shalt live safely.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar091)
