[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar040) [Next](gbar042)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 41.

'Then both of them knew that they were naked: wherefore, being ashamed,
they took fig leaves and made a clothing for their secret parts. When
midday was passed, behold God appeared to them, and called Adam, saying:
"Adam, where art thou?"

'He answered: "Lord, I did hide myself from thy presence because I and
my wife are naked, and so we are ashamed to present ourselves before
thee."

'Then said God: "And who hath robbed you of your innocence, unless ye
have eaten the fruit by reason of which ye are unclean, and will not be
able to abide longer in paradise?"

'Adam answered: "O Lord, the wife whom thou hast given me besought me to
eat, and so I have eaten thereof."

'Then said God to the woman: "Wherefore gavest thou such food to thy
husband?"

'Eve answered: "Satan deceived me, and so I did eat."

'"And how did that reprobate enter in hither?" said God.

'Eve answered: "A serpent that standeth at the northern gate brought him
near to me."

'Then said God to Adam: "Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy
wife and hast eaten the fruit, cursed be the earth in thy works; it
shall bring forth for thee brambles and thorns, and in the sweat of thy
face shalt thou eat bread. And remember that thou art earth, and to
earth shalt thou return."

'And he spake to Eve, saying: "And thou who didst hearken to Satan, and
gavest the food to thy husband, shalt abide under the dominion of man,
who shall keep thee as a slave, and thou shalt bear children with
travail."

'And having called the serpent, God called the angel Michael, him who
holdeth the sword of God, \[and\] said: "First drive forth from paradise
this wicked serpent, and when outside cut off his legs: for if he shall
wish to walk, he must trail his body upon the earth." Afterwards God
called Satan, who came laughing, and he said to him: "Because thou,
reprobate, hast deceived these and hast made them to become unclean, I
will that every uncleanness of them and of all their children, whereof
they shall be truly penitent and shall serve me, in going forth from
their body shall enter through thy mouth, and so shalt thou be satiated
with uncleanness."

'Satan then gave a horrible roar, and said: "Since thou willest to make
me ever worse, I yet will make me that which I shall be able!"

'Then said God: "Depart, cursed one, from my presence!" Then Satan
departed: whereupon God said to Adam \[and\] Eve, who were both weeping:
"Go ye forth from paradise, and do penance, and let not your hope fail,
for I will send your son to such wise that your seed shall lift the
dominion of Satan from off the human race: for he who shall come, my
messenger, to him will I give all things."

'God hid himself, and the angel Michael drove them forth from paradise.
Whereupon Adam, turning him round, saw written above the gate, "There is
only one God, and Mohammed is messenger of God." Whereupon, weeping, he
said: "May it be pleasing to God, O my son, that thou come quickly and
draw us out of misery."

'And thus,' said Jesus, 'sinned Satan and Adam through pride, the one by
despising man, the other by wishing to make himself equal with God.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar042)
