[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar032) [Next](gbar034)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 33.

Then said Jesus: 'Verily all that which a man loveth, for which he
leaveth everything else but that, is his god. And so the fornicator hath
for his image the harlot, the glutton and drunkard hath for image his
own flesh, and the covetous hath for his image silver and gold, and so
likewise every other sinner.'

Then said he who had invited him: 'Master, which is the greatest sin?'

Jesus answered: 'Which is the greatest ruin of a house?'

Everyone was silent, when Jesus with his finger pointed to the
foundation, and said: 'If the foundation give way, immediately the house
falleth in ruin, in such wise that it is necessary to build it up anew:
but if every other part give way it can be repaired. Even so then say I
to you, that idolatry is the greatest sin, because it depriveth a man
entirely of faith, and consequently of God; so that he can have no
spiritual affection. But every other sin leaveth to man the hope of
obtaining mercy: and therefore I say that idolatry is the greatest sin.'

All stood amazed at the speaking of Jesus, for they perceived that it
could not in any wise be assailed.

Then Jesus continued: 'Remember that which God spake and which Moses and
Joshua wrote in the law, and ye shall see how grave is this sin. Said
God, speaking to Israel: "Thou shalt not make to thyself any image of
those things which are in heaven nor of those things which are under the
heaven, nor shalt thou make it of those things which are above the
earth, nor of those which are above the water, nor of those which are
under the water. For I am thy God, strong and jealous, who will take
vengeance for this sin upon the fathers and upon their children even
unto the fourth generation." Remember how, when our people had made the
calf, and when they had worshipped it, by commandment of God Joshua and
the tribe of Levi took the sword and slew of them one hundred and twenty
thousand of those that did not crave mercy of God. Oh, terrible judgment
of God upon the idolaters!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar034)
