[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar086) [Next](gbar088)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 87.

'Woe unto the world because of offences. It needs must be that the
offence come, because all the world lieth in wickedness. But yet woe to
that man through whom the offence cometh. It were better for the man if
he should have a millstone about his neck and should be sunk in the
depths of the sea than that he should offend his neighbor. If thine eye
be an offence to thee, pluck it out; for it is better that thou go with
one eye only into paradise than with both of them into hell. If thy hand
or thy foot offend thee, do likewise, for it is better that thou go into
the kingdom of heaven with one foot or with one hand, than with two
hands and two feet go into hell.'

Said Simon, called Peter: 'Lord, how must I do this? Certain it is that
in a short time I shall be dismembered.'

Jesus answered: 'O Peter, put off fleshly prudence and straightway thou
shalt find the truth. For he that teacheth thee is thine eye, and he
that helpeth thee to work is thy foot, and he that ministereth aught
unto thee is thine hand. Wherefore when such are to thee an occasion of
sin leave them; for it is better for thee to go into paradise ignorant,
with few works, and poor, than to go into hell wise, with great works,
and rich. Everything that may hinder thee from serving God, cast it from
thee as a man casteth away everything that hindereth his sight.'

And having said this, Jesus called Peter close to him, and said unto
him: 'If thy brother shall sin against thee, go and correct him. If he
amend, rejoice, for thou hast gained thy brother; but if he shall not
amend go and call afresh two witnesses and correct him afresh; and if he
shall not amend, go and tell it to the church; and if he shall not then
amend, count him for an unbeliever, and therefore thou shalt not dwell
under the same roof whereunder he dwelleth, thou shalt not eat at the
same table whereat he sitteth, and thou shalt not speak with him;
insomuch that if thou know where he setteth his foot in walking thou
shalt not set they foot there.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar088)
