[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar143) [Next](gbar145)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 144.

'As God liveth, in whose presence my soul standeth, God sendeth his
prophets and servants into the world in order that sinners may repent;
and he sendeth not for the sake of the righteous, because they have no
need of repentance, even as he that is clean hath no need of the bath.
But verily I say unto you, if ye were true Pharisees ye would be glad
that I should have gone in to sinners for their salvation.

'Tell me, know ye your origin, and wherefore the world began to receive
Pharisees? Surely I will tell you, seeing that ye know it not. Wherefore
hearken to my words.

'Enoch, a friend of God, who walked with God in truth, making no account
of the world, was translated into paradise; and there he abideth until
the judgment (for when the end of the world draweth nigh he shall return
to the world with Elijah and one other). And so men, having knowledge of
this, through desire of paradise, began to seek God their creator. For
"Pharisee" strictly meaneth "seeketh God" in the language of Canaan, for
there did this name begin by way of deriding good men, seeing that the
Canaanites were given up to idolatry, which is the worship of human
hands.

'Whereupon the Canaanites beholding those of our people that were
separated from the world to serve God, in derision when they saw such an
one, said "Pharisee!" that is, "He seeketh God"; as much as to say: "O
mad fellow, thou hast no statues of idols and adorest the wind;
wherefore look to thy fate and come and serve our gods."

'Verily I say unto you,' said Jesus, 'all the saints and prophets of God
have been Pharisees not in name, as you are, but in very deed. For in
all their acts they sought God their creator, and for love of God they
forsook cities and their own goods, selling these and giving to the poor
for love of God.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar145)
