[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar085) [Next](gbar087)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 86.

Let thy friend be such that, even as he willeth to correct thee, so he
may receive correction; and even as he willeth that thou shouldest leave
all things for love of God, even so again it may content him that thou
forsake him for the service of God.

'But tell me, if a man know not how to love God how shall he know how.to
love himself; and how shall he know how to love others, not knowing how
to love himself? Assuredly this is impossible. Therefore when thou
choose thee one for friend (for verily he is supremely poor who hath no
friend at all), see that thou consider first, not his fine lineage, nor
his fine family, not his fine house, not his fine clothing, nor his fine
person, not yet his fine words, for thou shalt be easily deceived. But
look how he feareth God, how he despiseth earthly things, how he loveth
good works, and above all how he hateth his own flesh, and so shalt thou
easily find the true friend; if he above all things shall fear God, and
shall despise the vanities of the world; if he shall be always occupied
in good works, and shall hate his own body as a cruel enemy. Nor yet
shalt thou love such a friend in such wise that thy love stay in him,
for \[so\] shalt thou be an idolater. But love him as a gift that God
hath given thee, for so shall God adorn \[him\] with greater favour.
Verily I say unto you, that he who hath found a true friend hath found
one of the delights of paradise; nay, such is the key of paradise.'

Thaddaeus answered: 'But if perchance a man shall have a friend who is
not such as thou hast said, O master? What ought he to do? Ought he to
forsake him?'

Jesus answered: 'He ought to do as the mariner doth with the ship, who
saileth it so long as he perceiveth it to be profitable, but when he
seeth it to be a loss forsaketh it. So shalt thou do with thy friend
that is worse than thou: in those things wherein he is an offence to
thee, leave him if thou wouldst not be left of the mercy of God.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar087)
