[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Islam](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](gbar133) [Next](gbar135)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 134.

'They that bear good figs are the true teachers who preach good
doctrine, but the world, which taketh pleasure in lies, seeketh from the
teachers leaves of fine words and flattery. The which seeing, Satan
joineth himself with the flesh and the sense, and bringeth a large
supply of leaves; that is, a quantity of earthly things, in which he
covereth up sin; the which receiving, man becometh sick and ready for
eternal death.

'The citizen who hath the water and giveth his water to others to wash
off their uncleanness, but suffereth his own garments to become
putrefied, is the teacher who to others preacheth penitence and himself
abideth still in sin.

'O wretched man, because not the angels but his own tongue writeth upon
the air the punishment that is fitting for him!

'If one had the tongue of an elephant, and the rest of his body were as
small as an ant, would not this thing be monstrous? Yea, of a surety.
Now I say unto you, verily, that he is more monstrous who preacheth
penitence to others, but himself repenteth not of his sins.

'Those two men that sell apples are—the one, he who preacheth for love
of God, wherefore he flattereth none, but preacheth in truth, seeking
only a poor man's livelihood. As God liveth, in whose presence my soul
standeth, such a man is not received by the world, but rather despised.
But he who selleth the peel for its weight in gold, and giveth the apple
away, he it is who preacheth to please men: and, so flattering the
world, he ruineth the soul that followeth his flattery. Ah! how many
have perished for this cause!'

Then answered he who writeth and said: 'How should one listen to the
word of God; and how should one know him that preacheth for love of
God?'

Jesus answered: 'He that preacheth should be listened to as though God
were speaking, when he preacheth good doctrine; because God is speaking
through his mouth. But he that reproveth not sins, having respect of
persons, flattering particular men, should be avoided as an horrible
serpent, for in truth he poisoneth the human heart.'

'Understand ye? Verily I say unto you, even as a wounded man hath no
need of fine bandages to bind up his wounds, but rather of a good
ointment, so also hath a sinner no need of fine words, but rather of
good reproofs, in order that he may cease to sin.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](gbar135)
