<span id="P2103_656275"></span> <sup>36</sup> See \[vol. iii. p. 257,
also p. 477\] Tertullian, *Praescript*, c. xxx.; \[vol. iv. p. 245, this
series\] Origen, Peri arx., i. 2; Eusebius, *De Pvaep*., vii. 8, g; St,
Augustine, *Haer*., lix.; Theodoret, *Haer. Fab*., i. 19; and
Philastrius, *Haer*., lv.

<span id="P2104_657434"></span> <sup>37</sup> Literally, "unadorned."

<span id="P2105_658482"></span> <sup>38</sup> Ps. xix. 4, 5

<span id="P2109_658839"></span> <sup>39</sup> They were therefore called
"Quartodecimans." (See Eucebius, *Hist. Ecclesiast*., v. c. xxii. xxv.;
Epiphanius, *Haer*., l.; and Theodoret, fleer. *Haer. Fab*., iii. 4.)

<span id="P2110_659404"></span> <sup>40</sup> \[Bunsen, i. p. 105.\] The
chapter on the Quartodecimans agrees with the arguments which, we are
informed in an extract from Hippolytus' *Chronicon Paschalea*, as
preserved in a quotation by Bishop Peter of Alexandria, were employed in
his *Treatis against all Heresies*. This would seem irrefragable proof
of the authorship of the *Refutation of all Heresies*.

<span id="P2111_660096"></span> <sup>41</sup> Gal. v. 3.

<span id="P2112_660217"></span> <sup>42</sup> \[He regards the Christian
Paschal as authorized. 1 Cor. v. 7, 8\]

<span id="P2116_660492"></span> <sup>43</sup> These heretics had several
denominations: (I) Phrygians and Cataphrygians, from Phrygia; (2)
Pepuzian, from a villiage in Phrygia of this name; (3) Priscillianists;
(4) Quintillists See Esebius, *Hist. Ecclesiast*., iv, 27, v. 16, 18;
Epiphanius, *Haer*., xliii.; Theodoret, *Haer. Fab*., iii. 2;
Philastrius, xlix.; and St. Augustine, *Haer*., xxvi. \[The
"Tertullianists" were a class by themselves, which is a fact going far
to encourage the idea that they did not share the worst of these
delusions.\]

<span id="P2117_662213"></span> <sup>44</sup> Bunsen thinks that
Hippolytus is rather meagre in his details of the heresy of the
Phrygians or Montanists, but considers this, with other instances, a
proof that parts of *The Refutation*are only abstracts of more extended
accounts.

<span id="P2120_663303"></span> <sup>45</sup> \[See my Introductory Note
to *Hermas*, vol. ii. p. 5, this series.\]

<span id="P2122_664649"></span> <sup>46</sup> 1 Tim. iv. 1-5.

<span id="P2123_664812"></span> <sup>47</sup> \[This, Tertullian should
have learned. How happily Keble, in his *Christian Year*, gives it in
sacred verse: "We need not bid, for cloister'd cell, Our neighbour and
our work farewell, Nor strive to wind ourselves too high For sinful man
beneath the sky:" "The trivial round, the common task, Would furnish all
we ought to ask; Room to deny ourselves; a road To bring us daily nearer
God."\]

<span id="P2124_665400"></span> <sup>48</sup> Those did homage to Cain.

<span id="P2125_665440"></span> <sup>49</sup> The Ophites are not
considered, as Hippolytus has already devoted so much of his work to the
Naasseni. The former denomination is derived from the Greek, and the
latter from the Hebrew, and both signify worshippers of the serpent.

<span id="P2126_665690"></span> <sup>50</sup> Hippolytus seemingly makes
this a synonyme with Ophites. Perhaps it is connected with the Hebrew
word \#$hg

<span id="P2137_666866"></span> <sup>1</sup> Or, "fruitless" or
"meaning."

<span id="P2141_667317"></span> <sup>2</sup> \[Elucidation IV.\]

<span id="P2143_667743"></span> <sup>3</sup> \[1 Cor. xi. 19. These
terrible confusions were thus foretold. Note the remarkable feeling, the
impassioned tone, of the Apostle's warning in Acts xx. 28 - 31.\]

<span id="P2144_668139"></span> <sup>4</sup> \[The *Philosophumena*,
therefore, responds to the Apostle's warnings. Col. ii. 8; 1 Tim. vi.
20; Gal. iv. 3, 9; Col. ii. 20.\]

<span id="P2148_668611"></span> <sup>5</sup> See *Fragments of
Hippolytus' Works*(p.235 et seq.), edited by Fabricius: Theodoret,
*Haer. Fab*., iii. 3; Epiphanius, *Haer*., ivii.; and Philastrius,
*Haeret*., liv. Theodoret mentions Epigonus and Cleomenes, and his
account is obviously adopted by Hippolytus.

<span id="P2149_668974"></span> <sup>6</sup> \[See Tatian, vol, ii. p.
66, this series.\]

<span id="P2150_669392"></span> <sup>7</sup> \[See note 2a, cap. iii.
*infra*., and Elucidation V,\]

<span id="P2151_669719"></span> <sup>8</sup> \[See Elucidation Vl.\]

<span id="P2152_669851"></span> <sup>9</sup> \[See Elucidation Vl.\]

<span id="P2153_670159"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[Note the emphasis and
repeated statement with which our author dwells on this painful
charge.\]

<span id="P2154_670380"></span> <sup>11</sup> \[Elucidation VI.\]

<span id="P2155_670637"></span> <sup>12</sup> 2 Pet. ii. 22. \[See book
x. cap xxiii., p. 148, *infra*.\]

<span id="P2159_671022"></span> <sup>13</sup> \[O Zkoteinoj, because he
maintained the *darkest*system of sensual philosophy that ever shed
night over the human intellect. -T. Lewis in *Plato against the
Atheists*, p. 156; Elucidation VII.\]

<span id="P2160_671438"></span> <sup>14</sup> \[Note the use of this
phrase, "*imagine*themselves. etc," as a specialty of our author's
style. See cap. ii. *supra*; Elucidation VIII.\]

<span id="P2161_672106"></span> <sup>15</sup> \[Note the use of this
phrase, "*imagine*themselves. etc," as a specialty of our author's
style. See cap. ii. *supra*; Elucidation VIII.\]

<span id="P2165_672434"></span> <sup>16</sup> This addition seems
necessary from Stobaeus' account of Heraclitus. (See *Eclog. Phys*., i.
47, where we have Heraclitus affirming that "unity is from plurality,
and plurality from unity;" or, in other words, "that all things are
one.")

<span id="P2166_672798"></span> <sup>17</sup> Dr.Wordsworth for
dikaionsuggests eikaion, i e., "but that the Deity is by chance." There
is some difficulty in arriving at the correct text, and consequently at
the meaning of Hippolytus' extracts from Heraclitus. The Heraclitean
philosophy is explained by Stobaeus, already mentioned. See likewise
Bernays' "Critical Epistle" in Bunsen's *Analect. Ante-Nicaen*. )vol.
iii p. 331 et seq. of *Hippolytus and his Age*), and Schleiermacher in
&lt;\\i&gt;\\Museum der Alterthumswissensxhaft&lt;\\\|i&gt;\\, t. i p.
408 et seq.

<span id="P2167_673659"></span> <sup>18</sup> palintropoj. Miller
suggests palintonoj, the word used by Plutarch' (*De Isid. et Osirid*.,
p. 369, ed. Xyland) in recounting Heraclitus' opinion. Palintonoj,
referring to the shape of the bow, means "reflex" or "unstrung," or it
may signify "clanging," that is, as a consequence of its being well bent
back to wing a shaft.

<span id="P2168_674214"></span> <sup>19</sup> Compare Aristotle's
*Rhet*., iii. 5, and Sextus Empiricus, *Adv. Math*., lib. vii. p. 152
ed. Aurel, 1621.

<span id="P2169_674863"></span> <sup>20</sup> See Lucian, *Vit. Auct*.,
vol i. p. 554, ed. Hemsterh.

<span id="P2170_675335"></span> <sup>21</sup> This word seems necessary,
see Plutarch, *De Procreat. animae*, c. xxvii.

<span id="P2171_676155"></span> <sup>22</sup> This is a well-known
anecdote in the life of Homer. see Coleridge's *Greek Poets*-Homer.
\[The unsavoury story is decently given by Henry Nelson Coleridge in
this work, republished. Boston James Munroe & Co., 1842.\]

<span id="P2175_677371"></span> <sup>23</sup> See *Theogon*., v. 123 et
seq., v. 748 et st.

<span id="P2176_678256"></span> <sup>24</sup> Gnafewn: some read
gnafeiw, i.e., a fuller's soap. Tbe proper reading however, is probably
gnafwu, i.e., a carder's comb. Dr. Wordsworth's text has grafewnand en
tw grafeiw, and he translate.i the passage thus: "The path," says he,
"of the lines of the machine called the screw is both straight and
crooked, and the revolution in the raving-tool is both straight and
crooked."

<span id="P2177_678888"></span> <sup>25</sup> See Diogenes, *Laertius*,
ix. 8.

<span id="P2178_679368"></span> <sup>26</sup> Plato, Clemens
Alexandrinus, \[vol. ii. p. 384, this series\], and Sextus Empiricus
notice this doctrine of Heraclitus.

<span id="P2179_679896"></span> <sup>27</sup> Enqade eontaj: some read,
enqa qeon dei, i.e., "God must arise and become the guardian," etc. The
rendering in the text is adopted by Bernays and Bunsen.

<span id="P2181_681220"></span> <sup>28</sup> Or, "as commingled kinds
of incense *each*with different names, but denominated," etc.

<span id="P2182_681377"></span> <sup>29</sup> Dr. Wordsworth reads o
nomizetai, and translates the passage thus: "But they undergo changes,
as perfumes do, when whatever is thought agreeable to any individual is
mingled with them."

<span id="P2184_683253"></span> <sup>30</sup> Hippolytus repeats this
opinion in his summary in book x. (See Theodorit, *Haer. Fab*., iii. 3.)

<span id="P2188_684611"></span> <sup>31</sup> \[Elucidation IX\]

<span id="P2189_684769"></span> <sup>32</sup> \[Elucidation X.\]

<span id="P2190_685297"></span> <sup>33</sup> The MS. reads kaq hdian,
obviously corrupt. Dr. Wordsworth suggests kat idian, i.e., "he, under
pretext of arguing with them, deluded them."

<span id="P2192_686597"></span> <sup>34</sup> It is to be noticed how
the plural number i.i observed in this account, its keeping before the
reader's mind the episcopal office of him who was thus exercising high
ecclesiastical:authority. \[Elucidation XI.\]

<span id="P2193_687016"></span> <sup>35</sup> It is to be noticed how
the plural number i.i observed in this account, its keeping before the
reader's mind the episcopal office of him who was thus exercising high
ecclesiastical:authority. \[Elucidation XI.\]

<span id="P2194_687332"></span> <sup>36</sup> Or, "with violence."

<span id="P2195_687866"></span> <sup>37</sup> Hippolytus is obviously
sneering at the martyrdomn of Callistus, who did not m reality suffer or
die for the truth. Nay, his condemnation before Fuscianus enabled
Callistus to succeed entirely in his plans for worldly advancement.
\[The *martyrdom*of Callistus, so ludicrous in the eyes o( our author,
is *doctrine*in the Roman system. This heretic figures as a *saint*, and
has his festival on the 14th of October. *Maxima veneratione colitur*,
says the Roman Breviary.\]
