<span id="P3700_1167162"></span> <sup>199</sup> metenswmatwn, in
opposition to the dogma of metempsychosis.

<span id="P3701_1167501"></span> <sup>200</sup> In the *Timaeus*.

<span id="P3702_1167670"></span> <sup>201</sup> The first of the two
fragments in the *Parallela*, ends here.

<span id="P3703_1169259"></span> <sup>202</sup> \[The text Eccles. xi. 3
may be accommodated to this truth, but seems to have no force as
proof.\]

<span id="P3705_1169366"></span> <sup>203</sup> The second fragment
extant in the *Parallela* begins here.

<span id="P3706_1170148"></span> <sup>204</sup> Ps. cxix. 137.

<span id="P3707_1170769"></span> <sup>205</sup> \[It is not the
unrighteous, be it remembered, who go to "purgatory," according to the
Trent theology, but only true Christians, dying in full communion with
the Church. Hippolytus is here speaking of the ultimate doom of the
wicked, but bears in mind the imagery of Luke xvi. 24 and the appeal to
Abraham.)

<span id="P3708_1171344"></span> <sup>206</sup> The second fragment in
the *Parallela* ends here.

<span id="P3709_1172281"></span> <sup>207</sup> ekbrassomenh.

<span id="P3710_1172735"></span> <sup>208</sup> 1 Cor. ii. 9.

<span id="P3713_1172849"></span> <sup>209</sup> Epiphanius remarks that
they were but ten in number.

<span id="P3715_1173036"></span> <sup>210</sup> The following words are
the words of the *Symbolum*, as it is extant in Irenaeus, i. 10, etc.,
and iii. 4; and in Tertullian, *Contra Praxiam*, ch. ii., and *De
Praescript*., ch. xiii., and *De virginibus velandis*, ch. i. \[See vol.
iii,, this series.\]

<span id="P3716_1173319"></span> <sup>211</sup> Ex. iii. 6 nd Ex. xx. 3.

<span id="P3717_1173922"></span> <sup>212</sup> So also Epiphanius and
Damascenus. But Philastrius, *Heresy*, 53, puts Elijah for Aaron: hic
etiam dicebat se Moyscm esse, et fratrem suum Eliam prophetam.

<span id="P3722_1183483"></span> <sup>213</sup> Isa. xliv. 6.

<span id="P3723_1183510"></span> <sup>214</sup> Baruch iii. 35-58.
\[Based on Prov. viii., but so remarkable that Grotius presumptuously
declared it an interpolation. It reflects canonical Scripture, but has
no canonical value otherwise.\]

<span id="P3724_1183789"></span> <sup>215</sup> Isa. xlv. 14.

<span id="P3726_1184081"></span> <sup>216</sup> Rom. ix. 5.

<span id="P3727_1184268"></span> <sup>217</sup> kai autoij monokwla
xrwmenoi, etc. The word monokwlaappears to be used advervially, instead
oft monokwlwj and monotupwj, which are the terms employed by Epiphanius
(p. 481) The meaning is, that the Noetians, in explaining the words of
Scripture concerning Christ, looked only to one side of the question -
namely, to the divine nature; just as Theodotus, on his part going to
the opposite extreme, kept by the human nature exclusively, and held
that Christ was a mere man. Besides others, the presbyter Timotheus, in
*Colelerii Monument*, vol. iii. p. 389, mentions Theodotus in these
terms: "They say that this Theodotus was the leader and father of the
heresy of the Samosatan, having first alleged that Christ was a mere
man." \[See vol. iii, p. 654, this series.\]

<span id="P3728_1185242"></span> <sup>218</sup> Eph. iii. 15.

<span id="P3729_1185461"></span> <sup>219</sup> 1 Cor. viii. 6.

<span id="P3730_1185536"></span> <sup>220</sup> Isa. xlv. 11-15.

<span id="P3731_1186292"></span> <sup>221</sup> \[Bull, *Opp*, v. pp.
367. 734, 704-743, 753-756.\]

<span id="P3732_1186875"></span> <sup>222</sup> Rom. viii. 11.

<span id="P3733_1187198"></span> <sup>223</sup> Turrian has the
following note: "The Word of God constituted (operatum est) one Son to
God; i.e., the Word of God effected, that He who was the one Son of God
was also one Son of man, because as His hypostasis He assumed the flesh.
For thus was the Word made flesh."

<span id="P3735_1187551"></span> <sup>224</sup> John iii. 13.

<span id="P3736_1187676"></span> <sup>225</sup> \[ John iii. 13.\]

<span id="P3737_1187717"></span> <sup>226</sup> Dan. vii. 13.

<span id="P3738_1187810"></span> <sup>227</sup> Baruch iii. 36, etc.

<span id="P3739_1188131"></span> <sup>228</sup> Matt. xvii. 5.

<span id="P3740_1188317"></span> <sup>229</sup> The word *Israel* is
explained by Philo, *De praemiis et poenis*, p. 710, and elsewhere, as =
*a man seeing God*, orwn qeon, i.e., l) d@)d \#$y)

. So also in the *Constitutiones Apostol*., vii. 37, viii. 15; Eusebius,
*Praeparat*., xi. 6, p. 519, and in many others. To the same class may
be referred those who make Israel = oratikoj anhr kai qewrhtikoj, *a man
apt to see and speculate*, as Eusebius, *Praeparot*., p. 310, or = nouj
opwn qeon, as Optatus in the end of the second book; Didymus in Jerome,
and Jerome himself in various passages; Maximus, i. p. 284; Olympiodorus
on Ecclesiastes, ch. i.; Leontius, *De Sectis*, p. 392; Theophanes,
*Ceram. homil*., iv. p. 22, etc. Justin Martyr, *Dialog. cum Tryph.*.
\[see vol. i. pp. 226, 262\], adduces another etymology, anqrwpoj nikwn
dunamin.

<span id="P3741_1189756"></span> <sup>230</sup> Hippolytus reads
dihghsato for echghsato.

<span id="P3742_1190865"></span> <sup>231</sup> John i. 18.

<span id="P3743_1190910"></span> <sup>232</sup> John iii. 11, 13.

<span id="P3744_1190961"></span> <sup>233</sup> Rom. ix. 5.

<span id="P3746_1191432"></span> <sup>234</sup> Matt. xi. 27.

<span id="P3747_1191925"></span> <sup>235</sup> There is perhaps a play
on the words here- Nohtoj mh nown.

<span id="P3748_1192204"></span> <sup>236</sup> i.e., the other
thirty-one heresies, which Hippolytus had already attacked. From these
words it is apparent also that this treatise was the closing portion of
a book against the heresies (Fabricius).

<span id="P3750_1192890"></span> <sup>237</sup> \[This emphatic
testimony of our author to the sufficiency of the Scriptures is entirely
in keeping with the entire system of the AnteNicene Fathers. Note our
teeming indexes of Scripture texts.\]

<span id="P3752_1193997"></span> <sup>238</sup> See, on this passage,
Bull's *Defens. Fid. Nic.*, sec. iii. cap. viii. § 2, p. 2l9.

<span id="P3753_1194138"></span> <sup>239</sup> poluj hn.

<span id="P3754_1194225"></span> <sup>240</sup> alogoj, asofoj,
adunatoj, abougeutoj.

<span id="P3755_1194352"></span> <sup>241</sup> On these words see
Bossuet's explanation and defence, *Avertiss*., vi. § 68, *sur les
lettres de M. Furnien*.

<span id="P3756_1194902"></span> <sup>242</sup> aoxhgon, kai sumboulon,
kai ergathn.

<span id="P3757_1194992"></span> <sup>243</sup> The "begetting" of which
Hippolytus speaks here is not the generation, properly so called, but
that manifestation and bringing forth of the Word co-existing from
eternity with the Father, which referred to the creation of the world.
So at least Bull and Bossuet, as cited above; also Maranus, *De Divinit.
F. C.*, lib. iv. cap. xiii. § 3, p. 458.

<span id="P3758_1195548"></span> <sup>244</sup> fwj ek fwtoj. This
phrase, adopted by the Nicene Fathers, occurs before their time not only
here, but also in Justin Martyr, Tatian, and Athenagoras, as is noticed
by Grabe, *ad Irenaeum*, lib. ii. c. xxiii. Methodius also, in his
*Homily on Simwon and Anna*, p. 152, has the expression, su ei fwj
alhqinon ek fwtoj alhqinou Qeoj alhqinoj ek Qeou alhqinon. Athanasius
himself also uses the phrase luxnon ek luxnou, vol. i. p. 881, ed. Lips.
\[Illustratinq my remarks (p. v. of this volume), in the preface, as to
the study of Nicene theology in Ante-Vicene authors\].

<span id="P3759_1196180"></span> <sup>245</sup> noun.

<span id="P3761_1196476"></span> <sup>246</sup> Justin Martyr also says
that the Son is eteron ti, *something other*, from the Father; and
Tertullian affirms, *Filium et Patrem esse aluid ab alio*, with the same
intent as Hippolytus here, viz., to express the distinction of persons.
\[See vol. i. pp. 170, 216, 263, and vol. iii. p. 604.\]

<span id="P3762_1196955"></span> <sup>247</sup> ek tou pantoj.

<span id="P3763_1197064"></span> <sup>248</sup> Or reason.

<span id="P3764_1197145"></span> <sup>249</sup> paij.

<span id="P3766_1198282"></span> <sup>250</sup> Isa. lxv. 1.

<span id="P3767_1198820"></span> <sup>251</sup> John i. 1-3. Hippolytus
evidently puts the full stop at the oude en, attaching the o gegonen to
the following. So also Irenaeus, Clemens Alex., Origen, Theopbilus of
Antioch, and Eusebius, in severa/ places; so, too, of the Latin
Fathers-Tertullian, Lactantius, Victorinus, Augustine: and long after
these, Honorius Augustoduneneis, in his *De imagine Mundi*. This
punctuation was also adopted by the heretics Vilcntinus, Heracleon,
Theodotus, and the Macedonians and Eunomians; and hence it is rejected
by Epiphanius, ii. p. 80, and Chrysostoin. (Fabricius.)

<span id="P3768_1199515"></span> <sup>252</sup> John i. 10, 11.

<span id="P3769_1199671"></span> <sup>253</sup> Ps. xxxiii. 6.

<span id="P3771_1200051"></span> <sup>254</sup> uposthmati, foundation.
Victor reads en th upostasei, in the substance, nature: Syrnmachus has
en th omilia, in the fellowship.

<span id="P3772_1200230"></span> <sup>255</sup> Jer. xxiii. 18.

<span id="P3773_1200658"></span> <sup>256</sup> Acts x. 36.

<span id="P3774_1200730"></span> <sup>257</sup> to qelhma. Many of the
patristic theologians called the Son the Father's boulhsij or qelhma.
See the passages in Petavius, *De S. S. Trinitate*, lib. vi. c. 8,§ 21,
and vii. 12, § 12. \[Dubious.\]9 From this passage it is clear that
Hippolytus taught the doctrine of one God alone and three Persons. A
little before, in the eighth chapter, he said that there is one God,
according to substance or divine essence, which one substance is in
three Persons; and that, according to disposition or economy, there are
three Persons minifested. By the term *economy*, therefore, he
understands, with Tertullian, *adversus Praxcam*. ch. iii., the number
and disposition of the Trinity ( *numerum et dispositionem Trinitatis*).
Here he also calls the grace of the Holy Spirit the *third economy*, but
in the same way as Tertullian, who calls the Holy Spirit the *third
grade* ( *tertium grandum*). For the terms *gradus, forma, species,
dispositio*, and *aeconimia* mean the same in Tertuliian. (Maranus.)
Another proof that the Nicene Creed was a collection of AnteNicene
theologians.\]

<span id="P3776_1202234"></span> <sup>258</sup> oikonomia sumfwniaj
sunagetai eij ena Qeon, perhaps = the economy as being one of harmony,
leads to one God.

<span id="P3777_1202749"></span> <sup>259</sup> This mode of speaking of
the Father's *commanding*, and the Son's *obeying*, was used without any
offence, not only by Iranaeus, Hippolytus, Origen, and others before the
Council of Nicaea, but also after that council by the keenest opponents
of the Arian heresy -Athanasius, Basil, Marius Victorinus, Hilary,
Prosper, and other. See Petavius, *De Trin*., i. 7, § 7; and Bull,
*Defens Fid*. Nic., pp. 138, 164, 167, 170. (Fabricius.)

<span id="P3778_1203264"></span> <sup>260</sup> sunetidon.

<span id="P3779_1203350"></span> <sup>261</sup> Referring probably to
Eph. iv. 6.

<span id="P3780_1203420"></span> <sup>262</sup> The Christian doctrine,
Maranus remarks, could not be set forth more accurately; for he contends
not only that the number of Persons in no manner detracts from the unity
of God, but that the unity of God itself can neither consist nor be
adored without this number of Persons.

<span id="P3781_1203813"></span> <sup>263</sup> This is said probably
with reference to Peter's denial.

<span id="P3782_1204142"></span> <sup>264</sup> Matt. xxviii. 19.

<span id="P3783_1204510"></span> <sup>265</sup> Triadoj. \[See
Theophilus, vol. ii. p. 101, note.\]

<span id="P3785_1205040"></span> <sup>266</sup> all= allwj allhgorei.
The words in Italics are given only in the Latin. They may have dropped
from the Greek text. At any rate, some such addition seems necessary for
the sense.

<span id="P3786_1205726"></span> <sup>267</sup> Apoc. xix. 11-13.

<span id="P3787_1206225"></span> <sup>268</sup> Mic. ii. 7, 8. docan: In
the present text of the Septuagint it is doran, skin.

<span id="P3788_1206645"></span> <sup>269</sup> Hippolytus omits the
words dia thj sarkoj and kai peri amartiaj, and reads fanerwqh for
plhrwqh.

<span id="P3789_1206821"></span> <sup>270</sup> on Uion proshgoreue dia
to mellein auto/ genesqai.

<span id="P3790_1207119"></span> <sup>271</sup> Hippolytus thus gives
more definite expression to this temporality of the Sonship, as Dorner
remarks, than even Tertullian. See Dorner's *Doctrine of the Person of
Christ* (T. & T. Clark), div. i. vol. ii. p. 88, etc. \[Pearson *On the
Creed*, art. ii. p. 199 et seqq. The patristic citations are sufficient,
and Hippolytus may be harmonized with them.\]

<span id="P3791_1207627"></span> <sup>272</sup> thn sustasin.

<span id="P3792_1207661"></span> <sup>273</sup> "Sustasij," says Dornery
"be it observed, is not yet equiva1ent to personality. The sense is, it
had its subsistence in the Logos; He was the connective and vehicular
force. This is thoroughly unobjectionable. He does not thus necessarily
pronounce the humanity of Christ impersonal; although in view of what
has preceded, and what remains to be adduced, there can be no doubt
\[?\] that Hippolytus would have defende the impersonality, had the
question been agitated at the period at which he lived." See Dorner, as
above, i. 95. \[But compare Burton, *Testimonies of the Ante-Nicene
Father*, etc., pp. 60-87, where Tertullian and Hippolytus speak for
themselves. Note also what he says of the latter, and his variations of
expression, p. 87.\]

<span id="P3794_1208820"></span> <sup>274</sup> John xvi. 28.

<span id="P3795_1208917"></span> <sup>275</sup> Reading echlqon. The
Latin interpreter seems to read ecelqon= what is this that came forth.

<span id="P3796_1209096"></span> <sup>276</sup> pneuma. The divine in
Christ is thus designated in the AnteNicene Fathers generally. See
Grotius on Mark ii. 8: and for a full history of the term in this use,
Dorner's *Person of Christ*, i. p. 390, etc. (Clark).

<span id="P3797_1209584"></span> <sup>277</sup> thn peri touton
oikonomian.

<span id="P3798_1209715"></span> <sup>278</sup> thn tou dhmiourghsantoj
empeiron kai anekdihghtou texnhn.

<span id="P3799_1210310"></span> <sup>279</sup> i.e., Matthew and Luke
in their Gospels.
