<span id="P512_111150"></span> <sup>126</sup> Or "youngest," or "most
vigorous." This is Hesiod's word, which signifies literally," fittest
for bearing arms" (for service, as we say).

<span id="P516_111766"></span> <sup>127</sup> "The majority of those who
first formed systems of philosophy, consider those that subsist in a
form of matter, to be alone the principle of all things."-Aristotle's
*Metaphisics*, book i. c. iii. p. 13 (Bohn's ed.).

<span id="P526_113917"></span> <sup>1</sup> Or, "interval."

<span id="P527_114159"></span> <sup>2</sup> Hippolytus gives the
substance of Sextus Empiricus' remarks, omitting, however, a portion of
the passage followed. (See Sextus Empiricus' *Mathem*., v. 44.)

<span id="P528_114369"></span> <sup>3</sup> Or, "celestial."

<span id="P532_114673"></span> <sup>4</sup> Or, "Celbes," or "Ademes."
The first is the form of the name employed in book v. c, viii.; the
second in book x. c. vi.

<span id="P536_116494"></span> <sup>5</sup> This passage occurs in
Sextus Empiricus.

<span id="P537_116596"></span> <sup>6</sup> Or, "the knowledge of."

<span id="P538_116639"></span> <sup>7</sup> Horoscope (from wpa skopoj)
is the act of observing the aspect of the heavens at the moment of any
particular birth. Hereby the astrologer alleged his ability of
foretelling the future career of the person so born. The most important
part of the sky for the astrologer's consideration was that sign of the
Zodiac which rose above the horizon at the moment of parturition. This
was the "horoscope ascendant," or "first house." The circuit of the
heavens was divided into twelve "houses," or zodiacal signs.

<span id="P539_118055"></span> <sup>8</sup> Or, "difference."

<span id="P540_118140"></span> <sup>9</sup> Or," during."

<span id="P541_118180"></span> <sup>10</sup> apotecewj; some would read
apotacewj.

<span id="P542_118306"></span> <sup>11</sup> The passage is given more
explicitly in Sextus Empiricus. (See *Adversus Astrol*., v. 53.)

<span id="P544_118881"></span> <sup>12</sup> Sextus uses almost these
words.

<span id="P545_119413"></span> <sup>13</sup> Or "lodgment" (Sextus), or
"deposition."

<span id="P546_119772"></span> <sup>14</sup> Or, "attendants of
physicians."

<span id="P547_119921"></span> <sup>15</sup> Or, "make."

<span id="P548_120665"></span> <sup>16</sup> Or, "vanishes."

<span id="P549_120888"></span> <sup>17</sup> Not in Sextus Empiricus.

<span id="P550_121136"></span> <sup>18</sup> The passage is more clearly
given in Sextus.

<span id="P554_122217"></span> <sup>19</sup> Or, "the cold atmosphere."

<span id="P555_122417"></span> <sup>20</sup> Or, "manifestation."

<span id="P557_123139"></span> <sup>21</sup> Or, "manifestation."

<span id="P558_123730"></span> <sup>22</sup> Or, "reasonable."

<span id="P559_125064"></span> <sup>23</sup> Or, "but the motion... is
whirled on with velocity."

<span id="P560_125214"></span> <sup>24</sup> This rendering of the
passage may be deduced from Sextus Empiricus.

<span id="P564_125677"></span> <sup>25</sup> The text is corrupt, but
the above seems probably the meaning, and agrees with the rendering of
Schneidewin and Cruice.

<span id="P565_126242"></span> <sup>26</sup> Or, "view."

<span id="P567_126862"></span> <sup>27</sup> The clepsydra, an
instrument for measuring duration, was, with the sun-dial, invented by
the Egyptians under the Ptolemies. It was employed not only for the
measurernent of time, but for making astronomic calculations. Water, as
the name imports, was the fluid employed, though mercury has been
likewise used. The inherent defect of an instrument of this description
is mentioned by Hippolytus.

<span id="P568_127536"></span> <sup>28</sup> Literally, "twisting,
tergiversating."

<span id="P569_127687"></span> <sup>29</sup> This seems the meaning, as
deducible from a comparison of Hippolytus with the corresponding passage
in Sextus Empiricus.

<span id="P571_128995"></span> <sup>30</sup> Omitted by Sextus.

<span id="P572_129259"></span> <sup>31</sup> The Abbe Cruice observes,
in regard of some verbal difference here in the text from that of
Sextus, that the MS. of *The Refutation*was probably executed by one who
heard the extracts from other writers read to him, and frequently
mistook the sound. The transcriber of the MS. was one Michael, as we
learn from a marginal note at the end.

<span id="P576_130379"></span> <sup>32</sup> This was the great doctrine
of astrology, the forerunner of the science of astronomy. Astrology
seems to have arisen first among the Chaldeans, out of the fundamental
principle of their religion -the assimilation of the divine nature to
light. This tenet introduced another, the worship of the stars, which
was developed into astrology. Others suppose astrology to have been of
Arabian or Egyptian origin. From some of these sources it reached the
Greeks, and through them the Romans, who held the astrologic art in high
repute. The art, after having become almost extinct, was revived by the
Arabians at the verve of the middle ages. For the history of astrology
one must consult the writings of Manilius, Julius Firmicus, and Ptolemy.
Its greatest medieval apologist is Cardan, the famous physician of Paris
(see his work, *De Astron. Judic.*, lib. vi.-ix. tom. v. of his
collected works).

<span id="P577_131413"></span> <sup>33</sup> Sextus adds, "bright-eyed."

<span id="P578_131801"></span> <sup>34</sup> Hippolytus here follows
Sextus.

<span id="P579_132150"></span> <sup>35</sup> Aratus, from whom
Hippolytus quotes so frequently in this chapter, was a poet and
astronomer of antiquity, born at Soli in Cilicia. He afterwards became
physician to Gonatus, son of Demetrius Poliorcetes, king of Macedon, at
whose court he rose high into favour. The work alluded to by Hippolytus
is Aratus' *Phaenomena*,-a versified account of the motions of the
stars, and of sidereal influence over men. This work seems to have been
a great favourite with scholars, if we are to judge from the many
excellent annotated editions of it that have appeared. Two of these
deserve notice, viz., Grotius' Leyden edition, 1600, in Greek and Latin;
and Buhle's edition, Leipsic, 1803. See also Dionysius Petavius'
Uranoiogion. Arbutus must always be famous, from the fact that St. Paul
(Acts xiii. 28) quotes the fifth line of the *Phaenomena*. Cicero
considered Aratus a noble poet, and translated the *Phaenimena* into
Latin, a fragment of which has been preserved, and is in Grotius'
edition. Aratus has been translated into English verse, with notes by
Dr. Lamb, Dean of Bristol (London: J. W. Parker, 1858).

<span id="P585_133677"></span> <sup>36</sup> The Abbe Cruice suggests
"freedom from danger," instead of "cowardice," and translates thus:
"whereby kings are slain, by having impunity promised in the predictions
of these seers."

<span id="P586_134470"></span> <sup>37</sup> Sextus makes the number
"nine thousand nine hundred and seventy and seven years."

<span id="P587_134901"></span> <sup>38</sup> The parenthetical words are
taken from Sextus Empiricus, as introduced into his text by the Abbe
Cruice. Schneidewin alludes to the passage in Sextus as proof of some
confusion in Hippolytus' text, which he thinks is signified by the
transcriber in the words, "I think there is some deficiency or
omissions," which occur in the MS. of *The Refutation*.

<span id="P592_136469"></span> <sup>39</sup> As regards astological
predictions, see Origen's *Comment. on Gen*.; Diodorus of Tarsus, *De
Fato*; Photii *Biblioth*., cod, ccxxiii.; and Bardesanis, *De Legibus
Nationum*, in Cureton's *Spicilegium Syriacum*.

<span id="P593_136877"></span> <sup>40</sup> See Plato's *Timaeus*.

<span id="P595_138754"></span> <sup>41</sup> Schneidewin, on Roeper's
suggestion, amends the passage thus, though I am not sure that I exactly
render his almost unintelligible Latin version: "For as many sections as
there are of eacb, there are educible from the monad more segments than
sections; for example, if," etc. The Abbe Cruice would seemingly adopt
the following version: "For whatsoever are sections of each, now there
are more segments than sections of a monad, will become; for example,
if," etc.

<span id="P596_140070"></span> <sup>42</sup> Schneidewin, on
mathematical authority, discredits the numerical calculations ascribed
to Archimedes.

<span id="P597_140670"></span> <sup>43</sup> This is manifestly
erroneous; the total could only be "four myriads!"
