<span id="P6800_2185636"></span> <sup>42</sup> See secs. 9 and 10.

<span id="P6805_2186868"></span> <sup>43</sup> Acts xv. 7.

<span id="P6806_2187086"></span> <sup>44</sup> See illustrations in
Faber's *Difficulties of Romanism*, cap. iii. pp. 46-88, London, 1830.
This work is a succinct reply to Berington and Kirk lately reprinted in
New York. It refutes itself. Compare vol. i. pp. ix, and x., with the
*new dogmas*, vol. iii. pp. 443-460.

<span id="P6813_2188893"></span> <sup>45</sup> See Eusebius, H. E., vi.
cap. lxiii.

<span id="P6814_2189154"></span> <sup>46</sup> Tertullian, vol. iii. p.
661.

<span id="P6819_2189519"></span> <sup>47</sup> Vol. iii. p. 45, this
series.

<span id="P6833_2190704"></span> <sup>1</sup> \[Written A.D. 251.
Although, in order of time, this treatise would be the third, I have
placed it here because of its dignity, and because of its importance as
a key to the entire writings of Cyprian; for this theory is everywhere
the underlying principle of his conduct and of his correspondence. It
illustrates the epistles of Ignatius as well as his own, and gives the
sense in which the primitive Christians understood these words of the
Creed, "the Holy Catholic Church." This treatise has been subjected to
falsifying interpolations, long since exposed and detected, to make it
less subversive of the countertheory of Rome as developed by the school
doctors. Elucidation I.\]

<span id="P6836_2192080"></span> <sup>2</sup> Describing in few words
the ambition and dissimulation of Novatian in invading the episcopate of
Rome, he argues at length, that neither on the one hand is the passage
in Matthew xviii of any avail to compensate for their fewness as against
the Church: "Wherever two or three are gathered together in my name,"
etc.; nor, on the other, could martyrdom be of any benefit to them
outside the Church. Then he tells them that they need not marvel that
heresies nourished, since they had been foretold by Christ; nor that
certain Roman confessors acquiesced in the schism, because before one's
death no one is blessed, and the traitor Judas was found in the very
compnny of the apostles. Yet he charges them to shun the association of
schismatics and heretics, and finally exhorts them by the Scriptures to
peace and unanimity.

<span id="P6838_2192974"></span> <sup>3</sup> Matt. v. 13.

<span id="P6839_2193897"></span> <sup>4</sup> The creeping, stealing
thing.

<span id="P6841_2194507"></span> <sup>5</sup> Or, "living."

<span id="P6842_2194895"></span> <sup>6</sup> Matt. xix. 17.

<span id="P6843_2195015"></span> <sup>7</sup> John xiv. 15.

<span id="P6844_2195520"></span> <sup>8</sup> Matt. vii. 24.

<span id="P6846_2196993"></span> <sup>9</sup> \[Here note that our
author's entire ignorance of any Centre of Unity, of any one See as the
test of communion; in short, of any one bishop as having more of Peter's
authority than others,- is a sufficient disproof of the existence of any
such things. Otherwise, how could they have been overlooked in a
treatise devoted to the subject of unity, its nature and its *criteria*?
The effort to foist into the text something of the kind, by corruption,
demonstrates how entirely unsatesfactory to the Middle-Age theorists and
dogmatists is the unadulterated work, which they could not let alone.\]

<span id="P6848_2198949"></span> <sup>10</sup> \[On the falsifying of
the text by Romish editors, see Elucidation II.\]

<span id="P6849_2199368"></span> <sup>11</sup> Matt. xvi. 18, 199.

<span id="P6850_2199466"></span> <sup>12</sup> John xxi. 15. \[Here is
interpolated\]: "Upon him, being one, He builds His Church, and commits
His sheep to be fed."

<span id="P6851_2199876"></span> <sup>13</sup> John xx. 21.

<span id="P6852_2200174"></span> <sup>14</sup> \[Here is interpolated\]:
"And the primacy is given to Peter, that there might be shown one Church
of Christ and one See; and they are all shepherds, and the Rock is one,
which is fed by all the apostles with unanimous consent." This passage,
as well as the one a few lines before, is beyond all question spurious.

<span id="P6853_2200704"></span> <sup>15</sup> Cant. vi. 9.

<span id="P6854_2200855"></span> <sup>16</sup> \[Here is interpolated\];
"Who deserts the chair of Peter, upon whom the Church is founded." This
passage also is undoubtedly spurious.

<span id="P6855_2201242"></span> <sup>17</sup> Eph. iv. 4.

<span id="P6857_2201451"></span> <sup>18</sup> \[i.e., the universal
episcopate is the chair of Peter.\]

<span id="P6858_2201711"></span> <sup>19</sup> \[This maxim is the
essence of the treatise; i.e., "Ecclesia in Episcopo." Compare p. 333,
note 9, *supra*.\]

<span id="P6860_2203756"></span> <sup>20</sup> Matt. xii. 30.

<span id="P6861_2203982"></span> <sup>21</sup> John x. 30.

<span id="P6862_2204105"></span> <sup>22</sup> 1 John v. 7.

<span id="P6864_2204823"></span> <sup>23</sup> The above reading of this
passage seems hopelessly obscure; and it is not much mended apparently
by substituting "ipsam " (or Christum, unless "potius" be omitted, as in
some editions, in which case we should read, "who should put it on."

<span id="P6865_2205257"></span> <sup>24</sup> John xix. 23, 24.

<span id="P6866_2206090"></span> <sup>25</sup> 1 Kings xi. 31.

<span id="P6868_2206825"></span> <sup>26</sup> John x. 16.

<span id="P6869_2207241"></span> <sup>27</sup> 1 Cor. i. 10.

<span id="P6870_2207381"></span> <sup>28</sup> Eph. iv. 3.

<span id="P6871_2207844"></span> <sup>29</sup> Josh. ii. 19.

<span id="P6872_2208137"></span> <sup>30</sup> Ex. xii. 46.

<span id="P6873_2208312"></span> <sup>31</sup> "Hospitium."

<span id="P6874_2208466"></span> <sup>32</sup> Ps. lxviii. 6.

<span id="P6876_2210361"></span> <sup>33</sup> 1 John ii. 19.

<span id="P6878_2210984"></span> <sup>34</sup> 1 Cor. xi. 19.

<span id="P6880_2212534"></span> <sup>35</sup> Jer. xxiii. 16-21.

<span id="P6881_2212741"></span> <sup>36</sup> Jer. ii. 13.

<span id="P6883_2213542"></span> <sup>37</sup> Matt. xviii. 20.

<span id="P6884_2214119"></span> <sup>38</sup> Matt. xviii. 19,
20.\[Compare John\].

<span id="P6886_2216790"></span> <sup>39</sup> Mark xi. 25. \[Freeman,
*Principles*, etc. vol. i. 417.\]

<span id="P6888_2218520"></span> <sup>40</sup> 1 Cor. xiii. 2-5, 7, 8.

<span id="P6889_2218858"></span> <sup>41</sup> John xv. 12.

<span id="P6890_2218893"></span> <sup>42</sup> According to some
readings, "to Christ," or "to the rewards of Christ."

<span id="P6891_2219206"></span> <sup>43</sup> 1 John iv. 16.

<span id="P6892_2219825"></span> <sup>44</sup> Mark xiii. 6.

<span id="P6894_2220577"></span> <sup>45</sup> Matt. vii. 22.

<span id="P6895_2221161"></span> <sup>46</sup> Mark xii. 29-31.

<span id="P6897_2222265"></span> <sup>47</sup> Deformationem Religionis.

<span id="P6898_2222610"></span> <sup>48</sup> Some introduce, "men
corrupted in feeling, reprobate concerning the faith."

<span id="P6899_2222800"></span> <sup>49</sup> 2 Tim. iii. 1-9. \[Vol.
iv. p. 521, this series.\]
