[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13a008) 
[Next](m13a010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION IX

"Yudhisthira said, 'O grandsire, O thou of great splendour, what do
those men become who, through stupefaction of intellect, do not make
gifts unto Brahmanas after having promised to make those gifts? O thou
that art the foremost of all righteous persons, do tell me what the
duties are in this respect. Indeed, what becomes the end of those wicked
wights that do not give after having promised to give.'"

"Bhishma said, 'The person that, after having promised, does not give,
be it little or much, has the mortification to see his hopes (in every
direction) become fruitless like the hopes of a eunuch in respect of
progeny. Whatever good acts such a person does between the day of his
birth and that of his death, O Bharata, whatever libations he pours on
the sacrificial fire, whatever gifts he makes, O chief of Bharata's
race, and whatever penances he performs all become fruitless. They that
are conversant with the scriptures declare this as their opinion,
arriving at it, O chief of the Bharatas, with the aid of a well-ordered
understanding. Persons conversant with the scriptures are also of
opinion that such a man may be cleansed by giving away a thousand horses
with ears of a dark hue. In this connection is cited the old narrative
of the discourse between a jackal and an ape. While both were human
beings, O scorcher of foes, they were intimate friends. After death one
of them became a jackal and the other an ape. Beholding the jackal one
day eating an animal carcase in the midst of a crematorium, the ape,
remembering his own and his friend's former birth as human beings,
addressed him, saying,--Verily, what terrible sin didst thou perpetrate
in thy former birth in consequence of which thou art obliged in this
birth to feed in a crematorium upon such repulsive fare as the putrid
carcase of an animal?--Thus addressed, the jackal replied unto the ape,
saying,--Having promised to give unto a Brahmana I did not make him the
gift. It is for that sin, O ape, that I have fallen into this wretched
order of existence. It is for that reason that, when hungry, I am
obliged to eat such food.'

"Bhishma continued, 'The jackal then, O best of men, addressed the ape
and said,--What sin didst thou commit for which thou hast become an
ape?'

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

"The ape said, 'In my former life I used to appropriate the fruits
belonging to Brahmanas. Hence have I become an ape. Hence it is clear
that one possessed of intelligence and learning should never appropriate
what belongs to Brahmanas. Verily, as one should abstain from this, one
should avoid also all disputes with Brahmanas. Having promised, one
should certainly make the promised gift unto them.'

"Bhishma continued, 'I heard this, O king, from my preceptor while he
was engaged in discoursing upon the subject of Brahmanas. I heard this
from that righteous person when he recited the old and sacred
declaration on this topic. I heard this from Krishna also, O king, while
he was engaged in discoursing, O son of Pandu, upon Brahmanas. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) The property of a Brahmana should never be
appropriated. They should always be let alone. Poor, or miserly, or
young in years, they should never be disregarded. The Brahmanas have
always taught me this. Having promised to make them a gift, the gift
should be made. A superior Brahmana should never be disappointed in the
matter of his expectations. A Brahmana, O king, in whom an expectation
has been raised, has, O king, been said to be like a blazing fire. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14) That man upon whom a Brahmana with raised
expectations casts his eye, is sure, O monarch, to be consumed even as a
heap of straw is capable of being consumed by a blazing fire. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[3](#fn_15) When the Brahmana, gratified (with honours
and gifts) by the king addresses the king in delightful and affectionate
words, he becomes, O Bharata, a source of great benefit to the king, for
he continues to live in the kingdom like a physician combating against
diverse ills of the body. <span id="fr_16"></span>[4](#fn_16) Such a
Brahmana is sure to maintain by his puissance and good wishes, the sons
and grandsons and animals and relatives and ministers and other officers
and the city and the provinces of the king. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[5](#fn_17) Even such is the energy, so great, of the
Brahmana like unto that of the thousand-rayed Surya himself, on the
Earth. There-fore, O Yudhishthira, if one wishes to attain to a
respectable or happy order of being in one's next birth, one should,
having passed the promise to a Brahmana, certainly keep it by actually
making the gift to him. By making gifts to a Brahmana one is sure to
attain to the highest heaven. Verily, the making of gifts is the highest
of acts that one can achieve. By the gifts one makes to a Brahmana, the
deities and the pitris are supported. Hence one possessed of knowledge
should ever make gifts

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

unto the Brahmanas. O chief of the Bharatas, the Brahmana is regarded as
the highest object unto whom gifts should be made. At no time should a
Brahmana be received without being properly worshipped."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[24:1](m13a009.htm#fr_13) The commentator thinks
that by Krishna, the Island-born Krishna or Vyasa is meant.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[24:2](m13a009.htm#fr_14) The sense is that such
a Brahmana, if his expectation be not gratified, is competent to consume
the person that has falsely raised that expectation.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[24:3](m13a009.htm#fr_15) *Akshyayyam* is fire,
because it is fire that eats the food offered to the Pitris and makes it
inexhaustible.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[24:4](m13a009.htm#fr_16) The sense is that as a
physician cures diverse ailments of the body, after the same manner, a
gratified Brahmana cures diverse faults of the kingdom in which he
continues to live honoured and gratified by the king.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[24:5](m13a009.htm#fr_17) *Santirishta* is the
*rishti* or benefits caused by *santi*. The commentator cites *Medini*
for explaining that '*rishti*' is '*kshema*'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section X](m13a010)
