[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b028) 
[Next](m13b030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXIV

"Yudhishthira said, 'I have heard the discourse regarding the ordinance
about the gift of food. Do thou discourse to me now about the
conjunction of the planets and the stars in relation to the subject of
making gifts. <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69)

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is recited this ancient narrative of
the discourse between Devaki and Narada, that foremost of Rishis. Once
on a time when Narada of godlike feature and conversant with every duty

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

arrived at Dwaraka, Devaki asked him this question. Unto her that had
asked him, the celestial Rishi Narada duly answered in the following
words. Do thou hear as I recite them.'

"Narada said, 'By gratifying, O blessed lady, deserving Brahmanas with
Payasa mixed with ghee, under the constellation Krittika one attains to
regions of great happiness. <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) Under
the constellation Rohini, one should for freeing oneself from the debt
one owes to the Brahmanas make gift unto them of many handfuls of
venison along with rice and ghee and milk, and other kinds of edibles
and drinks. One giving away a cow with a calf under the constellation
called Somadaivata (or Mrigasiras), proceeds from this region of human
beings to a region in heaven of great felicity. One undergoing a fast
and giving away Krisara mixed with sesame, transcends all difficulties
in the next world, including those mountains with rocks sharp as razors.
By making gifts, O beautiful lady, of cakes and other food under the
constellation Punarvasu one becomes possessed of personal beauty and
great fame and takes birth in one's next life in a family in which there
is abundance of food. Making a gift of wrought or unwrought gold, under
the constellation Pushya, one shines in effulgence like Soma himself in
regions of surrounding gloom. He who makes a gift, under the
constellation Aslesha, of silver of a bull, becomes freed from every
fear and attains to great affluence and prosperity. By making a gift,
under the constellation Magha, of earthen dishes filled with sesame, one
becomes possessed of children and animals in this world and attains to
felicity in the next. <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71) For making
gifts unto Brahmanas, under the constellation called Purva-Phalguni of
food mixed with Phanita the giver observing a fast the while, reward is
great prosperity both here and hereafter. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[3](#fn_72) By making a gift, under the constellation
called Uttara-Phalguni, of ghee and milk with rice called Shashthika,
one attains to great honours in heaven. Whatever gifts are made by men
under the constellation of Uttara-Phalguni produce great merit, which,
again, becomes inexhaustible. This is very certain. Observing a fast the
while, the person that makes, under the constellation Hasta, a gift of a
car with four elephants, attains to regions of great felicity that are
capable of granting the fruition of every wish. By making a gift, under
the constellation Chitra, of a bull and of good perfumes, one sports in
bliss in regions of Apsaras like the deities sporting in the woods of
Nandana. By making gifts of wealth under the constellation Swati, one
attains to such excellent regions as one desires and wins besides great
fame. By making gifts, under constellation Visakha, of a bull, and a cow
that yields a copious measure of milk, a cart full of paddy, with a
Prasanga for covering the same, and also cloths for wear, <span
id="fr_73"></span>[4](#fn_73) a person gratifies the Pitris and the
deities attains to inexhaustible merit in the other world. Such a person

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

never meets with any calamity and gratifies the Pitris and the deities
and attains to inexhaustible merit in the other world. Such a person
never meets with any calamity and certainly reaches heaven. By making
gifts unto the Brahmanas of whatever articles they solicit, one attains
to such means of [subsistence](errata.htm#77) as one desires, and
becomes rescued from hell and every calamity that visits a sinner after
death. This is the certain conclusion of the scriptures. By making
gifts, under the constellation Anuradha of embroidered cloth and other
vestments and of food, observing a fast the while, one becomes honoured
in heaven for a hundred Yugas. By making a gift under the constellation
Jyeshtha, of the potherb called Kalasaka with the roots, one attains to
great prosperity as also to such an end as is desirable. By making unto
Brahmanas a gift under the constellation Mula, of fruits and roots, with
a restrained soul, one gratifies the Pitris and attains to a desirable
end. By making under the constellation Purvashadha, a gift, unto a
Brahmana conversant with the Vedas and of good family and conduct, of
cups filled with curds, while one is in the observance of a fast, one
takes birth in one's next life in a family possessed of abundant kine.
One obtains the fruition of every wish, by making gifts, under the
constellation Uttarashadha, of jugs full of barley-water, with ghee and
inspissated juice of sugarcane in abundance. By making a gift under the
conjunction called Abhijit, of milk with honey and ghee unto men of
wisdom, a righteous person attains to heaven and becomes an object of
attention and honour there. By making under the conjunction Sravana, a
gift of blankets or other cloth of thick texture, one roves freely
through every region of felicity, riding on a white car of pure
resplendence. By making with a restrained soul, under the constellation
Dhanishtha, a gift of a vehicle with bulls yoked thereto, or heaps of
cloths and wealth, one at once attains to heaven in one's next life. By
making gifts, under the constellation Satabhisha, of perfumes with
[Aquilaria](errata.htm#78) Agallocha and sandalwood, one attains in the
next world to the companionship of Apsaras as also eternal perfumes of
diverse kinds. By making gifts, under the constellation
Purva-Bhadrapada, or Rajamasha, one attains to great happiness in the
next life and becomes possessed of an abundant stock of every kind of
edibles and fruits. <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) One who makes,
under the constellation Uttara, a gift of mutton, gratifies the Paris by
such an act attains to inexhaustible merit in the next world. Unto one
who makes a gift, under the constellation Revati, of a cow with a vessel
of white copper for milking her, the cow so given away approaches in the
next world, ready to grant the fruition of every wish. By making a gift,
under the constellation Aswini, of a car with steeds yoked thereto, one
is born in one's next life in a family possessed of numerous elephants
and steeds and cars, and becomes endued with great energy. By making,
under the constellation Bharani, a gift unto the Brahmanas of kine and
sesame, one acquires in one's next life great fame and an abundance of
kine.'

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

"Bhishma continued, 'Even thus did Narada discourse unto Devaki
[upon](errata.htm#79) the subject of what gifts should be made under
what constellations. Devaki herself, having listened to this discourse,
recited it in her turn unto her [daughters](errata.htm#80)-in-law
(*viz*., the spouses of Krishna).'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[76:1](m13b029.htm#fr_69) What Yudhishthira
wishes to know is what conjunctions should be utilized for making what
particular gifts.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[77:1](m13b029.htm#fr_70) *Payasa* is rice
boiled in sugared milk. It is a sort of liquid food that is regarded as
very agreeable.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[77:2](m13b029.htm#fr_71) *Vardhamana*, *Sarava*
or *Saravika*. It is a flat certain cup or dish.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[77:3](m13b029.htm#fr_72) *Phanita* is the
inspissated juice of the sugarcane.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[77:4](m13b029.htm#fr_73) A *prasanga* is a
basket of bamboo or other material for covering paddy.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[78:1](m13b029.htm#fr_74) *Rajamasha* is a kind
of bean. It is the *Vinga sinensis*, syn. *Dilicheos sinensis* Linn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXV](m13b030)
