[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b091) 
[Next](m13b093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

### SECTION CXXVII

"Vibhavasu (otherwise called Surya) said, 'There are two offerings. One
of those consists of a palmful of water and the other called Akshata
consists of rice-grains with ghee. One should, on the day of the full
moon, stand facing that bright orb and make unto him the two offerings
mentioned, *viz*., a palmful of water and the rice-grains with ghee
called Akshata. The man who presents these offerings is said to adore
his sacred fire. Verily, he is regarded as one that has poured libations
on the three (principal) fires. That man of little understanding who
cutteth down a large tree on the day of the new moon, becomes stained
with the sin of Brahmanicide. By killing even a single leaf one incurs
that sin. That foolish man who chews a tooth-brush on the day of the new
moon is regarded as injuring the deity of the moon by such an act. The
Pitris of such a person become annoyed with him. <span
id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_288) The deities do not accept the libations
poured by such a man on days of the full moon and the new moon. His
Pitris become enraged with him, and his race and the family become
extinct.'

"Sree said, 'That sinful house, in which eating and drinking vessels and
seats and beds lie scattered, and in which women are beaten, the deities
and Pitris leave in disgust. Verily, without accepting the offerings
made unto them by the owners of such houses, the deities and the Pitris
fly away from such a sinful habitation.'

"Angiras said, 'The offspring of that man increase who stands every
night for a full year under a Karanjaka tree with a lamp for lighting
it, and holds besides in his hand the roots of the Suvarchala
plant.' <span id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_289)

"Gargya said, 'One should always do the duties of hospitality to one's
guests. One should give lamps in the hall or shed where sacrifices are
performed. One should avoid sleep during the day, and abstain from all
kinds of flesh or food. One should never injure kine and Brahmanas. One
should always recite names of the Pushkara lakes and the other sacred
waters. Such a course of duty, is the foremost. Even this constitutes a
high religion with its mysteries. If observed in practice, it is sure to
produce great consequences. If a person performs even a hundred
sacrifices, he is doomed to see the exhaustion of the merits attaching
to the libations poured therein. The duties, however, which I have
mentioned are such that when observed by a person endued with faith,
their merit becomes inexhaustible. Listen now to another high mystery
concealed from the view of many. The deities do not accept the libations
(poured upon the fire) on the occasion of Sraddhas and rites in their
honour or on the

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

occasion of those rites that are performable on ordinary lunar days or
on the especially sacred days of the full moon and the new moon, if they
behold a woman in her season of impurity or one that is the daughter of
a mother afflicted with leprosy. The Pitris of the man who allows such a
woman to come near the place where the Sraddha is being performed by
him, do not become gratified with him for thirteen years. Robed in
[raiment](errata.htm#191) of white, and becoming pure in body and mind,
one should invite Brahmanas and cause them to utter their benedictions
(when one performs the Sraddha). On such occasions one should also
recite the Bharata. It is by observing all these that the offerings made
at Sraddhas become inexhaustible.'

"Dhaumya said, 'Broken utensils, broken bedsteads, cocks and, dogs, as
also such trees as have grown within the dwelling houses, are all
inauspicious objects. In a broken utensil is *Kali* himself, while in a
broken bedstead is loss of wealth. When a cock or a dog is in sight, the
deities do not eat the offerings made to them. Under the roots of a tree
scorpions and snakes undoubtedly find shelter. Hence, one should never
plant a tree within one's abode.' <span id="fr_291"></span>[1](#fn_290)

"Jamadagni said, 'That man whose heart is not pure is sure to go to Hell
even if he adores the deities in a Horse-sacrifice or in a hundred
Vajapeya sacrifices, or if he undergoes the severest austerities with
head downmost. Purity of heart is regarded as equal to sacrifices and
Truth. A very poor Brahmana, by giving only a *Prastha* of powdered
barley with a pure heart unto a Brahmana, attained to the region of
Brahman himself. This is a sufficient proof (of the importance of purity
of heart).'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_288"></span>[267:1](m13b092.htm#fr_289) In India the
tooth-brush consists of a twig or a little branch. One end of it is
chewed and softened. The softened fibres serve the purpose of a brush.
Such a brush is used only once. It is thrown away after the brushing of
the teeth is over.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[267:2](m13b092.htm#fr_290) It is difficult to
identify what plants are meant by *Karanjaka* and *Suvarachala*.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[268:1](m13b092.htm#fr_291) *Bhanda* includes
utensils of copper and brass such as plates and cups and jars and jugs.
Broken utensils, to this day, are regarded inauspicious. They are
rejected, as a rule, by every family. *Kali* (Evil?) has his abode in
them, meaning that such utensils cause quarrels and disputes. Broken
bed-steads also are regarded as capable of causing loss of wealth. Cocks
and dogs should never be kept or reared in a house. The roots of trees
afford shelter to scorpions and snakes and venomous insects and worms.
One should not, therefore, plant trees or allow them to grow up within
one's abode.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXXVIII](m13b093)
