[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b065) 
[Next](m13b067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Where do those foolish, wretched, and sinful men
go, O chief of men, that steal or misappropriate such articles as belong
to Brahmanas?'

"Bhishma said, 'I shall, in this connection, O Bharata, recite to thee
the old narrative of a conversation between a Chandala and a low
Kshatriya.' <span id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_184)

"The person of the royal order said, 'Thou seemest, O Chandala, to be
old in years, but thy conduct seems to be like that of a boy! Thy body
is besmeared with the dust raised by dogs and asses, but without minding
that dust thou art anxious about the little drops of vine milk that have
fallen upon thy body! It is plain that such acts as are censured by the
pious are ordained for the Chandala. Why, indeed, dost thou seek to wash
off the spots of milk from thy body?' <span
id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_185)

"The Chandala said, 'Formerly, O king, certain kine belonging to
Brahmana were stolen. While they were being carried away, some milk from
their udders fell upon a number of Soma plants that grew by the
roadside. Those Brahmanas that drank the juice of the plants thus
bedewed with milk, as also the king who performed the sacrifice in which
that Soma was drunk, had to sink in hell. Indeed, for having thus

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

appropriated some thing that had belonged to a Brahmana, the king with
all the Brahmanas that had assisted him had to go to hell. All those men
also, Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, that drank milk or ghee or curds, in the
palace of the king who had stolen the Brahmana's kine, had to fall into
hell. The stolen kine also, shaking their bodies, slew with their milk
the sons and grandsons of those that had stolen them, as also the king
and the queen although the latter treated the animals with great care
and attention. As regards myself, O king, I used to live in the
observance of the vow of Brahmacharya in that place where these kine
were placed after they had been stolen away. The food I had obtained by
begging became sprinkled over with the milk of those kine. Having taken
that food, O thou of the royal order, I have, in this life, become a
Chandala. The king who had stolen the kine belonging to a Brahmana
obtained an infamous end. Hence, one should never steal or appropriate
anything that belongs to a Brahmana. Behold to what state I am reduced
in consequence of my having eaten food that had been sprinkled over with
milk belonging to a Brahmana! It is for this reason that Soma plants
become unsaleable by a person possessed of wisdom. They who sell the
Soma plant are censured by the wise. Indeed, O son, they who purchase
Soma and they who sell it, both sink in the hell called Raurava when,
departing from this world, they repair to the region of Yama. That man
who, possessing a knowledge of the Vedas, duly sells Soma, becomes in
his next life a usurer and quickly meets with destruction. For three
hundred times he has to sink into hell and become transformed into an
animal that subsists upon human ordure. Serving a person that is vile
and low, pride, and rape upon a friend's wife, if weighed against one
another in a balance, would show that pride, which transcends all
restraints, is the heaviest. Behold this dog, so sinful and disagreeably
pale and lean! (He was a human being in his former life). It is through
pride that living creatures attain to such a miserable end. As regards
myself, I was born in a large family, in a former birth of mine. O lord,
and I was a thorough master of all branches of knowledge and all the
sciences. I knew the gravity of all these faults, but influenced by
pride, I became blinded and ate the meat attached to the vertebral
columns of animals. In consequence of such conduct and such food, I have
come to this state. Behold the reverses brought about by Time! Like a
person whose cloth has taken fire at one end, or who is pursued by bees,
behold, I am running, penetrated with fear, and smeared with dust! They
that lead the domestic mode of life are rescued from all sins by a study
of the Vedas, as also by gifts of other kinds, as declared by the
wise. <span id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_186) O thou of the royal order, a
Brahmana that is sinful in conduct, becomes rescued from all his sins by
the study of the Vedas if he betakes himself to the forest mode of life
and abstains from attachment of every kind. O chief of Kshatriyas, I am
in

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

this life, born in a sinful order! I fail to see clearly how I may
succeed in cleansing myself from all sins. In consequence of some
meritorious act of a former life, I have not lost the memory of my
previous lives. O king, I throw myself on the mercy! I ask thee! Do thou
resolve my doubt. By what auspicious course of conduct should I wish to
achieve my emancipation? O foremost of men, by what means shall I
succeed in getting rid of my status as a Chandala?'

"The person of the royal order said, 'Know, O Chandala, the means by
which thou mayst be able to attain to emancipation. By casting off thy
life-breaths for the sake of a Brahmana thou mayst attain a desirable
end! By throwing thy body on the fire of battle as a libation to the
beasts and birds of prey for the sake of a Brahmana, indeed, by casting
off thy life-breaths thus, thou mayst achieve emancipation! By no other
means wilt thou succeed in achieving it!'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed, that Chandala, O scorcher of foes,
poured his life-breaths as a libation on the fire of battle for the sake
of protecting a Brahmana's wealth and as the consequence of that act
attained to a very desirable end. Hence, O son, thou shouldst always
protect the property of the Brahmanas, if, O chief of Bharata's race,
thou desirest, O thou of mighty arms, an end that is eternal felicity!'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[184:2](m13b066.htm#fr_185) '*Kshatrabandhu*'
implies a low or vile *Kshatriya*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[184:3](m13b066.htm#fr_186) Literally, 'Why
dost thou dip such parts of thy body into a pond of water?'

<span id="fn_186"></span>[185:1](m13b066.htm#fr_187) The study of the
Vedas is regarded as equivalent in merit of gifts. Hence actual gifts of
articles are spoken of as 'gifts of other kinds.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CII](m13b067)
