[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m13b052) 
[Next](m13b054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXXXVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou of great puissance, tell me what that object
is which, if dedicated to the Pitris, becomes inexhaustible! What Havi,
again, (if offered) lasts for all time? What, indeed, is that which (if
presented) becomes eternal?'"

"Bhishma said, 'Listen to me, O Yudhishthira, what those Havis are which
persons conversant with the ritual of the Sraddha regard as suitable in
view of the Sraddha and what the fruits are that attach to each. With
sesame seeds and rice and barley and Masha and water and roots and
fruits, if given at Sraddhas, the Pitris, O king, remain gratified for
the period of a month. <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133) Manu has
said that if a Sraddha is performed with a copious measure of sesame,
such Sraddha becomes inexhaustible. Of all kinds of food, sesame seeds
are regarded as the best. With fishes offered at Sraddhas, the Pitris
remain gratified for a period of two months. With mutton they remain
gratified for three months and with the flesh of the hare for four. With
the flesh of the goat, O king, they remain gratified for five months,
with bacon for six months, and with the flesh of birds for seven. With
[venison](errata.htm#121) obtained from those deer that are called
Prishata, they remain gratified for eight months, and with that obtained
from the Ruru for nine months, and with the meat of the Gavaya for ten
months.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

\[paragraph continues\] With the meat of the buffalo their gratification
lasts for eleven months. With beef presented at the Sraddha, their
gratification, it is said, lasts for a full year. Payasa mixed with ghee
is as much acceptable to the Pitris as beef. With the meat of the
Vadhrinasa the gratification of the Pitris lasts for twelve years. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134) The flesh of the rhinoceros, offered to
the Pitris on the anniversaries of the lunar days on which they died,
becomes inexhaustible. The potherb called Kalasaka, the petals of the
Kanchana flower, and meat of the goat also, thus offered, prove
inexhaustible. <span id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_135) In this connection,
O Yudhishthira, there are some verses, originally sung by the Pitris,
that are sung (in the world). They were communicated to me in former
days by Sanatkumara.--He that has taken birth in our race should give us
Payasa mixed with ghee on the thirteenth day (of the dark fortnight),
under the constellation Magha, during the Sun's southward course. One
born in our race should, under the constellation Magha, as if in the
observance of a vow, offer the meat of goat or the petals of the
Kanchana flower. One should also offer us, with due rites, Payasa mixed
with ghee, dedicating it on a spot covered by the shadow of an
elephant.--Many sons should be coveted so that even one may go to Gaya
(for performing the Sraddha of his ancestors), where stands the banian
that is celebrated over all the worlds and that makes all offerings made
under its branches inexhaustible. <span id="fr_136"></span>[3](#fn_136)
Even a little of water, roots, fruits, meat, and rice, mixed with honey,
if offered on the anniversary of the day of death becomes
inexhaustible.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[144:1](m13b053.htm#fr_133) *Masha*, is the
Phascolus Roxburghii.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[145:1](m13b053.htm#fr_134) It is difficult to
understand what is meant by *Vadhrinasa* here. It means either a large
bull, or a kind of bird, or a variety of the goat. Probably the bull is
intended.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[145:2](m13b053.htm#fr_135) *Pitrikshaye* is
*mrita-tithau*. *Kalasaka* is explained by Nilakantha as identical with
the common potherb called *Shuka* or the country sorrel (Rumex
visicarius, Linn). Some hold that it is something like the sorrel,
*Lauham* is the petals of the Kanchana flower (Bauhinia acuminata,
Linn).

<span id="fn_136"></span>[145:3](m13b053.htm#fr_136) To this day the
sanctity of Gaya is universally recognised by all Hindus. Sraddhas are
performed there under the banian called the *Akshaya* or inexhaustible
banian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXXXIX](m13b054)
