[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl02)  [Next](bl04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="img_00100"></span> ![](img/00100.jpg)

# I.--LEGENDS OF THE TARTARO.

WHO, or what is the Tartaro? "Oh! you mean the man with one eye in the
middle of his forehead," is the prompt and universal answer. The Tartaro
is the Cyclops, the sun's round eye, κύκλωψ. But the word Tartaro has
apparently nothing to do with this. M. Cerquand, in his "Legendes et
Récits Populaires du Pays Basque," derives the word from *Tartare*,
Tartar, in the same way as the French word Ogre is said to be derived
from *Hongrois*, *Ugri*. The only objection to this highly probable
derivation (made still more probable by a Souletin variation, Moiriak)
is the comparatively late date (the 13th century) of the first
appearance of the Tartars in Europe. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)
It is besides perfectly true that in many tales the Tartaro replaces,
and is identical with the giant or ogre; but this does not appear to us
to be the original conception of this mythological monster, nor have we
ever heard from an unlettered Basque such a description of him. To them
he is simply a Cyclops--a huge man, with an eye in the centre of his
forehead.

It is an interesting question--Is there any connection between the
Basque Tartaro and the Cyclops of the Odyssey and of the classics?
First, we must remark that the Cyclops legend is not peculiar either to
the Greek

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

and Latin writers, or even to the Aryan nations; *e.g.*, in his
communication of the Tartaro legends to the Société des Sciences de
Bayonne, M. d'Abaddie relates how he heard the tale told in June, 1843,
in Eastern Africa, in Lat. N. 9.2, E. Lon. 34.48, by a man who had never
before quitted the country. It is then only the special form of the
legend, and not the primary idea, that the Greeks *may* have borrowed
from the Basques. But there is this to observe--that, with both Greeks
and Latins, the Cyclops myth is an occidental and not an oriental one,
and is more strictly localised than almost any other. This may be
accounted for by saying that the sun's great fiery eye is rather that of
the setting than of the rising sun; that the red-hot stake is the ruddy
mountain peak, or the tall fir-trunk, seen against the western horizon,
and illumined by his descending rays. But in the stories of Theocritus
and Ovid, where the sun-myth is not so apparent, the home of the Cyclops
is still Sicily. Our first Tartaro legend reads very like a rough
outline of Ovid's story of "Acis and Galatea." Now, W. Von Humboldt in
his "Prüfung der Untersuchung über die Urbewohner Hispaniens vermittelst
der Vaskischen Sprache" (Berlin, 1821), in cap. xlv., p. 167, and,
again, con. vii., p. 178, arguing on quite different grounds, places
Sicily as the most easterly habitation of the Basques within historic
times. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) We leave it then to classical
scholars to consider whether the Italic races in Magna Græcia and Sicily
may not have come in contact with the Basques there, and from them have
adopted their special form of the Cyclops legend.

As we said above, the Tartaro sometimes replaces the giant or the ogre;
at other times we find him as Basa-Jaun, or even as an animal,
substituted for *Acheria*, the fox. He is, in his proper form, a huge
one-eyed giant, occasionally a cannibal, but not without a rough
"bonhomie" when satiated with food and drink. Intellectually far below
the

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

feebler race of mankind, he is invariably beaten in his contests with
them, notwithstanding his enormous strength; he loses all his wagers,
and is generally lured on to commit involuntary suicide. In some aspects
he reminds one of Milton's "Lubbar Fiend," and in his constant defeats
and being constantly outwitted, recals one of the types of the Devil in
mediæval story. At times he appears in gentler guise, as when he aids
the young prince to his rights, and supplies Petit Yorge with the means
of victory over the Heren-Suge. What the talking ring is which appears
in so many of these stories we confess ourselves unable to interpret; it
is found in the Keltic, but, as far as we are aware, not in the classic
legends.

One peculiarity of the Basque, and especially of the Tartaro legends, is
that the hero of them is so often a madman, an idiot, or a fool. If we
can trust our memory, the case is the same in the Slavonic
representatives of Odysseus. <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) But the
Basques seem to dwell upon and to repeat the idea in a peculiar way;
they ring the changes on all states, from the wild madman, like the
Scandinavian Berserker, through the idiot and fool, to the mere
blockhead and ninny. Errua, Enuchenta, Ergela, Sosua, Tontua, are terms
employed to designate the heroes who have sometimes, to our modern
apprehension, little of the idiot or fool, except the name. Can it be
that the power which put out the sun's fiery eye was looked upon as a
beneficent being in a burning tropic land, while, as the legend
travelled northward, the act seemed more like that of madness, or of
senseless stupidity?

One type of these Tartaro tales will at once recal Grimm's "Valiant
Little Tailor," and some of the more modern versions of "Jack the
Giant-Killer." But though the incidents are identical, it is hardly
possible that they can be thus borrowed. Several of our narrators were
*utterly* ignorant of French, and learnt the tale as children from old

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

people, who died a few years since at upwards of 80. The first
translation of Grimm's Tales into French was published in the year 1845.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[1:1](bl03.htm#fr_8) There seems to be a Basque
root "Tar," which appears in the words, "Tarro, Tarrotu, *v.*, devenir
un peu grand. Tarrapataka, *adv.*, marchant avec précipitation et en
faisant du bruit."--Salaberry's "Vocabulaire Bas-Navarrais," sub voce.
*Cf.* Campbell's "Tales of the Western Highlands," Vol. II., 94:--"He
heard a great *Tartar* noise," Tartar being printed as if it were a
Gaelic word.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[2:1](bl03.htm#fr_9) *Cf.* also Willer's
"Fragmenta Historicorum Græcorum" (Didot, Paris, 1841), Vol. I., p. 246.
"Ephori Fragmenta," 51, with the references there given.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[3:1](bl03.htm#fr_10) *Cf.* also the Gaelic,
"The Story and the Lay of the Great Fool," Campbell, Vol. III., pp.
146-154.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tartaro](bl04)
