[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl04)  [Next](bl06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### M. D'ABBADIE'S VERSION.

OUR next story was communicated by M. d'Abbadie to the Société des
Sciences et des Arts de Bayonne. The narrator is M. l'Abbe Heguiagaray,
the Parish Priest of Esquiule in La Soule:--

In my infancy I often heard from my mother the story of the Tartaro. He
was a Colossus, with only one eye in the middle of his forehead. He was
a shepherd and a hunter, but a hunter of men. Every day he ate a sheep;
then, after a snooze, every one who had the misfortune to fall into his
hands. His dwelling was a huge barn, with thick walls, a high roof, and
a very strong door, which he alone knew how

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

to open. His mother, an old witch, lived in one corner of the garden, in
a hut constructed of turf.

One day a powerful young man was caught in the snares of the Tartaro,
who carried him off to his house. This young man saw the Tartaro eat a
whole sheep, and he knew that he was accustomed to take a snooze, and
that after that his own turn would come. In his despair he said to
himself that he must do something. Directly the Tartaro began to snore
he put the spit into the fire, made it red-hot, and plunged it into the
giant's one eye. Immediately he leapt up, and began to run after the man
who had injured him; but it was impossible to find him.

"You shall not escape. It is all very well to hide yourself," said he;
"but I alone know the secret how to open this door."

The Tartaro opened the door half-way, and let the sheep out between his
legs. The young man takes the big bell off the ram, and puts it round
his neck, and throws over his body the skin of the sheep which the giant
had just eaten, and walks on all fours to the door.

The Tartaro examines him by feeling him, perceives the trick, and
clutches hold of the skin; but the young man slips off the skin, dives
between his legs, and runs off.

Immediately the mother of the Tartaro meets him, and says to him:

"O, you lucky young fellow! You have escaped the cruel tyrant; take this
ring as a remembrance of your escape."

He accepts, puts the ring on his finger, and immediately the ring begins
to cry out, "Heben nuk! Heben nuk!" ("Thou hast me here! Thou hast me
here!")

The Tartaro pursues, and is on the point of catching him, when the young
man, maddened with fright, and not being able to pull off the ring,
takes out his knife, and cuts off his own finger, and throws it away,
and thus escapes the pursuit of the Tartaro.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Variations of 'The Tartaro'](bl06)
