[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bl10)  [Next](bl12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span id="img_02000"></span> ![](img/02000.jpg)

# II.--THE HEREN-SUGE.--THE SEVEN-HEADED SERPENT.

IT would only be spoiling good work by bad to attempt to re-write the
exhaustive essay which appears, under the heading of "St. George," in
Baring Gould's "Curious Myths of the Middle Ages." He there traces the
atmospheric myth in which the Dragon is the storm-cloud, the Maiden the
earth, and the Hero the sun, through all the forms of the great Aryan
legend, in Indian, Egyptian, Phoenician, Italic, Keltic, Teutonic, and
Scandinavian mythology. He shows that it was merely by a mistaken
metaphor <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) that St. George came to
assume the place, and wear the glories of the solar hero; and that
England only followed in the wake of other countries, in making him her
national Saint and Patron.

We will, therefore, now only glance at some of the Basque and Pyrenean
forms of this wide-spread myth. M. Cerquand boldly places one form of
the story, which is attached to the house of Belzunce, among historical
legends. But the history of Belzunce and the Dragon stands in the same
relation

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

to the original myth as does that of Guy, Earl of Warwick, Moor of Moor
Hall, and of scores of other heroes. In a Basque version, collected by
ourselves, the concluding words show that in this form it is simply an
Eponymous legend, to account for the name, "and that is whence comes the
name of Belzunce." The oldest Pyrenean version with which we are
acquainted is that of the "Serpent d'Isabit." We give the outlines of it
from memory, as we heard, and read it, at Bagnères de Bigorre.

The serpent lay with his head resting on the summit of the Pic du Midi
de Bigorre, his neck stretched down towards Barèges, while his body
filled the whole valley of Luz, St. Sauveur, and Gédres, and his tail
was coiled in the hollow below the cirque of Gavarnie. He fed but once
in three months, or the whole country would have been desolate. With a
strong inspiration of his breath, he drew into his capacious maw, across
the valleys, whole flocks of sheep and goats, herds of oxen, men, women,
children, the population of whole villages at once. He was now asleep,
and inert, after such a repast. The whole male population of several
valleys assembled to consult on what should be done. After long and
fruitless debate an old man arose and spoke:--"We have nearly three
months yet before he will wake; let us cut down all the forests on the
opposite hills; then let us bring all our forges and all the iron we
possess, and with the wood thus cut down let us melt it all into the
red-hot fiery mass; then we will hide ourselves behind the rocks, and
make all the noise we can to try and awaken the monster." So said, so
done. The serpent awoke in a rage at having his slumbers broken, he saw
something bright on the opposite side of the valley, and drew in a long
breath, and the fiery mass, with a roar like a thunderbolt, flew across
the valley, right down the monster's throat. Then, what convulsions
ensued; rocks were uptorn or split open, the mountains were shattered,
the glaciers beaten into dust as the serpent twisted and lashed about in
his agony. To quench his agony of thirst

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

he descended to the valley, and drank up all the streams from Gavarnie
to Pierrefitte. Then, in his last convulsion, he threw himself back upon
the mountain side and expired; his head rested in a deep hollow; as the
fire within him slowly cooled, the water he had swallowed poured out of
his mouth, and formed the present Lac d'Isabit. In M. Cerquand's legend
of the Dragon d'Alçay, the red-hot iron is replaced by "a cow's skin
full of gunpowder." In all the Basque legends of this class the hero
dies.

But these legends differ widely from the following tales; there is in
them no princess to be rescued, no charcoal-burner, no marriage, or any
other wonders. Were it not for their still closer resemblance to the
Gaelic tales, we should suspect the following legends to be simply
translations of some French legend of St. George. As we remarked before,
like the Deccan cobras, the Heren-Suge is always seven-headed. It is
strange, too, to notice that the princess always behaves in the same
chivalrous way. "One is enough to die." The union, too, of Tartaro and
Heren-Suge in the same tale is curious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20:1](bl11.htm#fr_19.md) One of the oddest
instances of mistaken metaphors that we know of occurs in "La Vie de St.
Savin, par J. Abbadie, Curé de la Paroisse" (Tarbes, 1861). We translate
from the Latin, which is given in a note:--"Intoxicated with divine
love, he was keeping vigil according to his custom, and when he could
not find a light elsewhere, he gave light to his eyes from the light
that was in his breast. The small piece of wax-taper thus lit passed the
whole night till morning without being extinguished."-Off. S. Savin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Grateful Tartaro and the Heren-Suge](bl12.md)
