[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl25)  [Next](bl27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span id="img_06400"></span> ![](img/06400.jpg)

# V.--WITCHCRAFT AND SORCERY.

OUR legends of witchcraft and sorcery are very poor, and in some of
these, as said above, the witch is evidently a fairy. The reason of this
is not that the belief in witchcraft is extinct among the Basques, but
because it is so rife. Of stories of witchcraft (as matters of fact),
and some of them very sad ones, we have heard plenty; but of legends,
very few. In fact, witchcraft among the Basques has not yet arrived at
the legendary stage. The difference is felt at once in taking down their
recitations. In the legends they are reciting a text learnt by heart. It
is "the story says so." "It is so," whether they understand it or not.
But they tell their stories of witchcraft in their own words, just as
they would narrate any other facts which they supposed had happened to
themselves or to their neighbours. One woman told us, as a fact within
her own knowledge, and persisted in it, a tale which appears both in M.
Cerquand's pages and in Fr. Michel's "Pays Basque." <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) It was only after cross-examination that
we could discover that it had not really happened to her own daughter,
but that she had only seen the cottage and the chapel which are the
scene of the alleged occurrence. We have, too, been informed on
undoubted authority that, only a year or two back, a country

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

priest was sorely puzzled by one of his parishioners, in his full
senses, seriously and with contrition confessing to him that he
frequented the "Sabbat."

But what is strange and unexpected is, that with this prevalence of
belief in witchcraft and sorcery, and which can be traced back to our
earliest notices of the Basques, there is nothing to differentiate their
belief on this subject from the current European belief of three
centuries back. All the Basque words for witchcraft and sorcery are
evidently borrowed. The only purely Basque term is Asti, which seems to
be rather a diviner than a sorcerer. The term for the "Sabbat" is
"Akhelarre"--"goat pasture"--and seems to be taken from the apparition
of the devil there in form of a goat, which is not uncommon elsewhere.
Pierre de Lancre, by the terrors of his hideous inquisition in 1609,
produced a moral epidemic, and burnt numerous victims at St. Jean de
Luz; but there is not a single Basque term in all his pages. Contrary to
general opinion, both the Spanish Inquisition and the French
ecclesiastical tribunals were more merciful and rational, and showed far
less bigotry and barbarity than the two doctrinaire lawyers and judges
of Bordeaux. The last person burnt for witchcraft at St. Jean de Luz was
a Portuguese lady, who was accused of having secreted the Host for
purposes of magic, in 1619. While her case was being investigated before
the Bishop of Bayonne, in the crypt of the church, a mob of terrified
fishermen, on the eve of starting for Newfoundland, burst in, tore her
out of the church, and burnt her off-hand, in the midst of the "Place."
"They dared not," they said, "sail while such a crime was unpunished."
The Bishop's procés-verbal of the occurrence is still extant in the
archives of the Mairie.

The magic wand in all our tales is now said to be made from the hazel.
In De Lancre's time it was from the "Souhandourra"--"the cornus
sanguinea"--or dog-wood. This was then the witches' tree.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[64:1](bl26.htm#fr_61) Cerquand, Part I., p. 29,
notes to Conte 8; Fr. Michel, "Le Pays Basque," p. 152 (Didot, Paris,
1857).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witches at the Sabbat](bl27)
