[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bl26)  [Next](bl28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

### THE WITCHES AT THE SABBAT. <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md)

ONCE upon a time, like many others in the world, there was a young lad.
He was one day in a lime-kiln, and the witches came at night. They used
to dance there, and one pretended to be the mistress of a house, who was
very ill; and one day, is she was going out of the church, she let the
holy wafer fall on the ground, and a toad had picked it up; and this
toad is still near the door, under a stone, with the bread in his
mouth. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md) And again, this same witch
said that, until they took away this bread out of the toad's mouth, this
lady will not be cured. This young lad had heard it all. When they had
danced their rounds, the witches go away home, and our lad comes out of
the lime-kiln, and goes to the house of this lady who is ill, and says
to her,

"I know what must be done to cure you," and he told her all that he had
heard from the witch.

The sick lady did what they told her, and the same day she was cured,
and the young man was well paid.

And that very evening there came to him a hunch-backed girl, and said to
him,

"I have heard that you know where the witches hold their Sabbat."

He says, "Yes."

"To-morrow I think I should like to hear what the witches say."

And he points out to her the hole of the lime-kiln. And at midnight all
the witches came, some from one quarter, some from another-some
laughing, and others cutting capers. The witches said one to another,

"We must look in the lime-kiln, to see what may be there."

They go to look, and they find the hunchback girl, and they send her
off--

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

"Go, go--through hedges and hedges, through thorns and thorns, through
furze-bushes and furze-bushes, scratches and pricks."

And in no way could our poor hunchback find her way home. All torn to
pieces and exhausted, at last, in the morning, she arrived at her house.

ESTEFANELLA HIRIGARAY.

The second part of this story is evidently a blundered, version,
transferred from fairies to witches, of, Croker's "Legend of
Knochgrafton" ("Fairy Legends of South of Ireland," p. 10); and M.
Cerquand, Part II., p. 17, has a Basque version, "Les Deux Bossus,"
almost identical with this Irish legend. The tale, as given in Croker,
is found in the Bearnais Gascon, in Spanish, Italian, and German. It is
evident, we think, that the Basque land is not its home, but that it has
travelled there. We have also another Basque variation of the first
part, in which two lads hear the witches at the Sabbat say that a king's
daughter can only be cured by eating an ox's heart. The opening of this
story is so different, that we here give it:--

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[66:1](bl27.htm#fr_62.md) "Akhelarre," literally
"goat pasture." This was the name in the 16th century.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[66:2](bl27.htm#fr_63.md) This belief in a toad
sitting at the church door to swallow the Host is found in De Lancre.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witches and the Idiots](bl28.md)
