[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl29)  [Next](bl31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### THE CHANGELING.

LIKE many others in the world, there was a gentleman and lady. They were
very well off, but they could not keep any of their children. They had
had ever so many, and all died. The lady was again in a hopeful
condition. At the beginning of the night she was confined of a fine boy.

Two young men heard this news, and they said to each. other:

"We ought to have a feast; we must steal a sheep out of this house. They
will not pay attention to us with all their bustle and their joy."

One of the lads then goes after eleven o'clock towards the house. He
meets an old woman, who said to him:

"Where are you off to, lad? There is nothing like the truth."

"I was going, then, to such a house; the lady has been confined, and I
wish to take advantage of it to steal a sheep. They will not pay any
attention to-day. And you, where are you going.

"I too am going to the house. I am a witch, and it is I who have killed
all their children."

"And how do you do that?"

"Easily. When the infant sneezes nobody says, 'Domine stekan,' <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) and then I become mistress of the child."

The witch enters, doubtless as she liked, much more easily than our lad;
but nevertheless he got in himself too. He was busy choosing his sheep,
when he bears the infant sneeze. He says very, very loudly:

"Domine stekan; even if I should not get my sheep."

They go to see who is there, and what he was saying. The lad relates
what the old woman had told him. As you may imagine they thanked him
well, and told him to choose

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the finest sheep. The father and mother were delighted that they would
save this child; but, poor wretches, they had not seen everything. A
devil had come, who took their child and carried it to the roadside, and
left it there. A coachman passing by sees this child, and takes it with
him. He was married, but had no children. They had a great desire to
have one. They were very well off also. His wife was delighted to see
this fine child; they gave it a good nurse, and the child grew fast and
became wonderfully handsome. The devil had placed himself in the child's
cradle. This mother gave him suck, and, contrary to the other, he did
not grow at all. The parents were vexed at having such a child; they did
not know what to think of it. Their true child was more than
extraordinarily clever. The coachman and his wife were dazed with joy,
and they loved him as (if he were) their own child. When he was twelve
years old, he said to his father and mother that he wished to become a
monk. The coachman and his wife were very sorry, and they asked him to
become only a priest. But after having seen his great desire they allow
him to do as he wished.

He went away then, and at the age of eighteen years he was able to say
mass. When he was there, one day two men were passing in front of the
garden of his real father, and they began to quarrel. They got so
enraged that one killed the other, and threw him into his father's
garden. This father was tried and condemned to death for having killed
this man.

While this young monk was saying mass, there comes to him a white pigeon
and tells him what was taking place in his father's house, and that the
pigeon will assume the form of the monk, "and you shall go off in my
shape." The monk willingly does what he tells him, and arrives when they
are leading his father to execution. He was being followed by the judges
and by a crowd of people. He asks what he has done. They tell him that
he has killed a man. He asks if they would do him a favour before they
put him

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

to death-if they would accompany him to the grave of the man whom he has
killed. They tell him, "Yes."

They all go off then. The monk has the grave opened, restores him to
life, and asks him, pointing to his father:

"Is this the man who has killed you?"

The dead man says to him, "No!"

After having said that he dies again. The monk did not wish to know who
had killed him; he knew all he wanted with that. The father wished to
take the monk home with him to dinner, but he would not go that day. He
said to him:

"I will come on such a day."

As you may fancy they made a splendid dinner; nothing was wanting there.
They invited all their friends and acquaintances to rejoice with them.
When the monk arrives, the lady, before sitting down to table, wished to
show him her child, how she had suckled him with her own milk eighteen
years, and that he did not grow at all, but was always just as he was
when he was born. The monk betook himself to prayer, and he saw that
which they believed to be a child fly away under the shape of a devil in
fire and flame, and he carried off with him part of the house. He told
his mother not to vex herself because she had had the devil there, and
that she would be happier without such a child.

All the world was astonished at the power of this monk; but the mother
was still grieved. The monk, to console her, told her his history; how
he was her true child; how the devil had taken him and carried him to
the roadside how he had been found and brought up by a coachman; and
that it was he himself who had been made priest, and her son. All were
astounded at his words. After they had well dined, the monk went back
into his convent, and the father and mother lived honourably, as they
did before; and as they lived well, they died well too.

CATHERINE ELIZONDO.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[73:1](bl30.htm#fr_71) This is, of course, only
a mispronunciation of "Dominus tecum"--The Lord be with you." Compare
the opposite effect of "God save Us," in Croker's tale of "Master and
Man," pp. 96, 97.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](bl31)
