[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl32)  [Next](bl34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FISHERMAN AND HIS SONS.

LIKE many others in the world, there was a fisherman who lived with his
wife. One day he was fishing and caught a fine fish (at that time all
the animals and everything used to speak), and the fish said to
him: <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83)

"Spare my life! Spare my life! I will give you all that you shall
desire."

And this poor man spared its life, and went home without having caught
anything else. When he came home his wife asks him:

Where are your fish?"

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

He tells her how that he had caught a fish, and that it had begged him
to spare its life, and that he had left it in the water. His wife says
to him:

"Have you lost your head then? After having caught a fish to put it back
again into the water!"

And she called him all sorts of names, even "big donkey."

The next day he goes fishing again, and (what a chance!) the same fish
came again. It asks him again to spare its life. But the man answers:

"No! My wife loaded me with abuse last evening."

The fish said to him that he would give him as much money as he wished
if he would but spare him. And our fisherman lets him go again. He
remains there again all day, but nothing comes to his hook. Again he
goes off home without anything at all. His wife is furious at seeing
that he has nothing. He gives her some money, but she was not satisfied,
and told her husband that he ought to have brought the fish.

He goes fishing again for the third time, and again the same fish
returns, and says to him, "Let me go into the water."

But our man will not let him go again; his wife had scolded him so much
last night. He must carry him home.

"Well, then, since you will carry me home, I will tell you how you must
divide me. You must give my tail to the dog, my head to the mare, and my
trunk to your wife. At the end of a certain time your wife will bear
three sons, and they will all be exactly like each other, exactly alike.
The mare will have three colts, but all three alike, and the bitch three
puppies, all exactly alike too. And if any misfortune should happen to
any of the three children, the well which is behind the house will begin
to boil."

The woman did as the fish had said, and she gave birth to three
wonderfully fine boys, who were all exactly, exactly alike, and the mare
had three colts exactly alike, and the bitch three puppies exactly alike
too.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

When these children grew big, one of them said to his parents that he
wished to go from country to country to see the world. His parents did
not wish it. But he had such a desire that at last they gave him leave.
He takes a horse and a dog, extraordinarily large and handsome, a sword
also, <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) and off he starts. He goes on,
and on, very, very far. He comes to a city and goes to an inn. They were
lamenting loudly there, and everybody was sad. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85) He asks, "What is it?" They tell him how
that a serpent with seven heads lived in the mountain, and that every
day they drew lots to know who should go to him, because he must eat one
person every day; and that to-day the lot has fallen on the king's
daughter, and that everyone was in mourning, and that the next day this
princess must go very early to the mountain.

Our young man takes his horse, his dog, and his sword, and starts off
before the princess. He keeps himself hidden until the princess was
alone at the top. Then our lad comes out, and the princess says to him:

"Where do you come from here? Go down quickly, else you will be eaten as
well as I. It is quite enough for one (to die)."

And she entreats him to go down, but our lad will not. He wishes to try
if he can do anything. At the same moment they hear a shrill hissing,
and with that the serpent comes. The lad says to the dog:

"Do your duty."

And the dog leaps upon the serpent and holds him. He takes his sword and
cuts off his seven heads as best he can. When he has done that he takes
the seven tongues out of the seven heads and puts them in his pocket.
This princess had on seven robes, each more beautiful than the others,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

and he cuts seven pieces out of them severally. The princess does not
know what to do to thank him. She wishes to take the lad home with her,
but he will not go. And he returns to the inn.

The king proclaims that the man who has killed the serpent has gained
the half of his kingdom, and his daughter; that he should make himself
known. Our lad does not show himself at all, but a charcoal-burner <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86) passing by on the mountain found the seven
heads. He presents himself before the king as if he had killed the
serpent. But the princess does not recognise him, and says that it is
not he who has saved her. But as no one else came the marriage was about
to be celebrated, when the princess pointed out to her father from a
distance her rescuer. The king would not believe her. But they send and
fetch him, and tell the charcoal-burner to show the seven heads of the
serpent, and he shows them with great boldness. Our young man tells him
to open their mouths. He does so, and the mouths had no tongues. Then he
who had killed the serpent shows the seven tongues, and the seven pieces
of the princess' robes, and they were all convinced that he had killed
the serpent; and they burned the charcoal-burner alive in the middle of
the market-place.

Our young man marries the princess, and they had many and great
rejoicings because he had delivered all the world from the terrible
serpent. In the evening, when they retired to their chamber, the wife
knelt down to say her prayers, and the husband went and looked out of
the window, and he saw by the moonlight a magnificent castle, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87) which he had never seen before.

He asks his wife:

"What is that?"

His wife says to him:

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

"Nobody goes to that castle, for they who go there never. return." <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88)

The husband said to her that he must go there. His wife did not wish it,
but he had such a desire to do so that he takes his horse, his dog, and
his sword, and goes off. He looks round and round (the castle), but he
cannot find the door. At last he finds a little door half hidden, very
small. He knocks. An old woman comes to him, and asks him what he wants.

He says, "I have seen this castle so beautiful outside, that I am
anxious to see the inside."

She shows him in. He sees a table splendidly laid out. There was nothing
that there was not on the table. This woman invites him to take
something. He says that he does not want anything, but she insists so
much that he ends by taking something. As soon as he has eaten the first
mouthful he becomes a terrible monster, and by no means could he get out
of that house.

The water begins to boil at home, as the fish had said. All those in the
house are grieved because some misfortune has happened to the son. One
of the brothers at home said that he would immediately set out to the
help of his brother. Those at home are very sorry, but they let him go.
He takes a horse and a dog. The father and mother give him all the money
that they can give him, and he starts off. He goes on, and on, and on,
and, as was fated, <span id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_89) he comes to the
same inn as his brother. There they recognise him. They inform the king
that the gentleman is at the house, because he had had a search made for
him through all the neighbourhood. They come and fetch him out of his
corner, and he lets them do as they wish. A great supper was made, and
he goes off with the princess. As before, the princess knelt down to
pray. The young man goes to look out of the window, and sees this
palace. He asks her what this beautiful castle is. She says to him:

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

"You do not know what takes place there! They who go there never
return."

He says that he will start off directly. His wife asks him if he will
return to that castle as before. "Do not go, I pray you."

But nothing could have stopped him, and off he goes with his horse and
his dog. Like the other brother, he goes wandering round and round the
house without finding the door. At last he sees a very little door half
hidden. He knocks at it, and the old woman comes and says to him:

"What do you want?"

"I have seen the outside of this castle, and I wish to see the inside."

She tells him to come in. He leaves his horse and his dog outside, and
he sees a table splendidly set out; one could not mention anything that
was wanting, there was something of everything. She tells him to eat
something. He did not wish to, but at last he takes something, (so
little, that it was) almost nothing. At the first mouthful he becomes a
terrible monster, and cannot in any way get out.

The water at home begins to boil, and they know that some misfortune has
happened to him.

The third brother said that he must set out as quickly as possible. The
parents did not wish it, but he said to them

"Perhaps I shall save them; let me go."

They give him as much money as they can. He takes a horse and a dog, and
off he starts. He goes on, and on, and on. He also goes to the same inn
as his other brothers. He is recognised immediately, and the king is
informed that this young gentleman is there. He sends to fetch him
immediately, and makes great feastings and rejoicings, thinking that it
is always the same as their first young gentleman. In the evening he is
conducted to the princess. The princess kneels down to say her evening
prayers, and her husband, wishing to see a little more of the festival,
placed himself at the window. He also sees the beautiful castle. He asks
his wife:

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

"What is this beautiful house?"

She says to him, "What! You! Do not you know what it is? No one returns
from there. You know yourself what happens there, since you have been
there yourself."

He said to her, "I must go and see it again."

The princess would not let him go; but he broke away from her. He takes
his horse and his dog, and starts off. He looks, and looks all round,
and cannot find the door. An old woman appears to him, and says to him--

"What do you think will become of you here? They who go in there do not
come out."

"But that is why I wish to go in, to know what passes within."

Then the old woman gives him a pigeon, cooked and prepared for eating,
and said to him,

"Inside there is an old woman. She will try and force you to eat; but,
if you are wise, you will not eat. You will show her the pigeon that you
have in your pocket which remains after your repast, and you must make
her eat some of the pigeon, and you will have full power over her."

When he has found the door, he knocks. This old woman comes, and asks
him what he wants. He says that he only wishes to see this house. She
lets him in. He takes his dog, also, with him. He sees this splendid
table. She wishes absolutely to make him eat; but he says that it is
altogether impossible--that he has in his pocket a pigeon which he has
not been able to eat, and that she must eat some of that. The old woman
says she will not. He compels her, and tells her she must; and at last
she eats it. He then asks her what she has done with his brothers. She
says that she knows nothing about them; that she does not know what he
means. He forces her to tell him, and says to her,

"I will make my dog strangle you if you do not tell me."

He frightens her so, that she shows him some terrible

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

monsters. He tells her to restore them as they were before, otherwise
some misfortune shall happen to her, and to mind what she is about. At
last she set to work to change them as they were before, and their
horses and dogs as well.

They all go to the king's palace, where everyone is immensely astonished
to see three gentlemen arrive exactly alike in all respects. They ask
the princess which is her husband. But the poor young lady is greatly
embarrassed. She could not distinguish them, because they were exactly
alike. At last he who had killed the serpent said that he was her
husband. They make great rejoicings, and give a great deal of money to
the two brothers, and to their parents, and they went off. They burnt
the old woman in the midst of the market-place, and this handsome castle
was given to the newly-married pair, and they lived happily at court;
and, as they lived well, so they died happily.

CATHERINE ELIZONDO.

All the *latter* part of this tale is much more detailed than in the
Gaelic, and it is singular to read this note from Campbell's
collector:--"The Gaelic is given as nearly as possible in the words used
by Mackenzie; but he thinks his story rather shortened." Of the identity
of the two stories there can be no doubt, although each supplies what is
wanting to the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[87:1](bl33.htm#fr_83) For the whole of this
tale compare Campbell's "Sea Maiden," Vol. I., p. 71. The sea-maiden
takes the place of the fish. Besides the three sons, the three foals,
and the three puppies, three trees grow behind the house, and serve as a
sign like the well boiling Bladé's "Les Deux Jumeaux," in his "Contes
Agenais," is identical with this; *cf.* also Köhler's notes, p. 148.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[89:1](bl33.htm#fr_84) Much more is made of the
sword in the Gaelic tales. In them it is always a magic or a mystic
weapon.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[89:2](bl33.htm#fr_85) This episode of the fight
with the seven-headed beast is introduced in the same way in the
Gaelic--"The Sea-Maiden," pp. 76, 77. *Cf.* also "Rouge Etin," in
Brueyre.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[90:1](bl33.htm#fr_86) In the Gaelic the
charcoal-burner is a general.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[90:2](bl33.htm#fr_87) This takes place not on
the wedding night, but some time after in the "Sea-Maiden," p. 82. The
wife at prayers and the husband standing by indifferent is but too true
a picture, we fear.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[91:1](bl33.htm#fr_88) The "Sea-Maiden," p.
82--"Go not, go not," said she, "there never went man to this castle
that returned." See below.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[91:2](bl33.htm#fr_89) Basque, "as must needs
be."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tabakiera, The Snuff-Box](bl34)
