[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl36)  [Next](bl38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EZKABI-FIDEL.

As there are many in the world, and as we are many of us, there was a
mother who had a son. They were very poor. The son wished to go off
somewhere, in order to

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

better himself, (he said); that it was not living to live like that. The
mother was sorry; but what could she do? In order that her son may be
better off, she lets him go. He goes then, travelling on, and on, and
on. In a forest he meets with a gentleman, who asks him where be is
going. He tells him that, wishing to better himself, he had gone away
from home to do something. This gentleman asks him if he is willing to
be his servant. He replies, "Yes." They go off then together, and come
to a beautiful place. After having entered, the gentleman gives him all
the keys of the house, saying that he has a journey he must make, and
that he must see the whole house--that he will find in it everything he
wants to eat, and to take care of the horses in the stable. The
gentleman goes away as soon as he had seen all the house and the stable.
There were a lot of horses there, and in the midst of them all a white
mare, <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108) who said to him,

"Ay! ay! Fidel, save me, I pray you, from here, and get me outside. You
will not be sorry for it."

Fidel stops at the place whence this voice came. A moment after, the
white mare says to him,

"Come near the white mare; it is she who is speaking to you."

Fidel goes up to her, and says to her that he cannot let her go--that
the master has not given him any other work to do (than to take care of
the horses), and that he certainly will not do any such thing. The mare
said to him,

"Go and fetch a saucepan, and when I shall have filled it with water,
you will wash your hands and your head."

Fidel does as the mare told him, and is quite astonished at seeing his
hands shine, and he says to her that he does not wish to have them like
that, but that, as to his head, he

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

could hide it. <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109) The mare told him
to wash his hands in the water, and that they would become again as they
were before.

The time goes on, and the time returns. A long time had passed, and the
master had never returned. And one day the mare said to him,

"Fidel, do you know how long you have been here?"

He says to her, "I don't know at all--six months, perhaps?"

The mare says to him, "Six years have passed, and if the master arrives
when seven years shall have passed, you will be enchanted--you, too, as
we all are here--and the master is a devil."

After that he heard that, Fidel is frightened, and he says to himself
that it would be better to do what the white mare had said--to get on
her back, and both to escape from there. They go off then, both of them.
When they had gone some little distance, the mare asks him if he sees
anything behind him.

He says, "Yes," that he sees something terrible, but in the clouds; but
that it is something terrific. <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110) The
mare gives the earth a kick with her foot, and says to it,

"Earth, with thy power form a dense, terrible fog where he is."

They go on again, and the mare says again--

"Look back again, if you see anything."

Fidel says to her, "Yes, I see again this terrible thing; it is coming
after us quickly, and is going to catch us."

The mare at the same time says again to the earth, in striking it with
her foot,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

"Let it hail stones, and hail there where he is as much as can possibly
fall."

They go on. The mare says again,

"Look back, if you see anything."

He says to her again, "He is here, this terrible monster. It is all up
with us now--we cannot escape him; he is quite near, and he comes with
speed."

The mare strikes the earth with her foot, and says to it--

"Form before him a river, and let him drown himself there for evermore."

He sees him drown himself there. The mare says to him,

"Now you shall go to such a spot. The king lives there. You will ask if
they want a gardener, and they will tell you 'Yes.' You will stay there
without doing anything, and the work will do itself by itself, without
your doing anything. Every day three beautiful flowers will come up in
this garden. You will carry them to the three daughters of the king, but
you will always give the finest to the youngest." <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111)

It was the custom to carry the dinner to the gardener, but it was the
youngest of the daughters who carried it to him. From the first day the
gardener pleased the young lady, and she said to him one day that he
must marry her. The lad said to her that that cannot be, that she ought
not to think of marrying with a person of low birth and who has nothing,
and that she must not dream any such dreams. This young lady falls ill.
The father sends for the doctor, who says, after having touched her
pulse, that she is ill of love; and the doctor goes to tell it to the
king. The father goes to the young lady and tells her what the physician
has said to him--that she is not so very ill. The daughter says to him:

"In order to cure me you must send and fetch the gardener. Let him give
me some broth and I shall be cured."

The father sends to fetch him directly, has him washed and properly
dressed, and makes him carry the broth. There was among the court an
old, old nurse; she was a

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

witch, and as she knew what the physician had said, she goes and hides
herself in the young lady's bedroom before the gardener came there, in
order to know what the young lady would say to him. The young lady said
to him:

"Yes, and you shall marry me; I will not marry anybody else but you,
whatever you may say."

The lad said to her. "No, no, I will not hear that mentioned."

The nurse had heard all that had passed, and she goes and tells it
immediately to the king. The young lady was cured, and goes to carry the
dinner to Fidel. Fidel had a habit of always giving the first spoonful
of the soup to the dog. He gives it him that day too, and as soon as the
dog has eaten it he falls stark dead. When the young lady saw that she
goes and tells it to her father. The father sends for a big dog, and
gives him some of the soup, and as soon as he has eaten it he falls
dead. Judge of the anger of that young lady. She goes and takes this old
witch and has her burnt. She goes to look for Fidel in a little house
which was at the bottom of the garden, and she sees his head bare. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112) It was shining like the sun, and she
entirely lost her own head for it, and she said to him, that he must
marry her. As she left him no peace, her father said to her:

"If you *will* marry him, do so; but I will not give you anything. You
must go and live in a corner of the mountain with your husband; there is
a house there, and there you must stop. You may come only one day a week
to see me."

That was all the same to this young lady, (and they are married), and go
off there. As the king had given her no money, when Fidel's hair grew
she went from time to time to the goldsmiths, who said to her that they
had not money enough belonging to them to pay for the gold that she
brought them. And they lived there very happily.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

One day Fidel heard that the king was engaged in a great war, and he
told his wife to go to her father and tell him that he too wished to go
to this war. This young lady goes to tell her father her husband's
commission. Her father says to her:

"What is the use of a young man like that who has never killed anything
but mole-crickets? Let him stop at home."

His daughter says to him: "At least he is your son-in-law!"

The father then says to her: "He may come on such a day."

Fidel goes as they had told him. He asks the king for a horse and a
sword. The king gives him a horse blind and lame. Fidel was not pleased
with it. He begins his march, wishing to get on as quickly as possible,
but when he had gone a little distance, the horse sticks in the mud, and
cannot in any way get out of it. While he is there, the white mare comes
to him. She gives him a beautiful horse, and a lance and a sword, and
tells him that he will see his brothers-in-law encamped round a city,
but not to stop there with them, but to ride straight to the city; that
the gates will be shut, but as soon as he shall have touched them with
his lance they will be broken to pieces, and that they will make peace
with him. He does as she told him, and starts off on his horse like the
lightning, without paying the slightest attention to his
brothers-in-law. He goes up to the city, and as soon as he has touched
the gates with his sword they are in pieces. He enters the city, and all
the world comes out and makes him a thousand *fêtes*. They declare that
they wish for no more war. They give him the key of the treasury and all
the papers, and he retires from there with all the honours, When he
returns he tells his brothers-in-law to retire--that the war is
finished. They go back again. He stops at the place where he had left
his old horse in the mud. He sends away his beautiful horse with all his
things, and Fidel stops there, not being able to drag his old horse out
of the mud. When his brothers-in-law

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

pass, they mock at him (and ask him) if it is there that he has passed
all his time. He tells them, "Yes." The others go on ahead, and at
length he also arrives at the king's house. He leaves his old horse
there and goes off home. He does not tell his wife what has happened,
and they live in their hole.

The king was getting old, and he had entirely lost his sight. Somebody
gave him to understand that there was a water which made people young
again, and another which restored sight. He told his sons-in-law that
they must go (and look for it)--that he could not live long like that.
And both of them start off. Their wives, at starting, had given each a
golden apple. <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113) They go far away;
but they find nothing. Tired at last, they stop in a beautiful city.
They take each of them a wife, and they live according to their fancy.
When Fidel saw that his brothers-in-law did not arrive, he said to his
wife that he must go off; perhaps he might be able better to find the
waters, which his father wanted. He goes off without saying anything to
the king, and travels on, and on, and on.

He meets an old woman, who says to him, "Where are you going to?" He
tells her how he wants a water which gives sight to the blind and makes
the old young, <span id="fr_114"></span>[2](#fn_114) and that he would
not go back home without finding it. This old woman says to him:

"You will see two animals fighting close to you, and you will gather the
herb which makes the dead to live; you will have it boiled, and you will
keep this water for yourself."

This lad goes on a little farther, and he sees two lizards fighting so
fiercely that one kills the other. The one who was left alive takes a
blade of grass and touches the dead and rekindles his life. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[3](#fn_115) Fidel gathers this grass, and goes

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

off to this old woman. The old woman gives him two bottles, telling him
that the one is for giving sight to the blind, and the other for making
old men young; that he must not sell these waters for money, but must
make an exchange of them for two golden apples which his brothers-in-law
have in this very city, and that it is to them that he must give this
water.

Fidel goes into the city, and as soon as he has entered, he cries:

"Who wishes to buy the water that gives sight to the blind, and the
water which makes old men young?"

His two brothers-in-law appear, and say that they must have some of this
water, and ask what it costs. And he tells them that he does not sell
it, but only gives it in exchange for golden apples. These gentlemen
willingly make the exchange. But they wish to make trial of it directly;
they bring an old blind dog, and immediately he grows young again. Judge
how pleased they were with their water of power. They set off to the
king, and this water makes him become very young and gives him sight.
The king wishes to have great rejoicings, and invites all his friends in
the neighbourhood. Fidel arrives at home, and says nothing to his wife.
When he hears that the king is going to have rejoicings, he sends his
wife to ask the king if he would not like them to go there too; that
they would help, one in cutting the wood, and the other in serving at
table. She did not wish to go there at all. She told her husband that
she would a hundred times sooner stop at home; but her husband sends her
off by force, (saying) that they ought to be there on that day. She
goes, then, the poor woman, against her wish. She asks her father if he
does not want some one to help on the feast day. The father says,
"No!"--they have servants enough. An old general who was sitting by his
side said to him:

"Why do you not let them come?"

Then the king said, "Come then on such a day."

Fidel and his wife go. While they are at breakfast the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

old general asks Fidel if he also does not know something to relate? He
replies "Yes," that he knows some (stories), but more than one would not
be pleased with what he would tell. Then the king says, placing his
sword upon the table:

"The point of my sword shall know news of the heart of him who shall
speak."

Fidel begins then, how he went to the war with an old horse, blind and
lame, but that in spite of that he had carried off the keys of the
treasure and the papers. The king says to him that he has not seen them
yet--that he is still expecting them. Fidel takes out the papers and
gives them to the king. He gives also the keys of the treasury. The king
assures himself that they are the real ones. He then narrates how he has
sold in exchange for two golden apples that precious water. At this
instant his wife rises and says to him:

"Where have you these golden apples--you?"

As it is she who has spoken the first words, Fidel takes up the king's
sword and strikes his wife dead. <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116)
The king was grieved to see that, but Fidel says to him:

"Do not disturb yourself for that; as I have taken away her life I will
give it her again."

He takes out his water which rekindles dead men, and rubs some on her
temple, and she suddenly returns to life. Everyone is astounded at this
great deed, and at all that he has already done. The king tells him that
he has already gained the crown, but that he must be cured of this
terrible scab <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117) first. His wife
rises, takes off his kerchief which he had upon his head, and shows the
shining head of her husband, saying:

"See, this is the scab of my husband

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

The king says that the crown will shine much better on his head. He goes
to fetch it, and places it upon this precious head. He banishes his
sons-in-law with his two daughters to the same desert place where Fidel
formerly lived. And Fidel and his wife lived much richer than the king
was. His precious head gave him this power; and as they lived well they
died well too.

LAURENTINE.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[112:1](bl37.htm#fr_108) *Cf.* the horse in
Naaké's "Slavonic Fairy Tales," "Ivan Kruchina" (from the Russian), p.
117, and "the dun shaggy filly," in Campbell's "The Young King of
Easaidh Ruadh," Vol. I., p. 5, and elsewhere; also the horse in the
"Uso-Andre," and "The Unknown Animal," below. Campbell, Vol. I., p. 63,
remarks that the horses in Gaelic stories are always feminine; but they
are red as well as grey.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[113:1](bl37.htm#fr_109) In this, and the
following tale, Ezkabi's golden hair is evidently like "Diarmaid's"
beauty spot. "He used to keep his cap always down on the beauty-spot;
for any woman that might chance to see it, she would be in love with
him."--Campbell's "Diarmaid and Grainne," Vol. III., p. 39, notes and
variations.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[113:2](bl37.htm#fr_110) Compare the following
legend, and "Old Deccan Days" ("Truth's Triumph"), pp. 62, 63.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[114:1](bl37.htm#fr_111) *Cf.* above, "The
Grateful Tartaro and the Heren-Suge," .

<span id="fn_112"></span>[115:1](bl37.htm#fr_112) *Cf.* note, *supra*,
p. 113, and Grainne seeing Diarmaid as he lifts his cap or helmet, These
beauty-spots seem to be the counterpart of Aphrodite's cestus.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[117:1](bl37.htm#fr_113) *Cf.* the two golden
pears in the Spanish "Juanillo el Loco," Patrañas, p. 38, given in
exchange for the same water.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[117:2](bl37.htm#fr_114) *Cf.* below, "The
Singing Tree," etc., [p. 176](bl55.htm#page_176).

<span id="fn_115"></span>[117:3](bl37.htm#fr_115) *Cf.* "Old Deccan
Days," p. 139; and Cox, "Aryan Mythology," Vol. I., p. 160, *seq.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[119:1](bl37.htm#fr_116) *Cf.* below, [p.
156](bl47.htm#page_156).

<span id="fn_117"></span>[119:2](bl37.htm#fr_117) The word "Ezkabi" is
"the scab;" he either really had it, as in the next version, or was
supposed to have it from keeping his head covered, as in this. In both
cases the hair is most beautiful, precious, golden, and love-compelling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Variation of 'Ezkabi-Fidel'](bl38)
