[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl38)  [Next](bl40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LADY PIGEON AND HER COMB. <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118)

LIKE many others in the world, there was a mother and her son; they were
very poor. This son wished to leave his mother and go away, (saying)
that they were wretched as they were. He goes off then far, far, far
away. He finds a castle in a forest, and goes in and asks if they want a
servant, and it is a Tartaro who comes to him. He asks him:

"Where are you going to like that, ant of the earth?"

He says that, being very poor at home, he wished to work to better
himself.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

The Tartaro says to him, "As you have told the truth I spare your life,
ant of the earth, and in a few days you will go away from here. Three
young ladies will come to bathe in the water in my garden. They will
leave their pigeon-robes under a large stone, and you will take the
pigeon's skin which is in the middle. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119) The two young ladies will come out of
the water and will take their skins. She who stops in the water will ask
you for her skin, but you shall not give it her before she shall promise
to help you always."

The next day our lad sees that the young ladies are in the water. He
goes and does as the Tartaro tells him; he takes the middle one of the
three skins, the two young ladies take their skins, and the third asks
him to give her hers. The lad will not give it her without her promise.
The young lady will not give her word. He then says to her that he will
not give it her at all. The young lady then says to him that he may
reckon upon her, that she gives him her word, and that he shall go
to-morrow to her father's house, that he will take him as servant, and
that he lives in such a place. The lad goes off then the next day and
finds this beautiful house in a forest.

He asks if they want a servant? They tell him, "Yes," but that there is
a great deal of work to do there. The next morning (the father) takes
him into the forest and says to him:

"You must pull up all these oaks with their roots, you must cut them
into lengths, and put the trunks on one side, the branches on another,
and the roots by themselves, each in their place. Afterwards you will
plough the ground, then you will harrow it, then sow the wheat; you will
then cut it, and you bring me at, noon a little cake made out of this
wheat, otherwise you will be put to death." <span
id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120)

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

The lad says to him, "I will try."

He goes then to the forest and sits down pensive. It was already eleven
o'clock when the young lady appears to him. She says to him:

"Why are you like that, so sad? Have not I promised that I would help
you? Shut your eyes, but all the worse for you if you shall open them."

She throws a comb into the air, <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121)
and says

"Comb, with thy power tear up these oaks with their roots, cut them into
lengths, put the trunks together, and the branches, and the roots too by
themselves."

As soon as it was said it was done. She throws another comb, and says to
it:

"Comb, with thy power turn up this ground, harrow it, and sow the
wheat."

As soon as it was said it was done. She throws another comb, and says:

"Comb, with thy power make a cake of this wheat when you have cut it."

Our lad was curious to know what was taking place, but the young lady
said to him:

"Woe to you and to me if you open (your eyes). <span
id="fr_122"></span>[2](#fn_122) Nothing will be finished for us."

He does not open them, and the cake is cooked. Twelve o'clock was going
to strike. She says to him:

"Go with speed, you have no time to lose."

The lad goes to the king and brings him the cake. The king is
astonished. He says (to himself), "That is a clever lad, that," and he
wishes to be assured of it by looking out of window; and, after having
seen that this huge forest had been torn up, he is astonished, He sends
away the lad,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

and goes and tells it to his wife. His wife says to him, "Take care that
he is not in league with your daughter." <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123)

The husband says to her, "What do you mean? They have never seen each
other."

This husband was a devil. The young lady told our lad that her father is
going to send him to fetch a ring in a river far away. "He will tell you
to choose a sword from the midst of ever so many others, but you will
take an old sabre and leave the others."

The next day his wife told him that he ought to send him to fetch a ring
which he had lost in the bed of a river. He sends him then, and tells
him that he must choose a sword; that he will have quantities of evil
fish to conquer. The lad says to him that he will not have those fine
swords, that he has enough with this old sabre, which was used to scrape
off the dirt.

When he arrived at the bank of the river he sat there weeping, not
knowing what to do. The young lady comes to him, and says:

"What! You are weeping! Did not I tell you that I would always help
you?"

It was eleven o'clock. The young lady says to him

"You must cut me in pieces with this sabre, and throw all the pieces
into the water."

The lad will not do it by any means. He says to her:

"I prefer to die here on the spot than to make you suffer."

The lady says to him, "It is nothing at all what I shall suffer, and you
must do it directly--the favourable moment is passing by like this, like
this."

The lad, trembling all over, begins with his sabre. He throws all the
pieces into the river; but, lo I a part of the lady's little finger
sticks to a nail in his shoe. The young lady comes out of the water and
says to him:

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

"You have not thrown everything into the water. My little finger is
wanting." <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124)

After having looked for it, he sees that he has it under his foot,
hooked on to a nail. The young lady gives him the ring. She tells him to
go without losing a moment, for he must give it to the king at noon. He
arrives happily (in time). The young lady, as she goes into the house,
bangs the door with all her might and begins to cry out:

"Ay! ay! ay! I have crushed my little finger."

And she makes believe that she has done it there. The king was pleased.
He tells him that on the morrow he must tame a horse and three young
fillies. <span id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125) The lad says to him:

"I will try."

The master gives him a terrible club. The young lady says to him in the
evening:

"The horse which my father has spoken to you about will be himself. You
will strike him with all your might with your terrible club on the nose,
and he will yield and be conquered. The first filly will be my eldest
sister. You will strike her on the chest with all your force, and she
also will yield and will be conquered. I shall come the last. You will
make a show of beating me too, and you will hit the ground with your
stick, and I too will yield, and I shall be conquered."

The next day the lad does as the young lady has told him. The horse
comes. He was very high-spirited, but our lad strikes him on the nose,
he yields, and is conquered. He does the same thing with the fillies. He
beats them with his terrible club, they yield, and are conquered; and
when the third comes he makes a show of hitting her, and strikes the
earth. She yields, and all go off..

The next day he sees the master with his lips swollen, and with all his
face as black as soot. The young ladies had also pain in the chest. The
youngest also gets up very late indeed in order to do as the others.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

The master says to him that he sees he is a valuable servant, and very
clever, and that he will give him one of his daughters for wife, but
that he must choose her with his eyes shut. And the young lady says to
him:

"You will choose the one that will give you her hand twice, and in any
way you will recognise me, because you will find that my little finger
is wanting. I will always put that in front."

The next day the master said to him:

"We are here now; you shall now choose the one you wish for, always
keeping your eyes shut."

He shuts them then; and the eldest daughter approaches, and gives him
her hand. He says to the king:

"It is very heavy, (this hand); too heavy for me. I will not have this
one."

The second one approaches, she gives him her hand, and he immediately
recognises that the little finger is wanting. He says to the king:

"This is the one I must have."

They are married immediately. <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126) They
pass some days like that. His wife says to him;

"It is better for us to be off from here, and to flee, otherwise my
father will kill us."

They set off, then, that evening at ten o'clock, and the young lady
spits before the door of her room, saying:

"Spittle, with thy power, you shall speak in my place." <span
id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127) And they go off a long way. At midnight,
the father goes to the door of the lad and his wife, and knocks at the
door.; they do not answer. He knocks harder, and then the spittle says
to him:

"Just now nobody can come into this room."

The father says, "It is I. I must come in."

"It is impossible," says the spittle again.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

The father grows more and more angry; the spittle makes him stop an hour
like that at the door. At last, not being able to do anything else, he
smashes the door, and goes inside. What is his terrible rage when he
sees the room empty. He goes off to his wife, and says to her:

"You were not mistaken; they were well acquainted, and they were really
in league with one another, and they have both escaped together; but I
will not leave them like that. I will go off after them, and I shall
find them sooner or later."

He starts off. Our gentleman and lady had gone very far, but the young
lady was still afraid. She said to her husband:

"He might overtake us even now. I--I cannot turn my head; but (look) if
you can see something."

The husband says to her: "Yes, something terrible is coming after us; I
have never seen a monster like this."

The young lady throws up a comb, and says: <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128)

"Comb, with thy power, let there be formed before my father hedges and
thorns, and before me a good road."

It is done as she wished. They go a good way, and she says again:

"Look, I beg you, if you see anything again."

The husband looks back, and sees nothing; but in the clouds he sees
something terrible, and tells so to his wife. And his wife says, taking
her comb:

"Comb, with thy power, let there be formed where he is a fog, and hail,
and a terrific storm."

It happens as they wish. They go a little way farther, and his wife says
to him:

"Look behind you, then, if you see anything."

The husband says to her: "Now it is all over with us. We have him here
after us; he is on us. Use all your power."

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

She throws again a comb immediately, and says:

"Comb, with thy power, form between my father and me a terrible river,
and let him be drowned there for ever."

As soon as she has said that, they see a mighty water, and there their
father and enemy drowns himself. <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129)

The young lady says, "Now we have no more fear of him, we shall live in
peace."

They go a good distance, and arrive at a country into which the young
lady could not enter. She says to her husband:

"I can go no farther. It is the land of the Christians there; I cannot
enter into it. You must go there the first. You must fetch a priest. He
must baptize me, and afterwards I will come with you; but you must take
great care that nobody kisses you. If so, you will forget me altogether.
Mind and pay great attention to it; and you, too, do not you kiss
anyone."

He promises his wife that he will not. He goes, then, on, and on, and
on. He arrives in his own country, and as he is entering it an old aunt
recognises him, and comes behind him, and gives him two kisses. <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130) It is all over with him. He forgets his
wife, as if he had never seen her, and he stays there amusing himself,
and taking his pleasure.

The young lady, seeing that her husband never returned, that something
had happened to him, and that she could no longer count upon him, she
takes a little stick, and striking the earth, she says:

"I will that here, in this very spot, is built a beautiful hotel, with
all that is necessary, servants, and all the rest."

There was a beautiful garden, too, in front, and she had put over the
door:

"Here they give to eat without payment."

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

One day the young man goes out hunting with two comrades, and while they
were in the forest they said one to the other:

"We never knew of this hotel here before. We must go there too. One can
eat without payment."

They go off then. The young lady recognises her husband very well, but
he does not recognise her at all. She receives them very well. These
gentlemen are so pleased with her, that one of them asks her if she will
not let him pass the night with her. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131) The young lady says to him, "Yes." The
other asks also, "I, too, was wishing it." The young lady says to him:

"To-morrow then, you, if you wish it, certainly."

And her husband says to her: "And I after to-morrow then."

The young lady says to him, "Yes." One of the young men remains then. He
passes the evening in great delight, and when the hour comes for going
to bed, the young lady says to him:

"When you were small you were a choir-boy, and they used to powder you;
this smell displeases me in bed. Before coming there you must comb
yourself. Here is a comb, and when you have got all the powder out, you
may come to bed."

Our lad begins then to comb his hair, but never could he get all the
powder out, such quantities came out, and were still coming out of his
head; and he was still at it when the young lady rose. The lad said to
her:

"What! you are getting up before I come."

"And do you not see that it is day? I cannot stop there any longer.
People will come."

Our young man goes off home without saying a word more. He meets his
comrade who was to pass the night with this young lady. He says to him:

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

"You are satisfied? You amused yourself well?"

"Yes, certainly, very well. If the time flies as fast with you as it did
with me you will amuse yourself well."

He goes off then to this house. The young lady says to him, after he had
had a good supper:

"Before going to bed you must wash your feet. The water will be here in
this big copper; when you have them quite clean you may come to bed."

Accordingly he washes one, and when he has finished washing the other,
the first washed is still black and dirty. He washes it again, and finds
the foot that he has just well washed very dirty again. He kept doing
like that for such a long time. When the young lady gets up, the
gentleman says to her:

"What! You are getting up already, without me coming?"

"Why did you not then come before day? I cannot stay any longer in bed.
It is daylight, and the people will begin (to come)."

Our young man withdraws as the other had done. Now it is the turn of her
husband. She serves him still better than the others; nothing was
wanting at his supper. When the hour for going to bed arrives, they go
to the young lady's room; when they are ready to get into bed, the young
lady says to him:

"Put out the light."

He puts it out, and it lights again directly. He puts it out again, and
it lights again as soon as it is put out. He passes all the night like
that in his shirt, never being able to put out that light. When daylight
is come, the young lady says to him:

"You do not know me then? You do not remember how you left your wife to
go and fetch a priest?"

As soon as she had said that he strikes his head, and says to her:

"Only now I remember all that--up to this moment I was as if I had never
had a wife at all--how sorry I am;

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

but indeed it is not my fault, not at all. I never wished it like that,
and it is my old aunt who kissed me twice without my knowing it."

"It is all the same now. You are here now. You have done penance enough;
your friends have done it too. One passed the whole night getting powder
out of his head, and the other in washing his feet, and they have not
slept with me any more than you have. At present you must go into your
country, and you must get a priest. He shall baptize me, and then we
will go into your country."

The husband goes off and returns with the priest, and she is baptized,
and they set out for his country. When they have arrived there, she
touched the earth with her stick, and says to it:

"Let there be a beautiful palace, with everything that is needed inside
it, and a beautiful garden before the house."

As soon as it is said, it is done. They lived there very rich and very
happy with the old mother of the lad, and as they lived well they died
well too.

LAURENTINE KOPENA.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[120:1](bl39.htm#fr_118) *Cf.* with the whole
of this tale, Campbell's second tale, "The Battle of the Birds," and the
variations, especially the one of "Auburn Mary," Vol. I. pp. 52-58.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[121:1](bl39.htm#fr_119) *Cf.* Baring Gould's
chapter, "Swan-Maidens"--"Curious Myths of the Middle Ages," p. 561,
*seq*.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121:2](bl39.htm#fr_120) In the Gaelic the
labours are more like those of Herakles--to clean out a byre, to shoot
birds, and to rob a magpie's nest. The Basque incidents seem to fit
better into a climatological myth.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122:1](bl39.htm#fr_121) In "Old Deccan Days"
("Truth's Triumph") it is the hair and not the comb that does the
wonders. In M. Cerquand's "Récits" the comb is an attribute of the
Basa-Andre.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[122:2](bl39.htm#fr_122) In Campbell's "Battle
of the Birds" the hero always sleeps while the giant's daughter does his
task for him.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[123:1](bl39.htm#fr_123) Here the narrator
interposed, "You see it is just as it happens; the women are always the
worst." But in Campbell it is the giant himself who says, "My own
daughter's tricks are trying me."

<span id="fn_124"></span>[124:1](bl39.htm#fr_124) In Campbell the finger
is lost in climbing the tree to get the magpie's nest; but, as here, the
bride is recognised by the loss of it.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[124:2](bl39.htm#fr_125) In "Auburn Mary" the
hero has to catch a young filly, "with an old, black, rusty
bridle."--Campbell, Vol. I., p. 55.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[125:1](bl39.htm#fr_126) See below for a second
marriage. In Campbell, p. 37, there is a double marriage.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[125:2](bl39.htm#fr_127) In Campbell, p. 55,
"Auburn Mary," there is the same "talking spittle."

<span id="fn_128"></span>[126:1](bl39.htm#fr_128) *Cf.* "Truth's
Triumph," in "Old Deccan Days;" and Campbell, pp. 331 34; and *supra*,
"Ezkabi-Fidel," pp. [113](bl37.htm#page_113), [114](bl37.htm#page_114).

<span id="fn_129"></span>[127:1](bl39.htm#fr_129) Campbell, pp. 34 and
56.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[127:2](bl39.htm#fr_130) In Campbell, it is an
old greyhound that kisses him, but with the same result, pp. 34 and 56.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[128:1](bl39.htm#fr_131) In one of Campbell's
"Variations," pp. 51, 52, the ending is something like this. In more
than one, the hero marries another bride in his period of oblivion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Suggested Explanation of 'The Lady-Pigeon and Her Comb'](bl40)
