[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bl45)  [Next](bl47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### VARIATION OF THE ABOVE.

### JUAN DE KALAIS. <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143.md)

AS there are many in the world, and as there will be, there was a mother
and her son. They had a small fortune. Nothing would please the boy but
that he should go and learn to be a sailor. The mother allows him to do
so, and when he was passed as captain she gives him a ship with a
valuable cargo. The lad starts off and comes to a city. While he was
there he sees a crowd of men on a dung-heap, who were dragging an
object, some on one side and others on the other. He approaches and sees
that they have a dead man there. He asks what they are doing like that
for, and why they do not bury him. They tell him that he has left debts,
and that they will not bury him, even though he should fall to pieces.

Juan de Kalais asks, "And if anyone should pay his debts, would you bury
him then?" They say, "Yes."

Juan de Kalais has it cried throughout the city that whoever has to
receive anything of that man should show himself. As you may suppose,
many came forward, even those who had nothing to receive. Our Juan de
Kalais sold his cargo, and still, not having enough, he sold his ship
too.

He returns home and tells his mother what he has done. His mother was
very angry, and said that he would never grow rich if he acted like
that. But, as he wished much to go again, his mother bought for him a
wretched little ship and loads it with oakum, and tar, and resin, and he
goes on his voyage. He meets with a large man-of-war, and the captain
tells him that he must buy of him a charming young lady. Juan de Kalais
tells him that he has no money, but the other captain (he was an
Englishman) tells him to give him his cargo at least. Juan de Kalais
says to him:

That is not worth much."

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

But the English captain says to him that it is, that it just happens to
be most valuable to him, and they make the exchange. Our Juan de Kalais
goes to his mother's house, and his mother was more angry than before,
saying she had nothing now with which to load his ship. She had nothing,
and would give him nothing; that instead of getting rich they had become
poor, and that it would have been better if he had stopped at home.
After some days he married the young lady whom the captain had given
him, and as Juan de Kalais was in poverty and distress, not having any
cargo, his wife told him that he had no need of cargo--that she will
give him a flag and a handkerchief, and she gave him her ring and told
him to go to the roadstead of Portugal and to fire three rounds of
cannon; and, when people came, to tell them that he must see the king.
(She added) that she was called Marie Madeleine. Our Juan de Kalais sets
off and arrives in the roadstead of Portugal, and fires his three rounds
of cannon. Everybody is astonished at hearing this noise. The king
himself comes on board the ship and asks how they dared to fire, and
that everyone is a prisoner.-- <span id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_144.md) He
answers that he brings news of Marie Madeleine, and he shows him the
flag with her portrait and the handkerchief. The king did not know where
he was with joy, and he tells him that he must go directly and fetch
her.

The king had with him an old general <span
id="fr_145"></span>[2](#fn_145.md) who had wished to marry Marie Madeleine,
but she would not; and he asks the king if he might not go too with
him--that he would do it quicker. The king told him to go then if he
wished, and they set out.

When they were at sea the old general said to Juan de Kalais one day:

"Look, Juan de Kalais, what a fine fish there is here!"

He looks and does not see anything. The old general. says to him again:

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

"Stoop down your head, and look here."

And at the same time he throws him into the sea. The old general goes on
his voyage, and takes the young lady and goes back to the king, and
makes him believe that Juan de Kalais was drowned, and he still wished
to marry Marie Madeleine; but she would by no means consent, (saying)
that she had been married to Juan de Kalais, and that she was so deeply
sorry for him that she would remain seven years without going out of her
room. As her father wished her to marry this general she decided to do
so then.

Let us now go to the poor Juan de Kalais. He remained seven years on a
rock, eating sea-weed and drinking the seawater. There came to him a
fox, <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146.md) who said to him:

"You do not know, Juan de Kalais, the daughter of the King of Portugal
is going to be married to-morrow. What would you give to go there?"

"The half of what I have at present, and the half of what I shall have
later on."

The fox takes him and carries him to the door of the house of the King
of Portugal, and leaves him there. Juan de Kalais asks if they want a
servant. They tell him that they will have work for him too-that they
will have a wedding in the house to-morrow. The lady's maid recognised
Juan de Kalais, and goes running to tell it to the queen, who will not
believe it--(she says) that he was drowned. The servant, after having
looked at him again, assures her that it is he; and the princess, to put
an end to the dispute, goes off to see him, and quickly assures herself
that it is he, seeing the ring that she had given him. She throws
herself into his arms, and makes him come with her to the king. The king
said to her that they would have the wedding feast just the same. While
they were at table the king asked Juan de Kalais to tell them some
story. Juan de Kalais says "Yes," and takes out his sword, and puts it
on the table, saying, "Whoever speaks shall have news of my sword." He
begins to tell how he had saved a man by selling all

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

that he had and paying his debts; how afterwards he had made an exchange
for a young lady--that in order to save her he had given all his cargo;
then how he had been betrayed by one of his friends and thrown into the
water, and that he had lived on sea-weed and sea-water.

When the king had heard that he ordered the old general to be arrested,
and has him burnt immediately in the midst of the market-place.

The king gives Juan de Kalais all his riches, and they lived very
happily. At the end of a year they had a fine boy, and lo! the fox comes
and tells him that he has come to look for what he has promised him, and
he begins to make a division. If there were two gold chains he put one
aside, and of all that there was the same thing. When they had finished
the division the fox said to him that there was still something--that he
had told him it was to be the half of all he might possess. He remembers
then his child, and takes out his sword to cut it in half, when the fox
with his paw knocks the sword out of his hand, saying that it is enough;
that he sees what a sterling good man he is, and that he wants nothing;
that he (the fox) is the soul which he had saved by paying his debts,
and that he is now in Heaven, thanks to him, and that he will keep his
place and that of all his family ready there; and having said that he
flew away, taking the form of a pigeon.

LAURENTINE,  
Learnt it from her mother.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_143"></span>[151:1](bl46.htm#fr_143.md) This is, of course,
"Jean de Calais"--"John of Calais"--and would seem to show that it was
through some French, and not Spanish, versions that the Basques learnt
it.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[152:1](bl46.htm#fr_144.md) This seems inserted
from "Mahistruba," [p. 105](bl35.htm#page_105.md).

<span id="fn_145"></span>[152:2](bl46.htm#fr_145.md) In the Gaelic it is a
general, as here, and not a lame second officer, as in "Juan Dekos," who
wants to marry the lady, and who sets the hero on a desert
island.--Campbell, Vol. II., p. 118.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[153:1](bl46.htm#fr_146.md) See note on page
[1](bl20.htm#fn_43.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Duped Priest](bl47.md)
