[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bl47)  [Next](bl49.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

# (B.)--CONTES DES FÉES,

### DERIVED DIRECTLY FROM THE FRENCH.

WE do not suppose that the tales here given are the only ones in our
collection which are derived more or less directly from or through the
French. Several of those previously given under different heads we
believe to have been so. The question, however, still remains: Whence
did Madame d'Aulnoy, Perrault, and the other writers of the charming
"Contes des Fées," derive their materials? Place their talent as high as
we may, we still believe them to have been incapable of inventing them.
Combine, transpose, dress up, refine--all this they did in an
incomparable manner. Some portions they may have culled, directly or
indirectly, from Eastern stories; their own imagination may have filled
up many a blank, expanded many a hint, clothed many a half-dressed body
in the habit of their own times--as heraldic painters formed grotesque
monsters by selecting and putting together parts from many diverse
animals; but to create, even in fancy, was beyond their line, if it is
not altogether beyond the power of man. Therefore, when we hear these
tales related by peasants ignorant of French, we may still ask how far
they have learnt them at second or third hand from the printed works,
and how far they are reciting the crude materials out of which those
works were originally composed? This is a question which can only be
fully answered when all the legends in all the languages and patois of
France shall have been collected and compared. Meanwhile, we beg our
readers to accept these few tales as a small and not very valuable stone
contributed towards the erection of so vast an edifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ass'-Skin](bl49.md)
