[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl49)  [Next](bl51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Variations on 'Ass’-Skin'

We have four other variations of the above story, written down, with
others, that we heard, but did not copy out. One, which much resembles
the above, excepting in the commencement, opens with the proposal of a
king's son to marry one of the three daughters of another king. This
king asks his three daughters (like King Lear) how much they love him.
The eldest says, "As much as I do my little finger." That did not please
him. The second says, "As much as my middle finger." The youngest says,
"As much as the bread loves the salt." In a rage the father sends her
into the forest, with two servants, to be killed. They spare her, and
carry the horse's heart to the king, and the girl lives in the forest
"on the plants which the birds brought her, and on the flowers which the
bees brought her." The king's son finds her there while hunting, takes
her home, and marries her. At the wedding feast she gives her father
bread without salt, and then discovers herself, and all is made right,
and they live all happily, except the two sisters, who remain old maids.

Two others open like Campbell's "The King who Wished to Marry his
Daughter." A king loses his wife, who on her deathbed makes him promise
only to marry some one just like her. This is, of course, her daughter.
The daughter will not, and takes counsel of her godmother. She bids her
ask for a wedding dress made of the wings of flies; but this
impossibility is performed. Then the daughter escapes--in the one tale
in a ship, in the other on foot--and takes a place as servant. The king
has a ball; the old woman appears, and gives her the nut with the
dresses, etc. But in one of these tales, on the wedding-day she was more
handsomely dressed than ever before, "and think! they had their dresses
made for each other"--*i.e.*, they dress each

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

other! "I don't understand how it is," said the narrator, "but the story
says so."

Our fifth version is short, and, as it puts the step-mother in an
unusual light, we give it entire:--

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Step-Mother and the Step-Daughter](bl51)
