[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](bl55)  [Next](bl57.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SINGING TREE, THE BIRD WHICH TELLS THE TRUTH, AND THE WATER THAT MAKES YOUNG.

LIKE many others in the world, there were three young girls. They were
spinning together, and as girls must always talk about something while
they are spinning, the eldest said:

"You will not guess what I am thinking about?"

"Tell it us, tell it us," (said the other two).

"That I should like to be married to the king's valet."

"And I with his son-in-law," said the second.

And the third said: "And I with the king himself."

Now, the king lived not far from these girls, and just at that moment he
was passing before the door of their house, and heard what they said.
The next day the king asked the eldest:

"What were you saying yesterday at such a time?"

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

And she was ashamed to tell him, but the king pressed her so much that
at last she told it:

"I said that I wished to be married to your servant."

He made the second come, and asked her the same question: "What were you
talking about yesterday?"

She would not tell; but, the king pressed her so much that she said:

"I--I was saying that I wished to marry your son-in-law."

He sends them back home, and sends for the third, and asks her what she
said the evening before. She never dared to tell it, because that would
have been too great an impudence, but at the last she told it him; and
the king told her that they must really be married together, because she
was so very pretty. This young girl goes running off home. She told her
sisters that she is to marry the king, and all three go to live in the
king's house. The two sisters were very jealous. The princess became in
the family-way; and the king was obliged to go to another kingdom. His
poor wife was confined of a fine girl. But her sisters made the queen
believe that she had given birth to a cat, and they wrote this too to
the king. The king wrote back to them:

"If it be a cat, take all possible care of it." <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157.md)

When the king returned he did not mention the cat at all. She became
pregnant a second time, and the king was obliged to, go to another
kingdom, and when the princess was confined her sisters made her believe
that she had given birth to a dog. Think what grief and pain this poor
queen suffered. Her sisters wrote to the king that his wife had given
birth to a dog, and that without doubt she had something to do with
animals. He wrote again: "If it be a dog, take all possible care of it."
But they said that they had already thrown it into the water, as they
had done with the cat.

Fortunately a gardener was there, the same that had been there the first
time. He caught hold of the basket, and

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

finds a beautiful child inside. He is very glad, and carries the child
to his wife, who puts the infant out to nurse.

The princess became pregnant the third time. The king had intended to
stop at home; but at the moment of the confinement he was obliged to go
away somewhere, and the sisters wrote to the king that she had been
confined of a bear. The king flew into a great rage, and ordered her to
be put into a dungeon underground. They gave her a little food through a
hole, so that she might not die of starvation; and nevertheless she had
given birth to a handsome boy. The same gardener found this basket too,
which they had thrown into the water. He carries it to his wife, and she
gave it to the same nurse. They were very happy with it, and said that
Heaven had sent them these three children, and they loved their father
and mother very much; but when they were very old they both died.

The two brothers and their sister got on very well together. They loved
each other very much. The boys used to go out hunting and shooting, and
they were so well off that they had something to give to the poor. One
day there came an old woman begging, and she said to them:

"You cannot be happy."

"Yes, yes, we certainly are," they answered.

And the woman said to them: "No, no, you want three things before you
can be happy--the tree which sings, the bird which tells the truth, and
the water which makes young again."

The young girl grows sad at that. Her brothers remarked it immediately,
and they asked her what was the matter with her. But she would not tell
them. At last they forced her to tell it to them. She told them what
this woman had told her.

The elder of the brothers sets out immediately, taking with him a horse
and a little money. He gives an apple to his sister, saying to
her: <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158.md)

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

"If this apple changes I shall be in some trouble, and if it turns
rotten I shall be dead."

And he starts off, and travels on, and on, and on. He finds a monk who
tells him to retrace his steps, that there are great dangers before him;
but he will go on notwithstanding. He meets again another monk, who
tells him that he will never return. He confesses himself and prepares
for death, such great dangers will he have to pass through. He said to
him:

"You will hear terrible cries. It will seem to you as if they will pull
you by your clothes, but never turn your head round." <span
id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_159.md)

But our lad grew frightened and turned his head round, and was changed
into stone.

After some days the apple begins to get bad, and they fall into great
sorrow because something must have happened to their brother, and the
second brother said that he must go off too; and off he goes with a
horse and a little money. Like the other brother he meets a monk, who
wishes to stop him; but he said to him that it was all the same to him.
He goes on till he meets another monk. This one also said to him:

"Return on your steps. You will not be able to pass, you will hear cries
and see horrors and terrible things--you will never be able to pass
through."

But he prepares himself to go forward. He warned him well not to look
round. He leaves his horse and sets out. When he has gone a short
distance he hears frightful cries, and (sees) terrible things; and after
having gone some distance further he looks on one side, and is changed
into stone.

The apple which he had left with his sister first changes, then goes
quite rotten. You may judge of the sorrow and the grief of this poor
girl. She says to herself that she

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

must dress herself like a man. She locks the door (of their house), and
sets out on horseback. The same monk wishes to prevent her going on. But
she has a still greater desire to do so, and, notwithstanding all she
hears, she will go on. She arrives at the last monk, who was a great
saint. He did not recognise that it was a young girl. For a hundred
years past he had been on the same spot, until someone should get to the
end of the mountain, and he hoped that this young girl might pass. He
gives her a bottle into which she might put the water that makes young
again, and says to her:

"You will sprinkle one drop on each stone, and they will live."

She sets off. The horrible cries did not frighten her. All kinds of
things were said to her. She goes on and on, constantly running, and
gets to the top of the mountain, and she is saved.

At the same instant she hears a thrilling song from a tree, which was
warbling like a bird. A bird, too, flies on to her shoulder, and tells
her so many things that she is quite astounded. But she does not lose
her time--she takes out her bottle and fills it with water. She pours a
drop on each stone, and finds her brothers at last. Think, think how
they all three rejoiced together! They take their horses (they too had
been changed into stones) and go home with their tree, and the bird, and
the water.

They lived very happily. The brothers went out hunting every day, and
sometimes they met the king. One day the king invited them to dine with
him, but they said that they must first ask permission of their sister.
When they came home they asked her, and the bird answered immediately:

"On condition that the king will come here to-morrow."

They go with this answer to the king, and he says, "Yes."

They dine very well with the king, but their sister was not at all
pleased; she did not know how to receive the king. The bird says to her:

"Lay the table with a fine cloth, and three dishes; put

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

lentils into one, parched peas into the other, and haricot beans into
the other."

Next day the king comes with his two brothers. The king is astonished to
hear this beautiful tree and this fine singing. He had never heard
anything so wonderful. He was surprised to see these three dishes, and
he said to them --

"Is it not strange to receive a king like this?"

And the bird, hopping out of its cage, begins, "It is not more strange
than to see this young woman pass for a cat. *Is she a cat*?"

In the same way it points to the elder brother, "*Is this a dog*, this
young man? Is not this a thing more astonishing?"

The king is confounded. And the same thing for the third time, pointing
to the second son, "*Is this a bear*, this one? Is this not an
astonishing thing?"

The king, in his amazement, does not know what to answer to the bird;
but it continues:

"Is it not a shame to leave one's wife, and make her live eighteen years
in a dungeon underground?"

The king is terribly frightened, and off he goes with his sons and his
daughter, intending to free their mother; but they did not forget the
precious water, and they wash this princess in it, and she becomes as
young as at eighteen years old. Judge of the joy of the king, of the
queen, and of their children! The king fell into a great rage, and
condemns the queen's sisters to be burnt alive in the midst of the
market-place, with shirts of sulphur on them.

CATHERINE ELIZONDO.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_157"></span>[177:1](bl56.htm#fr_157.md) Here the narrator
evidently forgot to tell about the child's being exposed, and the
gardener finding it, as appears by the sequel.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[178:1](bl56.htm#fr_158.md) *Cf.* the well that
boils in "The Fisherman and his Three Sons," and the ring in "Beauty and
the Beast."

<span id="fn_159"></span>[179:1](bl56.htm#fr_159.md) Can Bunyan have taken
his description of the "Valley of the Shadow of Death," in the
"Pilgrim's Progress," partly from such tales as this?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Variation on 'The Singing Tree, the Bird Which Tells the Truth,
and the Water That Makes Young'](bl57.md)
