[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl58)  [Next](bl60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SISTER AND HER SEVEN BROTHERS.

THERE was a man and a woman very poor, and overburdened with children.
They had seven boys. When they had grown up a little, they said to their
mother that it would be better that they should go on their own
way--that they would get on better like that. The mother let them go
with great regret. After their departure she gave birth to a little
girl, and when this little girl was grown up a little she went one day
to a neighbour's to amuse herself, and having played some childish trick
the neighbour said to her:

"You will be a good one, you too, as your brothers have been." <span
id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_164)

The child goes home and says to her mother, "Mother, have I some
brothers?" <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_164)

The mother says, "Yes."

"Where are they?"

"Oh, gone off somewhere."

The daughter said to her, "I must go too, then. Give me a piece of linen
enough to make seven shirts."

And she *would* go off at once. The mother was very sorry for it, having
already seven children away from home, and the only one she had wished
to go away. She let her go then.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

This young girl went off, far, far, far away. She asks in a town if they
know seven brothers who work together. The tell her "No." She goes off
to a mountain and asks there too, and they tell her in what house they
live. She goes to this house, and sees that all the household work is to
be done, and that there is nobody at home. She makes the beds, and
cleans the whole house, and puts it in order. She prepares the dinner,
and then hides herself in the dust-hole. Her brothers come home, and are
astonished to see all the household work done and the dinner ready. They
begin to look if there is anyone in the house, but they never think of
looking in the dust-hole, and they go off again to their work. Before
night this young girl does all the rest of the work, and had the supper
ready against the return of her brothers, and hides herself again in the
dust-hole. Her brothers are astonished, and again search the house, but
find nothing.

They go to bed, and this young girl takes to sewing and sews a whole
shirt. She gives it to her eldest brother, and in the same way she made
a shirt every night, and took it to one of her brothers. They could not
understand how that all happened. They always said that they would not
go to sleep, but they fell asleep as soon as they were in bed. When the
turn of the youngest came to have the shirt, he said to them, "Certainly
I will not fall asleep." After he is in bed the young girl goes and says
to him, thinking that he is asleep:

"Your turn has come now at last, my dearly loved brother."

And she begins to put the shirt on him on the bed, when her brother says
to her:

"You are then my sister, you?

And he kisses her. She tells him then how she had heard that she had
brothers, and how she had wished to go to them to help them. The other
brothers get up and rejoice, learning that it was their sister who had
done all the household work.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

The brothers forbad her ever to go to such a neighbour's, whatever might
happen. But one day, without thinking about it, when she was behindhand
with her work, she went running to the house to ask for some fire, <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_165) in order to make the supper ready
quicker. She was very well received; the woman offered to give her
everything she wanted, but she said she was satisfied with a little
fire. This woman was a witch, and gives her a parcel of herbs, telling
her to put them as they were into the footbath--that they relieved the
fatigue very much. <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_166) Every evening
the seven brothers washed their feet at the same time in a large copper.
She therefore put these herbs into the copper, and as soon as they had
dipped their feet in they became six cows, and the seventh a Breton
cow. <span id="fr_168"></span>[3](#fn_167) This poor girl was in such
trouble as cannot be told. The poor cows all used to kiss their sister,
but the young girl always loved much best the Breton one. Every day she
took them to the field, and stopped with them to guard them.

One day when she was there the son of a king passes by, and is quite
astonished to see so beautiful a girl there. He speaks to her, and tells
her that he wishes to marry her. The young girl says to him that she is
very poor, and that that cannot be. The king says, "Yes, yes, yes, that
makes no difference."

The young girl makes as conditions that, if she marries him, he must
never kill these cows, and especially this little Breton one. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[4](#fn_168) The king promises it her, and they are
married.

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

The princess takes these cows home with her; they were always well
treated. The princess became pregnant, and was confined while the king
was absent. The witch comes, and takes her out of her bed, and throws
her down a precipice that there was in the king's grounds, and the witch
puts herself into the princess' bed. When the king comes home, he finds
her very much changed, and tells her that he would not have recognised
her. The princess tells him that it was her sufferings that had made her
thus, and, in order to cure her more quickly, he must have the Breton
cow killed.

The king says to her--

"What! Did you not make me promise that she should never be killed? How
is it you ask me that?"

The witch considered that one her greatest enemy; and, as she left him
no peace, he sent a servant to fetch the cows. He finds them all seven
by the precipice; they were lowing, and he tried to drive them to the
house, but he could not do it in any way; and he hears a voice, which
says,

"It is not for myself that I grieve so much, but for my child, and for
my husband, and for my dearly-loved cows. Who will take care of them?"

The lad could not succeed (in driving them), and goes and tells to the
king what is taking place. The king himself goes to the precipice, and
hears this voice. He quickly throws a long cord down, and, when he
thinks that she has had time to take hold of it, he pulls it up, and
sees that they have got the princess there. Judge of the joy of the
king! She relates to her husband all that the witch had done to her,
both formerly and now. The king goes to the witch's bed, and says to
her,

"I know your villanies now; and, if you do not immediately change these
cows, as they were before, into fine boys, I will put you into a red-hot
oven."

The witch makes them fine men, and, notwithstanding that, the king had
her burnt in a red-hot oven, and threw her ashes into the air. The king
lived happily with his

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

wife, and her seven brothers married ladies of the court, and sent for
their mother, and they all lived happily together.

LOUISE LANUSSE.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[187:1](bl59.htm#fr_165) *Cf.* "Basa-Jauna,"
[p. 49](bl19.htm#page_49).

<span id="fn_165"></span>[189:1](bl59.htm#fr_166) A piece of the braise,
or burnt stick. This is constantly done all through the South of France,
where wood is burnt. If your lire is out you run to get a stick from
your neighbour's fire.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[189:2](bl59.htm#fr_167) *Cf.* note to
"Basa-Jauna," p. [1](bl20.htm#fn_43).

<span id="fn_167"></span>[189:3](bl59.htm#fr_168) "Old Deccan Days"
("Truth's Triumph"), pp. 57-58. The little girl is the rose tree there
among the mango trees, her brothers. Cows are very gentle in the Pays
Basque, and are often petted, especially the tiny black and white Breton
ones. We have known a strong man weep at the death of a favourite cow,
and this one of ten others.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[189:4](bl59.htm#fr_169) The Ranee makes the
same conditions in "Truth's Triumph"--"You will let me take these crows"
(her brothers) "with me, will you not? for I love them dearly, and I
cannot go away unless they may come too."--"Old Deccan Days," p. 59.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Variations of Other French Fairy-Tales](bl60)
