[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Basque](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bl64)  [Next](bl66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402193092/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE POOR SOLDIER AND THE RICH MAN.

LIKE many others in the world, there was a man and his wife. They had an
only son. The time for the conscription arrived. He went away with much
regret . At the end of the seven years he was returning home with five
sous in his pocket. As he was walking along a poor man came up to him,
and asked charity in the Name of God. He gave him

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

a sou, telling him that he had only five sous, but that he could not
refuse at the Name of God. A moment after another poor man presents
himself, and asks charity in the Name of God. He gives to him, telling
him repeatedly:

"I, who had only five sous to take home after seven years of service--I
have already given away one of them; but I cannot refuse you--I shall
have still enough left to get a. breakfast with."

And he goes on, but a moment after comes another poor man, and he gives
again. This poor man says to him:

"You will go to such a house, and you must ask charity of M. Tahentozen
in the Name of God. He gives charity to no one; but he will ask you in
from curiosity, and to hear the news. When you have told him all that
you have seen, he will ask you where you have come from. You must say
that you come from Heaven, but that you have seen nothing there but poor
and maimed people, and that in hell there was nothing but rich men; and
that at the gate of hell there are two devils sitting in arm-chairs,
'and I saw one armchair empty, and I went and asked whom it was for; and
there came two devils from the gate, limping as if they were lame, and
they said: 'This is for M. Tahentozen. He never gives anything in
charity, and, if he does not change, his place is *there*."'"

Our soldier goes as he has been told, and asks charity in the Name of
God. But the servant, as she always did, sent him away. The master,
having heard someone, asks the servant who is there. The servant answers
that it is a. soldier who asks for charity. He tells her to bring him
up, in order to ask the news. Our soldier tells him all that the poor
man had told him to say. And thereupon the rich man begins to reflect,
and he keeps the soldier at his house, and makes him rich, and the rest
(of his money) he divides among the poor.

GACHINA, the Net-maker.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Widow and Her Son](bl66)
