[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth115)  [Next](toth117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 3.--COMING OF THE HOPI FROM THE UNDER-WORLD.

When people were living below they became quarrelsome, and some very
depraved. Chiefs decide to find another place to live. They send bird
Mótsni to find place of exit. He is unsuccessful. They then send
Mocking-bird, who finds place of exit. In meanwhile chiefs cause great
flood. Many Bálölöokong-wuus come with water and many people are
destroyed. On return of Mocking-bird chiefs announce they will leave in
four days. They then plant pine-tree and make it grow fast by singing.
It grows to opening, but it is not strong enough for many people to
climb on. They plant a stronger kind of pine. This does Hot reach
opening, and they plant reed, which is strong and grows through the
opening. They also plant sun-flower, but its disk protrudes downward
before it reaches opening. Spider Woman, Pöokonghoya, his brother
Bálöongawhoya, and Mocking-bird climb pine through opening, and then
Pöokónghoya holds firmly to pine and his brother to reed. Mocking-bird
sits singing songs still chanted at Wúwûchim ceremony. People begin to
climb, and as they emerge, Mocking-bird assigns them places and gives
them languages. Language spoken in under-world that of Pueblo Indians.
Songs of Mocking-bird are exhausted before all people come out, and
others begin to return. Kik-wongi from below is with people around
opening. His

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

half-grown son dies and is buried. He says some Powáka has come out with
them. He makes ball of fine corn-meal and throws it upwards. It comes
down on head of chief's nephew. Chief grabs him to throw him back.
Nephew tells chief to look down opening. He looks down and sees son
walking, so lets nephew remain. There is no sunshine. Light is seen at
distance, and chief sends some one to see about it. He finds field where
corn, etc., planted, and fire burning all around field to keep ground
warm. Then he sees very handsome man, Skeleton, by whose side is
standing very ugly mask. Skeleton feeds messenger and invites all people
to come to him. They go and remain there. They make fields, and when
they have gathered crop they plan to start off again. They still have no
sun, and it is cold. They paint disk of buffalo hide white, with picture
of woman in black, and place it on large piece of native cloth. Some one
stands on moon symbol and chiefs swing cloth and throw it upward. It
flies eastward into sky, and moon comes up in cast. The light is dim,
and it is still cold, so they try to make something better. They cut
round piece of cloth, stretch it over ring, and paint and decorate it,
as sun symbol still used, attaching nakwákwosis to it. They place symbol
with man on cloth, which they swing into air. It twirls upward toward
east and sun rises. It is now warm and light and people think of moving
on. They decide to go towards sunrise, but to divide into parties, White
People going south, Hopi north, and Pueblos between them. They soon
become estranged and attack one another. Castilians are especially bad.
They agree that when one of parties reaches place where sun rises, stars
will fall from sky, and other parties are to settle down where they are.
Woman in one party makes horses from scalps rubbed off from her body,
and they arrive first and many stars fall. Those who arrive at sunrise
are to help others when they are molested by enemies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4.--The Wanderings of the Hopi.](toth117)
