[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth014)  [Next](toth016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 12. THE DESTRUCTION OF PALÁTKWAPI. <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)

After all the people, except the Zunis, had come out from the underworld
through the sípahpuni, they remained for some time with Skeleton
(Másauwuu) (see Story No. 3). When they were traveling eastward from
here on different routes, and in different sections and parties, a large
party came to a place called Palátkwapi, somewhere south-east of
Flagstaff, in southern Arizona. Among these were the Divided Water clan
(Bátki-ñamu). <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39)

So these people had their clan name before they arrived at the above
-mentioned place, but with them a great many other people stopped at
Palátkwapi. Here they remained for a long time, for the truth of which
statement the extensive ruins at that place are proof. The name seems to
be derived from a high bluff of red stone. The people, especially the
young men, here became very bad. They ill-treated the people sometimes
in a disgraceful manner. <span id="fr_40"></span>[3](#fn_40) One time a
young man again shamefully mistreated an old man, who then became very
angry. This old man belonged to the Bátki clan. He went and reported the
same to the village chief (Kík-mongwi), crier chief (Chaák-mongwi) and
the warrior chief (Kaléhtak-mongwi), so they assembled in the old man's
house and asked him what was the matter, why he had called them. "Yes,"
the old man answered, "these young men here are very bad, they treat one
very mean when one goes to the rear, and I am angry at them, so I called
you here to tell you about it, what you think about it." So they talked
the matter over and the village chief said: "We shall move away from
here." So he called his son and told him: "You run to a distant place,
Pine Ridge

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

(Löqö'nmuru). <span id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) So the young man ran
and when he came back his father asked him: "How is it now, are you
strong?" "Yes," the son replied, "my legs are strong now." "All right,"
the father said. Both of them were sorcerers (Powáka), bad men.

Hereupon the father dressed four masks for him: the mask of the
Yáhponcha, the Lâ'nang Katcina, Áha Katcina (Oraíbi: Kuruwá), and the
Katcín-mana. The first resembles that of Skeleton (Másauwuu), only it
had small bunches of hair on each side and in front. All these masks the
young man put on his head, first that of the Mána, secondly the Lâ'nang
Katcina mask, thirdly the Áha mask, and lastly that of the Yáhponcha.
The father had dressed them during the night. He then strung a number of
fingers which he had cut off of old dry corpses, and tied them to both
of his son's wrists as rattles. He furthermore prepared a long
cedar-bark fuse which he handed to the young man. After he had thus
dressed his son, the chief said: "Now you run back to Pine Ridge and set
the pine timber there on fire, then you come back here." The son did as
he had been told and coming back he climbed up to the house of his
father. He now acted as a Ghost (duálangwu). The people had not noticed
his going or coming. After he had arrived in the house he ground corn on
his sister's small mealing stone. While he was grinding he sang:
"Tû'tawunaha! tû'tawunaha!" <span id="fr_42"></span>[2](#fn_42) Hereupon
he left the house and again ran away and set other timbers on fire.

The next night he returned, again ground a little corn, and departed,
This time the people became suspicious, and when they assembled in their
kivas in the morning they inquired who had been about. They said: "Some
one had gone into the house of the chief and ran away again," and they
requested some young men to hide away the next night and watch. By this
time several fires could be seen in the distant timbers. The next night
a number of young men watched, hiding away at the different corners of
the village, and one also in the recess of the plaza. During the night
the Powáka again lighted several fires in the timbers and came rushing
into the village. When he arrived there his fuse had gone out, but they
saw him enter into the village and ascend into the house of the village
chief, where they heard him grinding and singing again. He again
immediately left the house and passed one of the watchers, the latter
jumping up, but the ghost dashed by, springing across the plaza, where
the watcher became so scared that he did not make himself known, but
remained in a crouching position, So he dashed away and lighted other
fires.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

In the morning they talked the matter over in. the kivas, saying to the
watchers: "You are of no account. Next night we shall watch again, many
of us." They agreed that they would watch at different places, one also
taking a position on the path that led down from the village through a
river or creek that passed by. So during the night many watchers were
distributed and hid away in the corners and recesses of the streets, a
weakly young man, an orphan, taking a position near the aforesaid path
at the river. They again noticed the fires in the woods and all at once
saw the ghost running towards the village again, crossing the plaza, and
running up the ladder of the village chief's house. Again they heard him
grind and sing for a few minutes, then he left the house. The watchers
jumped up and wanted to grab him, but he jumped over them and tore away
from them. The small plaza was filled with people, but he jumped over
them and escaped, as he was very strong. But descending the trail to the
water he came upon the lonely watcher there, who jumped up, grabbed him,
and held him, crying out to the people on the plaza: "I have the
duálangwu." So the people rushed down to the water and saw that the
young man had caught the ghost. The people then led him back to the
village and put him into a kiva, made a light, and there they saw a
Yáhponcha sitting. The father had told him that in the fourth night they
would capture him, and so this became true.

Hereupon the crier cried out in the village: "You that are living here,
all of you come and assemble here." So the people all assembled there
and filled the kiva. The old men were crying and said: "There is some
reason for this, certainly it is not without some purpose that he goes
around this way and acts so. He certainly wants to do something bad."
The village chief now requested that some one go and take off the masks
from the ghost. Then some one approached him, but the masks were
fastened securely around his neck, so the man cut the strings with his
knife and took off the first mask and laid it on the floor, and behold!
there was another mask. So he took that off and laid it on the floor,
but found that there was another mask, and he took that one off and laid
it on the floor. But he saw that there was a fourth mask and that was a
Katcín-mana mask, so he took that off and they all looked at the
personage, and behold! it was the chief's son. "Puyáami!" they all said
(an expression of regret and sorrow). "That is the chief's son!" They
found that he had some báhos tied to each wrist and to each ankle. These
they untied, also placing them on the floor.

He was a nice, clean, handsome youth; had turquoise ear pendants,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

and many nice beads; his head was nicely washed, and on his face he had
two black lines painted with yaláhai, two lines running from the upper
part of the nose to the cheeks. The young man who had now been exposed
then said: "Take these báhos and thrust them into the ground, one at the
plaza, and the others in the different corners of a house," which he
designated. He furthermore told them that for four days they should have
a feast, and having said this he left the kiva and went to his home. The
people thought about it a great deal and were unhappy. They did not know
what it meant, and whether or not some evil was planned for them, but
they killed their sheep and prepared a feast and ate and feasted for
four days. During the third day, they especially prepared much food, and
were feasting all day and all night; still many of them were looking for
and expecting some evil to befall them the next day, but the sun rose
higher and higher and nothing happened to them, and when evening came
they felt very much relieved, saying: "Nothing has happened to us," and
they became happy again. Thus three years passed without any especial
evil happenings, but in the fourth year something happened. The young
man when telling the people that they should feast for four days, had
not told them right.

The people had been right in their suspicions that something evil might
befall them after their four days of feasting, but instead of it
happening after the four days, the plan of the ghost had been that it
should happen at the end of four years, which, however, he had not told
them. In the fourth year the expected evil came upon them. The old man,
who had four years before complained to the village chief of the bad
conduct of the young men of the village, was still living. He was still
angry, and in the fourth year he prepared many báhos of hard wood:
tûvávi, mópuovi, tâve, kwíngvi. He made the points of the báhos very
sharp and made very many of them. In the fall of the fourth year when
they had gathered in their crop, the village chief said to the crier
chief, who was also bad and in league with the village chief: "Our time
has now come. You cry out that the people again should feast four days."
So the Crier Chief announced saying: "You that live here, thus I am
informing you, all that have something living, kill the same and eat it
for four days. All that have something good, eat it and have a feast."
But the people were full of mistrust. They were afraid that at the
expiration of the four days some evil would befall them, and they did
not comply with the requests of the chiefs; they did not prepare a
feast.

During the night following the announcement the chiefs met with

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

the aforesaid old man, who told them that they should dress him up and
put him into the tiwónyapavi (Katcina shrine on the plaza in which there
was a stone image of a Katcina and which was supposed to belong to the
Katcinas). So they dressed him up, painting his back black, his chest
and abdomen red, and both sides of the front part of his body green. On
the arms, chest, and legs they made the typical marks of Pö'okong (two
short lines). To the back of his head they fastened a póhtakni, <span
id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) of the tail of a sparrow-hawk, extending
upwards with the points of the feathers. To the top of his head they
fastened a horn. His face was also painted black. He was to represent
the Bálölöokong. He wore no costume.

When they were done they went to the plaza during the night when all the
people were asleep. They dug a hole in the shrine already mentioned
above, so that it would admit the man entirely. Hereupon they placed in
his arms all the báhos that he had made, and with them they placed a
Bálölöokong whistle. They also gave him a little bowl with some water,
into which he could blow the whistle, as is still done in some
ceremonies. They then covered up the opening with a large flagstone,
covering earth and dust over it to destroy all appearances of the
opening that had been made, and finally placed a piece of native cloth
over it. They then commenced to sing some sorcerer's songs. When they
sang the third song, the old man in the ground began to eject rumbling,
roaring sounds, and told the chiefs: "I have been successful, I have
reached my object." "All right," they said, and left the old man
remaining in the ground. None of the inhabitants of the village had
noticed anything. The buried man then thrust about half of his hand
through an opening that he had made, and when the people arose in the
morning, they noticed the hand and said: "Something is protruding here."
The old man then sang:

Ala kwikwi, ala kwikwi,  
Ala kwikwi, ala kwikwi, kwi--(with a rising inflection).

As he sang the last word he lowered his little finger. The sun was now
rising. The next morning he sang the same words, lowering the next
finger, and on the third morning he again sang the same song and lowered
the third finger. By this time the people, who had seen and heard it,
felt very unhappy and were afraid that some evil would befall them. They
now noticed, that at the places where four years previously the báhos
had been planted by the direction of the ghost, water began to come out
of the ground. These báhos had

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

really been Bálölöokongs, who, it seems, had finally entered the ground
and were now bringing out the water from the ground.

The people now became alarmed and began to suspect that probably a flood
was about to destroy their village. That night they killed their sheep
and prepared food and had a great feast, thinking that probably the next
day they would all be destroyed anyway. On the fourth day just before
sunrise, the old man in his grave sang the same words again and lowered
the fourth finger as he finished his little song. Immediately he emerged
from the opening in the form of a large Bálölöokong, and now
Bálölöokongs were shooting forth from the ground with streams of water
in all parts of the village, from the fireplaces in the kivas, in the
houses from the water vessels, and in fact everywhere. Water began to
fill the houses in the village. Soon the houses began to fall, burying
many of the inhabitants under the falling walls. A number of them fled
to the higher places on the east side of the village, where there was a
large, strong house. In one of the houses a few old men climbed up on
the shelves on which are usually placed the trays with corn meal in Hopi
houses. Here they sat in a crouched position and turned into turkeys.
The water rose so high that their tails began to hang into the water. It
did not reach the houses in the eastern part of the village where the
people had assembled. None of the chiefs were destroyed. So when they
had assembled in the house mentioned the chiefs met in council and asked
what they were going to do now. So they began to make báhos, took beads
and turquoise, first crushed them and then ground them into powder. Of
this powder they made two balls which they placed onto a tray on which
they also had placed the báhos that they had made. There were a great
many of these báhos. They then called the Village Chief's son, who had
caused the destruction, and his sister, a very pretty maiden. They
dressed up the latter in the same manner in which the Flute-manas are
costumed, putting a white robe on her, over which they tied a white
kilt, and an eagle-breath feather in her hair above her forehead, beads
around her neck, etc. Her chin was painted black, white lines running
from ear to ear over her upper lip.

The young man was clothed in a plain white kilt and black zigzag lines
were painted on his legs, arms, and the back and front part of his body.
These two were to drive back the Bálölöokongs. The water was still
coming out of the ground and the Bálölöokongs still shooting swiftly
through the water. The one that had been the old man, who was buried on
the plaza, was the largest and most powerful of the Bálölöokongs and was
still standing at the place where he

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

had emerged from the ground. The rumbling of the falling houses could
still be heard. When the two were dressed, the young man took some báhos
in his left hand, the mána took the tray containing the two balls and
the rest of the báhos, and thus they began to wade into the waters. They
made straight for the large Bálölöokong, which was considered the chief
of the water serpents. Arriving at the place where he stood, the young
man grasped and encircled the serpent with both arms and pressed him
down into the water, whereupon the serpents as well as the young man and
his sister disappeared under the water and never returned.

Immediately the water began to fall and disappear in a comparatively
short time, the powder of the beads and of the turquoise, which the mána
had brought to the water serpent as an offering, causing the ground to
dry and to become hard quickly because the powder was made of very hard
substances. The water-serpents had all disappeared, but so had the young
man and his sister. The place where the village had stood was full of
mud and the people could not get there for some time yet. Everything was
destroyed there. Only the old men who had been turned into turkeys
survived. They had been very old and bald-headed, which is the reason
that the turkeys to-day have no hair or feathers on their head. In one
house, however, which stood somewhat high, two children, two little
brothers, had been sleeping during the flood and had not been drowned,
but they had very little to eat now. The younger one had found a little
piki in a tray, which they ate.

The people in the eastern part of the village soon set to work to
prepare to emigrate. They baked piki and made other food of the
provisions that they still had left. Early in the morning the day after
the water serpents had disappeared they took some of the food which they
had prepared, and made a food altar (tonö'sh-pongya), eastward from the
village. Packing up the things, and especially the food which they had
prepared, they all passed by this food altar, the village chief at the
head of the line. Each one took a little quantity of each kind of food
that they had placed there and ate it. They then passed on. The ground
was still soft and muddy from the flood The two children that had
survived in the village had not been found and were left. They soon
became hungry and hunted something to eat. Occasionally they would find
a little corn hanging on some of the walls that were still standing, or
some other food The older brother would carry his little brother on his
back. In the evening they would cry because they were lonely. The
turkeys that had been Hopi saw the children and pitied them, but,
although they cried

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

over them so that the tears would roll from their eyes, they could not
say anything to them. Finally one of the turkeys took such a pity on the
children that he commenced to talk to them. "You poor ones," he said to
them, "how will you take care of yourselves here? There is some corn
hanging on the walls yet, but you cannot reach it. You go to the east
there to those other houses. There the people made food when they left.
There is a food altar standing there yet, of which you may eat!" So the
children went there and found many trays full of piki standing on the
ground. Of that they satisfied their hunger. They also found a few
rabbit-skin blankets in a house and so they lived there.

The people that had left the village traveled on. One day the big
Bálölöokong came out of the ground again and looked after the people.
The place where he came out was now a large opening like a kóici (a
cistern-like oven in which sweet corn is steamed). He was a very large
serpent and (the Hopis say), as no one was there to put him back again,
he remained standing there. The two children by and by consumed all the
food that they had found there and they began to suffer. They wanted to
go back to their house but saw that water serpent standing there, and so
they were afraid and did not know how to get back to their house, but
their food was nearly all gone. Bálölöokong saw the children and had
sympathy with them. They were the children of his daughter so he was
their grandfather. He cried over their fate, the tears rolling down his
cheeks. Stretching up high, he looked whether the mother of the children
had gone very far, and saw the people, as they had not moved away very
far, but the children were still afraid to go back to their house.
Finally the serpent began to speak to them in Hopi: "Come here. Come
here. Be not afraid of me, I am your grandfather." The children looked
up and listened when they heard somebody speak to them. So they went to
the serpent, who said to them: "I am your grandfather. I pity you, but
what will you eat here? There is some corn yet, but you cannot reach it,
it is hanging so high on the walls. You find a place where there is some
sweet corn strung on a string hanging on the wall; then pile up some
stones, and climbing on the stones, throw some of the ears down with a
stick. These you take with you as food and then follow your parents.
They are not very far yet and you will overtake them. But whenever you
get ready to go you come here to me first. Now you go and hunt a knife,
and if you find one bring it to me, maybe I shall want to follow them
sometime, too." So the children went through the houses and sure enough
found a sharp knife of flint. They also found in one of the houses some
corn

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

hanging on strings on the wall not very high up. They piled up some
stones and loosened some of the corn-ears with a stick so that a good
deal of it fell down. This they ate and satisfied their hunger. They
intended to leave the next morning. "To-morrow we will follow our
parents," they said. So the next morning early they went to their
grandfather and said to him that they would now go. He asked them
whether they had any food to take with them. They said: "Yes, we have
wrapped up some of the corn that we have found strung up and hanging on
some of the walls and that we have thrown down." He said: "You follow
your parents, and I shall stand here and keep looking after you so that
nothing will happen to you. But you take your knife and be not afraid,
but cut a piece out of my back. This you take with you and give it to
the chiefs and tell them: "This is a piece of meat from the Bálölöokong,
and when at any time it does not rain you make báhos and rub a little of
this meat among the paint with which you paint the báhos, and it will
certainly rain." The children refused to cut out the piece of flesh,
saying: ''That will hurt you very much." "No, no," he said, "be not
afraid." Finally they were willing, took the knife and cut out quite a
large piece of flesh. They found that the meat was very tender and when
they had cut out the piece the wound closed up immediately.

So they started after their people. In the evening they were very tired
and slept all night. The next evening they were again very tired and
slept on a ridge that was covered with pine-trees. The older brother
carried his younger brother and also the food and he was nearly
exhausted. They were also very thirsty and hungry, but they were so weak
that they could hardly eat the hard corn. On the third day at about noon
they were nearly exhausted and were very thirsty. They sat down under a
pine-tree. Their food was also all consumed. As soon as they had sat
down they fell over and fell asleep.

Cótukvnangi, <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) the God of Thunder,
lived in the sky and saw the children and took pity on them. He
concluded to descend and help them. He took a gourd vessel full of water
and some rolls of nuvá-muhpi (píki made of meal of fresh roasting ears)
and then descended to where the children were. They were sleeping, their
mouths where dry and parched. Soon the younger brother awoke and there
somebody was sitting by their side, somebody very terrible. The
personage had three very long horns or projections on the head, two
standing sideways, and one standing upward on top of the head. They

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

were of ice. His costume also consisted of ice and was full of little
fringes or icicles that rattled all over his body. On the head he also
had two large ice ridges representing clouds. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

The little boy was very much frightened and grasped his brother and
cried: "Get up, there is somebody here." So the elder brother jumped up
and beheld the Cótukvnangi. He also was very much frightened and the two
children embraced each other and cried. While the children looked
downward, Cótukvnangi removed his mask and when they again looked up
they saw a very handsome man. "Do not cry, do not cry," he said to the
children, "here, drink; I have brought some water for you," and handed
them the gourd vessel, from which they drank and quenched their thirst.
He then handed them the food, and they ate it and satisfied their
hunger.

You remain here, "he said," you remain here at least two or three days
and eat and drink this, and when you have recovered and become strong
then follow your people. They are not far away. They are right east of
here." After he had said this and the children were not just looking
towards him he rose again and disappeared in the sky. When the children
looked for him he was gone.

So they slept there that night, staved the next day and remained another
night, and the following day at about noon Cótukvnangi again appeared to
them bringing them some more of the same kind of food, also some water
melons and drinking water. Cótukvnangi remained with them that afternoon
and after the sun had gone down he began to talk to them, talking to
them all that night. Cótukvnangi is the great warrior chief, and he now
gave to these two youths the lightning and the thunder, and he told them
how to kill enemies and that when they had killed their enemies they
should take their scalps; and he taught them the songs that they were to
sing when they returned from their war expeditions and after they had
killed some one, and told them that. when they came to their home they
should throw the scalps into the kiva, on the cloud symbol made with
corn-meal by the warrior chief. They should then cut out a round piece
of bear skin which they should place on the floor in the kiva and
encircle it by a line of corn-meal. The warrior who had brought home the
scalp should sit on this bear skin for three days and three nights, and
on the morning of the fourth day the warrior should wash his head in the
kiva (tókasnaya). Then he should go to his home where his k'áamu, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46) should also wash his head. Then he should
put the scalp which he had brought on a stick and

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

perform a dance on the plaza in which his káamu should accompany him.

After having thus explained to them many things about wars, and taught
them many war and battle songs all night, it had become morning and he
told them that now they should follow their people, He told them that
their parents would probably not know them, but they would ask who they
were, and they should then take hold of their mother and tell her who
they were and she would then probably know them. Then Cótukvnangi
returned to the sky. The lightning arrow (hóhu) and the thunder he had
promised them, but had not yet delivered to them. He told them that
whenever they needed them, wanting to go and kill some one, they should
pray to him and he would give them those things. So the two brothers
started off after they had refreshed themselves with the morning meal
once more. Arriving at Homólovi <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) they
came upon their people. They lived in two little villages, and in the
one farthest north only a few people lived, and here they found their
mother.

The older brother was still carrying his younger brother as the latter
was very tired. "Somebody has come," the people said. "Who has come?
Whose children have come? Where are you from?" they asked. "We are from
way over therefrom the village," they said. "We have followed you. You
have gone this way and our mother and our father are here and we have
come after them." So they called the people together and said: "Come
here and see if there is anybody here who did not bring their children
with them," and then the people gathered around the children. The people
commenced to ask now the different women whether there was any one who
had failed to bring their children with them, but no one was found. They
also asked the mother of the two children but she also denied. When no
one could be found that would claim the two boys, they recognized their
mother and went to her, taking hold of her hands, and said: "Our mother,
we have come," then the mother remembered and acknowledged that her two
children had remained in the house sleeping when they had fled, but she,
of course, had thought that they had perished. And when she now saw her
children before her, she embraced them and cried. So the children
remained with their mother.

The people living in the smaller village were the Bátki-ñamu. Those
living in the larger village were the people most of whom later
constituted the Forehead clan (Kál-ñamu). The two youths the told the
people about the piece of flesh that they had cut from the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

back of Bálölöokong, and had brought with them. So when the Bátki people
made báhos they rubbed a little of this meat into the paint with which
they painted the báhos, and then it thundered and rained. Before that it
had rained only a very little, and hardly ever was there any lightning
and thunder. After this there came heavy rains and weather, which made
the Bátki people "Great Bátki" people'

The two youths grew up to be young men, but they became bad, warring and
fighting the Hopi children and the other youths, and when they had grown
up they remembered what their father, the Thunder, had told them. They
said to each other: "We have now grown up, let us go out and ask our
father for what he has promised us, and then let us go and kill some
one." To their mother and the people they said that they were going to
kill some deer, and so she prepared some food for them and they started
off. In the evening they gathered some wood and built a fire.
Cótukvnangi saw them and came down to them again. "You have now reached
your object," he said to them. "Yes," they replied. "It is well that you
have come," he said. "Close by here are some Apache, and whoever becomes
a warrior for having killed them, he is a great warrior, because they
are fierce. These Navaho do not amount to much, and it is well that you
have come in this direction." So during the night he instructed them bow
to go out and kill the Apache, also teaching them some war songs.
Hereupon he went home again. He first told them, however, that he would
watch them, and that he would kill their enemies for them. They would do
it, he said, but it would be he that would do it through them. Then when
they were through they should come back again and he would come down
again, then they would talk together and from here they should go back
again to their home.

So in the morning they proceeded and soon came upon some Apache
(Útsaamu). There were a great many of them, who at once became-excited
and ran towards them and began to surround them. The two brothers at
once began to shoot arrows into the crowd for some time, but did not hit
any one, neither did the Apache hit them. The brothers had put the
lightning (tálwipiki) and the thunder (umû'kpi) under their clothing.
After they had been shooting for some time, they became tired, and the
older brother all at once said: "Now then it seems they are upon us. How
long yet will this last? Hereupon he drew forth the lightning and the
thunder and aimed at the Apache and shot the lightning into the crowd.
All their enemies were slain, their camps burned up, and the two
brothers

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

laughed at their slain enemies. The Apache had previously made many
raids on the Hopi at Homólovi, and for this reason the two brothers had
finally gotten very angry and taken revenge upon their enemies.

Among the Apache warriors had been one very large and fierce one. This
one they hunted up among the slain, scalped him and cut out his heart.
Then taking the moccasins and costumes from all the slain, they
returned, While they had killed all the warriors they had destroyed only
one tent in which there had been women and children. This had been blown
to pieces by the thunder. The objects in the other camps, in which the
women and children were, they had left untouched. When they again
arrived at the place where they had previously camped, Cótukvnangi again
descended and talked with them during the night. He gave them further
instructions with regard to warfare, but among other things he told them
that they should not be the war chiefs among their people, but when they
now came to their village, whomever they should select, on him they
should throw the scalp which they had now brought, and he should be the
war chief.

In the morning Cótukvnangi again ascended and the two returned to their
home, singing war songs as they went along. They went, however, to the
larger village, as in the village where their mother lived there were so
very few people, and here the rejoicings and rites, to be mentioned
presently, occurred. When they arrived at the village they were received
by the shouts of their people, who surrounded them, and snatching away
the trophies that they had brought with them, swung them around, by
which it is said they were discharmed from any bad influence, and then
they threw them among the people--a custom which was always observed
when Hopi warriors returned from their expeditions.

While the rejoicings and wranglings were going on, the older brother
took the scalp which he had been carrying on a stick while they were
dancing, and forcibly threw it at one of the inhabitants from the larger
village, saying: "It is you, you shall be our war chief. We give this to
you. You shall lead us after this." Hereupon they followed him, going
around the village four times. They then entered the kiva where the two
brothers instructed them as to the rites to be observed in connection
with their warfare. They drew the cloud symbol already referred to on
the floor, whereupon the newly appointed war chief threw the scalp upon
the symbol. They then cut out a piece of bear skin, sprinkled a ring of
corn meat around it, and placed the war chief upon it, where he had to
remain for three

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

days. Hereupon followed the public war dance on the plaza on the fourth
day (as already referred to on a previous page).

The people lived here in Homólovi a number of years, but how many cannot
be ascertained. Finally they concluded to move on north-eastward
because, it is claimed, there were so many mosquitos there which would
sting their children and their people and caused great suffering. The
Hopi say the reason why the people held out so long, although they
always suffered from the mosquitos, was that they had such good fields
there from which they raised good crops. The mosquitos are called by
most of the Hopi salt flies (ö'ong-totoptu), but they are also called
shípaúlavitu by some, from which it seems the present inhabitants of the
village of Shupaúlavi have derived their name. Then the migrating party
had reached a certain bluff, called Coyote Spring Bluff (probably about
twenty-five or thirty miles northeast of Winslow), they remained there,
but not very long it seems. Here they separated, the Bátki clan
proceeding northeastward to Aoátovi , the others going northward towards
a place a few miles west of Matö'ví. Here they again remained for a
number of years as they had good fields there. They finally proceeded
farther north to a place called Náshiwamu (about a mile south of
Shongópavi), where they probably remained about three years. Just as
they arrived at this place, the sun arose, the upper part of the sun
(his forehead, the Hopis say), just looming up above the horizon.

For this reason they were ever afterwards the Forehead clan (Kál-ñamu).
They made repeated efforts to get permission from the village chiefs of
Shongópavi to move on the mesa into the village, but their efforts were
unsuccessful. It seems that the chief had heard something of their
doings in Palátkwapi, because he claimed that they were dangerous, bad
people (Nû'nukpantu). In the third year they concluded that they would
return to their previous home at Homólovi.

The chief of Shupaúlavi, which village, however, was not called by that
name at that time, but was called Wáki (refuge house), heard that these
people were going to return and so he went to them and invited them to
move up to and settle down in his village, which invitation they
accepted, They are still by far the most numerous clan in the village of
Shupaúlavi. The village was from that time called Shupaúlavi, after the
name of the new arrivals, who were called by that name because they had
fled from Homólovi on account of the mosquitos which they called by that
name. At that time Shupaúlavi was considerably larger than Shongópavi,
the latter having lost a great many inhabitants a long time before, when
the people of that

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

village killed a number of Spanish and destroyed their missions, on
which occasion a number of Shongópavi fled to Shupaúlavi.

The chief of Shongópavi seems to have borne a grudge against Shupaúlavi,
because later on he informed the Spaniards in New Mexico, probably at
Sante Fe, that they should come and take away the inhabitants of
Shupaúlavi, and said that this was the latter's own wish. So one time
the news reached the villages that many Spaniards had arrived at Keams
Canyon where they were camping. The next day they came to Wálpi where
they inquired who it was that wanted to be taken away. The chief of
Wálpi and the chief of Shupaúlavi were good friends with each other, and
as soon as the Wálpi chief heard about the matter he quickly proceeded
to Shupaúlavi and informed his friends about it, saying: ''The Spaniards
have come because they have heard that you wanted them to come and take
you east. They have come for you and for no one else," ''That is false,"
the Shupaúlavi chief said. "It is not I that want that, it must be some
one else. It is probably the chief of Shongópavi." "All right," the
chief of Wálpi said, "you had then better go and meet the Spanish chief
and tell him about it. You take some presents with you, perhaps a tû'ihi
and a blue shirt. Give these to this Spanish chief, shake hands with
him, embrace him, and tell him how the matter is." So the chief of
Shupaúlavi wrapped up a tû'ihi and a blue shirt and went with his
friend. When they arrived in the kiva where the leader of the Spaniards
was, the latter, who was a powerful man, stood and looked at the new
arrivals with his arms akimbo, The two men eyed each other for some
time. Finally the Spaniard gave the Shupaúlavi chief his hand and shook
it. The Shupaúlavi chief embraced him, the Spanish officer doing the
same. All people present were crying. The chief at once drew forth the
presents which he had brought, and handed them to the Spanish officer.
"This is yours," he said. "I have heard that you came to get my children
and my people. It is not I that wished it, it must be some one else. It
certainly is not I." The Wálpi chief then asked the officer: "Is this
the man that carne to you and said that he wanted you to come and get
his people?" "No," the officer said, "this is not the man." "Thanks,
thanks, thanks," the Hopi said on all sides, and came and shook hands
with the officer. "Thanks that this is not the man." <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48)

"No," he repeated, "I never wanted that, it must be the chief of
Shongópavi." The officer then said that the next day he would

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

bring his soldiers to a place west of Wálpi where there was a large pool
of water at that time. He said that they were tired and would rest there
awhile. He also explained that they had brought with them a good deal of
clothing which they had wanted to give to the people which they had
expected to take along. "Now," he said, "What shall we do with these
clothes? You tell your people that they should come to-morrow when we
are camping there at that water and visit us, and if any of them have
anything that they would like to sell we would like to trade with them,
giving them clothing which we have brought along, and taking back some
of your things."

The Shupaúlavi chief consented to this and went home and told his people
about it. All were very happy now that the impending danger had been
averted. The next morning after they had eaten their breakfast the
people from all the villages proceeded to the camp of the Spaniards
where they were trading all day. In the evening the Hopi all returned to
their villages, the Spaniards camping there for the night. In the
morning after breakfast the latter returned.

After that the Spaniards never encroached on the Hopi any more, but the
Shongópavi chief, whose village at that time was very small, spread the
news that the Spaniards would come back again some time to Shupaúlavi
and got them. This so scared the people at Shupaúlavi that a majority of
them left the village and moved over to Shongópavi, which it is said
accounts partly for the small number of inhabitants in the village of
Shupaúlavi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[48:1](toth015.htm#fr_38) Told by Lomávântiwa
(Shupaúlavi).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[48:2](toth015.htm#fr_39) Lomávântiwa claims
that this clan brought with them from the lower world a small water
vessel which was later supplanted by the móngwikuru (a netted gourd
vessel). He said that this small vessel was their típoni, and from that
they derived their name.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[48:3](toth015.htm#fr_40) A favorite sport being
to follow those who went to attend to a call of nature, rush upon them
and throw them backward, thus soiling their bodies.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[49:1](toth015.htm#fr_41) Simply for practice,
it seems from the story.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[49:2](toth015.htm#fr_42) The meaning of this
could not be ascertained.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[52:1](toth015.htm#fr_43) A number of feathers
which are arranged side by side, but close together, forming a fan
shaped head-dress which is worn on many ceremonial occasions by various
dancers.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[56:1](toth015.htm#fr_44) Usually called
Cotukvnangwuu.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[57:1](toth015.htm#fr_45) Similar ridges are
still made on the top of the mask of the Tukwúnangw Katcina.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[57:2](toth015.htm#fr_46) Clan aunts.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[58:1](toth015.htm#fr_47) A place a few miles
north of the present Winslow.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[62:1](toth015.htm#fr_48) The Hopi say that the
chief of Shongópavi was a Powáka (sorcerer), who was able to fly when he
wanted to do so. He had been over in New Mexico during some night and
had informed the Spanish chief himself, being back the next day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. The Revenge of the Katcinas](toth016)
