[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth141)  [Next](toth143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

## 29.--A JOURNEY TO THE SKELETON HOUSE.

In Shongópavi, son of village chief often sits looking at graveyards and
wondering whether dead continue to live somewhere. Father cannot tell
him, and speaks about it to other chiefs, and especially to village
crier. They say Badger Old Man has medicine for it. They send for Badger
Old Man, who says he has medicine, and goes for it. Next day young man
is dressed as though dead. Badger Old Man spreads white ówa on floor,
and tells young man to lie down on it, and places medicine in his mouth,
in his ears, and on his heart. Young man eats medicine and "dies." Then
he sees path leading westward to Skeleton House, which he follows, and
he sees one sitting in inclosure of sticks who will be long time in
getting to Skeleton House. He proceeds westward through cactus and agave
plants, and arrives at steep bluff., Chief sitting there points out
direction of house, which young man cannot see for stroke. Chief places
young man's kilt on ground, places him on it, and throws it over
precipice. Young man slowly descends on kilt as if flying with wings. On
arriving on ground he proceeds and comes upon Skeleton Woman. She tells
hurt that smoke is from where wicked people are thrown in and destroyed.
He goes on to Skeleton House, where Skeleton people assemble to look at
him. They ask who he is, and then take him to Bear Clan. There is ladder
up to house. He tries to ascend, but rungs are made of sunflower stems
and first one breaks as he steps on it. He stays down and Skeletons
bring him food. They laugh when he eats, as they eat only odor and steam
of food. That is why they are not heavy, and why clouds into which dead
are transformed can float in air. They ask what he has come for; they
say he must go back, his flesh is still too strong. He is to make
nakwákwosis for them at Soyál Ceremony, and they give him directions for
wrapping up women when they die, that raindrops may fall when Skeleton
moves through sky as clouds. Young man sees Skeletons carrying mealing
stones on backs, and others bundles of cactus, as punishment. At another
place he sees chiefs who had been good in this world. Young man returns.
At bluff he mounts kilt and breeze lifts him up. He sees chief again,
who says no one should desire to come there, it is not good or light. He
meets no one on return home, and as he enters body he comes to life
again. Badger Old Man washes and discharms him. He is fed, and then
tells what he has seen in much same language as before. He adds that no
one should desire to go to that place, because people are living in
light here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30.--Skeleton Woman and the Hunter.](toth143)
