[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth075)  [Next](toth077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 73. THE COYOTE AND THE PORCUPINE. <span id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_143)

At some distance southwest of Wálpi is a place called Water Killing Hill
(Báqöychomo), where there are still some old ruins. A short distance
north of this place is a place called Skeleton Hill (Máschomo). At these
two places the people from Oraíbi, Wálpi, and the other villages rested
with their captives after they had destroyed Aoátovi, taking with them
many men, women, and children. Here at these places, it is said, they
extorted from their captives the secrets of their ceremonies and altars,
and after they had learned everything from them, they killed a good many
of them, probably torturing some of them. Tradition says that in some
cases they cut women's breasts off and left them to perish, From this
killing of those captives these two places have derived their names.

At the first named place the Porcupine used to live, a long time ago,
while the Coyote was living at the last named place. One time

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

the Coyote went to visit his friend, the Porcupine. "Sit down," the
latter said. "All right," the Coyote said, and so they talked together a
long time. When it was noon the Porcupine said: "We are going to eat
something. You build a fire;" so the Coyote built a large fire. When the
Coyote had built the fire the Porcupine said: "Now we are going to have
something to eat." So he drew a small pointed stick from his hair on the
top of his head and thrust it into his nose. After he had done this
repeatedly, blood and fat dropped out of his nose on the fire, where it
was roasted. This he handed to the Coyote to eat. So they were eating.
"Aha," the Porcupine said: "thus I am preparing food." "Yes," the Coyote
said, "we are happy."

So after they had eaten they conversed until evening; then the Coyote
said, "I must go home now." "Very well," the Porcupine replied, "it is
evening now," "But you must visit me too, to-morrow," the Coyote said,
and thereupon left, the Porcupine saying laughingly, "You will have
something good too, since you have seen it here." So the next morning
the Porcupine went over to his friend and there sure enough found that
the Coyote also had a pointed stick thrust into his hair. When it was
noon again the Porcupine also built a fire at his friend's kiva. "We are
going to eat something fine," the Coyote said. So the Coyote pulled out
his stick, drew close up to the fire, bent over it, and also began to
poke his nose with the stick, whereupon also blood, mixed with fat or
tallow, began to come out. It covered the fire, and finally began to
flow away, and wouldn't stop. The Coyote's nose was bleeding and
bleeding, and finally he became exhausted and fell down.

The Porcupine, thinking that his friend had died, laughed, and without
having eaten anything, left the kiva and went home. He was angry at his
friend because he wanted to imitate him, and now was not successful. By
and by the Coyote revived. The blood had stopped flowing, forming large
hard pieces of coagulated blood and grease in front of his nose. He was
very angry. "That friend of mine," he said, "that friend is the cause
that this happened to me; he wanted it this way. I am going to devour
him." So after he had become strong again the next morning, he went over
to his friend to attack him. When he arrived there he looked down, and
his friend looking up noticed the blood on his nose. "Well now, have you
not died? I thought you had died, and that is the reason why I went
away." "Yes," the Coyote said very roughly, "you have bewitched me. On
your account I almost died, and now I have come over here to devour
you." "No, no," the Porcupine said, "you are not going to devour me.
Why, you are my friend, and a friend will not eat up

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

his friend. No, indeed." Then he began to talk kindly to his friend
saying: "Well, since you have not died, we will live together again."
The Coyote then also quieted down and they conversed together amicably.
They then lived there again as friends, the Coyote thinking that he
would have a chance sometime to take revenge on the Porcupine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_143"></span>[202:1](toth076.htm#fr_145) Told by Sik'áhpik'i
(Shupaúlavi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 74. The Coyote and the Badger](toth077)
