[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth046)  [Next](toth048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 44. KAVÚSHKAVUWNÖM AND SHOVÍVIOUNÖM

Halíksai! In Oraíbi they were living. At Bayávushtuhco lived a woman by
the name of Kavúshkavuwnöm, and at Oánmuru lived a woman by the name of
Shovíviounöm. These two women were great friends. They usually got water
at Spider Spring (Kóhkangva). One time Kavúshkavuwnöm was getting water
again, and as she was returning her friend Shovíviounöm met her, also
getting water. The latter asked her in a half-singing manner: "What now
\[in order\] to cook, you get water?" (Híhta vúla kwiwánikae kúyito?)
Whereupon Kavúshkavuwnöm replied: "A dish of young squashes"
(Ngamóochona). Shovíviounöm hereupon said: "So you are going to feast?"
(Aha, hálihi kurzh pas um chónni?) "Yes," the other one replied, "you
must come this evening and visit me," whereupon they separated, the one
going home with her water, and the other one going after water.

When Shovíviounöm returned with her water she went to grinding corn and
prepared some hurúshuki. Of this she put some into a tray and proceeded
to the house of her friend, Kavúshkavuwnöm, who had invited her to come
over. The latter had in the meanwhile prepared her dish of young
squashes. This she put into a bowl and the two then sat down and ate the
squashes and the hurúshuki. While they were eating they conversed
together, and when they were through and Shovíviounöm had visited for a
little while, she returned to her home.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

The next morning Shovíviounöm went after water first. She looked around
several times for her friend, who, however, was not yet coming. She went
down to the spring, filled her jug with water, but still her friend was
not coming. So she returned to the village, and as she was ascending the
incline to the village Kavúshkavuwnöm descended from the village, also
going after water. When they met, Kavúshkavuwnöm asked her friend: "What
now \[in order\] to cook, you get water?" (Híhta vúla kwiwánikae
kúyito?) Whereupon Shovíviounöm replied: ''Tavóchona." .. So you are
going to feast?" "(Aha, hálihi kurzh pas um chónni?) Kavúshkavuwnöm
said. "Yes," Shovíviounöm replied, "you must come and visit me in the
evening. "

When they had both returned they prepared their meals, Kavúshkavuwnöm
preparing some hurúshuki, and Shovíviounöm preparing a dish of rabbit
meat. In the evening Kavúshkavuwnöm proceeded to the house of her
friend. The latter put her dish of rabbit meat into a bowl, and
Kavúshkavuwnöm added her hurúshuki. The two then ate, enjoying their
feast. When they were through, they conversed together until the sun
went down, whereupon Kavúshkavuwnöm returned to her house and both
retired for the night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[153:1](toth046.htm#fr_105) Told by Lománömtiwa
(Oraíbi).

2 Told by Tangákhoyoma (Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 45. How the Children of Pivánhonk'api Obtained Permission To
Catch Birds](toth048)
