[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth050)  [Next](toth052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 48. THE MAIDEN AND THE COYOTE. <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_108)

A long time ago a beautiful maiden lived in the northern part of the
village of Oraíbi. The young men of the village vied with one another to
gain her favor, but she treated with contempt all attempts in that
direction. The young men would gather flowers, some of them even going
long distances to find rare flowers, and offer them to her, but she
would persistently refuse to accept any of them. So they finally gave up
the attempts in disgust.

The Yellow Cloud chief of the north heard about it and also decided to
try to win her. He prepared a beautiful bridal outfit, consisting of two
robes, a pair of moccasins, a knotted belt, and a reed mat, the latter
to be used as a receptacle for a part of the outfit. In fact, it was the
same outfit that is made for brides at the present time, but yellow
being the color of the north with the Hopi, this whole outfit was of
that color. The chief brought it to the village and presented it to the
maiden, but she refused to accept it, so he, too, returned to his home
in disgust. The Blue Cloud chief of the west hearing about this, made up
his mind that he would try to win the favor of that maiden, so he
prepared a blue bridal outfit and offered it to the maiden, but it was
promptly refused. Hereupon the Red Cloud

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

chief of the south prepared the same outfit in red color, but also
without success. The White Cloud chief of the east tried his luck with a
white bridal costume, but with no better results. The Black Cloud chief
from above failed in the same manner, and finally the Gray Cloud chief
from below tried his luck, only to meet with complete failure, as his
five companions had. <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_109)

After all these attempts and failures, Paváyoyk'ashi, a rain deity in
the far south, heard about this story. He painted and dressed up
beautifully like the Flute players, Powámuy dancers, and certain
Katcinas at the present day, painted a black line over his cheeks and
nose, took a bow and arrows, placed the latter in a panther skin quiver
and proceeded to Oraíbi. He found the maiden already mentioned, in the
valley south of Oraíbi watching her father's field, He addressed her,
saving, that she should speak to her parents and ask them whether they
would give her to him and, in case they should give their consent, he
would come and get her in four days. She was favorably impressed with
him and promised to do so. In the evening, when she arrived in her home,
she told her parents about it, saying that somebody had come there, had
asked her in marriage provided they, the parents, would give their
consent. The parents offered no objections.

The Coyote Old Man at that time lived west of the village at a place
called Coyote Gap. He had been thinking of that maiden, but knowing that
she had refused all offers, had never had the courage to ask for her.
Hearing now that she had accepted Paváyoyk'ashi, he at once determined
to win her. So he traveled south to a country where it is warm and where
there are parrots and macaws. He captured one of the macaws, returned,
and at once proceeded to the house of the maiden, saving: ''I have
brought something pretty for you." She asked, "What is it?" He produced
the parrot and asked her whether she wanted it. She was at once struck
with the beauty of the bird, and, not thinking of any evil intentions
that the Coyote might have, accepted the present. The parrot was alive.
The Coyote, well pleased with his success, returned to his house. During
the night he proceeded to the house of Paváyoyk'ashi, stole his costume
and ornaments and all that he usually took with him, and returned. The
next morning he dressed and painted up just like Paváyoyk'ashi and
proceeded to the house of the maiden. this being the day on which
Paváyoyk'ashi had said that he would come

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

for her, she mistook Coyote Old Man for her lover and went with him.
They proceeded to the house of the Coyote Old Man where she remained.
She soon discovered her mistake and was very unhappy over it.

When Paváyoyk'ashi awoke in the morning, he missed his costume. After
hunting for it and being unable to find anything, he discovered tracks
leading to and from his house. He followed these and tracked them to the
house of the maiden, from there back to the house of the Coyote, where
to his great sorrow he found her. He did not say anything, however, but
returned to his home, being, of course, very angry. In the meanwhile the
young men of the village heard that the beautiful maiden, whom to win
they had made so many unsuccessful attempts, had been ensnared by the
Coyote Old Man. They were very much exasperated over it, went down the
mesa, surrounded the Coyote's house and determined to kill the Coyote.
When they arrived there he was still sleeping. The maiden, sitting by
his side, was very much dejected. When the Coyote heard the noise he
awoke, jumped up, ran up the ladder and succeeded in escaping between
and through the pursuers without being hurt by the sticks that were
hurled at him. Ascending a ridge or mesa some distance west of the
village, he turned around and in a defiant way expressed his
satisfaction at the victory he had gained over them, by successfully
getting their most beautiful maiden away from them, and the village.
While he spoke he grasped his genitalia and showed them to his pursuers,
Hereupon he descended the mesa upon the other side and disappeared.

Paváyoyk'ashi bided his time and one time brought a strong wind, some
very heavy rain and thunder clouds, in which he was hidden, to the
village. He took revenge on his enemy, the Coyote, by striking him dead
with a ray of lightning. The maiden returned to her home, but realizing
that she had cast herself away, she continued to lead a life of
lewdness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[157:1](toth051.htm#fr_110) Told by Qöyáwaima
(Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_109"></span>[158:1](toth051.htm#fr_111) With the Hopi
yellow is the ceremonial color of the north; green or blue, of the west
red, of the south; white, of the east; black, of the above; gray,
meaning in this case a mixture of all kinds of colors, of the below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 49. Chórzhvûk'iqölö and the Eagles](toth052)
