[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth058)  [Next](toth060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 56. THE TOAD AND THE SNOW KATCÍNAS. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_122)

Halíksai! A long time ago they were living in Oraíbi. There was a kiva
in the northern part of the village called the Chórzhovi (Bluebird
Height). In this kiva one time the Snow Katcínas were practicing for a
dance. North of the village at Katcínavala lived the Toad Woman (Machak
Wuhti). She had a son. The latter frequently went to the village in the
evening to listen to the Katcínas when they were practicing their
singing. When he would be lying on the kiva roof looking down, the other
young men would pile up on him and thus worry him. So finally he did not
do that any more but sat aside and simply listened to the singing of the
Katcínas. He usually wore a robe of wildcat skin, as was customary among
the young men at that time.

On the eighth day (Totók'a), the women of the village were preparing
food for the dance on the next day. The Toad Woman also prepared some
píkami and other food. Her son was anxious to see the dance the next
day. During the night he did not sleep, but remained awake in the
village with the others. Early in the morning the Toad Woman washed his
head with suds. When he had dried his hair, his mother got some píkami
and they were eating. The sun then rose. He put on his wildcat robe
again, and also put on a cap of skin, and then went to the village, as
the Katcínas went to the village for the first time.

When he entered the village he put a little paint into a bowl and
painted his face. When the children saw him they laughed at him, partly
on account of his funny cap. On the plaza the Katcinas were dancing,
distributing food among the people at the same time, but nobody gave
this youth any food. Soon an old man said to the children who were on
the plaza they should take the Toad Boy to some ant hill, because he
liked ants very much. There were ants living in different parts of the
village. So the children took him to a place and dug out ants so that
they were running about in great numbers. The Toad at once commenced to
eat them and the children laughed at

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

him. When the Toad had eaten a great many of the ants, he went back to
the plaza again and stayed with the Katcínas and attended the dance all
day, enjoying himself.

Towards evening he went home. When he left the village the children
followed him, some of them having red piki that the Katcínas had given
them, "Give me some of that red piki, too," he said, "because I envy
you." So they gave him a very little, which he took home and gave to his
mother. She was happy over the red piki, and they ate it. And they are
still living there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[180:1](toth059.htm#fr_124) Told by Kwáyeshva
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 57. The Locust That Came To Life While Being Roasted](toth060)
