[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth053)  [Next](toth055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 51. MÚYINGWA, TWO CHILDREN, AND THE HUMMING-BIRD <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_114)

A long time ago the Oraíbi had nothing to eat as it did not rain for
about four or five years. The first year the corn became large enough so
that some corn-ears just began to ripen, then the frost came and killed
it. The next year the ears were just forming when the frost again killed
the corn. The third year the ears did not even begin to form when the
stalks were killed by frost. The fourth year it remained very small. The
people by this time had eaten all the corn they had saved from previous
years and some began to move away. Some of them, however, still planted
some the fifth year, but the drought was so great that the corn withered
soon after it had come out of the ground.

They all left then, trying to find something to eat with other people.
Only a little boy and his sister were left in the village. One time the
little brother made a little bird for his sister from the pith of the
sunflower stalk and gave it to her to play with. While he went away to
hunt something else for her she played with the little bird, throwing it
upwards several times, and all at once it became a living Humming-bird
and flew away. When the boy returned he asked her what she had done with
her little bird. She told him that it had flown away, at which he was
very much surprised. The children had hardly anything to eat. The next
morning the little bird came back, flew into the house where the
children stayed and entered an opening in one of the walls. "My little
bird has come back!" the little girl said. "Where is it?" the boy asked.
"Why, it went into that opening there." The boy put his hand into the
opening and found that it seemed to be very large. The bird he could not
find, but he found a little corn-ear which the bird had apparently
placed there. At this the children were very glad. They broke it in two,
roasted it, and ate it. Soon the bird came out of the opening and flew
away again. The next day it returned with a larger corn-ear which the
children ate, and so it returned for four days, always bringing a larger
corn-ear for the children. On the fifth day it came back but did not
bring any corn with it. When the boy reached into the opening he drew
forth the little bird, but in the form in which he had made it. He held
it in his hand and said: "You are

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

something living. You go and hunt our parents, they have left us here
and you will perhaps find them, and you bring us something to eat. You
go south here and look for our father and mother. "

Hereupon the boy asked his sister how she had caused the bird to fly.
She took the little bird by the wings and said: "This is the way I did
it," throwing it upward, whereupon the bird was alive again and flew
away. Sitting upon a rock south of the village the little bird looked
southward and all at once detected at Tü'wanashabe, <span
id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_115) a cactus plant with a single red
blossom. The bird at once flew towards this plant and removing it found
an opening under it. Entering this opening it found itself in a kiva
where some grass and herbs were growing. At the north end of this kiva
was another opening. Passing through this one, the little bird found
itself in a second kiva. Here it found some corn with some pollen on it,
and ate some of it. At the north end of this kiva there was also an
opening leading into a third kiva. Entering this kiva the bird found
grass, herbs, and corn of all kinds, and here also lived Mû'yingwa, the
God of Growth and Germination. <span id="fr_118"></span>[2](#fn_116)

There were also all kinds of birds in this last kiva, but it was the
Humming-birds that first noticed the little intruder and told Mû'yingwa
about it. "Somebody has come in," they said. "Who is it?" he asked, "and
where is he? Let him come here." So the little bird flew on Mû'yingwa's
arm and waited. "Why are you going about here?" Mû'yingwa asked. "Yes,"
the bird said, "what are you doing here? Why have you listened to the
wishes of the bad people who wanted you to retire here to this place and
not concern yourself about the people up there? Why have you complied
with their wishes? Your fields up there look very bad. It has not rained
there and nothing is growing. The people have all left except two poor
little children who are the only ones left in Oraíbi. You come out here
and look after things up there." "All right," Mû'yingwa answered, "I am
thinking about the matter. "

Hereupon the bird asked for something to eat and also for something to
bring to those children, saying that they had not had anything that day,
and that they were hungry. Mû'yingwa told the bird to take just what it
wanted and bring it to the children. So the bird broke off a nice
roasting corn-ear to take along. Arriving at the house it flew into the
same opening again, disposing of the corn-ear there. The boy reached
into the opening and drew forth the corn-ear. The children were very
happy over it and talked to the

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

bird, which was still in the opening, and said: "Thank you that you have
pitied us, thank you that you have brought us something to eat again. On
your account we live here now. Through you we can satisfy our hunger. We
are very happy over it. You must not leave us now." The bird answered:
"Yes, I have pity on you and for that reason I have come again. I shall
now live close by here, at Tü'wanashabe."

The children then asked the bird to hunt for their parents, and so the
bird flew away to hunt for them. Flying over the fields west of Oraíbi
it proceeded towards the north, and at a place called Tóho (from a black
shale or paint gotten from there by the Hopi to this day), it found the
father and the mother of these children. They were living upon some
cactus that was growing there, but were very much emaciated. When the
Humming-bird flew by them the man said: "Something is passing by here,"
but looking around they could not see anything, so the bird came back
and was then detected by the man and his wife. The man at once went
towards the bird, saying: "Who are you, flying about here?" The bird
stopped in its flight, though keeping its wings in motion and listened
to what the man had to say. He asked the little bird to pity them and
procure them some food. There was no living being in that part of the
country at that time, and so from the fact that this bird was flying
about there the people concluded that it must know some place where it
found something to eat. The bird did not answer anything, but flew away.
Arriving at the opening in the children's house, the boy asked: "Did you
find our parents?" "Yes," the Humming-bird answered," away up north I
found them." "Both of them?" the children asked. "Yes, both of them,"
the bird replied; "but alas, they have very little to eat. They are
hungry and they are very much emaciated."

The children then begged the bird to bring them something to eat,
whereupon it flew away. Mû'yingwa had in the meanwhile concluded to go
up into the world and look after things there. He first ascended to the
first kiva above him, where he staved four days. During this time it
rained a little about Oraíbi. After four days he ascended into the next
kiva above him when it rained again on the earth. He then ascended into
the third kiva, whereupon it rained considerably in and around Oraíbi,
and when he after four more days emerged from the last kiva he found
that the grasses and herbs were growing nicely.

The parents of the children had seen from the distance the clouds and
rain about Oraíbi, and concluded to return to the village, not

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

knowing that their children were still living. Others of the inhabitants
of Oraíbi who had not yet perished, also heard that it was now raining
at their village and so they also returned. When these children grew up
they, and after them their descendants, became the village chiefs and
owners of the village of Oraíbi.

(The informant says that this tale is not complete. He says that he
knows it is longer, but he has forgotten some of the details about it.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[169:1](toth054.htm#fr_116) Told by Qöyáwaima
(Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_115"></span>[170:1](toth054.htm#fr_117) A place about three
miles south of Oraíbi.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[170:2](toth054.htm#fr_118) Those who speak of
three kivas under the earth consider the kivas in the village as the
first kiva, making only four. According to others, there are four kivas
besides those in the village.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 52. The Kalátötö Who Wished To Have Hair On His Head](toth055)
