[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth010)  [Next](toth012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 8. THE WANDERINGS OF THE BEAR CLAN (HON-ÑAMU). <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)

After we had left the sípahpuni the Bear people separated and went ahead
of the others. <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) First they came
somewhere near the present

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

site of Phœnix, and stayed there awhile. They remained for or shorter or
longer periods at many different places. Finally they came to the Little
Colorado River, and about there it was where they assumed the clan name,
but just exactly where the place was nobody can tell. Their forefathers
say that the party once came upon a dead bear that they looked at, and
from that they were called forever afterwards the Bear clan. Another
party that traveled with them took the hide of the bear, of which the
hair had already been removed by little animals (Mû'yi. Pl. Mû'mutyu),
who use hair or wool for their nests or burrows. These people took the
skin and cut from it carrying straps (piqö'sha), from which they were
called Piqö'sha clan. Another party came upon the bear at just this time
and were called Mû'yi clan, after the small mice mentioned before. These
three clans arrived there just about the same time, and hence are
considered as closely related to one another.

Shortly after another party passed by and found many blue-birds sitting
upon the cadaver eating from it; so they were called the Bluebird clan
(Chórzh-ñamu). Still later another party, came upon the scene and found
the remains of the cadaver full of spider web, so this party was called
Spider (Kóhk'ang) clan. By and by a sixth migrating party came along. By
this time the bones of the bear were bleached already. They took the
skull, tied yucca leaves to it and carried it along as a drinking vessel
in the manner in which the chief's or priest's jugs (móngwikurus) are
carried at the present time, and from this. that party was called the
jug (Wíkurzh) clan. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) Finally a
seventh party came along and found the place where the bear had been
killed swarming with ants, so they were called the Ant (Án-ñamu) clan.

These seven clans have derived their names from the same origin, and are
now considered as being related to one another. The Bear clan is also
said to have halted at various places along the Little Colorado River.
From there they moved eastward, stopping for some time at a place called
Badger Spring (Honánva). <span id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30)

From this place they again moved eastward, stopped at a place called
Mákwutavi, and from here they finally moved to Matö'ví, a large spring a
number of miles south of Shongópavi. At this place they also remained
for a considerable length of time, but finally they moved northward to
the present site of Shongópavi, where they

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

remained. They being the first to arrive at this place, they have ever
since considered themselves to be the leading clan in the village, the
village chief having also been chosen from their clan. A few persons of
the Bear clan moved from here to Oraíbi, where the chieftainship of the
so-called Liberal or Friendly faction is still held by that clan, the
Conservative or Hostile faction of that village selecting their chief
from the Spider clan. Two of this clan moved to the villages of
Shupaúlavi and Mishóngnovi, where the office of the village chief has
also remained in this clan to the present day.

The Bear clan brought with them the altar paraphernalia, song, etc., of
the Blue Flute cult. When they stopped and planted anywhere they would
perform the Blue Flute ceremony and sing the songs, and their crop would
then grow and mature very quickly, so that they would have something to
eat. They also brought with them the Hû Katcina, the Bear (Hon) Katcina,
the Â'ototo <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) Natácka, his wife Cóoyok
Wuhti, and finally the Cóoyoko Táhaam. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32)

Later on other clan and migrating parties arrived at Shongópavi asking
of the Bear clan admission to the village. If proper arrangements could
be made with the Bear clan they remained; if not, they moved on. Many of
the large and small ruins with which the country is covered date back to
the time of the migration of these different clans, showing the places
where they made stays of shorter or longer duration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[36:1](toth011.htm#fr_27) Told by Lomavântiwa
(Shupaúlavi).

<span id="fn_28"></span>[36:2](toth011.htm#fr_28) The Hopi agree in
their different tales that after leaving the sípahpuni, not only the
different nationalities scattered and took different routes towards the
East, but also those people whom they considered their forefathers,
scattered and traveled eastward in smaller and larger bodies. They
stopped at various places for shorter or longer periods, and it was in
these wanderings that the different clans were created, and it is by
reason of this separation and of the traveling eastward of the different
bodies by different routes, that the traditions and tales of the
different clans vary so considerably from each other. The following is a
tale of the experiences of the Bear clan as given by one of the
principal men in Shupaúlavi, a member of different secret orders, and
one of the best story tellers and singers.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[37:1](toth011.htm#fr_29) According to others
Wíkorzh from *wíhu*, fat, and *koro*, cavity, because they say the eyes
in the cadaver had disappeared from their cavities, some dried fat or
fatty meat still adhering to the socket walls. This latter explanation
is very likely correct. Compare tale No. 9.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[37:2](toth011.htm#fr_30) My informant was
unable to explain why this spring was called by that name and not after
Bear Clan.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[38:1](toth011.htm#fr_31) Meaning obscure but
perhaps referring to the rattle with the antelope scapulas.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[38:2](toth011.htm#fr_32) The meaning of these
last three names is also obscure. Lomavântiwa claims that he has
information as to whether these Katcinas performed any dances or rites
while the clan was still migrating. He says that his information about
Katcinas, dances, etc., only dates back to the time when they already
lived in the villages and the Katcina clans came.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 9. The Wanderings of the Spider Clan (Kohk'ang-ñamu)](toth012)
