[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth163)  [Next](toth165) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

## 51.--MÛ'YINGWA, TWO CHILDREN, AND THE HUMMING-BIRD.

Oraíbi people have nothing to eat, as it does not rain for five years.
All go away, leaving little boy and girl in village. Brother makes for
sister little bird from pith of sunflower stalk. She plays with it, and,
throwing it upwards, it becomes Humming-bird and flies away. Next
morning bird flies into house and enters opening in wall. Boy puts hand
into opening and finds little corn ear placed there by bird. They roast
and eat it. Next day bird returns with larger corn ear, and so it does
for four days. On fifth day it does not bring any corn and boy draws
bird forth from opening in form in which he had made it. Little girl
throws it upwards and bird flies away. It sits upon rock, looks
southward, and detects cactus plant with single red blossom. Bird flies
towards plant and removing it finds opening under it. Entering opening
it is in kiva, where grass and herbs are growing. At north end is
another opening through which bird passes to second kiva, where is corn
with pollen. Bird finds opening into third kiva, where are grass, herbs
and corn of all kinds. Here lives Mû'yingwa, god of Growth and
Germination. Mû'yingwa asks why he is going about. Bird flies on his arm
and tells him condition of things at Oraíbi, and asks him to come out
and look after things. He says children are hungry. Mû'yingwa tells him
to take what he wants. Bird takes roasting corn ear and carries it to
opening. Children are thankful to bird and ask it to hunt their parents.
It flies north and finds father and mother of children. They are much
emaciated. Man asks bird to procure them some food. It flies away and
tells children about parents. They ask it to bring them something to
eat, and bird flies away. Mû'yingwa ascends to first kiva, and it rains
little about Oraíbi. In four days he ascends to next kiva, and it again
rains. He ascends to third kiva an d it rains considerably around
Oraíbi. After four days more he emerges from last kiva and finds grasses
and herbs growing. Parents of children and others return. Children grow
up and become village chiefs and owners of Oraíbi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 52.--The Kalátötö Who Wished To Have Hair On His Head.](toth165)
