[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth104)  [Next](toth106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 102. THE DESTRUCTION OF SIKYÁTKI. <span id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_185)

Halíksai! A long time ago the people were living in Wálpi, but not on
top of the mesa. The village was then west of the mesa where there are
now the ruins. The people at Sikyátki were also living. One time the
Racer Katcinas from Sikyátki came over to Wálpi to have a race. During
the race one of the Wálpi men cut off the hair knot of the Hö'msontaka
Katcina, instead of cutting off just a small portion of the side lock,
as is usually done. This made the Katcina very angry. He returned to
Sikyátki and then for some time he practiced running. When he had become
very strong he made up his mind that he was going to take revenge on the
one who had cut

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

his hair. One time the Wálpi came over also to have a race at Sikyátki.
The young man whose hair had been cut was still angry. He took a knife
and then went up on the bluff opposite Sikyátki, where he waited.

When the dance was in progress he went down and entered the plaza. He
wore the mask of the Hö'msontaka Katcina. Four clowns performed in
connection with the Katcina dance. These saw him first and said; "Here a
Katcina is coming." "Yes," he said, "I want to race." "Very well," they
said. So he raced with them and caught every one of them, cutting a
small portion of their side locks off. When they were through with the
racing he kept looking through the crowd of people. Soon he detected on
top of a house a maiden who had her hair whorls done up nicely. He
recognized her as a sister of the one who had cut his hair, and he was
determined to take revenge on her. When the clowns noticed it they said:
"There he has found a friend."

Hereupon he dashed away and ran up the ladder to the top of the house
where the maiden was standing with another maiden. The people dispersed
as he came upon the roof. He rushed to the place where the two maidens
were standing. They rushed down the ladder and entered a house. He
followed them and grabbed the sister of his enemy, taking hold of her
hair whorls and, jerking a knife from his belt, he cut off her head. He
took hold of one of her hair whorls and rushed out, swinging the head
where all the people could see it. Hereupon he ran away. The people
followed him but could not overtake him. They rushed up the mesa and the
dance broke up immediately.

When the Katcina had reached the top of the mesa he turned back and
again waved the head to his pursuers. They were very angry. He turned
and went to the village again by another trail, still carrying the head
in his hand. The people of the two villages quarreled severely, but the
Wálpi people withdrew to their village. There was, however, constant
wrangling and fighting going on between the two villages after that. The
people of Sikyátki, it seems, were very wicked. They were especially
wicked towards the women and maidens, and as they did not even spare the
chief's wife, he got very angry and was determined to take revenge upon
his own people. He agreed with the chief of Wálpi that when his people
would be planting for the chief in the valley, the Wálpi should come to
the village and destroy it. So when the Wálpi heard the announcement
that the Sikyátki people were going to plant the fields of their chief
they made ready.

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

They went on top of the mesa and watched. Many of them had halls; of
pitch with them that they had procured from the woods. When the Sikyátki
people were out in the fields they rushed upon the village where they
found only some women and children. These they killed, They then rubbed
the pitch on the walls of the houses and set the houses on fire, thus
destroying the village. When the people who were planting saw the smoke
rise from the village, they at once realized what had happened. They
rushed to their village but had only their planting sticks with them.
The Wálpi, before setting fire to the houses, had secured the bows,
arrows, and tomahawks so that they were well armed when they met the
people of Sikyátki, and in a short time had killed then) all, including
the chief who had been the instigator of the revenge. Thus Sikyátki was
destroyed and has ever since been in ruins. It came so suddenly that
even now charred corn is constantly found in the ruins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[244:1](toth105.htm#fr_187) Told by Sik'áhpiki
(Shupaúlavi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 103. The Destruction of Aoátovi](toth106)
