[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth107)  [Next](toth109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 105. HOW AN ORAÍBI CHIEF PUNISHED HIS PEOPLE. <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_192)

A long time ago the people were living in Oraíbi. They were also living
in Wálpi which, however, then was not on top of the mesa, but somewhat
farther down towards the north-west. One time the children (people) of
the chief in Oraíbi were very bad and the chief concluded that he would
punish them. So he went over to the warrior chief in Wálpi. He sat down
and they first smoked, then the warrior chief asked him what his object
in coming was. "Yes," he said, "my children are very bad and I have come
to see what you think about it. After some days we will come by here to
attack Wálpi. You must then be ready and come to meet us in the valley,
and when my children return and run, you must kill them, but those who
pass the rock that is standing south of Ponótoika, they shall remain
unmolested.

The warrior chief of Wálpi agreed to this, on the condition that the
Oraíbi chiefs would not ask for any of the lives of the Wálpi. To this
he agreed. So the Oraíbi chief returned and told his people that in four
days they would make a raid on Wálpi and try especially to steal some
maidens. They were willing, and so during the night after the third day
proceeded towards Wálpi. Early in the morning they approached the
village, hut the Wálpi were ready. They descended from their village
well armed, and, sounding the war yell, rushed upon the Oraíbi.

One of the Wálpi young men had a very large, fierce dog. This dog rushed
ahead and bit a great many of the Oraíbi in the leg, thus

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

disabling them. The Oraíbi had been so thoroughly surprised that they
got frightened and fled when the Wálpi rushed upon them. The latter now
chased the fleeing Oraíbi and killed a great many. The big dog also
disabled and killed a number of them. Only a few passed the rock
mentioned above. On account of this battle, in which that dog killed so
many Oraíbi, a dog is engraved on that rock and it is called the dog
mark (Pókvâita).

This is the way chiefs often punished their children (people) when they
became "bewitched." That is one reason why there are so very many ruins
all over the country. Many people were killed in that way because their
chiefs became angry and invited some chief or inhabitant from other
villages to destroy their people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[255:1](toth108.htm#fr_194) Told by Sik'ahpiki
(Shupaúlavi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 106. A Katcina Race Contest Between the Wálpi and the
Oraíbi](toth109)
