[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth137)  [Next](toth139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 25.--HOW THE ANTELOPE MAIDEN WAS RECONCILED.

Two sons of village chiefs of Zuñi are racing. At bluff they are called
by Antelope mána. They approach, and maiden draws up elder brother by
deep inhalation. She tells other one that she will not give back his
brother even for his beads. When father hears, he sends younger brother
to ask assistance of Pöokónghoyas, for whom he makes ball tied to stick
and arrow. He goes to house of Spider Woman, their grandmother, who
calls them. Messenger hands them presents, and they send him to Mole.
Mole tells them to go northward to his uncle. They come to house of
Storm, who is Hopi. Young man tells his story and they smoke. Young man
swallows smoke Then Storm sends him to Snake people at Wálpi. He goes
and finds Snake people dressed up as warriors. He tells them why he has
come, and they smoke. Young man again swallows all smoke, which pleases
Snakes. They give him báho, which they say maiden wants, and tell him to
make báhos like it. He returns home, and they make good many báhos.
Young man, father, two Pö'okongs, Spider Woman, and Storm proceed to
bluff. Father asks for son and shows maiden báhos. By aid of Storm they
get into house, and maiden says she wants báhos, but before she gives up
son they must play game. She spreads sand on floor, and Hopi plant seeds
and thrust báhos into border of sand. Plants grow up quickly, and maiden
then says they shall race, following sun. Young man mounts eagle breath
feather and maiden turns into swift snake. Maiden is in

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

lead, and Spider Woman, with reed, by strong inhalation, increases young
man's speed so that he beats. Mána draws son from inner room where many
bones of voting men. Antelope Maiden has been angry because no báhos had
been made for her, but she is reconciled when her báhos are revived.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26.--The Pö'okongs and the Bálölöokong.](toth139)
