[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth129)  [Next](toth131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 17.--THE ÁHÖ'LI AND OTHER WÁLPI KATCINAS.

In former Wálpi village lives Áhö'li Katcina and his little sister. In
Sitcómovi lives youth with grandmother. Áhö'li and maiden go to field to
plant. In field is báho shrine where Áhö'li deposits corn meal and
nakwákwosis as prayer-offerings. In shrine lives Mû'yingwa and sister,
who cries on receiving offering, as they have been neglected. Áhö'li
places seeds on ground. Two deities arise, and as Mû'yingwa points
certain objects to sky, sister forcibly throws squash filled with all
kinds of seeds on ground on seeds placed by Áhö'li. Mû'yingwa hands
objects to Ahö'li to produce rain and crops. Áhö'li and maiden return to
village and hear some one singing on top of bluff. Youth from Sitcómovi
enters house and thanks them for what they have done They smoke
together, youth blowing smoke in ringlets upon objects four times,
praying to them, and they become moist, indicating that they would
produce rain. Youth remains, and in morning they dress up in costumes
and proceed to báho shrine half-way down mesa. Here they sprinkle meal
to sun and on shrine, and again hear voice singing. They look up and see
Big-Horn Katcina. They go to look for him, and see Â'ototo shaking
rattle of bones. While talking Big-Horn comes and after hearing what
Áhö'li has done, they agree to go down mesa. Part of way down they make
báho shrine as mark between Háno and Sitcómovi. Further down they meet
Cóoyoko, who devours children, coming out of large shrine with twisted
stone. They tell him not to trouble them, and descend to house of
Áhö'li, where they stay singing all night. In morning they go to fields
and everything is growing beautifully. Near mesa they meet Big-Skeleton,
who tells them to go and live on mesa. They have lived there ever since,
and soon after that Wálpi commences to move up mesa and build new
village.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18.--The Two War Gods and the Two Maidens.](toth131)
