[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth041)  [Next](toth043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 39. THE TWO PUEBLO MAIDENS WHO WERE MARRIED TO THE NIGHT. <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_98)

Halíksai! In Kawaíhkaa, a Pueblo village in New Mexico, the people were
living. North of the plaza, at the house where there was a long ladder,
lived two maidens. They were sisters, and persistently refused to marry
any of the young men in the village. Finally the Night (Tókila)
concluded to try to marry the two maidens, and came to the house. He
came there in the evening and asked them to marry him. They said they
would lay the matter before their parents, and if they were willing they
would marry him. The parents were willing, and so the two sisters waited
for their suitor. The next evening he came to fetch his two brides.

Leaving the village they went through a narrow passage. Outside of the
village they found a large tray (póta), which the Night had left there.
"This we shall enter," he said. So they all took a place on the tray,
whereupon they were lifted up and carried through the air to Kawaíhka
Nuwátok'aovi, where they entered a deep canyon or gulch. Here the Night
lived. When they came into the house they saw in an inner room a great
many human bones. They were the remains of many women whom the Night had
stolen in the village, and with whom he had lived a while and then, as
soon as they became pregnant, had thrown them into the room to perish. A
number of

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

women and maidens were still living, and they pitied these two new
arrivals, and said: "Alas! that you two have come with him." So the two
were very unhappy.

Close by was a lake from which the two sisters used to get water. They
stayed with the Night a while, but soon became very unhappy when they
saw that they were pregnant. One time the younger sister went to get
some water and then somebody spoke to her. It was the Frog. "You poor
one," he said, "you must go home this night. Here is a large trail. In
the evening you must take your water jars on your head and come after
water. You leave them here, and then you follow this road, which leads
to your home. This you must tell your sister also." Hereupon the younger
sister returned and said to her older sister: "There at the water some
one has told me something." "What did he say to you?" she asked. "He
told me that we should go home this night.''

So in the evening, after they had eaten, they took their water jars and
went after water. When they arrived at the lake the Frog said: "Have you
come"' "Yes," they replied. "Very well, you just follow this track, and
you trot, and you will arrive at your home." After they had traveled a
distance they came upon Spider Woman, who was sitting close to the trail
in a stooping position as an old hag. "Have you come?" she said. "Yes,"
they replied. "Very well, I have heard that you are going home, and so I
waited for you here." She then told them that she would go along, and
that they should not fear. So they traveled on that night and did not
sleep any. The next day, when they had traveled until about noon, Spider
Woman looked back and saw some clouds approaching. "They are coming,"
she said: "and will certainly overtake us."

The three did not tarry, but when they had come nearly to the village
the sky was full of clouds; they had overtaken them. When they had
arrived close to the village they were struck by lightning and killed.
But as they were killed, each one was delivered of a child, the elder
sister of a little boy, the younger one of a little girl. The children
remained alive and at once began to nurse. During the night their
mothers would become alive, but during the day they were always dead. In
that way the children were brought up. Finally they began to walk
around. Spider Woman had left the two fugitives as soon as they were
struck by lightning.

When the children had grown up somewhat, they asked their mothers who
their father was. "We certainly have a father, and you tell us who he
is, and we will go to him; then he will take care of us and provide for
us." The mothers then told them, "Yes, you have

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

a father, but from him we have fled, and he will not care for you. East
of here is a village, Kawaíhkaa, and there is where we used to live.
There our father and our mother live. You go there and north of the
plaza where the big ladder is you inquire and see what they will say to
you. There is where we used to live. But they too are bad. They will
undoubtedly ask you to contend with them, and if any one is beaten they
usually kill him. On top of the ladder something is hanging, and if any
one does not guess that, he is killed; but if they contend with you and
beat you, you must guess that. There is a little turtle tied up in it."

Hereupon they slept until morning, then the two children started. Their
mothers said to them: "If they contend with you and your grandfather
pities you and gives you something, you bring us something too, so that
we can dress up, because our clothes are worn out. If they do not say
anything to you, we shall go there too." When they arrived at the
village they crossed the plaza, saw the ladder, and went up. Their
grandparents lived in a kiva there. They entered and sat down. The
grandparents had always been sad and sorry and at first did not say
anything. Finally the grandfather saw them and asked, "Who are you?"
"Why, it is we," they said. "But who are you? Where do you come from?"
"From west of here," they replied. "From Akókovi (a village west of
Kawaíhkaa)?" the grandfather asked. "No," they said, "not from there,
but we stayed right west of here." "But who are you?" they asked again.

"A long time ago you had two daughters and somebody fetched them, and we
are their children. We have grown up now and have come here." Hereupon
they set food before them and fed them. The grandmother was crying. When
they had eaten, sure enough, they were asked to playa game with them.
"If they are our grandchildren," they said, "they will know something."
So the grandfather laid out a flat stone on which was drawn a
tû'kwnanawöhpi. <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_99) The grandfather sat
on one side, the boy at the other end, and then they began to play. The
boy won the game. "Very well," the grandfather said, "there at the top
of the ladder something is wrapped up. You guess what that is. If you
guess that you kill me, and if you do not guess it I shall kill you."
Hereupon they all went out and looked at the bundle that was hanging at
the top of the ladder. "Now, what is in there?" the grandfather said.
"Who knows?" the child said. "You guess once," the brother said to his
sister. "How do I know what can be in there?" she said; "you guess."
"Now, do not hesitate," the grandfather said, "but speak out and say
what you

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

think." "Why, what can be in there?" the little brother finally said;
"it is perhaps a little turtle." "Now, you are surely our grand.
children," the grandfather exclaimed.

"Well now, you kill me," the grandfather said. "No, we do not want to
kill you," the children replied, "but you pay us something." ''Very
well," the grandfather said, "what do you want?" "I want a shirt, a how,
and quiver with arrows, and some wrist protectors, and a pair of
moccasins," the boy said. The little girl asked for a dress, a blanket,
moccasins, and a belt. And thus the grandparents paid them these things.
They then also asked for some clothes; for their mothers, whereupon the
grandfather gave them four sheep-wool dresses, two pairs of moccasins,
and two belts. The children then said, that their mothers had said, if
they were willing and would not say anything, then the mothers would
also come. "Certainly you must come," the grandparents said; "you shall
not remain there," So the children took these things with them and
returned to their mothers.

When they arrived there the latter were very happy. The little boy was
already shooting his arrow. They all dressed up now and ate their
evening meal. Hereupon they proceeded to the village, but all abreast.
In this same manner they ascended the ladder, and when they had arrived
at the opening the elder woman called down, "Our father, our mother,"
but received no answer. The younger sister then called down the same
words, but received no answer. "They do not care for us," they said. The
children had told their grandparents that their mothers would come if
the grandparents would not say anything to them. They then descended the
ladder and stopped at the elevated portion in the kiva. Again the two
called, "Our father, our mother," and again no answer. "They do not care
for us," the two women said. They then descended into the deeper portion
of the kiva and again one after the other called, "Our father, our
mother," whereupon the grandmother responded. "How!" she said, and
immediately her two children and two grandchildren fell dead. Had they
heeded the injunction a little better, and had been quiet just once
more, the fourth time they would all have lived together happily, but
this way now they had no children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[143:1](toth042.htm#fr_100) Told by Lománömtiwa
(Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_99"></span>[145:1](toth042.htm#fr_101) A game resembling
our checkers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 40. How Hiyónatitiwa Defeated the Plan of His Enemies](toth043)
