[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth111)  [Next](toth113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 109. A RAID ON THE HOPI VILLAGES. <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_198)

Halíksai! At the old ruin on top of the hill (about seven miles
north-east of Oraíbi) used to live some people. Across the valley on
another mesa was also a village. The inhabitants of these two villages
used to live farther north-east. They were harassed and warred upon by
the Utes (Útsiâ), for which reason they moved to the two places already
mentioned. For about five years they were left in peace in those
villages after they had settled there. But in the sixth year their
enemies found them again, and one evening they were seen approaching the
village and were camping at the mesa somewhat eastward. The chiefs said
to their young men: "It seems that somebody is camping there. You run
there in the evening and find out who they are."

So some of the young men ran there, and sneaking close to the camp found
out that, sure enough, they were their old enemies. When the inhabitants
of the villages heard that, they were busy all night making bows and
arrows and preparing for a fight. Very early in the morning the
inhabitants of the village on the west side of the valley all moved over
to a small village on the east side of the valley, that was situated on
the extreme edge of the mesa. Here they thought they could defend
themselves better, as it would be very difficult for their enemies to
get up to their village.

When the sun rose the enemies approached the village on the west side of
the valley, rushed up the hill and went through the village, but did not
find any one, all having fled. But they soon discovered their tracks and
followed them. They were on horseback, but when they arrived at the
place where these people had assembled they could not get up to the
village, and many of them were shot and killed by the people in the
village. But finally, towards evening, some of them going around the
mesa succeeded in getting into the village from the south side, where
they captured some of the women and maidens, rushed off with them,
mounted their ponies, and escaped.

The warriors of the village, though they followed them, could not
overtake them, as they were afoot. The people who had thus been

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

attacked said that they would not stay at their villages, as they would
certainly be attacked again by their enemies. So they dressed up and
packed up all their things, and forming into line, went to Oraíbi, the
chief going at the head of the line. They were admitted to the village
and are still living there. In that battle not many of them had been
killed, as they were well defended from their assailants, and the
latter, after having taken some women and children, escaped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[267:1](toth112.htm#fr_200) Told by Kwáyeshva
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 110. The Early Spanish Missions At Oraíbi](toth113)
