[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth214)  [Next](toth216) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 103.--THE DESTRUCTION OF AOÁTOVI.

People of Aoátovi go on hunting expedition and maidens accompany them.
Maidens run for rabbits. As party is returning, young man in chasing
rabbit dashes over and kills daughter of village chief, He is very angry
and determines that in revenge village shall be razed to ground. One
night he goes to Shongópavi and wakens, village chief. After smoking he
tells chief what has occurred. He asks him to instruct his young men to
practice their strength and says he will return in four days. On night
of fourth day chief again goes to Shongópavi to see friend and tells him
to get ready for Katcina race. In four days four young men dressed as
Katcinas go to Aoátovi taking presents of corn ears. They go to plaza,
where young men of village come and race commences. Sometimes Katcinas
win and then others win. The last bunch of corn ears is raced for by
young men of village and Hö'msona Katcina. Young man outruns Katcina and
on his return Hö'msona throws him down and cuts his throat. Hö'msona
goes and motions to other Katcinas to

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

run. People are suspicious, as young man does not return. They go and
find him killed. They follow Katcinas, some on ponies. They overtake and
kill Hö'msona and two other Katcinas. Remaining one crosses wash, after
taking off mask, which he hangs on brush. People, seeing mask, return.
During night chief of Aoatovi goes again to Shongópavi and asks chief to
come and get his people. Chief meditates and then refuses. Aoátovi chief
returns home. In night he goes to Oraíbi and arranges with chief to
destroy his people. He then produces two clay figures, one representing
males and other females of his village, and tells him to select. Oraíbi
chief selects female. Next day he tells his warrior chiefs, and that
people are to make bows and arrows. He sends three nephews to other Hopi
villages to ask them to participate in destruction of Aoátovi. Chief of
Shongópavi says the wicked may do so, but he refuses. On fourth day
Oraíbi set off in two parties for Aoátovi, going first to other
villages. They meet towards evening and at sundown move towards Aoátovi.
At foot of mesa chief and his wife come down to them with bundles of
piki. Chief arranges signal for them to rush upon mesa and kill men in
kivas. Oraíbi chief is to select women and maidens he wants and then
rest of villages shall take others. Chief's son gives signal and raiders
rush into village, remove ladders of kivas, and throw firewood down.
They throw firebrand into kivas and then Spanish pepper on fire.
Meanwhile people of Wálpi and Mishóngnovi take younger women, maidens
and children and move off with them. Older women are killed. Chief of
Aoátovi and his son are both destroyed with others in kiva. Village is
not destroyed. Raiders return and halt at Skeleton Mound. Oraíbi claim
right to select prisoners first. Others refuse to give up women and
maidens, and many younger and prettier ones are killed. Others are taken
to different villages, and that is why so many Aoátovi people are now
found there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 104.--The Destruction of Aoátovi.](toth216)
