[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth087)  [Next](toth089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

## 85. THE SQUIRREL AND THE CHIPMUNK. <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_161)

A long time ago the Squirrel and the Chipmunk lived near the Nose Gulch
(Pongóyakvöcö), the Squirrel living on the north side and the Chipmunk
on the south side. The two were good friends and often visited each
other. Near by were some peach orchards, where a certain old man owned a
number of trees, There the two would go every day and eat peaches. The
Chipmunk relished the peaches, while the Squirrel preferred the kernels
from the stone. The Chipmunk would climb the trees, break open the
peaches, and eating the flesh of the peaches, throw down the seeds to
the Squirrel; or the Chipmunk would also throw down peaches, which the
Squirrel would put in its mouth and carry to a certain place on the
rock, where the two afterwards would feast on them.

They were careful that the owner of the peach orchard would not find
them there, because they knew that the latter made very desperate
efforts, to capture and kill them. One time the Squirrel said to the
Chipmunk: "We ought to have a little dance some time. When you go ho-.me
you try to make a song and then come and sing it to me. and then when we
go to eat peaches again we shall have a little dance there and sing the
little song." So the Chipmunk went home and thought over the matter and
tried very hard to compose a song. Finally he concluded to make a song
about his friend, the Squirrel, and when he was done he went over and
sang it to the Squirrel. The latter at first was not very much pleased
and said: "Why you have song-tied me, you have made a song about me."
"Yes," the Chipmunk said, "I did not know what to sing, and as we always
go and eat peaches together and have such a good time there and then lie
down on the rock together, I thought I would compose a song about that."
This satisfied the Squirrel. They then practiced the song together,
which was as follows:

Lakana, lakana!  
Squirrel, squirrel!  
Oyu nalaa,  
Satisfied alone.  
Oatu owaka  
(The) rock on top  
Pushickatcii--  
Lying stretched out;  
Hinahina, hinahina.

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

You have spoken correctly, the Squirrel said, "we are living in
plenty.'' Hereupon they went to the peach orchard again to eat peaches
but found the old man in the orchard, so they waited a little while
until he had done his work and had gone to sleep under one of the trees.
They then carried a great many peaches as usual, to the place on the
rock where they generally feasted, and after they had filled themselves
they had a little dance, singing their song. They stood on their hind
legs holding their front paws upward. The old man awoke from the noise
of the singing, and when he saw, them he at once knew that they were the
culprits who destroyed and carried away his peaches, so he ran towards
them, saying: "Aha, why are you making noise? I have found you. You are
naughty, and I am going to kill you," and saying this he tried to climb
the rock upon which they were. They jumped down, however, and both
rushed into the house of the Squirrel at the foot of the rock. The old
man followed them and when he saw where they had gone, he waited. The
two were very happy and laughed at their pursuer. The Chipmunk looked up
and said: ''Aha, there he is watching us. I am going to get out, pass
him, and run to my house. He cannot catch me." "All right," the Squirrel
said, "try it." So the Chipmunk, rushed out. The man ran after it
furiously, trying to kill it, and had almost overtaken it when the
Chipmunk had reached its house and rushed into it,

After that the two did not fear the old man and continued to live off
his peach orchard, being careful, however, that he did not catch them.
And so ever since the Squirrel and Chipmunk are not very much afraid of
the Hopi and destroy and eat their peaches, Had the old man at that time
killed the two, such would not be the case now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_161"></span>[221:1](toth088.htm#fr_163) Told by Qowáwaima
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 86. A Bet Between the Cooyoko and the Fox](toth089)
