[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth112)  [Next](toth114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 110. THE EARLY SPANISH MISSIONS AT ORAÍBI. <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_199)

A long time ago the Oraíbi were living in their village. The Spaniards
often made inroads upon them and warred against them. Finally they made
peace with each other and the Spaniards requested that they be permitted
to live in Oraíbi. The Hopi consented, so they hunted a place where the
Spaniards could build their house, and selected a place north of the
village of Oraíbi, where the ruins of the old Spanish buildings may
still be seen. Here the Hopi assisted them in building their house. They
got the stone for them and helped them to build their house, which the
old people say was built in a spiral or snail-house shaped form, there
being four spirals. In the center of the spiral-shaped construction was
the house, or rather kiva, as the Hopi call it in their tales. Here,
tradition says, the Spaniards withdrew, especially in winter when it was
cold. Coming out of this kiva they had to go around four times through
the long winding hallway which ended in the square house with four
rooms. From this house the egress or ingress was made through doors,
while from the place in the center the Hopi say they came out through
the roof.

Soon another house, which tradition calls an "assembly house," was built
north-east of this structure. This large house had a tower in which
bells were suspended. When this assembly house was finished, the
Spaniards called all the people from the village, and when they had
assembled at their house, they told them that they should ,all go to the
new, large assembly house, and when they had done so the Tûtáachi told
them that he was going to wash their heads (baptize them). They asked
him what that was, what that meant. He told them that that was something
very good. So they consented and he poured a little water on the heads
of those present'. After this the Tûtáachi called another Tûtáachi from
Basoi, <span id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_200) who came with a number of
others and brought clothing and shoes for the Hopi. The shoes

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

were made of leather, the clothing of some gray woolen stuff. The things
were brought on carts with heavy wooden wheels, but there was no iron on
them,

It seemed that this Tûtáachi was to be the assistant of the one living
in Oraíbi, at least the new arrival remained in Oraíbi. The Hopi then
had to assemble in the assembly house on Sundays, where the Tûtáachis,
or priests, spoke to them. Soon they asked the Hopi to work for them.
The water in the springs around Oraíbi not being good, they requested
them to get drinking water for them from Mû'enkape, which is far away.
The Oraíbi soon got tired of this and sometimes, instead of going to
Mû'enkape, they went to Tûhciva, a spring south of the mesa on which the
sun shrine is situated, about three miles south-east of Oraíbi. But the
priests soon found out the deception, and were angry. They soon set the
inhabitants of Oraíbi to work at making cisterns, and the Hopi
themselves were pleased with this, as they were now not requested to got
water so often from the distance.

The Spaniards also soon brought cattle, and the Oraíbi would
occasionally buy calves from them for corn. Some of the cattle were very
gentle and were used to drag logs to the village, which the Hopi had to
get for the Spaniards from Kí'shiwuu, fifty or sixty miles north-east.
The deep cuts and ruts in the rocks north-east of Oraíbi where many logs
were dragged up may still be seen to-day. Some also had to get logs from
the San Francisco Mountains (near Flagstaff), but as parts of the road
from there were very sandy, not so many were gotten from that place as
from Kí'shiwuu.

Thus the Spaniards kept the Hopi at work in various ways, and they were
not bad to them at first. For four years everything went along well, and
it rained often too, so that there was water in the cisterns; but at the
end of four years things began to change. The priests commenced to
forbid the Hopi to have Katcina dances and to make báhos. They demanded
of them to attend the meetings in the assembly house, and they did not
let them concern themselves about the clouds and the rain, and that year
(the fifth) it was very warm and very dry. The Hopi began to be very
tired and did not plant much that year, so the chiefs called a council
and they talked the matter over. "We are not getting along well," they
said to each other, "we are not happy. It does not rain. Let us try it
with báhos again. The Hopi have always had it that way, and known it
that way, to make báhos for the clouds." So they again began to have
ceremonies, each fraternity with its own altar, and they made báhos, but
did not tell the priests about it. They deposited the prayer-offerings

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

in the different directions, but it did not rain. So the chiefs and
leaders were very much discouraged. Their "fathers," as they had to call
the Spanish priests, demanded food from them, and yet they had very
little to eat themselves, only some votáka (corn-meal mush).

So they decided to try the Katcinas again, and they arranged a Katcina
dance, but one of the Hopi went and informed the padres that they were
going to have a Katcina dance again; then they had the dance, and it
rained some, but very little. The padres in the meanwhile continued to
oppress the Hopi and made them work very hard, and demanded
contributions of food, etc., from them. They would also disregard all
the feelings of the Hopi as to their own (the Hopi's) religion. They
would trample under foot the chastity of the Hopi women and maidens. So
finally the Hopi became angry and began to discuss the advisability of
getting rid of their oppressors. One time a number of the latter went
away, east somewhere, to get some supplies, clothing, etc., it is said,
so that the padre remained at the Mission alone. When the Hopi saw that
the priest's assistants had left, they met in council in the Nashebe,
the chief's kiva, and talked the matter over. Some were in favor of
going and killing the padre, others objected, saying that certainly the
Spaniards would then come and punish them. But finally the party that
was in favor of getting rid of the oppressors prevailed, and they
concluded that they would stand the oppression no longer, but get rid of
the priest. The question then came up, Who should go and kill him?
Nobody wanted to do it. Finally the Badger clan volunteered to go. "You
are not brave," they said, "we shall go."

So they proceeded to the Mission and knocked at the door. The padre was
asleep and after they had roused him up he refused to open the door at
first, but when they continued to knock he opened the door, whereupon
they rushed into the room, grabbed him, dragged him out of the house,
threw him on the ground and then cut his throat, one holding his head.
Hereupon they carried the corpse eastward down the mesa, where they
threw it into a gulch and piled stones upon it. Hereupon they waited for
some time to see whether anybody would come, or what would happen.

The killing of the padre in Oraíbi the signal for the other villages to
get rid of the padres that lived at those mesas also. The Hopi then
waited, expecting that Spaniards would come and avenge their brethren,
but no one came, so they destroyed the houses of the Spaniards, divided
their logs and timbers, and used them for their kivas. Some of the
smaller bells are still owned by the Agave Fraternity.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

No one has ever come to punish the Hopi for killing the padres. The
places where the latter had their large sheep corrals call still be
seen, especially near the spring Nawáivöcö, and at a place about four
miles south of Oraíbi. From that time on the Hopi again had their dances
and their sacred altar performances in their kivas.

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

# ABSTRACTS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[268:1](toth113.htm#fr_201) Told by Wíkvaya
(Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_200"></span>[268:2](toth113.htm#fr_202) This place could
not be identified and I doubt whether the name was given correctly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1.--Origin Myth.](toth114)
