[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msh08)  [Next](msh10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V. THE PROBLEM OF THE VICEGERENT IN IBN RUSHD AND IBN <u>T</u>UFAIL

After this it will cause no surprise that it is this figure of the
Vicegerent (*al-Mu<u>t</u>â\` . . . alladhî amara bi ta<u>h</u>rîk
il-samâwât*) who excited the curiosity and suspicion of thinkers in the
century after Ghazzâlî's death. The passage is at least twice singled
out, once by Ibn Rushd in the treatise already cited, and once by Ibn
<u>T</u>ufail in his <u>H</u>ayy ibn Yaq<u>z</u>ân.

\(1\) Ibn Rushd uses the passage to level at Ghazzâlî a direct
accusation of gravest hypocritical insincerity over a matter which
Ghazzâlî had ostentatiously singled out as the prime test of orthodoxy,
namely.. the doctrine of *emanation*. According to Ibn Rushd the passage
about the Vicegerent was the explicit teaching of this doctrine of the
Philosophers, for which,

{p. 18}

elsewhere, Ghazzâlî can find no words strong enough to express his
censure and contempt. The words of Ibn Rushd are as follows:

"Then he comes on with his book known as *Mishkât al-Anwâr*, and
mentions therein all the grades of the Knowers of Allah; and says that
all of them are veiled save those who believe that Allah is not the
mover of the First Heaven, *He being the One from Whom this mover of the
First Heaven emanated*: which is an open declaration on his part of the
tenet of the philosophers' schools in the science of theology; though he
has said in several places that their science of theology (as distinct
from their other sciences) is a set of conjectures."\[1\]

It is not within the scope of this Introduction to follow in detail the
evidence for and against the truth of this radical accusation. This has
been done at length and with considerable minuteness in the monograph in
*Der Islâm*, which has already been cited (pp. 133-145). The

\[1. Op. cit., ed. Müller, p. 21, Cairo edition, p. 59. The treatise was
written before A.H. 575; date of *Mishkât* c. 500.\]

{p. 19}

reader must be referred to that; and it must suffice here to say that
after the full consideration of all the evidence the verdict given
there. is Not Guilty. On the other hand, the existence of an esoteric
doctrine in regard to this Vicegerent and his function is undeniable
(and undenied); and it is clear, from the comparison of the *Mishkât*
itself with the *Munqidh*, that that doctrine differed vitally from the
one professed by Ghazzâlî exoterically (*Munqidh*, p. 11). Ghazzâlî
himself, in a passage of remarkable candour,\[1\] admits that every
"Perfect" man has three sets of opinions (*madhâhib*), (a) those of his
own environment, (b) those he teaches to inquirers according as they are
able to receive them, and (c) those which he believes in secret between
himself and Allah, and never mentions except to an inner circle of
friends or students.

Ibn Rushd's accusation was an attempt to identify the figure of the
Vicegerent, al-Mu<u>t</u>â\` with that of *Al Ma\`lûl al Awwal*, the
First Caused, in the emanational scheme of the Neoplatonizing\[2\]
philosophers of Islâm, with

\[1. *Mîzân al \`Amal*, p. 214.

2\. The unquestionable Neoplatonism of much of the forms and expression
of Ghazzâlî's thought, if not of the thought itself {footnote p. 20}
*Contd*. (see especially pp. 15, 16. 29, 47 seq.\]), exposed him in a
very special way to this charge of emanational pantheism. And it cannot
have made it easier for him to steer clear of such dangers in fact.\]

{p. 20}

al-Fârâbi and Ibn Sinâ at their head. This was the Demiurge, the Being
who first emanates from the Absolute Being, and mediates between It and
all the lower stages or relational existence, with their increasing
limitedness and grossness, thus relieving the predicateless Absolute
from all part in the creation *or administration* of the universe.

There can be no doubt that whatever Ghazzâlî's doctrine of the
Vicegerent was, and whatever else his esoteric doctrine contained, the
emanational theory formed no part of that doctrine. For this particular
piece of pseudo-metaphysics he appears to have had a very particular
dislike and contempt; and if Ibn Rushd was really serious in levelling
his accusation he can hardly be acquitted of being blinded by his bitter
prejudice against "Abû <u>H</u>âmid". The only possible ground for Ibn
Rushd's accusation which I have been able to discover is as follows:--it
is a fact that the extreme (*ghulât*) Imâmites did identify

al-Rû<u>h</u> "The Spirit of

{p. 21}

Allah" with the First Emanation\[1\]. If, as is contended hereafter,
Ghazzâlî identified *al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`* with

Al-Rû<u>h</u>, and Ibn Rushd was aware of this, he may have thought, or
been pleased to think, that Ghazzâlî therefore thought that
*al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`* was the First Emanation. This would be an indirect
confirmation of the identification which it is attempted presently to
prove, namely, *al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`* =

al-Rû<u>h</u>.

\(2\) We now pass to the other criticism of the passage, by Ibn Rushd's
contemporary Ibn <u>T</u>ufail, in the introduction to his philosophical
romance entitled *<u>H</u>ayy Ibn Yaq<u>z</u>ân*.\[2\]

Ibn <u>T</u>ufâil's allusion to this perplexing passage is as follows:--

"Some later writers\[3\] have fancied they have found something
tremendous in that passage of his that occurs at the end of al-Mishkât,
which (they think) impales Ghazzâlî on a dilemma from which there is no
escape. I mean where, after speaking of the various degrees of the

\[1. Massignon, *<u>H</u>allâj*, p. 661.

2\. Ed. Gautier, pp. 14-15, transl. 12-14.

3\. Or "a later writer" presumably Ibn Rushd himself, in the passage
already cited and discussed.\]

{p. 22}

Light-Veiled, and then going on to speak of the true Attainers, he tells
us that these Attainers have discovered that this Existing One possesses
an attribute which negates unmitigated Unity; insisting that it
necessarily follows from this that Ghazzâlî believed that the Absolute
Being has within His Essence some sort of plurality: which God forbid!"

The excursus on this passage in the article cited from Der Islâm (pp.
145-151) can only be summarized here. It seems to have escaped the
critics quoted by Ibn <u>T</u>ufail, that the Unveiled, according to
Ghazzâlî himself, *abandoned* the position of the last of the
Light-Veiled just because of this dread, viz. that the identification of
*al-Mutâ\`* with Allah would endanger "the unmitigated Unity" of Deity.
Ibn <u>T</u>ufail himself, though he admits the serious contradictions
which appear in Ghazzâlî's books, flatly refuses to see in this passage
anything so monstrous, or anything sinister at all.

Unfortunately he does not give us his own exegesis of the passage; but
it may perhaps be inferred from his own schematization of the

{p. 23}

grades of being. In this he makes elaborate use of the schema of
reflectors, and reflectors of reflectors, which Ghazzâlî has already
suggested in this book (pp. \[15, 16\]). "The essences of the
Intelligences of the Spheres" are represented as successive, graded
reflections of the Divine Essence. The highest of them is not the
essence of the One Real nor is he the Sphere itself, nor is he other
than both. He is, as it were, the image of the sun which appears in a
polished mirror; for that image is neither the sun, nor the mirror, nor
other than them both." It is probable that Ibn <u>T</u>ufail, who
professed to have won through to his position after studying al-Ghazzâlî
and Ibn <u>S</u>înâ (the juxtaposition is singular!), would have more or
less equated this conception of the highest Essence of the Intelligences
of the Spheres with the conception of *al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`* in the
*Mishkât*, though he says nothing about the business of Heaven-moving in
relation to this Being. It need not follow that al-Ghazzâlî would have
accepted this explanation\[1\]; though both men were evidently striving
equally to avoid a total pantheism, and both

\[1. Though his "mirror" schema in Mishkât, p. \[15\], is near Ibn
<u>T</u>ufâil's meaning.\]

{p. 24}

disbelieved in the emanational theory as taught by al-Fârâbî and Ibn
Sinâ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. One Solution Of The Problem Of The Vicegerent](msh10)
