[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msh15)  [Next](msh17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PART I.--LIGHT, AND LIGHTS: PRELIMINARY STUDIES

1\.

"Light" as Physical Light; as the Eye; as the Intelligence

The Real Light is Allâh; and the name "light" is otherwise only
predicated metaphorically and conveys no real meaning.

To explain this theme: you must know that the word light is employed
with a threefold signification: the first \[p. 4\] by the Many, the
second by the Few, the third by the Fewest of the Few. Then you must
know the various grades of light that relate to the two latter classes,
and the degrees of the reality appertaining to these grades, in order
that it may be disclosed to you, as these grades become clear, that
ALLAH is the highest and the ultimate Light: and further, as the reality
appertaining to each grade is revealed, that Allâh alone is the Real,
the True Light, and beside Him there is no light at all.

{p. 80}

Take now the first signification. Here the word light indicates a
phenomenon. Now a phenomenon, or appearance, is a relative term, for a
thing necessarily appears to, or is concealed from, something other than
itself; and thus its appearance and its non-appearance are both
relative. Further, its appearance and its nonappearance are relative to
perceptive faculties; and of these the most powerful and the most
conspicuous, in the opinion of the Many, are the senses, one of which is
the sense of sight. Further, things in relation to this sense of sight
fall under these categories: (1) that which by itself is not visible, as
dark bodies; (2) that which is by itself visible, but cannot make
visible anything else, such as luminaries like the stars, and fire
before it blazes up; (3) that which is by itself visible, and also makes
visible, like the sun and the moon, and fire when it blazes up, and
lamps. Now it is in regard to this third category that the name "light"
is given: sometimes to that which is effused from these luminaries and
falls on the exterior of opaque bodies, as when we say "The earth is
lighted up", or "The light of the sun falls on the earth", or "The
lamp-light falls on

{p. 81}

wall or on garment"; and sometimes to the luminaries themselves, because
they are self-luminous. In sum, then, light is an expression for that
which *is by itself visible and* \[p. 5\] *makes other things visible*,
like the sun. This is the definition of, and the reality concerning,
light, according to its first signification.

We have seen that the very essence of light is appearance to a
percipient; and that perception depends on the existence of two
things--light and a seeing eye. For, though light is that which appears
and causes-to-appear, it neither appears nor causes-to-appear to the
blind. Thus percipient spirit is as important as perceptible light *quâ*
necessary element of perception; nay, 'tis the more important, in that
it is the percipient spirit which apprehends and through which
apprehension takes place; whereas light is not apprehensive, neither
does apprehension takes place through it, but merely when it is present.
By the word light, in fact, is more properly understood that visualizing
light which we call the eye. Thus men apply the word light to the light
of the eye, and say of the weak-sighted that "*the light of his eye* is

{p. 82}

weak", and of the blear-eyed that "*the light of his vision* is
impaired," and of the blind that "*his light* is quenched." Similarly of
the pupil of the eye it is said that it concentrates "the light of
vision, and strengthens it, the eye-lashes being given by the divine
wisdom a black colour, and made to compass the eye every way round
about, in order to concentrate its "light." And of the white of the eye
it is said that it disperses the "light of the eye" and weakens it, so
that to look long at a bright white surface, or still more at the sun's
light, dazzles "the light of the eye" and effaces it, just as the weak
are effaced by the side of the strong. You understand, then, that
percipient spirit is called light; and why it is so called; and why it
is more properly so called. And this is the second signification, that
employed by the Few.

You must know, further, that the light of physical sight is \[p. 6\]
marked by several kinds of defects. It sees others but not itself.
Again, it does not see what is very distant, nor what is very near, nor
what is behind a veil. It sees the exterior of things only, not their
interior; the parts, not the whole; things finite, not

{p. 83}

things infinite. It makes many mistakes in its seeing, for what is large
appears to its vision small; what is far, near; what is at rest, at
motion; what is in motion, at rest. Here are seven defects inseparably
attached to the physical eye. If, then, there be such an Eye as is free
from all these physical defects, would not *it*, I ask, more properly be
given the name of light? Know, then, that there is in the mind of man an
eye, characterized by just this perfection--that which is variously
called Intelligence, Spirit, Human Soul. But we pass over these terms,
for the multiplicity of the terms deludes the man of small intelligence
into imagining a corresponding multiplicity of ideas. We mean simply
that by which the rational man is distinguished from the infant in arms,
from the brute beast, and from the lunatic. Let us call it the
*Intelligence*, following the current terminology. So, then, the
intelligence is more properly called Light than is the eye, just because
in capacity it transcends these seven defects.

Take the first. The eye does not behold *itself*, but the intelligence
does perceive itself as

{p. 84}

well as others; and it perceives itself as endowed with knowledge,
power, etc., and perceives its own knowledge and perceives its knowledge
of its own knowledge, and its know, ledge of its knowledge of its own
knowledge, and so on *ad infinitum*. Now, this is a property which
cannot conceivably be attributed to anything which perceives by means of
a physical instrument like the eye. Behind this, however, \[p. 7\] lies
a mystery the unfolding of which would take long.

Take, now, the second defect: the eye does not see what is very near to
it nor what is very far away from it; but to the intelligence near and
far are indifferent. In the twinkling of an eye it ascends to the
highest heaven above, in another instant to the confines of earth
beneath. Nay, when the facts are realized, intelligence is revealed as
transcending the very idea of "far" and "near," which occur between
material bodies; these compass not the precincts of its holiness, for it
is a pattern or sample of the attributes of Allâh. Now the sample must
be commensurate with the original, even though it does not rise to the

{p. 85}

degree of equality\[1\] with it. And this may move you to set your mind
to work upon the true meaning of the tradition: "*Allah created Adam
after His own likeness*." But I do not think fit at the present time to
go more deeply into the same.

The third defect: the eye does not perceive what is behind the veil, but
the intelligence moves freely about the Throne, the Sedile, and
everything beyond the veil of the Heavens, and likewise about the Host
Supernal, and the Realm Celestial, just as much as about its own world,
and its propinquate, (that is its own) kingdom. The realities of things
stand unveiled to the intelligence. Its only veil is one which it
assumes of its own sake, which resembles the veil that the eye assumes
of its own accord in the closing of its eyelids. But we shall explain
this more fully in the third chapter of this work.

The fourth defect: the eye perceives only the exterior surfaces of
things, but not their interior; may, the mere moulds and forms, not the
realities; while intelligence breaks through

\[1. Reading \#\#\# which both sense and rhyme demand.\]

{p. 86}

into the inwardness of things and into their secrets; apprehends the
reality of things and their essential spirits; \[p. 8\] elicits their
causes and laws--from what they had origin, how they were created, of
how many ideal forms they are composed, what rank of Being they occupy,
what is their several relation to all other created things, and much
else, the exposition of which would take very long; wherein I think good
to be brief.

The fifth: the eye sees only a fraction of what exists, for all
concepts, and many percepts, are beyond its vision; neither does it
apprehend sounds, nor yet smells, nor tastes, nor sensations of hot and
cold, nor the percipient faculties, by which I mean the faculties of
hearing, of smelling, of tasting. nay, all the inner psychical qualities
are unseen to it, joy, pleasure, displeasure, grief, pain, delight,
love, lust, power, will, knowledge, and innumerable other existences.
Thus it is narrow in its scope, limited in its field of action, unable
to pass the confines of the world of colour and form, which are the
grossest of all entities; for natural bodies are in themselves the
grossest of the

{p. 87}

categories of being, and colour and form are the grossest of their
properties. But the domain of intelligence is the entirety of existence,
for it both apprehends the entities we have enumerated, and has free
course among all others beside (and they are the major part), passing
upon them judgments that are both certain and true. To it, therefore,
are the inward secrets of things manifest, and the hidden forms of
things clear. Then tell me by what right the physical eye is given
equality with the intelligence in claiming the name of Light? No verily!
it is only relatively light; but in relation to the intelligence it is
darkness. Sight is but one of the spies of Intelligence \[p. 9\] who
sets it to watch the grossest of his treasures, namely, the treasury of
colours and forms; bids it carry reports about the same to its Lord, who
then judges thereof in accordance with the dictates of his penetration
and his judgment. Likewise are all the other faculties but
Intelligence's spies--imagination, phantasy, thought, memory,
recollection; and behind them are servitors and retainers, constrained
to his service in this present world of his. These, I say, he
constrains,

{p. 88}

and among these he moves at will, as freely as monarch constrains his
vassals to his service, yea, and more freely still. But to expound this
would take us long, and we have already treated of it in the book of my
*I<u>h</u>yâ\` al-\`Ulûm*, entitled "The Marvels of the Mind".

The sixth: the eye does not see what is infinite. What it sees is the
attributes of known bodies, and these can only be conceived as finite.
But the intelligence apprehends concepts, and concepts cannot be
conceived as finite. True, in respect of the knowledge which has
actually been attained, the content actually presented to the
intelligence is no more than finite, but potentially it does apprehend
that which is infinite. It would take too long to explain this fully,
but if you desire an example, here is one from arithmetic. In this
science the intelligence apprehends the series of integers, which series
is infinite; further, it apprehends the coefficients of two, three, and
all the other integers, and to these also no limit can be conceived; and
it apprehends all the different relations between numbers, and to these
also no limit can be conceived; and finally it apprehends

{p. 89}

its own knowledge of a thing, and its knowledge of its knowledge of its
knowledge of that thing; and so on, potentially, to infinity.

The seventh: the eye apprehends the large as small. It sees the sun the
size of a bowl, and the stars like silver-pieces scattered upon a carpet
of azure. But intelligence apprehends that the stars \[p. 10\] and the
sun are larger, times upon times, than the earth. To the eye the stars
seem to be standing still, and the boy to be getting no taller. But the
intelligence sees the boy moving constantly as he grows; the shadow
lengthening constantly; and the stars moving every instant, through
distances of many miles. As the Prophet said to Gabriel, asking: "Has
the sun moved?" And Gabriel. answered: "No--Yes." "How so?" asked he;
and the other replied: "Between my saying No and Yes it has moved a
distance equal to five hundred years." And so the mistakes of vision are
manifold, but the intelligence transcends them all.

Perhaps you will say, we see those who are Possessed of intelligence
making mistakes

{p. 90}

nevertheless, I reply, their imaginative and phantastic faculties often
pass judgments and form convictions which they think are the judgments
of the intelligence. The error is therefore to be attributed to those
lower faculties. See my account of all these faculties in my *Mî\`âr
al-\`Ilm* and *Ma<u>h</u>akk al-Na<u>z</u>ar*. But when the intelligence
is separated from the deceptions of the phantasy and the imagination,
error on its part is inconceivable; it sees things as they are. This
separation is, however, difficult, and only attains perfection after
death. Then is error unveiled, and then are mysteries brought to light,
and each one meets the weal or the woe which he has already laid up for
himself, and "*beholds a Book, which reckons each venial and each mortal
sin, without omitting a single one*".\[1\] In that hour it shall be said
unto him: "*We have stripped from thee the Veil that covered thee and
thy vision this day is iron*."\[2\] Now that covering Veil is even that
of the imagination and the phantasy; and therefore the man who has been
deluded by his own fancies, his false beliefs, and his vain

\[1. S. 50, 18.

2\. S. 22, 50.\]

{p. 91}

imaginations, replies: "*Our Lord! We have seen Thee and heard Thee!*
\[p.11\] *O send us back and we will do good*.\[1\] *Verily now we have
certain knowledge*!"

From all which you understand that the eye may more justly be called
Light than the light (so called) which is apprehended by sense; and
further that the intelligence should more properly be called Light than
the eye. It would be even true to say that between these two there
exists so great a difference in value, that we may, nay we must,
consider only the INTELLIGENCE as deserving the name Light at all.

2\.

The Koran as the Sun of the Intelligence

Further you must notice here, that while the intelligence of men does
truly see, the things it sees are not all upon the same plane. Its
knowledge is in some cases, so to speak, *given*, that is, present in
the intelligence, as in the case of axiomatic truths, e.g. that the same
thing cannot be both with and without an origin; or existent and
non-existent; or that the same proposition cannot be both true and
false; or that the judgment which is true

\[1. S. 12, 32.\]

{p. 92}

of one thing is true of an identically similar thing; or that, granted
the existence of the particular, the existence of the universal must
necessarily follow.

For example, granted the existence of black, the existence of "colour"
follows; and the same with "man" and "animal"; but the converse does not
present itself to the intelligence as necessarily true; for "colour"
does not involve "black", nor does "animal" involve "man". And there are
many other true propositions, some necessary, some contingent, and some
impossible. Other propositions, again, do not find the intelligence
invariably with them, when they recur to it, but have to shake it up,
arouse it, strike flint on steel, in order to elicit its spark.
Instances of such propositions are the theorems of speculation, to
apprehend which the intelligence has to be aroused by the dialectic
(*kalâm*) of the philosophers. Thus it is when the light of philosophy
dawns that man sees actually, after having before seen potentially. Now
the greatest \[p. 12\] of philosophies is the word (*kalâm*) of Allah in
general, and the Koran in particular.

{p. 93}

Therefore the verses of the Koran, in relation to intelligence, have the
value of sunlight in relation to the eyesight, to wit, it is by this
sunlight that the act of seeing is accomplished. And therefore the Koran
is most properly of all called Light, just as the light of the sun is
called light. The Koran, then, is represented to us by the sun, and the
intelligence by the Light of the Eye, and hereby we understand the
meaning of the verse, which said: "*Believe then on Allâh and His
Prophet, and the Light which We caused to descend*;"\[1\] and again:
"*There hath come a sure proof from your Lord, and We have caused a
clear Light to descend*."\[2\]

3\.

The Worlds Visible and Invisible: with their Lights

You have now realized that there are two kinds of eye, an external and
an internal; that the former belongs to one world, the World of Sense,
and that internal vision belongs to another world altogether, the World
of the Realm Celestial; and that each of these two eyes has a sun and a
light whereby its seeing is perfected; and that one of these suns is
external, the

\[1. S. 64,8.

2\. S. 4, 174.\]

{p. 94}

other internal, the former belonging to the seen world, viz. the sun,
which is an object of sense. perception, and the other internal,
belonging to the world of the Realm Celestial, viz. the Koran, and other
inspired books of Allah. If, then, this has been disclosed to you
thoroughly and entirely, then one of the doors of this Realm Celestial
has been opened unto you. In that world there are marvels, in comparison
with which this world of sight is utterly condemned. He who never fares
to that world, but allows the limitations of life in this lower world of
sense to settle upon him, is still a( brute beast, an excommunicate from
that which constitutes us men; gone astray is he more than any brute
beast, for to the brute are not vouched the wings of flight, on which to
fly away unto that invisible world. "Such men," the Koran says, "are
cattle, nay, are yet further astray!"\[1\] \[p. 13\] As the rind is to
the fruit; as the mould or the form in relation to the spirit, as
darkness in relation to light; as infernal to supernal; so is this World
of Sense in relation to the world of the Realm Celestial. For this

\[1. S. 7, 178.\]

{p. 95}

reason the latter is called the World Supernal or the World of Spirit,
or the World of Light, in contrast with the World Beneath, the World of
Matter and of Darkness. But do not imagine that I mean by the World
Supernal the World of the \[Seven\] Heavens, though they are "above" in
respect of part of our world of sense-perception. These heavens are
equally present to our apprehension, and that of the lower animals. But
a man finds the doors of the Realm Celestial closed to him, neither does
he become of or belonging to that Realm unless "*this earth to him be
changed into that which is not earth, and likewise the heavens*"\[1\];
unless, in short, all that comes within the ken of his sense and his
imagination, including the visible heavens, cause to be his earth, and
his heaven come to be all that transcends his sense. This is the first
Ascension for every Pilgrim, who has set out on his Progress to approach
the Presence Dominical. Thus mankind was consigned back to the lowest of
the low, and must thence rise to the world of highest height. Not so is
it with the Angels; for they are part of the World of the

\[1. S. 14, 48.\]

{p. 96}

Realm Celestial, floating ever in the Presence of the Transcendence,
whence, they gaze down upon our World Inferior. Thereof spoke the
Prophet in the Tradition: "*Allâh created the creation in darkness, then
sent an effusion of His light upon it*," and "*Allâh hath Angels, beings
who know the works often better than they know them themselves*." Now
the Prophets, when their ascents reached unto the World of the Realm
Celestial, attained the uttermost goal, and from thence looked down upon
a totality of the World Invisible; for he who is in the World of the
Realm Celestial is with Allâh, and hath the keys \[p. 14\] of the
Unseen. I mean that from where he is the causes of existing things
descend into the World of Sense; for the world of sense is one of the
effects of yonder world of cause, resulting from it just as the shadow
results from a body, or as fruit from that which fructuates, or as the
effect from a cause. Now the key to this knowledge of the effect is
sought and found in the cause. And for this reason the World of Sense is
a type of the World of the Realm Celestial, as will appear when we
explain the NICHE, the LAMP, and the TREE. For the thine, compared is in
some sort parallel, and

{p. 97}

bears resemblance, to the thing compared therewith, whether that
resemblance be remote or near: a matter, again, which is unfathomably
deep, so that whoever has scanned its inner meaning had revealed to him
the verities of the types in the Koran by an easy way.

I said that everything that sees self and not-self deserves more
properly the name of Light, while that which adds to these two functions
the function of making the not-self visible, still more properly
deserves the name of Light than that which has no effect whatever beyond
itself. *This* is the light which merits the name of "*Lamp
Illuminant*",\[1\] because its light is effused upon the not-self. Now
this is the property of the transcendental prophetic spirit, for through
its means are effused the illuminations of the sciences upon the created
world. Thus is explained the name given by Allâh to Mohammed,
"*Illuminant*."\[2\] Now all the Prophets are Lamps, and so are the
Learned-but the difference between them is incalculable.

\[1. S. 33, 46.

2\. S. 46, 33.\]

{p. 98}

4\.

These Lights as Lamps Terrestrial and Celestial: with their Order and
Grades

If it is proper to call that from which the light of vision emanates a
"Lamp Illuminant", then that from which the Lamp is itself lit may \[p.
15\] meetly be symbolized by *Fire*. Now all these Lamps Terrestrial
were originally lit from the Light Supernal alone; and of the
transcendental Spirit of prophecy it is written that "*Its oil were
well-nigh luminous though fire touched it not*"; but becomes "*very
light upon light*" when touched by that Fire.\[1\] Assuredly, then, the
kindling source of those Spirits Terrestrial is the divine Spirits
Supernal, described by Ali and Ibn Abbas, when they said that "Allâh
hath an Angel with countenances seventy thousand, to each countenance
seventy thousand mouths, in each mouth seventy thousand tongues
wherewith he laudeth God most High". This is he who is contrasted with
all the angelic host, in the words: "*On the day whereon* THE SPIRIT
*ariseth and the Angels, rank on rank*."\[2\] These Spirits Celestial,
then, if they be considered as the kindling-source of the

\[1. S. 24, 35; see p. \[45\] of translation.

2\. S. 28, 78.\]

{p. 99}

Lamps Terrestrial, can be compared alone with "*Fire*".\[1\] And that
kindling is not perceived save "*on the Mountain's side*".\[2\]

Let us now take these Lights Celestial from which are lit the Lamps
Terrestrial, and let us rank them in the order in which they themselves
are kindled, the one from the other. Then the nearest to the
fountain-head will be of all others the worthiest of the name of Light
for he is the highest in order and rank. Now the analogy for this graded
order in the world of sense can only be seized by one who sees the light
of the moon coming through the window of a house, falling on a mirror
fixed upon a wall, which reflects that light on to another wall, whence
it in turn is reflected on the floor, so that the floor becomes
illuminated therefrom. The light upon the floor is owed to that upon the
wall, and the light on the wail to that in the mirror, and the light in
the mirror to that from the moon, and the light in the moon to that from
the sun, \[16\] for it is the sun that radiates its light upon the moon.
Thus these four lights are ranged one above the other, each

\[1. S. 28, 29.

2\. S. 28, 29: also 19, 53.\]

{p. 100}

one more perfect than the other; and each one has a certain rank and a
proper degree which it never passes beyond. I would have you know, then,
that it has been revealed to the men of Insight that even so are the
Lights of the Realm Celestial ranged in an order; and that the highest
is the one who is nearest to the Ultimate Light. It may well be, then,
that the rank of Seraphiel is above the rank of Gabriel; and that among
them is that Nighest to Allâh, he whose rank comes nighest to the
Presence Dominical which is the Fountain-head of all these lights; and
that among these is a Nighest to Man, and that between these two are
grades innumerable, whereof all that is known is that they are many, and
that they are ordered in rank and grade, and that as they have described
themselves, so they are indeed--"*Not one of us but has his determined
place and standing*,"\[1\] and "*We are verily the ranked ones; we are
they in whose mouth is Praise*."\[1\]

5\.

The Source of all these Grades of Light: ALLAH

The next thing I would have you know is

\[1. S. 37, 164-7.\]

{p. 101}

that these degrees of light do not ascend in an infinite series, but
rise to a final Fountain-head who is Light in and by Himself, upon Whom
comes no light from any external source, and from Whom every light is
effused according to, its order and grade. Ask yourself, now whether the
name Light is more due to that which is illumined and borrows its light
from an external source; or that which in itself is luminous,
illuminating all else beside? I do not believe that you can fail to see
the true answer, and thus conclude that the name light is most of all
due to this LIGHT SUPERNAL, above Whom there is no light at all, and
from Whom light descends upon all other things.

Nay, I do not hesitate to say boldly that the term "light" as applied to
aught else than this primary light is purely metaphorical; for all \[p.
17\] others, if considered in themselves, have, in themselves and by
themselves, no light at all. Their light is borrowed from a foreign
source; which borrowed illumination has not any support in itself, only
in something not-itself. But to call the borrower by the same name as
the lender is mere metaphor. Think

{p. 102}

you that the man who borrows riding-habit, saddle, horse, or other
riding beast, and mounts the same when and as the lender appoints, is
actually, or only metaphorically, rich? Or is it the lender who alone is
rich? The latter, assuredly! The borrower remains in himself as poor as
ever, and only of him who made the loan and exacts its return can
richness be predicated--him who gave and can take away. Therefore, the
Real Light is He in Whose hand lies creation and its destinies; He who
first gives the light and afterwards sustains it. He shares with no
other the reality of this name, nor the full title to the same; save in
so far as He calls some other by that name, deigns to call him by it in
the same way as a Liege-Lord deigns to give his vassal a fief, and
therewith bestows on him the title of lord. Now when that vassal
realizes the truth, he understands that both he and his are the property
of his Liege, and of Him alone, a property shared by Him with no partner
in the world.

You now know that Light is summed up in appearing and manifesting, and
you have ascertained the various gradations of the same. You

{p. 103}

must further know that there is no darkness so intense as the darkness
of No-being. For\[1\] a dark thing is called "dark" simply because it
cannot appear to anyone's vision; it never comes to exist for sight,
though it does exist in itself. But that which has no existence for
others nor for itself is assuredly the very extreme of darkness. In
contrast with it is Being, which is, therefore, Light; for unless a
thing is manifest in itself, \[p. 18\] it is not manifest to others.
Moreover, Being is itself divided into that which has being in itself,
and that which derives its being from not-itself. That being of this
latter is borrowed, having no existence by itself. Nay, if it is
regarded in and by itself, it is pure not-being. Whatever being it has
is due to its relation to a not-itself; and this is not real being at
all, as you learned from my parable of the Rich and the Borrowed
Garment. Therefore, Real Being is Allâh most High, even as Real Light is
likewise Allâh.

6\.

The Mystic Verity of Verities

It is from this starting-point that Allâh's gnostics rise from metaphors
to realities, as one

\[1. Reading \#\#\# for \#\#\#.\]

{p. 104}

climbs from the lowlands to the mountains; and at the end of their
Ascent see, as with the direct sight of eye-witnesses, that there is
nothing in existence save Allâh alone, and that "*everything perisheth
except His Countenance, His Aspect*"\[1\] (*wajh*); not that\[2\] it
perisheth at some particular moment, but rather it is sempiternally a
perishing thing, since it cannot be conceived except as perishing. For
each several thing other than Allâh is, when considered in and by
itself, pure not-being; and if considered from the "aspect" (*wajh*) to
which existence flows from the Prime Reality, it is viewed as existing,
but not in itself, solely from the "aspect" which accompanies Him Who
gives it existence. Therefore, the God-aspect is the sole thing in
existence. For everything has two aspects, an aspect to itself and an
aspect to its Lord: in respect of the first, it is Not-being; but in
respect of the God-aspect, it is Being. *Therefore* there is no Existent
except God and the God-aspect, and therefore all things are perishing
except the God-aspect from and to all eternity. These gnostics,
therefore, have no need

\[1. S. 88, 28.

2\. Reading \#\#\#.\]

{p. 105}

await the arising of the Last Uprising in order to hear the Creator
proclaim, "*To whom is the power this day?* *To* ALLAH! *the One, the
Not-to-be-withstood*"\[1\]; \[p. 19\] for that summons is.. pealing in
their ears always and for ever. Neither do they understand by the cry
"Allah is most great" (*Allâhu akbar*) that He is only "greater" than
others. God forbid! For in. all existence there is beside Him none for
Him. to exceed in greatness. No other attains so much as to the degree
of co-existence, or of sequent existence, nay of existence at all,
except from the Aspect that accompanies Him. All existence is,
exclusively, His Aspect. Now it is impossible that He should be
"greater"' than His own Aspect. The meaning is rather that he is too
absolutely Great to be called Greater, or Most Great, by way of relation
or comparison--too Great for anyone, whether Prophet or Angel, to grasp
the real nature of His Greatness. For none knows Allah with a real
knowledge but He Himself; for every, known falls necessarily under the
sway and within the province of the Knower; a state:

\[1. S. 16, 40.\]

{p. 106}

which is the very negation of all Majesty, all "Greatness". The full
proof whereof I have given in my *al-Maq<u>s</u>ad al-Asnâ fî ma\`ânî
asmâ'i llâhi-l <u>H</u>usnâ*.

These gnostics, on their return from their Ascent into the heaven of
Reality, confess with one voice that they saw nought existent there save
the One Real. Some of them, however, arrived at this scientifically, and
others experimentally and subjectively. From these last the plurality of
things fell away in its entirety. They were drowned in the absolute
Unitude, and their intelligences were lost in Its abyss. Therein became
they as dumbfounded things. No capacity remained within them save to
recall ALLAH; yea, not so much as the capacity to recall their own
selves. So there remained nothing with them save ALLAH. They became
drunken with a drunkenness wherein the sway of their own intelligence
disappeared; so that one\[1\] exclaimed, "I am The ONE REAL!" and
another, "Glory be to ME! How great is MY glory!"\[2\] and another,
"Within this robe is nought but Allâh!"\[2\] ... But the words of

\[1. Al-<u>H</u>allâj.

2\. Abû Yazîd al-Bistâmî. See Massignon's *Hallâj*, p. 513.\]

{p. 107}

Lovers Passionate in their intoxication and ecstasy \[p. 20\] must be
hidden away and not spoken of . . . Then when that drunkenness abated
and they came again under the sway of the intelligence, which is Allâh's
balance-scale upon earth, they knew that that had not been actual
Identity, but only something resembling Identity; as in those words of
the Lover at the height of his passion:--

"I am He whom I love and He whom I love is I;  
We are two spirits immanent in one body."\[1\]

For it is possible for a man who has never seen a mirror in his life, to
be confronted suddenly by a mirror, to look into it, and to think that
the form which he sees in the mirror is the form of the mirror itself,
"identical" with it. Another might see wine in a glass, and think that
the wine is just the stain of the glass. And if that thought becomes
with him use and wont, like a fixed idea with him, it absorbs him
wholly, so that he sings:--

"The glass is thin, the wine is clear!  
The twain are alike, the matter is perplexed:

\[1. By al-<u>H</u>allâj.\]

{p. 108}

For 'tis as though there were wine and no wineglass there,  
Or as though mere were wine-glass and nought of wine!"

He there is a difference between saying, "The wine is the wine-glass,"
and saying, "'tis as though it were the wine-glass." Now, when this
state prevails, it is called in relation to him who experiences it,
Extinction, nay, Extinction of Extinction, for the soul has become
extinct to itself, extinct to its own extinction; for it becomes
unconscious of itself and unconscious of its own unconsciousness, since,
were it conscious of its own unconsciousness, it would be conscious of
itself. In relation to the man immersed in this state, the state is
called, in the language of metaphor, "Identity"; in the language of
reality, "Unification." And beneath these verities also lie mysteries
which we are not at liberty to discuss.

7\.

The "God-Aspect": an "advanced" Explanation of the Relation of these
Lights to ALLAH

It may be that you desire greatly to know

{p. 109}

the aspect (*wajh*) \[p. 21\] whereby Allâh's light is related to the
heavens and the earth, or rather the aspect whereby He is in Himself the
Light of heavens and earth. And this shall assuredly not be denied you,
now that you know that Allâh is Light, and that beside Him there is no
light. and that He is every light, and that He is the universal light:
since light is an expression for that by which things are revealed; or.,
higher still, that by and for which they are revealed; yea, and higher
still, that by, for, and from which they are revealed: and now that, you
know, too that, of everything called light, only that by, for, and from
which things are revealed is *real*--that Light beyond which there is no
light to kindle and feed its flame, for It is kindled and fed in itself,
from Itself, and for Itself, and from no other source at all. Such a
conception, such a description, you are now assured, can be applied to
the Great Primary, alone. You are also assured that the heavens and the
earth are filled with light appertaining to those two fundamental
light-planes, our *Sight* and our *Insight*; by which I mean our senses
and our *intelligence*. The first kind of light is

{p. 110}

what we see in the heavens--sun and moon and stars; and what we see in
earth--that is, the rays which are poured over the whole face of the
earth, making visible all the different colours and hues, especially in
the season of spring; and over all animals and plants and things, in all
their states: for without these rays no colour would appear or even
exist. Moreover, every shape and size which is visible to perception is
apprehended in consequence of colour, and it is impossible to conceive
of apprehending them without colour. As for the other ideal,
intelligential Lights, the World Supernal is filled with them--to wit,
the angelic substance; and the World Inferior is also full of them--\[p.
22\] to wit, animal life and human life successively. The order of the
World Inferior is manifested by means of this inferior human light;
while the order of the World Supernal is manifested by means of that
angelical light. This is the order alluded to in the passage in the
Koran, "*He it is Who has formed you from the earth, and hath peopled it
with you, that He might call you Successors upon the earth*" . . . and "

Maketh you Successors on

{p. 111}

the earth," and "*Verily I have set in the earth a Successor*"
(*Khalîfa*).\[1\]

Thus you see that the whole world is all filled with the external lights
of perception, and the internal lights of intelligence; also that the
lower lights are effused or emanate the one from the other, as light
emanates or is effused from a lamp; while the Lamp itself is the
transcendental Light of Prophecy; and that, the transcendental Spirits
of Prophesy are lit from the Spirit Supernal, as the lamp is lit from
fire; and that the Supernals are lit the one from the other; and that
their order is one of ascending grades: further, that these all rise to
the Light of Lights, the Origin and Fountainhead of lights, and that is
ALLAH, only and alone; and that all other lights are borrowed from Him,
and that His alone is real light; and that everything is from His light,
nay, He is everything, nay, HE IS THAT HE is, none but He has ipseity or
heity at all, save by metaphor. Therefore there is no light but He,
while all other lights are only lights from the Aspect which accompanies
Him, not from

\[1. S. 61, 11; 55, 24; 62, 27; 30, 2. Cf. *Mishkât*, p.\[34\].\]

{p. 112}

themselves. Thus the aspect and face of everything faces to Him and
turns in His direction; and "whithersoever they turn themselves there is
the Face of Allâh."\[1\] So, then, there is no divinity but HE; for
"*di*vinity" is an expression by which is connoted that towards which
all faces are *di*rected"\[2\] in worship and in confession--that He is
Deity; but which I mean the faces of the hearts of men, for they verily
are lights and spirits. Nay, more, just as "there is no *deity* but He,"
so there is no *heity* but He, \[p. 23\] for "he" is an expression for
something which one can indicate; but in every and any case we can but
indicate Him. Every time you indicate anything, your indication is in
reality, to Him, even though through your ignorance of the truth of
truths which we have mentioned you -know it not. Just as one cannot
point to, indicate, *sunlight* but only the *sun*, so the relation of
the sum of things to Allâh is, in the visible -analogue, as the relation
of light to the sun. Therefore "*There is no deity but* ALLAH" is the

\[1. S. 2. 115, see 144, 149, 150.

2\. Gh.'s piece of amateur etymology here, by which he appears to derive
the root *'lh* ("god") from the root *wty* ("turn"), is about as absurd
as my attempt to suggest it in the English.\]

{p. 113}

Many's declaration of Unity: that of the Few is "*There is no he but*
HE"; the former is more general, but the latter is more particular, more
comprehensive, more exact, and more apt to give him who declares it
entrance into the pure and absolute Oneness and Onliness. This kingdom
of the One-and-Onliness is the ultimate point of mortals' Ascent: there
is no ascending stage beyond it; for "ascending" involves plurality,
being a sort of relatively involving two stages, an ascent *from* and an
ascent *to*. But when Plurality has been eliminated, Unity is
established, relation is effaced, all indication from "here" to "there"
falls away, and there remains neither height nor depth, nor anyone to
fare up or down. The upward Progress, the Ascent of the soul, then
becomes impossible, for there is no height beyond the Highest, no
plurality alongside of the One, and, now that plurality has terminated,
no Ascent for the soul. If there be, indeed, any change, it is by way of
the "Descent into the Lowest Heaven", the radiation from above
downwards; for the Highest, though It may have mo higher, has a lower.
This is the goal of

{p. 114}

goals, the last object of spiritual search, known of him who knows it,
denied by him who is ignorant of it. It belongs to that knowledge which
is according to the form of the hidden thing, and which no one knoweth
save the Learned\[1\] is Allah. If, therefore, they utter it, it is only
denied by the Ignorant of Him.

There is no improbability in the explanation given by these Learned to
this "Descent into the Lowest Heaven", \[p. 24\] namely, that it is the
descent of *an Angel*; though one of those Gnostics\[2\] has, indeed,
fancied a less probable explanation. He, immersed as he was in the
divine One-and-Onliness, said that *Allah* has "a descent into the
lowest heaven", and that this descent is *His* descent, in order to use
physical senses, and to set in motion bodily limbs; and that *He* is the
one indicated in the Tradition in which the Prophet says, "*I have
become His hearing whereby He heareth, His vision whereby He seeth, His
tongue wherewith He speaketh*."' Now if the Prophet was Allah's hearing
and vision and tongue, then *Allah* and He alone is

\[1. Cf. S. 3, 7.

2\. Al-<u>H</u>allâjj.

3\. A saying reported by Ibn Adham, d. 170.\]

{p. 115}

the Hearer, the Seer, the Speaker; and *H*e is the one indicated in His
own word to Moses, "*I was sick, and thou visitedst Me not*."\[1\]
According to this, the bodily movements of this Confessor of the divine
Unity are from the lowest heaven; his sensation from a heaven next
above; and his intelligence from the heaven next above that. From that
heaven of the intelligence he fares upward to the limit of the Ascension
of created things, the kingdom of the One-and-Onliness, a sevenfold way;
thereafter "*settleth he himself on the throne*" of the divine Unity,
and therefrom "*taketh command*"\[2\] throughout his storied heavens.
Well might one, in looking upon such an one, apply to him the saying,
"*Allah created Adam after the image of the Merciful One*"; until, after
contemplating that word more deeply, he becomes aware that it has an
interpretation like those other words, "I am the ONE REAL," "Glory be to
ME!"\[3\] or those sayings of the Prophet, that Allah said, "

I was sick and thou

\[1. See St, Matt. xxv.

2\. Ar. *al amr*. See on p. \[55\], Introduction, pp. 32-40. Or,
"controlleth things." And see S, 32, 5.

3\. M, p. \[19\].\]

{p. 116}

visitedst Me not," and "*I am His hearing, and His vision; and His
tongue*". But I see fit now to draw rein in this exposition, for I think
that you cannot hear more of this sort than the amount which I have now
communicated.

8\.

The Relation of these Lights to ALLAH:  
Simpler Illustrations and Explanations

It may well be that you will not rise to the height of these words, for
all your pains; it may be that for all your pains you will come short of
it after all. Here, then, is something that lies nearer your
understanding, and nearer your weakness. The meaning of the doctrine
that Allah is \[p. 25\] the Light of Heavens and Earth may be understood
in relation to phenomenal, visible light. When you see hues of
spring-the tender green, for example-in the full light of day, you
entertain no doubt but that you are looking on colours, and very likely
you suppose that you are looking on nothing else alongside of them. As
though you should say, "I see nothing alongside of the green." Many have
in fact, obstinately maintained this. They have asserted that light is a
meaningless term, and that there is nothing but colour with

{p. 117}

the colours. Thus they denied the existence of the light, although it
was the most manifest of all things--how should it not be so,
considering that through it alone all things become manifest?, for it is
the thing that is itself visible and makes visible, as we said before.
But, when the sun sank, and heaven's lamp disappeared from sight, and
night's shadow fell, then apprehended these men the existence of an
essential difference between inherent shadow and inherent light; and
they confessed that light is a form that lies behind all colour, and is
apprehended with colour, insomuch that, so to speak, through its intense
union with the colours it is not apprehended, and through its intense
obviousness it is invisible. And it may be that this very intensity is
the direct cause of its invisibility, for things that go beyond one
extreme pass over to the extreme opposite.

If this is clear to you, you must further know that those endowed with
this Insight never saw a single object without seeing Allah along with
it. It may be that one of them went further than this and said, "I have
never seen a single object, but I first saw Allah"; for

{p. 118}

some of, them only see objects through and in Allah, while others first
see objects and then see Allah in and through those objects. It is to
the first class that the Koran alludes to in the words, "*Doth it not
suffice that My Lord seeth all*?"\[1\] and to the second in the words,
"*We shall shew them our signs in all the world and in themselves*." For
the first class \[p. 26\] have the direct intuition of Allah, and the
second infer Him from His works. The former is the rank of the
Saint-Friends of God, the latter of the Learned "who are established in
knowledge".\[2\] After these two grades there remains nothing except
that of the careless, on whose faces is the veil.

Thus you see that just as everything is manifest to man's Sight by means
of light, so everything is manifest to man's Insight by means of Allah;
for He is with everything every moment and by Him does everything
appear. But here the analogy ceases, and we have a radical difference;
namely, that phenomenal light can be conceived of as disappearing with
the sinking of the sun, and as assuming a veil

\[1. S. 41, 53.

2\. S. 3, 6.\]

{p. 119}

in order that shadow may appear: while the divine light, which is the
condition of all appearance, cannot be conceived as disappearing. That
sun can never set! It abides for ever with all things. Thus the method
of difference (as a method for the demonstration of the Existence of God
from His works) is not at our disposal. Were the appearance of Allah
conceivable, heaven and earth would fall to ruin, and thence, through
difference, would be apprehended an effect which would simultaneously
compel the recognition of the Cause whereby all things appeared. But, as
it is, all Nature remains the same and invariable to our sight because
of the unity of its Creator, for "*all things are singing His
praise*"\[1\] (not some things) at all times (not sometimes); and thus
the method of difference is eliminated, and the way to the knowledge of
God is obscured. For the most manifest way to the knowledge of things is
by their contraries: the thing that possesses no contrary and no
opposite, its features being always exactly alike when you are looking
at it, will very likely elude your

\[1. See S. 17, 44.\]

{p. 120}

notice altogether. In this case its obscureness results from its very
obviousness, and its elusiveness from the very radiance of its
brightness. Then glory to Him who hides Himself from His own creation by
His utter manifestness, and is veiled from their gaze through the very
effulgence of His own light!

But it may be that not even this teaching is intelligible to some
limited intelligences, \[27\] who from our statement (that "Allah is
*with*, everything", as the light is with everything) will understand
that He is in every place. Too high. and holy is He to be related to
*place*! So far from starting this vein imagining, we assert to you that
He is prior to everything, and above everything, and that He makes
everything manifest. Now manifester is inseparable from, manifested,
subjectively, in the cognition of the thinker; and this is what we mean
by saying. that Allah accompanies or is "with" everything. You know,
further, that manifester is prior to, and above, manifested, though He
be "with" it; but he is "with" it from one aspect, and "above" it from
another. You are not to suppose, therefore, that there is

{p. 121}

here any contradiction. Or, consider, how in the world of sense, which
is the highest to which your knowledge can rise, the motion of your
hands goes "with" the motion of its shadow, and yet is prior to it as
well. And whoever has not wit enough to see this, ought to abandon these
researches altogether; for

"To every science its own people;  
And each man finds easy that for which he has been created apt."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: PART II.--The Science Of Symbolism.](msh17)
