[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](msh10)  [Next](msh12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VII. ANOTHER SOLUTION

But there are other passages in our treatise which, when carefully
studied, lead to the belief that in Ghazzâlî's own mind--though the
identification is nowhere explicitly stated or significantly hinted--the
*Mu<u>t</u>â\`* is none than

al-Rû<u>h</u>, THE SPIRIT OF ALLAH.\[1\]

In S. 17, 87, Mohammed himself had left this enigmatic entity as a
divinely uncommunicated,

\[1. Nicholson. The Idea of Personality in *<u>S</u>ûfism*, pp. 44, 45.
The identification had occurred independently to the present writer
before appearance of Professor Nicholson's work. It had also occurred
independently to Professor D. B. Macdonald.\]

{p. 33}

and therefore incommunicable, mystery. The passage runs as follows:
"They ask thee of The Spirit: say, The Spirit pertains *to my Lord's
Word-of-Command*, and ye have not been communicated knowledge \[of It\]
save a little." The Arabic of the words italicized is *min amri rabbî*;
and we are again faced, at the outset, with the troublesome double
meaning of the word *amr*. The phrase *min amr* might merely
mean--perhaps *did* only mean--"a *matter* of"\[1\] (my Lord's), a vague
phrase, common in Arabic, meaning "something that pertains to" so and
so. But in a case like this, we are not concerned with what Mohammed may
originally have meant, but what mystic writers have taken him to mean.
And enormously though this verse attracted puzzled, and baffled
commentators and mystics of all ages, the latter seem to have taken the
word *amr*, with practical unanimity, in the far more significant sense
of "Command". The Hebrew root means "speak", and this meaning is
implicit in the Arabic root also, which signifies *spoken* command. And

\[1. The word *min* is itself tantalizingly ambiguous. It might mean
"(derived) from" or "(part) of" or "pertaining to." Under such
circumstances one looks round for the vaguest possible phrase to render
the preposition.\]

{p. 34}

just as later Jewish writers made out of a derivative of this root a
Logos doctrine (*Memra*), so the Mohammedan mystics came near to making
a Logos doctrine out of the word *amr*, taking their start from this
very text.

A mystery having been definitely started by this text, a haze of
mystification was thrown over the entire subject of "spirit": over
angels as "spirits", over the human "spirit", the prophetic "spirit";
the interrelation between these, and the relation of all to "the
Spirit"; finally *Its* relation to Allah. In our treatise there is a
full measure of this mystification.

"The Spirit" is

ar-Rû<u>h</u>. With this may be absolutely identified *Rû<u>h</u> Allah*
"The Spirit of God"; *Rû<u>h</u>uhu* "His Spirit"; and *al-Rû<u>h</u>u-l
Qudsî*\[1\] (or *Rû<u>h</u>u-l Qudsî*) "The Transcendent Spirit"--all
Koranic expressions.

What then are the considerations which suggest that we have in this
Figure of Mystery

\[1. This is the Arabic for the Christian "The Holy Spirit". But in
Arabic as in early Hebrew the word emphasized the idea of separation or
transcendence rather than of righteousness or holiness.\]

{p. 35}

the key to the mystery of the Vicegerent? On this supposition there
would be no wonder that Ghazzâlî left the figure of the latter a
mystery, and declined to divulge the secret of it (p. \[55\]). He
*could* not divulge the whole secret, because by the decree of Allah and
the Book, he could not know it himself--"save a little." And, there is
no wonder he declined to discuss it, considering the interminable
complexities and baffling obscurities of the recorded musings of
<u>S</u>ûfî doctors on the theme.

At the very outset we are struck by the fact that the word
*Mu<u>t</u>â\`* occurs in the Koran (S. 81, 23), and not only so, but it
occurs as an attribute of the mysterious Agent of Revelation, the vision
of whom Mohammed saw at the. first (S. 53, 5-16). The text 87, 23, is
not definitely cited in *Mishkât*; and in later Islâm the commentators,
with their arid tameness, made a stereotyped identification of this
Figure with the Angel Gabriel. But the Koran gives no warrant for this;
and there is nothing in the *Mishkât* to show that Ghazzâlî thus taught.
On the contrary, Gabriel is assigned a low place

{p. 36}

in the angelic hierarchy. No one can read those two Koranic passages (in
S. 87 and S. 53) without feeling that Mohammed's awful visitant *on
those two occasions* was the One of absolute supreme rank in the
heavenlies: not a spirit but the Spirit. And It was
*mu<u>t</u>â\`*--"one who is obeyed." Is it not but a very short step
from this to *al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`*, The Obeyed-One?

The identification, however attractive, would nevertheless be precarious
if there was not so much in the *Mishkât* itself that supports this
identification.

\(1\) On p. \[15\] the ultimate kindling-place of the graded Lights, of
which the Prophets occupy the lower and terrestrial ranks and the
Angelic Beings the higher and celestial, is the theme of discussion.
Both these ranks of beings are compared to "lights" and all of them are
contrasted with the Highest of all, who is compared to "fire", from
whose flame these graded lights are successively lit, from top to
bottom. Who and what is this Highest of all next to Allah? He is said to
be an Angel with countenances seventy thousand'. . . {p. 37} This is he
who is contrasted with all the angelic host, in the words: '*On that day
whereon THE SPIRIT ariseth, and the Angels, rank on rank*.'" It is thus
explicitly clear that this Being is the highest of all possible beings
in heaven or earth next to Allah; and so, if the Vicegerent of p. \[55\]
is *also* the highest of all, it would seem inevitable to equate them.

\(2\) In the very next page, p. \[16\], Ghazzâlî schematizes this
conception, and, comparing Allah with the *Sun* (the source of light in
the terrestrial system), he compares the highest of the ministrant
lights to the *Moon* (all others being reflections, or
reflections-of-reflections, of it). This "Highest is the one who is
nearest to the Ultimate Light: . . . that Nighest to Allah, he whose
rank comes nighest to the Presence Dominical, which is the Fountainhead
of all these Lights" This "Nighest" and "Highest" cannot be other than
THE SPIRIT spoken of in the preceding page. And on p. \[31\]--unless
Ghazzâlî has suddenly changed all the symbols--the Sun is said to be the
Sovereign, while "the antitype of the Moon will be that Sovereign's
*Minister* (*wakîl*), for it is through

{p. 38}

the moon that the sun sheds his light on the world in its own absence,
and even so it is through his own *wakîl* that the Sovereign makes his
influence felt by subject who never beheld the royal person". Does not
this *wakîl* who stands "highest and nighest" to his Liege-Lord, and who
makes himself obeyed by all that Lord's subjects, strongly suggest "the
Obeyed One", *al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`*, the Vicegerent of the conclusion, whose
function is, precisely, this?

\(3\) But what perhaps clinches the matter is the tell-tale word *amr*
in that passage about *al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`* himself on p. \[55\]. Those who
stopped short of complete illumination, he says, identified
*al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`* with Allah just because he moves the *primum mobile*
(and so all things) "with his Word of Command" (*amr*). "The explication
of which *amr* (he continues), and what it really is, contains much that
is obscure, and too difficult for most minds, besides going beyond the
scope of this book." And then he says that the perfect Illuminati
perceived that, *al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`* the Obeyed One is not more than the
Highest--other-than-Absolute-Deity, and is related to Him as the sun to
Essential Light

{p. 39}

(mysterious enough this!) or as a glowing coal to the Elemental Fire:
and therefore they turned their faces from that Being "who commanded
(*amara*) the moving of the Heavens" to the One Existent, Transcendent,
Incomparable, Predicateless.

With this word amr thus impressed on us with such penetrating
significance we turn back to the Koran text: "The Spirit pertains to my
Lord's Word of Command (*amr*) . . ." Unless the word *min* introduces a
quite upsetting element, the identification between this SPIRIT and the
Commander who is Obeyed seems complete.

But the history of the <u>S</u>ûfî teaching on the text shows that min
need introduce no such upsetting element, and that the practical
identification of *Amr* with

Rû<u>h</u>, of The Word of Command with The Spirit, was with the Mystics
a familiar idea. It was the explicit teaching of al-Hallâj\[1\] and the
typical "word of command" which this Divine Spirit gave was the fiat
"*Kun*!"

\[1. Massignon, op. cit., pp. 519-21.\]

{p. 40} "Be!"\[1\] We have seen the fascination which this treatise
shows al-<u>H</u>allâj had for al-Ghazzâlî. Does it not seem likely, nay
almost certain, that in his meditation on the inscrutable text he
followed al-Hallâj in this equation, with whatever mental reserve
regarding the Spirit itself--whether divine or creaturely, eternal or
originate? Not that it was only Imâmites or extreme <u>S</u>ûfî Sunnites
like al-<u>H</u>allâj who asserted the divinity of The Spirit. The
ultra-orthodox <u>H</u>anbalites "admitted in some manner the eternity
of the *Rû<u>h</u> Allah*".\[2\] Ibn <u>H</u>anbal himself had given
them the lead with a characteristic hedging aphorism (which reminds us
of similar remarks on the *<u>S</u>ifat*, the *Kalâm Allah*, and the
Qur'ân) "Whoever says that

al-Rû<u>h</u> is created, (*makhlûq*) is a heretic: whoever says that It
is eternal (*qadîm*) is an infidel."\[3\] His followers held fast on to
"*uncreate*", and it was hard to keep "*eternal*" from following. No
wonder al-Ghazzâlî

\[1. This mediation of the creative function would carry with it the
mediation of the administrative. In this connexion use would
unquestionably be made of S. 7, 53, "the sun, the moon, and the stars
are compelled-to-work by His *amr*--His Word-of-Command--His
Spirit--exactly the function of *al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`*.

2\. Massignon, op. cit., p. 664.

3\. Ib., p. 661.\]

{p. 41}

gave a unique and mysterious tinge to his similitude for "The Obeyed",
and that It figures, virtually, as an Arian Logos. Th more one reflects
on what is said about the function of this Being in M., p. \[55\], and
especially Its comparison with the Sun (Allah being Essential Light), or
with glowing coal (Allah being Elemental Fire), the more unique It
appears, and: the more mysterious our author's thought about It becomes.
For *such* functions, and *such* a relation to Absolute Deity, are in
very truth entirely unique, in kind as well as degree; and, thus
described, the Vicegerent becomes, in a secondary way, as unique a
Figure as is Deity Itself. No wonder the passage raised doubts as to the
soundness of our author's monotheism! No wonder he was not anxious to go
more deeply into the matter, out of consideration for the limited
spiritual capacities of his readers! Perhaps, to preserve his own faith
in the Unity, Indivisibility, and absolute Uniqueness of Allah,. he was
glad to leave the dark problem of the Vicegerent where Allah Himself had
left that of--the Spirit--an uncommunicated and incommunicable mystery,
which now he only knew in

{p. 42}

part, and only saw as in a glass, darkly.

It remains to consider whether there is any evidence that Ghazzâlî
extended the equation *Mu<u>t</u>â\`* = *Amr* =

Rû<u>h</u> to include the *Nûr Muhammadî* (as suggested tentatively by
Professor R. Nicholson in his lectures on "The Idea of Personality in
Sûfism"'), the archetypal spirit of Mohammed, the Heavenly Man created
in the image of God, and regarded as a Cosmic Power on whom depends the
order and preservation of 'the universe. If this could be sustained it
would to some extent modify the conclusion reached before that
*al-Mu<u>t</u>â\`* had nothing to do with any human being, idealized or
not, whether a Prophet or even Mohammed; though even so, there would be
a vast difference between this archetypal Spirit and the historical
Prophet.

While the germs of this idea, as of every other one, may be found much
earlier than Ghazzâlî's century (the fifth), the study of the sketch
which M. Massignon gives of the history of the doctrine
(*<u>H</u>allâj*, pp. 830 seqq.) does not create the impression that it
was developed or

\[1. Pp. 46, 47, and Lecture III.\]

{p. 43}

received in orthodox circles\[1\] up to Ghazzâlî's time. Professor
Nicholson does not find it in an orthodox <u>S</u>ûfî writer earlier
than \`Abdu-l Qâdir al-Jîlânî (b. 571, d. 561), in the generation
immediately succeeding that of Ghazzâlî.\[2\] After which the doctrine
developed and spread amazingly, reaching its height with Ibn al-\`Arabî
al-Jîlî several centuries later.\[3\]

Thus the a-priori evidence is this time decidedly against Ghazzâlî's
having anything to do with this doctrine. Unless, therefore, very clear
actual evidence were found in his writings, it would be surely
justifiable to assert definitely that it is not Ghazzâlîan. It appears
not to be found in his works other than al-Mishkât. If this is so, it
may be further asserted with confidence that it is not found in
*al-Mishkât* either.

On the contrary, there is much there that shows a relatively simple,
primeval conception of Mohammed on the part of Ghazzâlî. For him the
archetypal man is Adam, as in the Koran,

\[1. It was at first prevalently Imâmite and Shî\`ite (Nicholson, *Idea
of Personality in <u>S</u>ûfism*, p. 58).

2\. He described Mu<u>h</u>ammed as *al-rû<u>h</u> al-qudus* and
*rû<u>h</u> jasad al-wajûd* "the Transcendent Spirit, the Spirit of the
body of the Universe."

3\. Nicholson, op. cit., p. 59.\]

{p. 44}

not Mohammed.\[1\] An examination of the passage\[2\] in which the idea
of the "Khalîfa" appears shows that here also his thought was not
esoteric, and that Mohammed was not in his mind: he is thinking of the
whole human race, or of Adam himself, the first and representative human
being, the only "Khalîfa" particularized by the Koran. And the one
passage in the *Mishkât* which at first sight does look as if it
contained a "high doctrine of the person" of Mohammed, turns out on
closer inspection to, prove the exact reverse, viz. that essentially be
belonged to this world and to the time-order--to the prophets, *above*
whom are ranked the celestial "Lights" culminating, as we have. seen, in
the Supreme Angelical, The Spirit. This passage is on pp. \[14, 15\].
Here we have the Transcendent Spirit Prophetical (*al-Rû<u>h</u>
al-qudus al-nabawî*) attributed to Mohammed as prophet, by reason of
which he is called a Luminous Lamp (*sirâj munîr*). If this stood by
itself we might be suspicious of something esoteric. But immediately
after this the other prophets, and even saints, are said to be

\[1. M., p. \[34\].

2\. M., p. \[22\].\]

{p. 45}

"Lamps"', and to possess, as Its name implies this Spirit Prophetical.
The sequel shows that this Spirit is the Fire from which all the
Angelical lights above and the Prophetical lights beneath are lit, and
that this Spirit is the Supreme Angelical, "The Spirit," as in the
passage already discussed.'

To sum up the conclusion to which I have been led by a consideration of
the evidence of the *Mishkât* itself, top-ether with the a-priori
evidence which supplements it and is checked by it,--the heavenly
Vicegerent is the Spirit of Allah, the Transcendent Spirit of Prophecy,
the divine Word-of-Command; he is not a *Qu<u>t</u>b* or any Adept; he
is not Mohammed nor the archetypal spirit of Mohammed.

Whether this mystery of the Vicegerent was connected in our author's
mind with that of the divine-human, archetypal *<u>S</u>ûra*, as
developed by al Hallâj and other advanced Mystics, will be discussed
later.

\[1. See above, pp. 36-37 The only thing that puzzles is that Ghazzâlî
sometimes distributes and pluralizes the Spirit, see p. \[15, l. 4\] and
p. \[22. l. 8\]. In each case the regulative singular, however, is close
by. This reminds one of Rev. iv, 5 and v. 6, compared with Rev. ii. 7.\]

{p. 46}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Al-Ghazzali And The Seven Spheres](msh12)
