[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38013)  [Next](cc38015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
11:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** I say then, Hath God cast away his
people? God forbid. For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham,
*of* the tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Dico igitur, Num abjecit Deus populum
suum? absit: etenim ego Israelita sum, ex genere Abrahae, tribu
Benjamin.

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2.** God hath not cast away his people which
he foreknew. Wot ye not what the scripture saith of Elias? how he maketh
intercession to God against Israel, saying,

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Non abjecit Deus populum suum quem
praecognovit. An nescitis in Elia quid scriptura dicat? quomodo appellet
Deum adversus Israel, dicens,

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Lord, they have killed thy prophets,
and digged down thine altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my
life.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Domine, Prophetas tuas occiderunt, et
altaria tua diruerunt, et ego relictus sum solus, et quaerunt animam
meam.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>**4.** But what saith the answer of God unto
him? I have reserved to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed
the knee to *the image of* Baal.

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Sed quid dicit ei oraculum?  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) Reservavi mihi ipsi septem millia
virorum, qui non flexerunt genu imagini Baal.

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Even so then at this present time also
there is a remnant according to the election of grace.

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>**5.** Sic ergo et hoc tempore, reliquiae
secundum electionem gratiae supersunt:

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>**6.** And if by grace, then *is it* no more
of works; otherwise grace is no more grace. But if *it be* of works,
then is it no more grace: otherwise work is no more work.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>**6.** Quod si per gratiam, jam non ex
operibus; alioqui gratia, jam non est gratia: si vero ex operibus, jam
non est gratia; alioqui opus, jam non est opus.

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span><span id="xv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>**1.** *I say then, etc.* What he has
hitherto said of the blindness and obstinacy of the Jews, might seem to
import that Christ at his coming had transferred elsewhere the promises
of God, and deprived the Jews of every hope of salvation. This objection
is what he anticipates in this passage, and he so modifies what he had
previously said respecting the repudiation of the Jews, that no one
might think that the covenant formerly made with Abraham is now
abrogated, or that God had so forgotten it that the Jews were now so
entirely alienated from his kingdom, as the Gentiles were before the
coming of Christ. All this he denies, and he will presently show that it
is altogether false. But the question is not whether God had justly or
unjustly rejected the people; for it was proved in the last chapter that
when the people, through false zeal, had rejected the righteousness of
God, they suffered a just punishment for their presumption, were
deservedly blinded, and were at last cut off from the covenant.

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>The reason then for their rejection is not
now under consideration; but the dispute is concerning another thing,
which is this, That though they deserved such a punishment from God,
whether yet the covenant which God made formerly with the fathers was
abolished. That it should fail through any perfidiousness of men, was
wholly unreasonable; for Paul holds this as a fixed principle, that
since adoption is gratuitous and based on God alone and not on men, it
stands firm and inviolable, howsoever great the unfaithfulness of men
may be, which may tend to abolish it. It was necessary that this knot
should be untied, lest the truth and election of God should be thought
to be dependent on the worthiness of men.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>*For I am also an Israelite, etc.* Before he
proceeds to the subject, he proves, in passing, by his own example, how
unreasonable it was to think that the nation was utterly forsaken by
God; for he himself was in his origin an Israelite, not a proselyte, or
one lately introduced into the commonwealth of Israel. As then he was
justly deemed to be one of God’s special servants, it was an evidence
that God’s favor rested on Israel. He then assumes the conclusion as
proved, which yet he will hereafter explain in a satisfactory manner.

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span>That in addition to the title of an
Israelite, he called himself the seed of Abraham, and mentioned also his
own tribe; this he did that he might be counted a genuine Israelite, and
he did the same in his Epistle to the Philippians, <span
id="xv.i-p19.1"></span>[Php 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#004)<span
id="xv.i-p19.1"></span>. But what some think, that it was done to
commend God’s mercy, inasmuch as Paul sprung from that tribe which had
been almost destroyed, seems forced and far-fetched.

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span><span id="xv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span>**2.** *God has not cast away, etc.* This is
a negative answer, accompanied with a qualifying clause; for had the
Apostle unreservedly denied that the people were rejected, he would have
been inconsistent with himself; but by adding a modification, he shows
it to be such a rejection, as that God’s promise is not thereby made
void. So the answer may be divided into two parts, — that God has by no
means cast away the whole race of Abraham, contrary to the tenor of his
own covenant, — and that yet the fruit of adoption does not exist in all
the children of the flesh, for secret election precedes. Thus general
rejection could not have caused that no seed should be saved; for the
visible body of the people was in such a manner rejected, that no member
of the spiritual body of Christ was cut off.

<span id="xv.i-p22"></span>If any one asks, “Was not circumcision a
common symbol of God’s favor to all the Jews, so that they ought to have
been all counted his people?” To this the obvious answer is, — That as
outward calling is of itself ineffectual without faith, the honor which
the unbelieving refuse when offered, is justly taken from them. Thus a
special people remain, in whom God exhibits an evidence of his
faithfulness; and Paul derives the origin of constancy from secret
election. For it is not said here that God regards faith, but that he
stands to his own purpose, so as not to *reject* the people whom he has
foreknown.

<span id="xv.i-p23"></span>And here again must be noticed what I have
before reminded you of, — that by the verb *foreknow,* is not to be
understood a foresight, I know not what, by which God foresees what sort
of being any one will be, but that good pleasure, according to which he
has chosen those as sons to himself, who, being not yet born, could not
have procured for themselves his favor.  <span
id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) So he says to the Galatians, that they
had been known by God, (<span id="xv.i-p24.4"></span>[Ga
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)<span id="xv.i-p24.4"></span>); for
he had anticipated them with his favor, so as to call them to the
knowledge of Christ. We now perceive, that though universal calling may
not bring forth fruit, yet the faithfulness of God does not fail,
inasmuch as he always preserves a Church, as long as there are elect
remaining; for though God invites all people indiscriminately to
himself, yet he does not inwardly draw any but those whom he knows to be
his people, and whom he has given to his Son, and of whom also he will
be the faithful keeper to the end.

<span id="xv.i-p25"></span>*Know ye not, etc.* As there were so few of
the Jews who had believed in Christ, hardly another conclusion could
have been drawn from this small number, but that the whole race of
Abraham had been rejected; and creep in might this thought, — that in so
vast a ruin no sign of God’s favor appeared: for since adoption was the
sacred bond by which the children of Abraham were kept collected under
the protection of God, it was by no means probable, unless that had
ceased, that the people should be miserably and wretchedly dispersed. To
remove this offense, Paul adopts a most suitable example; for he
relates, that in the time of Elias there was such a desolation, that
there remained no appearance of a Church, and yet, that when no vestige
of God’s favor appeared, the Church of God was, as it were, hid in the
grave, and was thus wonderfully preserved.

<span id="xv.i-p26"></span>It hence follows, that they egregiously
mistake who form an opinion of the Church according to their own
perceptions. And surely if that celebrated Prophet, who was endued with
so enlightened a mind, was so deceived, when he attempted by his own
judgment to form an estimate of God’s people, what shall be the case
with us, whose highest perspicuity, when compared with his, is mere
dullness? Let us not then determine any thing rashly on this point; but
rather let this truth remain fixed in our hearts — that the Church,
though it may not appear to our eyes, is sustained by the secret
providence of God. Let it also be remembered by us, that they are
foolish and presumptuous who calculate the number of the elect according
to the extent of their own perception: for God has a way, easy to
himself, hidden from us, by which he wonderfully preserves his elect,
even when all things seem to us past all remedy.

<span id="xv.i-p27"></span>And let readers observe this, — that Paul
distinctly compares here, and elsewhere, the state of things in his time
with the ancient condition of the Church, and that it serves in no small
degree to confirm our faith, when we bear in mind, that nothing happens
to us, at this day, which the holy Fathers had not formerly experienced:
for novelty, we know, is a grievous engine to torment weak minds.

<span id="xv.i-p28"></span>As to the words, *In Elias,* I have retained
the expression of Paul; for it may mean either in the history or in the
business of Elias; though it seems to me more probable, that Paul has
followed the Hebrew mode of speaking; for <span
id="xv.i-p28.1"></span>ב, *beth,* which is rendered in the Greek by
<span id="xv.i-p28.2"></span>ἐν, *in,* is often taken in Hebrew for *of*

<span id="xv.i-p29"></span>*How he appeals to God, etc*  <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) It was certainly a proof how much
Elias honored the Lord, that for the glory of his name he hesitated not
to make himself an enemy to his own nation, and to pray for their utter
ruin, because he thought that the religion and worship of God had
perished among them: but he was mistaken in charging the whole nation,
himself alone *excepted,* with that impiety, for which he wished them to
be severely visited. There is however in this passage, which Paul
quotes, no imprecation, but a complaint only: but as he complains in
such a way as to despair of the whole people, there is no doubt but that
he gave them up to destruction. Let us then especially notice what is
said of Elias, which was this, — that when impiety had everywhere
prevailed, and overspread almost the whole land, he thought that he was
left alone.

<span id="xv.i-p32"></span>*I have reserved for myself seven thousand,
etc.* Though you may take this finite for an indefinite number, it was
yet the Lord’s design to specify a large multitude. Since then the grace
of God prevails so much in an extreme state of things, let us not
lightly give over to the devil all those whose piety does not openly
appear to us. It also ought to be fully imprinted on our minds, — that
however impiety may everywhere prevail, and dreadful confusion spread on
every side, yet the salvation of many remains secured under the seal of
God.  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) But that no one may under
this error indulge his own sloth, as many seek hiding-places for their
vices in the hidden providences of God, it is right to observe again, —
that they only are said to be saved who continue sound and unpolluted in
the faith of God. This circumstance in the case ought also to be
noticed, — that those only remained safe who did not prostitute their
body, no, not even by an external act of dissimulation, to the worship
of idols; for he not only ascribes to them a purity of mind, but that
they had also kept their body from being polluted by any filthiness of
superstition.  <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341)

<span id="xv.i-p35"></span>*So then also at this time, etc.* He applies
the example to his own age; and to make all things alike, he calls God’s
people a remnant, that is, in comparison with the vast number in whom
impiety prevailed: and alluding at the same time to the prophecy he had
quoted from Isaiah, he shows, that in the midst of a miserable and
confused desolation the faithfulness of God yet shone forth, for there
was still some remnant: and in order more fully to confirm this, he
expressly calls them a remnant that survived through the grace of God:
and thus he bore witness that God’s election is unchangeable, according
to what the Lord said to Elias, — that where the whole people had fallen
away to idolatry, he had reserved for himself seven thousand: and hence
we conclude, that through his kindness they were delivered from
destruction. Nor does he simply speak of grace; but he now calls our
attention also to election, that we may learn reverently to rely on the
hidden purpose of God.

<span id="xv.i-p36"></span>One thing then that is laid down is, — that
few are saved in comparison with the vast number of those who assume the
name of being God’s people; the other is, — that those are saved by
God’s power whom he has chosen with no regard to any merit. The
*election of grace* is a Hebrew idiom for gratuitous election.

<span id="xv.i-p37"></span><span id="xv.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p38"></span>**6.** *If through grace, it is no more by
works, etc.* This amplification is derived from a comparison between
things of an opposite character; for such is the *case* between God’s
grace and the merit of works, that he who establishes the one overturns
the other.

<span id="xv.i-p39"></span>But if no regard to works can be admitted in
election, without obscuring the gratuitous goodness of God, which he
designed thereby to be so much commended to us, what answer can be given
to Paul by those infatuated persons, *(*<span
id="xv.i-p39.1"></span>*phrenetici* — *insane,)* who make the cause of
election to be that worthiness in us which God has foreseen? For whether
you introduce works future or past, this declaration of Paul opposes
you; for he says, that grace leaves nothing to works. Paul speaks not
here of our reconciliation with God, nor of the means, nor of the
proximate causes of our salvation; but he ascends higher, even to this,
— why God, before the foundation of the world, chose only some and
passed by others: and he declares, that God was led to make this
difference by nothing else, but by his own good pleasure; for if any
place is given to works, so much, he maintains, is taken away from
grace.

<span id="xv.i-p40"></span>It hence follows, that it is absurd to blend
foreknowledge of works with election. For if God chooses some and
rejects others, as he has foreseen them to be worthy or unworthy of
salvation, then the grace of God, the reward of works being established,
cannot reign alone, but must be only in part the cause of our election.
For as Paul has reasoned before concerning the justification of Abraham,
that where reward is paid, there grace is not freely bestowed; so now he
draws his argument from the same fountain, — that if works come to the
account, when God adopts a certain number of men unto salvation, reward
is a matter of debt, and that therefore it is not a free gift.  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342)

<span id="xv.i-p42"></span>Now, though he speaks here of election, yet
as it is a general reasoning which Paul adopts, it ought to be applied
to the whole of our salvation; so that we may understand, that whenever
it is declared that there are no merits of works, our salvation is
ascribed to the grace of God, or rather, that we may believe that the
righteousness of works is annihilated, whenever grace is mentioned.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
11:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**7.** What then? Israel hath not obtained
that which he seeketh for; but the election hath obtained it, and the
rest were blinded

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span>**7.** Quid ergo? Quod quaerit Israel, non
est assequutus;  <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) electio autem
assequuta est, reliqui vero excaecati fuerunt;

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span>**8.** (According as it is written, God hath
given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and
ears that they should not hear;) unto this day.

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span>**8.** Quemadmodum scriptum est, Dedit illis
Deus spiritum compunctionis, oculos ut non videant, et aures ut non
audiant, usque ad hodiernum diem.

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span>**9.** And David saith, Let their table be
made a snare, and a trap, and a stumblingblock, and a recompence unto
them:

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>**9.** Et David dicit, Fiat mensa eorum in
laqueum et in captionem et in offendiculum et in retributionem ipsis:

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span>**10.** Let their eyes be darkened, that they
may not see, and bow down their back alway.

<span id="xv.ii-p10"></span>**10.** Obscurentur oculi eorum ne videant,
et dorsum eorum semper incurva.

<span id="xv.ii-p11"></span><span id="xv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p12"></span>**7.** *What then? What Israel seeks, etc.*
As he is here engaged on a difficult subject, he asks a question, as
though he was in doubt. He intended, however, by expressing this doubt,
to render the answer, which immediately follows, more evident; for he
intimates, that no other can be given; and the answer is, — that Israel
in vain labored to seek salvation, because his attempt was absurd.
Though he mentions here no cause, yet as he had expressed it before, he
certainly meant it to be understood in this place. For his words are the
same, as though he had said, — that it ought not to seem strange, that
Israel gained nothing in striving after righteousness. And hence is
proved what he presently subjoins concerning election, — For if Israel
has obtained nothing by merit, what have others obtained whose case or
condition was not better? Whence has come so much difference between
equals? Who does not here see that it is election alone which makes the
difference?

<span id="xv.ii-p13"></span>Now the meaning of the word *election* here
is doubtful; for to some it seems that it ought to be taken in a
collective sense, for the elect themselves, that there may be a
correspondence between the two clauses. Of this opinion I do not
disapprove, provided it be allowed that there is something more in the
word than if he had said, the elect, even this, that he intimates that
there was no other reason for obtaining their election, as though he
said, — “They are not those who strive by relying on merits, but those
whose salvation depends on the gratuitous election of God.” For he
distinctly compares with the whole of Israel, or body of the people, the
remnant which was to be saved by God’s grace. It hence follows, that the
cause of salvation exists not in men, but depends on the good pleasure
of God alone.

<span id="xv.ii-p14"></span>*And the rest have been blinded*  <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) As the elect alone are delivered by
God’s grace from destruction, so all who are not elected must
necessarily remain blinded. For what Paul means with regard to the
reprobate is, — that the beginning of their ruin and condemnation is
from this — that they are forsaken by God.

<span id="xv.ii-p16"></span>The quotations which he adduces, collected
from various parts of Scripture, and not taken from one passage, do
seem, all of them, to be foreign to his purpose, when you closely
examine them according to their contexts; for you will find that in
every passage, blindness and hardening are mentioned as scourges, by
which God punished crimes already committed by the ungodly; but Paul
labors to prove here, that not those were blinded, who so deserved by
their wickedness, but who were rejected by God before the foundation of
the world.

<span id="xv.ii-p17"></span>You may thus briefly untie this knot, — that
the origin of the impiety which provokes God’s displeasure, is the
perversity of nature when forsaken by God. Paul therefore, while
speaking of eternal reprobation, has not without reason referred to
those things which proceed from it, as fruit from the tree or river from
the fountain. The ungodly are indeed, for their sins, visited by God’s
judgment with blindness; but if we seek for the source of their ruin, we
must come to this, — that being accursed by God, they cannot by all
their deeds, sayings, and purposes, get and obtain any thing but a
curse. Yet the cause of eternal reprobation is so hidden from us, that
nothing remains for us but to wonder at the incomprehensible purpose of
God, as we shall at length see by the conclusion. But they reason
absurdly who, whenever a word is said of the proximate causes, strive,
by bringing forward these, to cover the first, which is hid from our
view; as though God had not, before the fall of Adam, freely determined
to do what seemed good to him with respect to the whole human race on
this account, — because he condemns his corrupt and depraved seed, and
also, because he repays to individuals the reward which their sins have
deserved.  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345)

<span id="xv.ii-p19"></span><span id="xv.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p20"></span>**8.** *Given them has God, etc.* There is
no doubt, I think, but that the passage quoted here from Isaiah is that
which Luke refers to in <span id="xv.ii-p20.1"></span>[Ac
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026)<span id="xv.ii-p20.1"></span>,
as quoted from him, only the words are somewhat altered. Nor does he
record here what we find in the Prophet, but only collects from him this
sentiment, — that they were imbued from above with the spirit of
maliciousness, so that they continued dull in seeing and hearing. The
Prophet was indeed bidden to harden the heart of the people: but Paul
penetrates to the very fountain, — that brutal stupor seizes on all the
senses of men, after they are given up to this madness, so that they
excite themselves by virulent stimulants against the truth. For he does
not call it the spirit of giddiness, but of compunction, when the
bitterness of gall shows itself; yea, when there is also a fury in
rejecting the truth. And he declares, that by the secret judgment of God
the reprobate are so demented, that being stupified, they are incapable
of forming a judgment; for when it is said, that by seeing they see
nothing, the dullness of their senses is thereby intimated.  <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346)

<span id="xv.ii-p22"></span>Then Paul himself adds, *to this very day,*
lest any one should object and say, that this prophecy had been formerly
fulfilled, and that it was therefore absurd to apply it to the time of
the gospel: this objection he anticipates, by subjoining, that it was
not only a blindness of one day, which is *described,* but that it had
continued, together with the unhealable obstinacy of the people, to the
coming of Christ.  <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347)

<span id="xv.ii-p24"></span><span id="xv.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p25"></span>**9.** *And David says, etc.* In this
testimony of David there is also made some change in the words, but it
is not what changes the meaning. For he thus speaks, “Let their table
before them become a snare, and their peaceful things a trap;” there is
no mention of retribution. As to the main point there is sufficient
agreement. The Prophet prays, that whatever is desirable and happy in
life might turn out to the ruin and destruction of the ungodly; and this
is what he means by *table* and *peaceful things.*  <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) He then gives them up to blindness of
spirit and weakening of strength; the one of which he expresses by the
darkening of the eyes, and the other by the incurvation of the back. But
that this should be extended almost to the whole nation, is not to be
wondered at; for we know, that not only the chief men were incensed
against David, but that the common people were also opposed to him. It
appears plain, that what is read in that passage was not applied to a
few, but to a large number; yea, when we consider of whom David was a
type, there appears to be a spiritual import in the opposite clause.
 <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349)

<span id="xv.ii-p30"></span>Seeing then that this imprecation remains
for all the adversaries of Christ, — that their meat shall be converted
into poison, (as we see that the gospel is to be the savor of death unto
death,) let us embrace with humility and trembling the grace of God. We
may add, that since David speaks of the Israelites, who descended
according to the flesh from Abraham, Paul fitly applies his testimony to
the subject in hand, that the blindness of the majority of the people
might not appear new or unusual.

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
11:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011)<span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>**11.** I say then, Have they stumbled that
they should fall? God forbid: but *rather* through their fall salvation
*is come* unto the Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy.

<span id="xv.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Dico igitur, Num impegerunt ut
corruerent? Absit: sed eorum lapsu salus contigit gentibus in hoc, ut
ipsi ad aemulationem provocarentur.

<span id="xv.iii-p4"></span>**12.** Now if the fall of them *be* the
riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the
Gentiles; how much more their fulness?

<span id="xv.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Si vero eorum lapsus divitiae sunt
mundi, et imminutio eorum divitiae gentium, quanto magis complementum
ipsorum?

<span id="xv.iii-p6"></span>**13.** For I speak to you Gentiles,
inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine office:

<span id="xv.iii-p7"></span>**13.** Vobis enim dico gentibus, quatenus
certe ego gentium sum Apostolus, ministerium meum illustror,

<span id="xv.iii-p8"></span>**14.** If by any means I may provoke to
emulation *them which are* my flesh, and might save some of them.

<span id="xv.iii-p9"></span>**14.** Si quomodo ad aemulationem
provocavero carnem meam, et aliquos ex ea salvos fecero:

<span id="xv.iii-p10"></span>**15.** For if the casting away of them
*be* the reconciling of the world, what *shall* the receiving *of them
be*, but life from the dead?

<span id="xv.iii-p11"></span>**15.** Si enim rejectio eorum,
reconciliatio est mundi, quid assumptio nisi vita ex mortius?

<span id="xv.iii-p12"></span><span id="xv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p13"></span>**11.** *Have they stumbled, etc.* You will
be greatly hindered in understanding this argument, except you take
notice, that the Apostle speaks sometimes of the whole nation of the
Jews, and sometimes of single individuals; for hence arises the
diversity, that onewhile he speaks of the Jews as being banished from
the kingdom of God, cut off from the tree and precipitated by God’s
judgment into destruction, and that at another he denies that they had
fallen from grace, but that on the contrary they continued in the
possession of the covenant, and had a place in the Church of God.

<span id="xv.iii-p14"></span>It is then in conformity with this
difference that he now speaks; for since the Jews for the most part
rejected Christ, so that perverseness had taken hold almost on the whole
nation, and few among them seemed to be of a sane mind, he asks the
question, whether the Jewish nation had so stumbled at Christ, that it
was all over with them universally, and that no hope of repentance
remained. Here he justly denies that the salvation of the Jews was to be
despaired of, or that they were so rejected by God, that there was to be
no future restoration, or that the covenant of grace, which he had once
made with them, was entirely abolished, since there had ever remained in
that nation the seed of blessing. That we are so to understand his
meaning is evident from this, — that having before connected a sure ruin
with blindness, he now gives a hope of rising again; which two things
are wholly different. They then, who perversely stumbled at Christ, fell
and fell into destruction; yet the nation itself had not fallen, so that
he who is a Jew must necessarily perish or be alienated from God.

<span id="xv.iii-p15"></span>*But by their fall salvation has come to
the Gentiles, etc.* The Apostle asserts two things in this place, — that
the fall of the Jews had turned out for salvation to the Gentiles; but
to this end — that they might be kindled by a sort of jealousy, and be
thus led to repentance. He no doubt had an eye to the testimony of
Moses, which he had already quoted, where the Lord threatened Israel, —
that as he had been provoked by them to emulation through their false
gods; so he also, according to the law of retaliation, would provoke
them by a foolish nation.

<span id="xv.iii-p16"></span>The word here used denotes the feeling of
emulation or jealousy with which we are excited, when we see another
preferred before us. Since then it was the Lord’s purpose that Israel
should be provoked to emulation, they were not so fallen as to be
precipitated into eternal ruin; but that God’s blessing, despised by
them, might come to the Gentiles, in order that they might at length be
also stirred up to seek the Lord, from whom they had fallen away.

<span id="xv.iii-p17"></span>But there is no reason for readers to weary
themselves much as to the application of this testimony: for Paul does
not dwell on the strict meaning of the word, but alludes only to a
common and well-known practice. For as emulation stimulates a wife, who
for her fault has been rejected by her husband, so that she strives to
be reconciled again; so it may be now, he says, that the Jews, seeing
the Gentiles introduced into their place, will be touched with grief for
their divorce, and seek reconciliation.

<span id="xv.iii-p18"></span><span id="xv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p19"></span>**12.** *And if their fall, etc.* As he had
taught us that after the Jews were repudiated, the Gentiles were
introduced in their place, that he might not make the salvation of the
Jews to be disliked by the Gentiles, as though their salvation depended
on the ruin of the Jews, he anticipates this false notion, and lays down
a sentiment of an opposite kind, that nothing would conduce more to
advance the salvation of the Gentiles, than that the grace of God should
flourish and abound among the Jews. To prove this, he derives an
argument from the less, — “If their fall had raised the Gentiles, and
their diminution had enriched them, how much more their fullness?” for
the first was done contrary to nature, and the last will be done
according to a natural order of things. And it is no objection to this
reasoning, that the word of God had flowed to the Gentiles, after the
Jews had rejected, and, as it were, cast it from them; for if they had
received it, their faith would have brought forth much more fruit than
their unbelief had occasioned; for the truth of God would have been
thereby confirmed by being accomplished in them, and they also
themselves would have led many by their teaching, whom they, on the
contrary, by their perverseness, had turned aside.

<span id="xv.iii-p20"></span>Now he would have spoken more strictly
correct, if, to the *fall,* he had opposed *rising:*  <span
id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) of this I remind you, that no one may
expect here an adorned language, and may not be offended with this
simple mode of speaking; for these things were written to mold the heart
and not the tongue.

<span id="xv.iii-p22"></span><span id="xv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p23"></span>**13.** *For to you Gentiles I speak, etc.*
He confirms by a strong reason, that nothing shall be lost by the
Gentiles, were the Jews to return again to favor with God; for he shows,
that the salvation of both is so connected, that it can by the same
means be promoted. For he thus addresses the Gentiles, — “Though I am
peculiarly destined to be your Apostle, and ought therefore with special
care to seek your salvation, with which I am charged, and to omit as it
were all other things, and to labor for that only, I shall yet be
faithfully discharging my office, by gaining to Christ any of my own
nation; and this will be for the glory of my ministry, and so for your
good.”  <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) For whatever served to
render Paul’s ministry illustrious, was advantageous to the Gentiles,
whose salvation was its object.

<span id="xv.iii-p28"></span>And here also he uses the verb <span
id="xv.iii-p28.1"></span>παραζηλῶσαι, *to provoke to emulation*, and for
this purpose, that the Gentiles might seek the accomplishment of Moses’
prophecy, such as he describes, when they understood that it would be
for their benefit.

<span id="xv.iii-p29"></span><span id="xv.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p30"></span>**14.** *And save, etc.* Observe here that
the minister of the word is said in some way to save those whom he leads
to the obedience of faith. So conducted indeed ought to be the ministry
of our salvation, as that we may feel that the whole power and efficacy
of it depends on God, and that we may give him his due praise: we ought
at the same time to understand that preaching is an instrument for
effecting the salvation of the faithful, and though it can do nothing
without the Spirit of God, yet through his inward operation it produces
the most powerful effects.

<span id="xv.iii-p31"></span><span id="xv.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p32"></span>**15.** *For if their rejections, etc.*
This passage, which many deem obscure, and some awfully pervert, ought,
in my view, to be understood as another argument, derived from a
comparison of the less with the greater, according to this import,
“Since the rejection of the Jews has availed so much as to occasion the
reconciling of the Gentiles, how much more effectual will be their
resumption? Will it not be to raise them even from the dead?” For Paul
ever insists on this, that the Gentiles have no cause for envy, as
though the restoration of the Jews to favor were to render their
condition worse. Since then God has wonderfully drawn forth life from
death and light from darkness, how much more ought we to hope, he
reasons, that the resurrection of a people, as it were, wholly dead,
will bring life to the Gentiles.  <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) It is no objection what some allege,
that reconciliation differs not from resurrection, as we do indeed
understand resurrection in the present instance, that is, to be that by
which we are translated from the kingdom of death to the kingdom of
life, for though the thing is the same, yet there is more force in the
expression, and this a sufficient answer.

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
11:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>**16.** For if the firstfruit *be* holy, the
lump *is* also *holy:* and if the root *be* holy, so *are* the branches.

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span>**16.** Quod si primitiae sanctae, etiam
conspersio; et si radix sancta etiam rami:

<span id="xv.iv-p4"></span>**17.** And if some of the branches be broken
off, and thou, being a wild olive tree, wert graffed in among them, and
with them partakest of the root and fatness of the olive tree;

<span id="xv.iv-p5"></span>**17.** Si vero ex ramis quidam defracti
sunt, tu vero oleaster quum esses, insitus es pro ipsis, et particeps
factus es radicis et pinguedinis oleae;

<span id="xv.iv-p6"></span>**18.** Boast not against the branches. But
if thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root thee.

<span id="xv.iv-p7"></span>**18.** Ne contra ramos glorieris: quod si
gloriaris, non tu radicem portas; sed radix to.

<span id="xv.iv-p8"></span>**19.** Thou wilt say then, The branches were
broken off, that I might be graffed in.

<span id="xv.iv-p9"></span>**19.** Dices ergo, Defracti sunt rami, ut
ego insererer.

<span id="xv.iv-p10"></span>**20.** Well; because of unbelief they were
broken off, and thou standest by faith. Be not high-minded, but fear:

<span id="xv.iv-p11"></span>**20.** Bene; propter incredulitatem
defracti sunt, tu vero fide stabilitus es; Ne animo efferaris, sed
timeas.

<span id="xv.iv-p12"></span>**21.** For if God spared not the natural
branches, *take heed* lest he also spare not thee.

<span id="xv.iv-p13"></span>**21.** Si enim Deus naturalibus ramis non
perpercit, vide ne qua fit, ut et tibi non parcat.

<span id="xv.iv-p14"></span><span id="xv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p15"></span>**16.** *For if the first-fruits, etc.* By
comparing the worthiness of the Jews and of the Gentiles, he now takes
away pride from the one and pacifies the other, as far as he could; for
he shows that the Gentiles, if they pretended any prerogative of honor
of their own, did in no respect excel the Jews, nay, that if they came
to a contest, they should be left far behind. Let us remember that in
this comparison man is not compared with man, but nation with nation. If
then a comparison be made between them, they shall be found equal in
this respect, that they are both equally the children of Adam; the only
difference is that the Jews had been separated from the Gentiles, that
they might be a peculiar people to the Lord.  <span
id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353)

<span id="xv.iv-p18"></span>They were then sanctified by the holy
covenant, and adorned with peculiar honor, with which God had not at
that time favored the Gentiles; but as the efficacy of the covenant
appeared then but small, he bids us to look back to Abraham and the
patriarchs, in whom the blessing of God was not indeed either empty or
void. He hence concludes, that from them an heredity holiness had passed
to all their posterity. But this conclusion would not have been right
had he spoken of persons, or rather had he not regarded the promise; for
when the father is just, he cannot yet transmit his own uprightness to
his son: but as the Lord had sanctified Abraham for himself for this
end, that his seed might also be holy, and as he thus conferred holiness
not only on his person but also on his whole race, the Apostle does not
unsuitably draw this conclusion, that all the Jews were sanctified in
their father Abraham.  <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354)

<span id="xv.iv-p23"></span>Then to confirm this view, he adduces two
similitudes: the one taken from the ceremonies of the law, and the other
borrowed from nature. The first-fruits which were offered sanctified the
whole lump, in like manner the goodness of the juice diffuses itself
from the root to the branches; and posterity hold the same connection
with their parents from whom they proceed as the lump has with the
first-fruits, and the branches with the tree. It is not then a strange
thing that the Jews were sanctified in their father. There is here no
difficulty if you understand by holiness the spiritual nobility of the
nation, and that indeed not belonging to nature, but what proceeded from
the covenant. It may be truly said, I allow, that the Jews were
naturally holy, for their adoption was hereditary; but I now speak of
our first nature, according to which we are all, as we know, accursed in
Adam. Therefore the dignity of an elect people, to speak correctly, is a
supernatural privilege.

<span id="xv.iv-p24"></span><span id="xv.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p25"></span>**17.** *And if some of the branches, etc.*
He now refers to the present dignity of the Gentiles, which is no other
than to be of the branches; which, being taken from another, are set in
some noble tree: for the origin of the Gentiles was as it were from some
wild and unfruitful olive, as nothing but a curse was to be found in
their whole race. Whatever glory then they had was from their new
insition, not from their old stock. There was then no reason for the
Gentiles to glory in their own dignity in comparison with the Jews. We
may also add, that Paul wisely mitigates the severity of the case, by
not saying that the whole top of the tree was cut off, but that some of
the branches were broken, and also that God took some here and there
from among the Gentiles, whom he set in the holy and blessed trunk.
 <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355)

<span id="xv.iv-p27"></span><span id="xv.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p28"></span>**18.** *But if thou gloriest, thou bearest
not the root, etc.* The Gentiles could not contend with the Jews
respecting the excellency of their race without contending with Abraham
himself; which would have been extremely unbecoming, since he was like a
root by which they were borne and nourished. As unreasonable as it would
be for the branches to boast against the root, so unreasonable would it
have been for the Gentiles to glory against the Jews, that is, with
respect to the excellency of their race; for Paul would have them ever
to consider whence was the origin of their salvation. And we know that
after Christ by his coming has pulled down the partition-wall, the whole
world partook of the favor which God had previously conferred on the
chosen people. It hence follows, that the calling of the Gentiles was
like an ingrafting, and that they did not otherwise grow up as God’s
people than as they were grafted in the stock of Abraham.

<span id="xv.iv-p29"></span><span id="xv.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p30"></span>**19.** *Thou wilt then say, etc.* In the
person of the Gentiles he brings forward what they might have pleaded
for themselves; but that was of such a nature as ought not to have
filled them with pride, but, on the contrary, to have made them humble.
For if the cutting off of the Jews was through unbelief, and if the
ingrafting of the Gentiles was by faith, what was their duty but to
acknowledge the favor of God, and also to cherish modesty and humbleness
of mind? For it is the nature of faith, and what properly belongs to it,
to generate humility and fear.  <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356)
But by fear understand that which is in no way inconsistent with the
assurance of faith; for Paul would not have our faith to vacillate or to
alternate with doubt, much less would he have us to be frightened or to
quake with fear.  <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357)

<span id="xv.iv-p35"></span>Of what kind then is this fear? As the Lord
bids us to take into our consideration two things, so two kinds of
feeling must thereby be produced. For he would have us ever to bear in
mind the miserable condition of our nature; and this can produce nothing
but dread, weariness, anxiety, and despair; and it is indeed expedient
that we should thus be thoroughly laid prostrate and broken down, that
we may at length groan to him; but this dread, derived from the
knowledge of ourselves, keeps not our minds while relying on his
goodness, from continuing calm; this weariness hinders us not from
enjoying full consolation in him; this anxiety, this despair, does not
prevent us from obtaining in him real joy and hope. Hence the fear, of
which he speaks, is set up as an antidote to proud contempt; for as
every one claims for himself more than what is right, and becomes too
secure and at length insolent towards others, we ought then so far to
fear, that our heart may not swell with pride and elate itself.

<span id="xv.iv-p36"></span>But it seems that he throws in a doubt as to
salvation, since he reminds them to beware lest they also should not be
spared. To this I answer, — that as this exhortation refers to the
subduing of the flesh, which is ever insolent even in the children of
God, he derogates nothing from the certainty of faith. And we must
especially notice and remember what I have before said, — that Paul’s
address is not so much to individuals as to the whole body of the
Gentiles, among whom there might have been many, who were vainly
inflated, professing rather than having faith. On account of these Paul
threatens the Gentiles, not without reason, with excision, as we shall
hereafter find again.

<span id="xv.iv-p37"></span><span id="xv.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p38"></span>**21.** *For if God has not spared the
natural branches, etc.* This is a most powerful reason to beat down all
self-confidence: for the rejection of the Jews should never come across
our minds without striking and shaking us with dread. For what ruined
them, but that through supine dependence on the dignity which they had
obtained, they despised what God had appointed? They were not spared,
though they were natural branches; what then shall be done to us, who
are the wild olive and aliens, if we become beyond measure arrogant? But
this thought, as it leads us to distrust ourselves, so it tends to make
us to cleave more firmly and steadfastly to the goodness of God.

<span id="xv.iv-p39"></span>And here again it appears more evident, that
the discourse is addressed generally to the body of the Gentiles, for
the excision, of which he speaks, could not apply to individuals, whose
election is unchangeable, based on the eternal purpose of God. Paul
therefore declares to the Gentiles, that if they exulted over the Jews,
a reward for their pride would be prepared for them; for God will again
reconcile to himself the first people whom he has divorced.

<span id="xv.v"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p1"></span><span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
11:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022)<span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p2"></span>**22.** Behold therefore the goodness and
severity of God: on them which fell, severity; but toward thee,
goodness, if thou continue in *his* goodness: otherwise thou also shalt
be cut off.

<span id="xv.v-p3"></span>**22.** Vide igitur lenitatem  <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) et severitatem Dei; in eos quidem qui
ceciderunt, severitatem;  <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) in te
vero lenitatem, si permanseris in lenitate; alioqui tu quoque excideris:

<span id="xv.v-p6"></span>**23.** And they also, if they abide not still
in unbelief, shall be graffed in: for God is able to graff them in
again.

<span id="xv.v-p7"></span>**23.** Et illi, si non perstiterint in
incredulitate, inserentur; potens enim est Deus rursum inserere ipsos.

<span id="xv.v-p8"></span>**24.** For if thou wert cut out of the olive
tree which is wild by nature, and wert graffed contrary to nature into a
good olive tree: how much more shall these, which be the natural
*branches*, be graffed into their own olive tree?

<span id="xv.v-p9"></span>**24.** Si enim tu ex oleastro, quae tibi
nativa erat, exectus es, et printer naturam insitus es in veram oleam;
multo magis hi secundum naturam propriae oleae inserentur.

<span id="xv.v-p10"></span><span id="xv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p11"></span>**22.** *See then, etc.* By laying the case
before their eyes he more clearly and fully confirms the fact, — that
the Gentiles had no reason to be proud. They saw in the Jews an example
of God’s severity, which ought to have terrified them; while in
themselves they had an evidence of his grace and goodness, by which they
ought to have been stimulated to thankfulness only, and to exalt the
Lord and not themselves. The words import the same, as though he had
said, — “If thou exultest over their calamity, think first what thou
hast been; for the same severity of God would have impended over thee,
hadst thou not been delivered by his gratuitous favor: then consider
what thou art even now; for salvation shall not continue to thee, except
thou humbly recognisest the mercy of God; for if thou forgettest thyself
and arrogantly exultest, the ruin, into which they have fallen, awaits
thee: it is not indeed enough for thee to have once embraced the favor
of God, except thou followest his call through the whole course of thy
life.” They indeed who have been illuminated by the Lord ought always to
think of perseverance; for they continue not in the goodness of God, who
having for a time responded to the call of God, do at length begin to
loathe the kingdom of heaven, and thus by their ingratitude justly
deserve to be blinded again.

<span id="xv.v-p12"></span>But he addresses not each of the godly apart,
as we have already said, but he makes a comparison between the Gentiles
and the Jews. It is indeed true that each individual among the Jews
received the reward due to his own unbelief, when they were banished
from the kingdom of God, and that all who front among the Gentiles were
called, were vessels of God’s mercy; but yet the particular design of
Paul must be borne in mind. For he would have the Gentiles to depend on
the eternal covenant of God, so as to connect their own with the
salvation of the elect people, and then, lest the rejection of the Jews
should produce offense, as though their ancient adoption were void, he
would have them to be terrified by this example of punishment, so as
reverently to regard the judgment of God. For whence comes so great
licentiousness on curious questions, except that we almost neglect to
consider those things which ought to have duly taught us humility?

<span id="xv.v-p13"></span>But as he speaks not of the elect
individually, but of the whole body, a condition is added, *If they
continued in his kindness* I indeed allow, that as soon as any one
abuses God’s goodness, he deserves to be deprived of the offered favor;
but it would be improper to say of any one of the godly particularly,
that God had mercy on him, when he chose him, provided he would continue
in his mercy; for the perseverance of faith, which completes in us the
effect of God’s grace, flows from election itself. Paul then teaches us,
that the Gentiles were admitted into the hope of eternal life on the
condition, that they by their gratitude retained possession of it. And
dreadful indeed was the defection of the whole world, which afterwards
happened; and this dearly proves, that this exhortation was not
superfluous; for when God had almost in a moment watered it with his
grace, so that religion flourished everywhere, soon after the truth of
the gospel vanished, and the treasure of salvation was taken away. And
whence came so sudden a change, except that the Gentiles had fallen away
from their calling?

<span id="xv.v-p14"></span>*Otherwise thou also shalt be cut off, etc.*
We now understand in what sense Paul threatens them with excision, whom
he has already allowed to have been grafted into the hope of life
through God’s election. For, first, though this cannot happen to the
elect, they have yet need of such warning, in order to subdue the pride
of the flesh; which being really opposed to their salvation, ought
justly to be terrified with the dread of perdition. As far then as
Christians are illuminated by faith, they hear, for their assurance,
that the calling of God is without repentance; but as far as they carry
about them the flesh, which wantonly resists the grace of God, they are
taught humility by this warning, “Take heed lest thou be cut off.”
Secondly, we must bear in mind the solution which I have before
mentioned, — that Paul speaks not here of the special election of
individuals, but sets the Gentiles and Jews in opposition the one to the
other; and that therefore the elect are not so much addressed in these
words, as those who falsely gloried that they had obtained the place of
the Jews: nay, he speaks to the Gentiles generally, and addresses the
whole body in common, among whom there were many who were faithful, and
those who were members of Christ in name only.

<span id="xv.v-p15"></span>But if it be asked respecting individuals,
“How any one could be cut off from the grafting, and how, after
excision, he could be grafted again,” — bear in mind, that there are
three modes of insition, and two modes of excision. For instance, the
children of the faithful are ingrafted, to whom the promise belongs
according to the covenant made with the fathers; ingrafted are also they
who indeed receive the seed of the gospel, but it strikes no root, or it
is choked before it brings any fruit; and thirdly, the elect are
ingrafted, who are illuminated unto eternal life according to the
immutable purpose of God. The first are cut off, when they refuse the
promise given to their fathers, or do not receive it on account of their
ingratitude; the second are cut off, when the seed is withered and
destroyed; and as the danger of this impends over all, with regard to
their own nature, it must be allowed that this warning which Paul gives
belongs in a certain way to the faithful, lest they indulge themselves
in the sloth of the flesh. But with regard to the present passage, it is
enough for us to know, that the vengeance which God had executed on the
Jews, is pronounced on the Gentiles, in case they become like them.

<span id="xv.v-p16"></span><span id="xv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p17"></span>**23.** *For God is able, etc*. Frigid would
this argument be to the profane; for however they may concede power to
God, yet as they view it at a distance, shut up as it were in heaven,
they do for the most part rob it of its effect. But as the faithful,
whenever they hear God’s power named, look on it as in present
operation, he thought that this reason was sufficient to strike their
minds. We may add, that he assumes this as an acknowledged axiom, — that
God had so punished the unbelief of his people as not to forget his
mercy; according to what he had done before, having often restored the
Jews, after he had apparently banished them from his kingdom. And he
shows at the same time by the comparison, how much more easy it would be
to reverse the present state of things than to have introduced it; that
is, how much easier it would be for the natural branches, if they were
again put in the place from which they had been cut off, to draw
substance from their own root, than for the wild and the unfruitful,
from a foreign stock: for such is the comparison made between the Jews
and the Gentiles.

<span id="xv.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
11:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)<span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p2"></span>**25.** For I would not, brethren, that ye
should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own
conceits, that blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the
fulness of the Gentiles be come in.

<span id="xv.vi-p3"></span>**25.** Nolo euim vos ignorare, fratres,
mysterium hoc, ut ne apud vosmetipsos superbiatis, quod caecitas ex
parte Israeli contigit, donec plenitudo gentium ingrediatur:

<span id="xv.vi-p4"></span>**26.** And so all Israel shall be saved: as
it is written, There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall
turn away ungodliness from Jacob:

<span id="xv.vi-p5"></span>**26.** Atque ita universus Israel salvus
fiet; quemadmodum scriptum est, Veniet ex Sion is qui liberat, et
avertet impietates a Iacob:

<span id="xv.vi-p6"></span>**27.** For this *is* my covenant unto them,
when I shall take away their sins.

<span id="xv.vi-p7"></span>**27.** Et hoc illis a me testamentum, quum
abstulero peccata eorum.

<span id="xv.vi-p8"></span><span id="xv.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p9"></span>**25.** *I would not, etc.* Here he rouses
his hearers to a greater attention, while he avows that he is going to
declare something that was secret. Nor did he do this without reason;
for he wished to conclude, by a brief or plain sentence, a very
perplexed question; and yet he declares what no one could have expected.
But the words, *Lest ye should be proud in yourselves,*  <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) show what was his designed object; and
that was, to check the arrogance of the Gentiles, lest they should exult
over the Jews. This admonition was also necessary, lest the defection of
that people should immoderately disturb the minds of the weak, as though
the salvation of them all was to be forever despaired of. The same is
still not less useful to us at this day, so that we may know, that the
salvation of the remnant, whom the Lord will at length gather to
himself, is hid, sealed as it were by his signet. And whenever a long
delay tempts us to despair, let us remember this word *mystery;* by
which Paul clearly reminds us, that the mode of their conversion will
neither be common nor usual; and hence they act absurdly who attempt to
measure it by their own judgment; for what can be more unreasonable than
to regard that as incredible which is far removed from our view? It is
called a mystery, because it will be incomprehensible until the time of
its revelation.  <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) It is, however,
made known to us, as it was to the Romans, that our faith may be content
with the word, and support us with hope, until the event itself come to
light.

<span id="xv.vi-p12"></span>*That blindness in part, etc.* “In part,” I
think, refers not simply to time, nor to the number, but means, in a
manner, or in a measure; by which expression he intended, as it seems to
me, only to qualify a declaration which in itself was severe. *Until*
does not specify the progress or order of time, but signifies the same
thing, as though he had said, “That the fullness of the Gentiles,” etc.
The meaning then is, — That God had in a manner so blinded Israel, that
while they refused the light of the gospel, it might be transferred to
the Gentiles, and that these might occupy, as it were, the vacated
possession. And so this blindness served the providence of God in
furthering the salvation of the Gentiles, which he had designed. And the
*fullness of the Gentiles* is to be taken for a great number: for it was
not to be, as before, when a few proselytes connected themselves with
the Jews; but such was to be the change, that the Gentiles would form
almost the entire body of the Church.  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362)

<span id="xv.vi-p17"></span><span id="xv.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p18"></span>**26.** *And so all Israel, etc.* Many
understand this of the Jewish people, as though Paul had said, that
religion would again be restored among them as before: but I extend the
word *Israel* to all the people of God, according to this meaning, —
“When the Gentiles shall come in, the Jews also shall return from their
defection to the obedience of faith; and thus shall be completed the
salvation of the whole Israel of God, which must be gathered from both;
and yet in such a way that the Jews shall obtain the first place, being
as it were the first-born in God’s family.” This interpretation seems to
me the most suitable, because Paul intended here to set forth the
completion of the kingdom of Christ, which is by no means to be confined
to the Jews, but is to include the whole world. The same manner of
speaking we find in <span id="xv.vi-p18.1"></span>[Ga
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016)<span id="xv.vi-p18.1"></span>.
The Israel of God is what he calls the Church, gathered alike from Jews
and Gentiles; and he sets the people, thus collected from their
dispersion, in opposition to the carnal children of Abraham, who had
departed from his faith.

<span id="xv.vi-p19"></span>*As it is written, etc.* He does not confirm
the whole passage by this testimony of Isaiah, (<span
id="xv.vi-p19.1"></span>[Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020)<span id="xv.vi-p19.1"></span>,)
but only one clause, — that the children of Abraham shall be partakers
of redemption. But if one takes this view, — that Christ had been
promised and offered to them, but that as they rejected him, they were
deprived of his grace; yet the Prophet’s words express more, even this,
— that there will be some remnant, who, having repented, shall enjoy the
favor of deliverance.

<span id="xv.vi-p20"></span>Paul, however, does not quote what we read
in Isaiah, word for word;

<span id="xv.vi-p21"></span>“come,” he says, “shall a Redeemer to Sion,
and to those who shall repent of iniquity in Jacob, saith the Lord.”
(<span id="xv.vi-p21.1"></span>[Isa
59:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#020)<span id="xv.vi-p21.1"></span>.)

<span id="xv.vi-p22"></span>But on this point we need not be very
curious; only this is to be regarded, that the Apostles suitably apply
to their purpose whatever proofs they adduce from the Old Testament; for
their object was to point but passages, as it were by the finger, that
readers might be directed to the fountain itself.

<span id="xv.vi-p23"></span>But though in this prophecy deliverance to
the spiritual people of God is promised, among whom even Gentiles are
included; yet as the Jews are the first-born, what the Prophet declares
must be fulfilled, especially in them: for that Scripture calls all the
people of God Israelites, is to be ascribed to the pre-eminence of that
nation, whom God had preferred to all other nations. And then, from a
regard to the ancient covenant, he says expressly, that a Redeemer shall
come to Sion; and he adds, that he will redeem those in Jacob who shall
return from their transgression.  <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) By these words God distinctly claims
for himself a certain seed, so that his redemption may be effectual in
his elect and peculiar nation. And though fitter for his purpose would
have been the expression used by the Prophet, “shall come to Sion;” yet
Paul made no scruple to follow the commonly received translation, which
reads, “The Redeemer shall come forth from Mount Sion.” And similar is
the case as to the second part, “He shall turn away iniquities from
Jacob:” for Paul thought it enough to regard this point only, — that as
it is Christ’s peculiar office to reconcile to God an apostate and
faithless people, some change was surely to be looked for, lest they
should all perish together.

<span id="xv.vi-p27"></span><span id="xv.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p28"></span>**27.** *And, this is my covenant with them,
etc.* Though Paul, by the last prophecy of Isaiah, briefly touched on
the office of the Messiah, in order to remind the Jews what was to be
expected especially from him, he further adds these few words from
Jeremiah, expressly for the same purpose; for what is added is not found
in the former passage.  <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) This
also tends to confirm the subject in hand; for what he said of the
conversion of a people who were so stubborn and obstinate, might have
appeared incredible: he therefore removes this stumblingblock, by
declaring that the covenant included a gratuitous remission of sins. For
we may gather from the words of the Prophet, — that God would have no
more to do with his apostate people, until he should remit the crime of
perfidy, as well as their other sins.

<span id="xv.vii"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
11:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028)<span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p2"></span>**28.** As concerning the gospel, *they are*
enemies for your sakes: but as touching the election, *they are* beloved
for the fathers’ sakes.

<span id="xv.vii-p3"></span>**28.** Secundum Evangelium quidem inimici
propter vos; secundum electionem vero dilecti propter Patres:

<span id="xv.vii-p4"></span>**29.** For the gifts and calling of God
*are* without repentance.

<span id="xv.vii-p5"></span>**29.** Sine poenitentia enim sunt dona et
vocatio Del.

<span id="xv.vii-p6"></span>**30.** For as ye in times past have not
believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief:

<span id="xv.vii-p7"></span>**30.** Quemadmodum enim vos quoque  <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) increduli fuistis Deo, nunc autem
misericordiam estis consequuti istorum incredulitate:

<span id="xv.vii-p9"></span>**31.** Even so have these also now not
believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy.

<span id="xv.vii-p10"></span>**31.** Sic et ii nunc increduli facti
sunt, eo quod adepti estis misericordiam, ut ipsi quoque misericordiam
consequantur.  <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366)

<span id="xv.vii-p12"></span>**32.** For God hath concluded them all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all.

<span id="xv.vii-p13"></span>**32.** Concludit enim Deus omnes sub
incredulitate, ut omnium misereatur.

<span id="xv.vii-p14"></span><span id="xv.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p15"></span>**28.** *With regard indeed to the gospel,
etc.* He shows that the worst thing in the Jews ought not to subject
them to the contempt of the Gentiles. Their chief crime was unbelief:
but Paul teaches us, that they were thus blinded for a time by God’s
providence, that a way to the gospel might be made for the Gentiles;
 <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) and that still they were not
for ever excluded from the favor of God. He then admits, that they were
for the present alienated from God on account of the gospel, that thus
the salvation, which at first was deposited with them, might come to the
Gentiles; and yet that God was not unmindful of the covenant which he
had made with their fathers, and by which he testified that according to
his eternal purpose he loved that nation: and this he confirms by this
remarkable declaration, — that the grace of the divine calling cannot be
made void; for this is the import of the words, —

<span id="xv.vii-p17"></span><span id="xv.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p18"></span>**29.** *The gifts and calling of God are
without repentance.* He has mentioned gifts and calling; which are to be
understood, according to a figure in grammar,  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) as meaning the gift of calling: and
this is not to be taken for any sort of calling but of that, by which
God had adopted the posterity of Abraham into covenant; since this is
especially the subject here, as he has previously, by the word,
election, designated the secret purpose of God, by which he had formerly
made a distinction between the Jews and the Gentiles.  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) For we must bear this in mind, — that
he speaks not now of the election of individuals, but of the common
adoption of the whole nation, which might seem for a time, according to
the outward appearance, to have failed, but had not been cut up by the
roots. As the Jews had fallen from their privilege and the salvation
promised them, that some hope might remain to the remnant, Paul
maintains that the purpose of God stands firm and immovable, by which he
had once deigned to choose them for himself as a peculiar nation. Since
then it cannot possibly be, that the Lord will depart from that covenant
which he made with Abraham,

<span id="xv.vii-p23"></span>“I will be the God of thy seed,” (<span
id="xv.vii-p23.1"></span>[Ge 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span
id="xv.vii-p23.1"></span>,)

<span id="xv.vii-p24"></span>it is evident that he has not wholly turned
away his kindness from the Jewish nation.

<span id="xv.vii-p25"></span>He does not oppose the gospel to election,
as though they were contrary the one to the other, for whom God has
chosen he calls; but inasmuch as the gospel had been proclaimed to the
Gentiles beyond the expectation of the world, he justly compares this
favor with the ancient election of the Jews, which had been manifested
so many ages before: and so election derives its name from antiquity;
for God had in past ages of the world chosen one people for himself.

<span id="xv.vii-p26"></span>*On account of the Fathers,* he says not,
because they gave any cause for love, but because God’s favor had
descended from them to their posterity, according to the tenor of the
covenant, “Thy God and the God of thy seed.” How the Gentiles had
obtained mercy through the unbelief of the Jews, has been before stated,
namely, that God, being angry with the Jews for their unbelief, turned
his kindness to them. What immediately follows, that they became
unbelievers through the mercy manifested to the Gentiles, seems rather
strange; and yet there is in it nothing unreasonable; for Paul assigns
not the cause of blindness, but only declares, that what God transferred
to the Gentiles had been taken away from the Jews. But lest what they
had lost through unbelief, should be thought by the Gentiles to have
been gained by them through the merit of faith, mention is made only of
mercy. What is substantially said then is, — that as God purposed to
show mercy to the Gentiles, the Jews were on this account deprived of
the light of faith.

<span id="xv.vii-p27"></span><span id="xv.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p28"></span>**32.** *For God has shut up, etc.* A
remarkable conclusion, by which he shows that there is no reason why
they who have a hope of salvation should despair of others; for whatever
they may now be, they have been like all the rest. If they have emerged
from unbelief through God’s mercy alone, they ought to leave place for
it as to others also. For he makes the Jews equal in guilt with the
Gentiles, that both might understand that the avenue to salvation is no
less open to others than to them. For it is the mercy of God alone which
saves; and this offers itself to both. This sentence then corresponds
with the testimony of Hosea, which he had before quoted, “I will call
those my people who were not my people.” But he does not mean, that God
so blinds all men that their unbelief is to be imputed to him; but that
he hath so arranged by his providence, that all should be guilty of
unbelief, in order that he might have them subject to his judgment, and
for this end, — that all merits being buried, salvation might proceed
from his goodness alone.  <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370)

<span id="xv.vii-p31"></span>Paul then intends here to teach two things
— that there is nothing in any man why he should be preferred to others,
apart from the mere favor of God; and that God in the dispensation of
his grace, is under no restraint that he should not grant it to whom he
pleases. There is an emphasis in the word *mercy;* for it intimates that
God is bound to none, and that he therefore saves all freely, for they
are all equally lost. But extremely gross is their folly who hence
conclude that all shall be saved; for Paul simply means that both Jews
and Gentiles do not otherwise obtain salvation than through the mercy of
God, and thus he leaves to none any reason for complaint. It is indeed
true that this mercy is without any difference offered to all, but every
one must seek it by faith.

<span id="xv.viii"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
11:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span
id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p2"></span>**33.** O the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable *are* his judgments,
and his ways past finding out!

<span id="xv.viii-p3"></span>**33.** O profunditatem divitiarum et
sapientiae et cognitionis Dei! quam incomprehensibilia  <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) sunt judicia ejus et impervestigabiles
 <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) viae ipsius!

<span id="xv.viii-p6"></span>**34.** For who hath known the mind of the
Lord? or who hath been his counsellor?

<span id="xv.viii-p7"></span>**34.** Quis enim cognovit mentem Domini?
aut quis illi a consiliis fuit?

<span id="xv.viii-p8"></span>**35.** Or who hath first given to him, and
it shall be recompensed unto him again?

<span id="xv.viii-p9"></span>**35.** Aut quis prior dedit ei et
retribuetur illi?

<span id="xv.viii-p10"></span>**36.** For of him, and through him, and
to him, *are* all things: to whom *be* glory for ever. Amen.

<span id="xv.viii-p11"></span>**36.** Quoniam ex illo et per illum et in
illum sunt omnia: Ipsi gloria in secula. Amen.

<span id="xv.viii-p12"></span><span id="xv.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p13"></span>**33.** *Oh! the depth, etc.* Here first
the Apostle bursts into an exclamation, which arose spontaneously from a
devout consideration of God’s dealings with the faithful; then in
passing he checks the boldness of impiety, which is wont to clamor
against the judgments of God. When therefore we hear, *Oh! the depth,*
this expression of wonder ought greatly to avail to the beating down of
the presumption of our flesh; for after having spoken from the word and
by the Spirit of the Lord, being at length overcome by the sublimity of
so great a mystery, he could not do otherwise than wonder and exclaim,
that, the riches of God’s wisdom are deeper than our reason can
penetrate to. Whenever then we enter on a discourse respecting the
eternal counsels of God, let a bridle be always set on our thoughts and
tongue, so that after having spoken soberly and within the limits of
God’s word, our reasoning may at last end in admiration. Nor ought we to
be ashamed, that if we are not wiser than he, who, having been taken
into the third heaven, saw mysteries to man ineffable, and who yet could
find in this instance no other end designed but that he should thus
humble himself.

<span id="xv.viii-p14"></span>Some render the words of Paul thus, “Oh!
the deep riches, and wisdom, and knowledge of God!” as though the word
<span id="xv.viii-p14.1"></span>βάθος was an adjective; and they take
*riches* for abundance, but this seems to me strained, and I have
therefore no doubt but that he extols God’s deep riches of wisdom and
knowledge.  <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373)

<span id="xv.viii-p22"></span>*How incomprehensible, etc.* By different
words, according to a practice common in Hebrew, he expresses the same
thing. For he speaks of *judgments,* then he subjoins *ways,* which mean
appointments or the mode of acting, or the manner of ruling. But he
still continues his exclamation, and thus the more he elevates the
height of the divine mystery, the more he deters us from the curiosity
of investigating it. Let us then learn to make no searchings respecting
the Lord, except as far as he has revealed himself in the Scriptures;
for otherwise we shall enter a labyrinth, from which the retreat is not
easy. It must however be noticed, that he speaks not here of all God’s
mysteries, but of those which are hid with God himself, and ought to be
only admired and adored by us.

<span id="xv.viii-p23"></span><span id="xv.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p24"></span>**34.** *Who has known the mind of the
Lord?* He begins here to extend as it were his hand to restrain the
audacity of men, lest they should clamor against God’s judgments, and
this he does by stating two reasons: the first is, that all mortals are
too blind to take a view of God’s predestination by their own
understanding, and to reason on a thing unknown is presumptuous and
absurd; the other is, that we can have no cause of complaint against
God, since no mortal can boast that God is a debtor to him; but that, on
the contrary, all are under obligations to him for his bounty.  <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374)

<span id="xv.viii-p28"></span>Within this limit then let every one
remember to keep his own mind, lest he be carried beyond God’s oracles
in investigating predestination, since we hear that man can distinguish
nothing in this case, any more than a blind man in darkness. This
caution, however, is not to be so applied as to weaken the certainty of
faith, which proceeds not from the acumen of the human mind, but solely
from the illumination of the Spirit; for Paul himself in another place,
after having testified that all the mysteries of God far exceed the
comprehension of our minds, immediately subjoins that the faithful
understand the mind of the Lord, because they have not received the
spirit of this world, but the Spirit which has been given them by God,
by whom they are instructed as to his goodness, which otherwise would be
incomprehensible to them.

<span id="xv.viii-p29"></span>As then we cannot by our own faculties
examine the secrets of God, so we are admitted into a certain and clear
knowledge of them by the grace of the Holy Spirit: and if we ought to
follow the guidance of the Spirit, where he leaves us, there we ought to
stop and as it were to fix our standing. If any one will seek to know
more than what God has revealed, he shall be overwhelmed with the
immeasurable brightness of inaccessible light. But we must bear in mind
the distinction, which I have before mentioned, between the secret
counsel of God, and his will made known in Scripture; for though the
whole doctrine of Scripture surpasses in its height the mind of man, yet
an access to it is not closed against the faithful, who reverently and
soberly follow the Spirit as their guide; but the case is different with
regard to his hidden counsel, the depth and height of which cannot by
any investigation be reached.

<span id="xv.viii-p30"></span><span id="xv.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p31"></span>**35.** *Who has first given to him, etc.*
Another reason, by which God’s righteousness is most effectually
defended against all the accusations of the ungodly: for if no one
retains him bound to himself by his own merits, no one can justly
expostulate with him for not having received his reward; as he, who
would constrain another to do him good, must necessarily adduce those
deeds by which he has deserved a reward. The import then of Paul’s words
is this — “God cannot be charged with unrighteousness, except it can be
proved, that he renders not to every one his due: but it is evident,
that no one is deprived by him of his right, since he is under
obligation to none; for who can boast of any thing of his own, by which
he has deserved his favor?”  <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375)

<span id="xv.viii-p36"></span>Now this is a remarkable passage; for we
are here taught, that it is not in our power to constrain God by our
good works to bestow salvation on us, but that he anticipates the
undeserving by his gratuitous goodness. But if we desire to make an
honest examination, we shall not only find, that God is in no way a
debtor to us, but that we are all subject to his judgment, — that we not
only deserve no layout, but that we are worthy of eternal death. And
Paul not only concludes, that God owes us nothing, on account of our
corrupt and sinful nature; but he denies, that if man were perfect, he
could bring anything before God, by which he could gain his favor; for
as soon as he begins to exist, he is already by the right of creation so
much indebted to his Maker, that he has nothing of his own. In vain then
shall we try to take from him his own right, that he should not, as he
pleases, freely determine respecting his own creatures, as though there
was mutual debt and credit.

<span id="xv.viii-p37"></span><span id="xv.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p38"></span>**36.** *For from him and through him,
etc.* A confirmation of the last verse. He shows, that it is very far
from being the case, that we can glory in any good thing of our own
against God, since we have been created by him from nothing, and now
exist through him. He hence infers, that our being should be employed
for his glory: for how unreasonable would it be for creatures, whom he
has formed and whom he sustains, to live for any other purpose than for
making his glory known? It has not escaped my notice, that the phrase,
<span id="xv.viii-p38.1"></span>εἰς αὐτὸν, *to him,* is sometimes taken
for <span id="xv.viii-p38.2"></span>ἐν αὐτῷ*, in* or *by him,* but
improperly: and as its proper meaning is more suitable to the present
subject, it is better to retain it, than to adopt that which is
improper. The import of what is said is, — That the whole order of
nature would be strangely subverted, were not God, who is the beginning
of all things, the end also.

<span id="xv.viii-p39"></span>*To him be glory, etc.* The proposition
being as it were proved, he now confidently assumes it as indubitable, —
That the Lord’s own glory ought everywhere to continue to him
unchangeably: for the sentence would be frigid were it taken generally;
but its emphasis depends on the context, that. God justly claims for
himself absolute supremacy, and that in the condition of mankind and of
the whole world nothing is to be sought beyond his own glory. It hence
follows, that absurd and contrary to reason, and even insane, are all
those sentiments which tend to diminish his glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc38014.htm#fr_337) <span
id="xv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p10.1"></span>Oraculum,” ὁ
χρηματισμός, the oracle, the divine response. The answer is put for him
who gave the answer, for it is “Jehovah” in the passage that is quoted;
as “Scripture” in <span id="xv.i-p10.2"></span>[Ro
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002)<span id="xv.i-p10.2"></span>, and
in other places, means him who speaks in the Scriptures. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc38014.htm#fr_338) <span
id="xv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p24"></span> That foreknowledge here includes election or
predestination, as <span id="xv.i-p24.1"></span>Augustine maintains, is
evident from what follows in <span id="xv.i-p24.2"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span id="xv.i-p24.2"></span>,
where “the remnant” is said to be reserved “according to the election of
grace,” or gratuitous election. If it be gratuitous, then it cannot be
according to any foreseen works: and works are expressly excluded in
<span id="xv.i-p24.3"></span>[Ro
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span id="xv.i-p24.3"></span>.
Were it otherwise, were foreseen works the ground of election, there
would be no suitableness nor congruity in such terms as foreknowledge
and election on the subject. It would have been much more appropriate in
this case for the Apostle to say, “God will receive every Jew who will
render himself worthy by his works.” On this supposition there was no
necessity for him to go back to election to remove the objection which
he had stated; he had only to refer to the terms of the gospel, which
regard Jews and Gentiles without any difference. But instead of doing
this, which *seems* adequate to the purpose, he gives an answer by
referring to the foreknowledge and free election of God. There is no way
to account for this, except by admitting, that election is an
efficacious purpose which secures the salvation of those who are its
objects, who have been chosen in Christ before the foundation of the
world. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc38014.htm#fr_339) <span
id="xv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p30"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p30.1"></span>Quomodo
appellet Deum adversus Israel — how he appeals to or calls on God
against Israel;” ὡς ἑντυγχάνει τῷ Θεῷ κατὰ τοῦ Ισραὴλ; “how he solicits
(<span id="xv.i-p30.2"></span>interpellet) God against Israel,” <span
id="xv.i-p30.3"></span>Beza; “when he pleadeth with God against Israel,”
<span id="xv.i-p30.4"></span>Doddridge; “when he complaineth to God
against Israel,” <span id="xv.i-p30.5"></span>Macknight. To “complain to
God against, or, with respect to, Israel,” would probably be the most
suitable rendering. See <span id="xv.i-p30.6"></span>[Ac
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#024)<span id="xv.i-p30.6"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p31"></span>The quotation in the following verse is from
<span id="xv.i-p31.1"></span>[1Ki
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010)<span id="xv.i-p31.1"></span>,
and is not taken literally, either from the Hebrew, or from the
*Septuagint*. The order of the two first clauses is changed; “prophets,”
and not “altars,” are mentioned first; in these he has adopted the words
of the *Septuagint*, but in this clause which follows he has changed the
terms; instead of καὶ ὑπολέλειμμαι ἐγὼ μονώτατος, the Apostle has κἀγὼ
ὑπελείφθην μόνος; and he has left out the words, “to take it away” after
life. The case is similar with the quotation in <span
id="xv.i-p31.2"></span>[Ro 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004)<span
id="xv.i-p31.2"></span>, from <span id="xv.i-p31.3"></span>[1Ki
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)<span id="xv.i-p31.3"></span>.
The sense is given, but not exactly the words, either from the Hebrew or
the *Septuagint*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc38014.htm#fr_340) <span
id="xv.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p33"></span> <span id="xv.i-p33.1"></span>Pareus
observes, that these seven thousand had no public ministry, for that was
idolatrous; and that yet they were preserved by such instruction as they
derived from the written word. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc38014.htm#fr_341) <span
id="xv.i-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p34"></span> <span id="xv.i-p34.1"></span>Calvin, as some
others, has supplied “image” before “Baal,” as the feminine article τὣ
is by Paul prefixed to it. In the *Septuagint* it is τῷ, and a masculine
pronoun is found at the end of the verse in <span
id="xv.i-p34.2"></span>[1Ki 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)<span
id="xv.i-p34.2"></span>, so that it could not have been a female deity,
as some have supposed. It is indeed evident, especially from a passage
in <span id="xv.i-p34.3"></span>[Tob
1:5](../../../bib/apo/tob001.htm#005)<span id="xv.i-p34.3"></span>, that
there was a female deity of this name, but the text in Kings will not
allow us to regard this goddess to be intended. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc38014.htm#fr_342) <span
id="xv.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p41"></span> The last half of this verse is considered
spurious by <span id="xv.i-p41.1"></span>Griesbach, being not found in
the greatest number of MSS., nor in the *Vulgate*, nor in the Latin
Fathers; but it is found in some of the Greek Fathers, <span
id="xv.i-p41.2"></span>Theodoret, <span
id="xv.i-p41.3"></span>Oecumenius, <span id="xv.i-p41.4"></span>Photius,
and in the text, though not in the comment of <span
id="xv.i-p41.5"></span>Chrysostom, and in <span
id="xv.i-p41.6"></span>Theophylact, with the exception of the last
clause, “Otherwise work,” etc. The *Syriac* and *Arabic* versions also
contain the whole verse. The argument is complete without the last
portion, which is, in fact, a repetition of the first in another form.
But this kind of statement is wholly in unison with the character of the
Apostle’s mode of writing. He often states a thing positively and
negatively, or in two different ways. See <span
id="xv.i-p41.7"></span>[Rom. 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="xv.i-p41.7"></span>; <span
id="xv.i-p41.8"></span>[Ro 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)<span
id="xv.i-p41.8"></span>; <span id="xv.i-p41.9"></span>[Eph.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#009)<span id="xv.i-p41.9"></span>. Then
an *omission* more probable than an *addition*. <span
id="xv.i-p41.10"></span>Beza, <span id="xv.i-p41.11"></span>Pareus,
<span id="xv.i-p41.12"></span>Wolfius, etc., regard it as genuine, and
<span id="xv.i-p41.13"></span>Doddridge and <span
id="xv.i-p41.14"></span>Macknight have retained it in their versions.
Every reason, except the number of MSS., is in favor of its genuineness.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc38014.htm#fr_343) <span
id="xv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span> Literally it is, “what Israel seeks, this he
has not obtained.” The pronoun for “this,” τούτου <span
id="xv.ii-p4.1"></span>Griesbach has displaced, and introduced τοῦτο in
its stead, as the most approved reading. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc38014.htm#fr_344) <span
id="xv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p15"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p15.1"></span>Excaecati
fuerunt,” ἐπωρώθησαν; it means hardened, stupified, rendered callous or
obdurate. <span id="xv.ii-p15.2"></span>*Occalluerunt* — “were
hardened,” <span id="xv.ii-p15.3"></span>Beza; both <span
id="xv.ii-p15.4"></span>Macknight and <span
id="xv.ii-p15.5"></span>Doddridge render it, “blinded.” It is applied to
the heart in <span id="xv.ii-p15.6"></span>[Mark
6:52](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#052), [Mark
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#017)<span id="xv.ii-p15.6"></span>;
<span id="xv.ii-p15.7"></span>[Joh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040)<span id="xv.ii-p15.7"></span>, —
to the mind in <span id="xv.ii-p15.8"></span>[2Co
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014)<span id="xv.ii-p15.8"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc38014.htm#fr_345) <span
id="xv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p18"></span> The foregoing reasoning is not
satisfactory: it goes beyond the evident meaning of the Apostle. He no
doubt quoted the texts according to their original design, and to say he
did not is to assert what is incapable of being proved, and what is even
contrary to the Apostle’s reasoning throughout. The hardening or
blinding spoken of by the Prophets, is stated uniformly as a punishment
for previous unbelief and impenitence, as admitted by our author
himself, and the obvious fact as to the Jews in the Apostle’s days, was
an evidence of the same, and though he states not this fact here, he
states it in the sequel of this Epistle. But why some were hardened, and
others were softened, is what must be resolved altogether to the will of
God. This, and no more than this, is what the Apostle evidently teaches
here: and it is neither wise nor right to go beyond what is expressly
taught, especially on a subject of a nature so mysterious and
incomprehensible. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc38014.htm#fr_346) <span
id="xv.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p21"></span> The quotation in this verse is taken from
two passages: the first clause is from <span
id="xv.ii-p21.1"></span>[Isa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010)<span id="xv.ii-p21.1"></span>,
and the rest from <span id="xv.ii-p21.2"></span>[Isa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)<span id="xv.ii-p21.2"></span>, or
<span id="xv.ii-p21.3"></span>[De
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)<span id="xv.ii-p21.3"></span>.
The first clause is not exactly according to the Hebrew or the
*Septuagint*; instead of “God gave them,” etc., it is in the
*Septuagint*, “the Lord hath made you drink,” etc., and in Hebrew,
“Jehovah has poured upon you,” etc. It is the “spirit of slumber” in
both, or rather, “of deep sleep” — <span id="xv.ii-p21.4"></span>תרדמה,
a dead or an overwhelming sleep; and κατανύξις, though not as to its
primary sense the same, is yet used according to this meaning. The verb
means to puncture, to prick, either with grief or remorse, and also to
affect with stupor. The latter idea the noun must have in this place,
for the Hebrew does not admit of the other. The latter part is found in
substance, though not in the same form of words in the two places
referred to. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc38014.htm#fr_347) <span
id="xv.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p23"></span> Some consider this passage as taken from
<span id="xv.ii-p23.1"></span>[De
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)<span id="xv.ii-p23.1"></span>,
and regard the last words as part of the quotation. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc38014.htm#fr_348) <span
id="xv.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p26"></span> <span id="xv.ii-p26.1"></span>Grotius
understands by “table” guests, or friends, who partake of the provisions
spread on the table. The wish is, that these should be a snare, etc.
“Table,” according to <span id="xv.ii-p26.2"></span>Pareus, means luxury
or festivity: and he adds, that there are here three metaphors, — the
ensnaring of birds — the entrapping of wild beasts — and the stumbling
in the dark, or that of blind men. Then the recompense or retaliation
implies, that this evil of being ensnared and entrapped, and of
stumbling, are only just retaliations for similar acts on their part; as
they had ensnared, entrapped, and caused others to stumble, it was but
just that they should be treated in the same way. And if we take “table”
as a metonymy for friends or guests, the meaning would be very striking.
And we know that the very friends and confederates of the Jews became
their enemies and effected their ruin. See <span
id="xv.ii-p26.3"></span>[Jer
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#022)<span id="xv.ii-p26.3"></span>.

<span id="xv.ii-p27"></span>The subject of imprecations is attended with
some difficulty. To imprecate, or to pronounce a curse on others, or to
wish others accursed, was forbidden even under the law, and it is
expressly forbidden under the gospel, <span
id="xv.ii-p27.1"></span>[Matt. 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044),
Matt. 45:0, [Rom. 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#014)<span
id="xv.ii-p27.1"></span>; we have the example of our Savior praying for
his enemies even on the cross; and yet we find that God pronounced a
curse on all the transgressors of the law, <span
id="xv.ii-p27.2"></span>[De 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span
id="xv.ii-p27.2"></span>, — that Christ pronounced a curse on Chorazin
and Bethsaida, — that the Psalmist often imprecated vengeance on his
enemies, <span id="xv.ii-p27.3"></span>[Ps
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010)<span id="xv.ii-p27.3"></span>;
<span id="xv.ii-p27.4"></span>[Ps
109:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007)<span
id="xv.ii-p27.4"></span>, — that the Apostle cursed Alexander the
coppersmith, <span id="xv.ii-p27.5"></span>[2Ti
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014)<span id="xv.ii-p27.5"></span>, —
and that John bids us not to pray for him who sins the sin unto death,
<span id="xv.ii-p27.6"></span>[1Jo
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016)<span id="xv.ii-p27.6"></span>.

<span id="xv.ii-p28"></span>The truth is, that circumstances make the
difference; what is forbidden in one respect is allowed in another. The
rule to man is, not to curse, but to bless, except to pronounce on God’s
enemies as such the judgment which God has already denounced on them.
But to curse individuals is what no one is allowed to do, except he be
inspired so as to know who those are who are given up by God to final
judgment; which may be supposed to have been the case with the Psalmist
and with St. Paul. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc38014.htm#fr_349) <span
id="xv.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p29"></span> <span id="xv.ii-p29.1"></span>[Ps.
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#023)<span id="xv.ii-p29.1"></span>. The
passage is given as in the *Septuagint*, except that καὶ εἰς θήραν is
added, and the two following words are transposed, with αὐτοῖς put after
them, and ἀνταπόδομα is put for ἀνταπόδοσιν <span
id="xv.ii-p29.2"></span>[Ro 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010)<span
id="xv.ii-p29.2"></span> is given without any variation from the
*Septuagint*. The Hebrew is in words considerably different, and more so
in our version than it really is. The word, <span
id="xv.ii-p29.3"></span>שלומים, is improperly rendered “welfare,” while
it ought to be “recompenses,” or, according to <span
id="xv.ii-p29.4"></span>Tremelius and Bp. <span
id="xv.ii-p29.5"></span>Horseley, “retributions,” or “retribution.” See
<span id="xv.ii-p29.6"></span>[Isa
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#008)<span id="xv.ii-p29.6"></span>.
The last clause of <span id="xv.ii-p29.7"></span>[Ro
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#010)<span id="xv.ii-p29.7"></span>,
though in meaning the same, is yet wholly different in words from the
Hebrew, which is thus correctly rendered in our version, “and make their
loins continually to shake.” The idea in both instances is the taking
away of vigor and strength. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc38014.htm#fr_350) <span
id="xv.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p21"></span> This is not quite correct: the first part
is a mere announcement of a fact — the fall of the Jews; and then in
what follows, according to the usual style of Scripture, the same thing
is stated in other words, and a corresponding clause is added; and the
antithesis is found to be suitable — the diminution and the completion.
The reason for the restatement of the first clause seems to be this, —
that the fall might not be deemed as total, but in part; it was ἣττημα,
a less part, a diminution, a lessening of their number in God’s kingdom.
A contrast to this is the πλήρωμα, the full or complete portion, that
is, their complete restoration, as it is said in <span
id="xv.iii-p21.1"></span>[Ro
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026)<span id="xv.iii-p21.1"></span>.
To preserve the antithesis, the first word must have its literal
meaning, a diminution or lessening, that is, as to the number saved.
<span id="xv.iii-p21.2"></span>Hammond renders the phrase, “their
paucity.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc38014.htm#fr_351) <span
id="xv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p24"></span> The meaning attached here to the words τὴν
διακονίαν μου δοξάζω, is somewhat different from what is commonly
understood. Its classical sense, “highly to estimate,” is what is
generally given here to the verb: but <span
id="xv.iii-p24.1"></span>Calvin takes it in a sense in which it is
mostly taken in Scripture, as meaning, “to render illustrious,” or
eminent, “to render glorious.” The construction of the two <span
id="xv.iii-p24.2"></span>[Romans
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013)<span id="xv.iii-p24.2"></span>
and 14, is somewhat difficult, and the meaning is not very clear. To
include the words, “as I am indeed the Apostle of the Gentiles,” in a
parenthesis, as it is done by some, would render the sense more evident,
and to add “this” after “say,” and “that” before “I render.” The version
then would be as follows, —

<span id="xv.iii-p25"></span>**13.** For I say *this* to you Gentiles
(as I am indeed the Apostle of the Gentiles,) *that* I render my
ministry glorious,

<span id="xv.iii-p26"></span>**14.** If I shall by any means excite to
emulation my own flesh and save some of them.

<span id="xv.iii-p27"></span>The sentiment in the last clause is the
same as that at the end of <span id="xv.iii-p27.1"></span>[Ro
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011)<span id="xv.iii-p27.1"></span>.
The *Vulgate*, and some of the Latin Fathers, and also <span
id="xv.iii-p27.2"></span>Luther, read δοξάσω in the future tense; which
would make the passage read better, — “*that* I shall render,” etc.
These two verses are not necessarily connected with the Apostle’s
argument; for in the following verse he resumes the subject of <span
id="xv.iii-p27.3"></span>[Ro
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012)<span id="xv.iii-p27.3"></span>,
or rather, as his usual manner is, he states the same thing in other
words and in more explicit and stronger terms. So that the γὰρ in the
next verse may very properly be rendered “yea,” or as an illative,
“then.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc38014.htm#fr_352) <span
id="xv.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p33"></span> Some view the last words, “life from the
dead,” as understood of the Jews and not of the Gentiles. But the
antithesis seems to require the latter meaning. The rejection or casting
away, ἀποβολὴ of the Jews was the occasion of reconciliation to the
world, that is, the Gentiles; then the reception, πρόσληψις, of the Jews
will be “life from the dead” to the Gentiles or to the world. He
expresses by stronger terms the sentiment in <span
id="xv.iii-p33.1"></span>[Ro
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012)<span id="xv.iii-p33.1"></span>,
“the riches of the world,” only intimating, as it appears, the decayed
state of religion among the Gentiles; for to be dead sometimes means a
religious declension, <span id="xv.iii-p33.2"></span>[Rev.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#002)<span id="xv.iii-p33.2"></span>; or
a state of oppression and wretchedness, as the case was with the
Israelites when in captivity, <span id="xv.iii-p33.3"></span>[Eze
37:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001)<span
id="xv.iii-p33.3"></span>; <span id="xv.iii-p33.4"></span>[Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)<span id="xv.iii-p33.4"></span>.
The phrase is evidently figurative, and signifies a wonderful revival,
such as the coming to life of those in a condition resembling that of
death. The restoration of the Jews unto God’s favor will occasion the
revival and spread of true religion through the whole Gentile world.
This is clearly the meaning.

<span id="xv.iii-p34"></span>Some of the fathers, such as <span
id="xv.iii-p34.1"></span>Chrysostom and <span
id="xv.iii-p34.2"></span>Theodoret, regarded the words as referring to
the last resurrection: but this is wholly at variance with the context.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc38014.htm#fr_353) <span
id="xv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p16"></span> There were two kinds of first-fruits: the
sheaf, being the first ripe fruit, <span id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>[Le
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#010)<span id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>;
and the dough, the first kneaded cake, <span id="xv.iv-p16.2"></span>[Nu
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#020)<span id="xv.iv-p16.2"></span>.
It is to the last that the reference is here made.

<span id="xv.iv-p17"></span>The first-fruits are considered by some,
such as <span id="xv.iv-p17.1"></span>Mede and <span
id="xv.iv-p17.2"></span>Chalmers, to have been the first Jewish converts
to Christianity — the apostles and disciples; but this is not consistent
with the usual manner of the Apostle, which is to express the same thing
in two ways, or by two metaphors. Besides, the whole context refers to
the first adoption of the Jewish nation, or to the covenant made with
Abraham and confirmed to the patriarchs. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc38014.htm#fr_354) <span
id="xv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p19"></span> That the holiness here mentioned is
external and relative, and not personal and inward, is evident from the
whole context. The children of Israel were denominated holy in all their
wickedness and disobedience, because they had been consecrated to God,
adopted as his people, and set apart for his service, and they enjoyed
all the external privileges of the covenant which God had made with
their fathers.

<span id="xv.iv-p20"></span><span id="xv.iv-p20.1"></span>Pareus makes a
distinction between what passes from progenitors to their offspring and
what does not pass. In the present case the rights and privileges of the
covenant were transmitted, but not faith and inward holiness. “Often,”
he says, “the worst descend from the best, and the best from the worst;
from wicked Ahaz sprang good Hezekiah, from Hezekiah descended impious
Manasse, from Manasse again came good Josiah, and from Josiah sprang
wicked sons, Shallum and Jehoiakim.” But all were alike holy in the
sense intended here by the Apostle, as they were circumcised, and
inherited the transmissible rights and privileges of the covenant.

<span id="xv.iv-p21"></span>“The holiness,” says <span
id="xv.iv-p21.1"></span>Turrettin, “of the first-fruits and of the root
was no other than an external, federal, and national consecration, such
as could be transferred from parents to their children.”

<span id="xv.iv-p22"></span>“The attentive reader,” says <span
id="xv.iv-p22.1"></span>Scott, “will readily perceive that *relative*
holiness, or consecration to God, is here exclusively meant. \[...\]
Abraham was as it were the root of the visible Church. Ishmael was
broken off, and the tree grew up in Isaac; and when Esau was broken off,
it grew up in Jacob and his sons. \[...\] When the nation rejected the
Messiah, their relation to Abraham and to God was as it were suspended.
They no longer retained even the outward seal of the covenant; for
circumcision lost its validity and baptism became the sign of
regeneration: they were thenceforth deprived of the ordinances of God.”
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc38014.htm#fr_355) <span
id="xv.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p26"></span> There is a difference of opinion as to the
precise meaning of the words ἐνεκεντρίσθης ἐν αὐτοις <span
id="xv.iv-p26.1"></span>Calvin*’s* version is, “<span
id="xv.iv-p26.2"></span>insitus es pro ipsis — thou hast been ingrafted
for them,” or in their stead; that of <span id="xv.iv-p26.3"></span>Beza
and <span id="xv.iv-p26.4"></span>Pareus is the same, and also that of
<span id="xv.iv-p26.5"></span>Macknight; but <span
id="xv.iv-p26.6"></span>Grotius has “<span id="xv.iv-p26.7"></span>inter
illos — between them,” that is, the remaining branches; and <span
id="xv.iv-p26.8"></span>Doddridge renders the words “among them,”
according to our version. What is most consonant with the first part of
the verse, is the rendering of <span id="xv.iv-p26.9"></span>Calvin;
what is stated is the cutting off of some of the branches, and the most
obvious meaning is, that others were put in for them, or in their stead.
It has been said, that it was not the practice to graft a wild olive in
a good olive, except when the latter was decaying, such may have been
the case; but the Apostle’s object was no so much to refer to what was
usual, as to form a comparison suitable to his purpose; and this is what
our Savior in his parables had sometimes done. Contrary to what the case
is in nature, the Apostle makes the stock good and the graft bad, and
makes the stock to communicate its goodness to the graft and to improve
the quality of its fruit. But his main object is to show the fact of
incision, without any regard to the character of the stock and of the
graft in natural things; for both *his* stock and *his* graft are of a
different character. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc38014.htm#fr_356) <span
id="xv.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p31"></span> “Be not elated in mind — <span
id="xv.iv-p31.1"></span>ne animo efferaris;” μὴ ὑψηλοφρόνει; “be not
high-minded,” as in our version, is the literal rendering. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_357"></span>[358](cc38014.htm#fr_357) <span
id="xv.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p32"></span> Some have deduced from what Paul says here
the uncertainty of faith, and its possible failure. This has been done
through an entire misapprehension of the subject handled by the Apostle.
He speaks not of individuals, but of the Gentile world, not of living
faith but of professed faith, not the inward change, but of outward
privileges, not of the union of the soul to Christ, but of union with
his Church. The two things are wholly different; and to draw an argument
from the one to the other is altogether illegitimate; that is to say,
that as professed faith may be lost, therefore living faith may be lost.

<span id="xv.iv-p33"></span><span id="xv.iv-p33.1"></span>Augustine, in
commenting on <span id="xv.iv-p33.2"></span>[Jer
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#040)<span id="xv.iv-p33.2"></span>,
says, “God promised perseverance when he said, ‘I will put fear in their
heart, that they may not depart from me.’ What else does it mean but
this, ‘such and so great will my fear be, which I shall put in their
heart, that they shall perseveringly cleave to me.’”

<span id="xv.iv-p34"></span>“As those,” says <span
id="xv.iv-p34.1"></span>Pareus, “who believe for a time never had true
faith, though they seem to have had it, and hence fall away and do not
persevere: so they who possess true faith never fail, but continue
steadfast, for God infallibly sustains them and secures their
perseverance.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_358"></span>[359](cc38014.htm#fr_358) <span
id="xv.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p4"></span> “<span id="xv.v-p4.1"></span>Lenitatem;”
χρηστότητα; “<span id="xv.v-p4.2"></span>indulgentiam — indulgence,”
<span id="xv.v-p4.3"></span>Jerome; “<span
id="xv.v-p4.4"></span>benignitatem — benignity,” <span
id="xv.v-p4.5"></span>Beza. Its most literal meaning is “beneficence,”
as χηστὸς is useful or beneficial: but “goodness,” as in our version,
expresses its sense here perhaps better than any other word. It is
rendered “kindness” in <span id="xv.v-p4.6"></span>2 Corinthians 6:6;
Ephesians 2:7; Colossians 3:12; Titus 3:4; — “gentleness” in <span
id="xv.v-p4.7"></span>[Ga 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span
id="xv.v-p4.7"></span>, — and “good” in <span id="xv.v-p4.8"></span>[Ro
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#012)<span id="xv.v-p4.8"></span>. It
is nowhere else found and has a similar meaning in the *Septuagint*, and
stands often for <span id="xv.v-p4.9"></span>טוב, which signifies good,
goodness, benevolence. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc38014.htm#fr_359) <span
id="xv.v-p4.10"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p5"></span> “<span id="xv.v-p5.1"></span>Severitatem;”
ἀποτομίαν; “<span id="xv.v-p5.2"></span>rigorem — rigor,” <span
id="xv.v-p5.3"></span>Erasmus, “<span id="xv.v-p5.4"></span>praecisam
severitatem — a cut-off severity,” <span id="xv.v-p5.5"></span>Beza. It
means literally excision, cutting off, amputation, and metaphorically,
rigor, severity; and it is taken, says <span
id="xv.v-p5.6"></span>Schleusner, not from the amputation of infected
limbs, but from the cutting off of barren and useless branches of trees.
It occurs here only, and is not found in the *Septuagint* Αποτμία τῶν
νόμων — rigor of the laws, <span id="xv.v-p5.7"></span>Diod. Sic. It is
used adverbially in two places, <span id="xv.v-p5.8"></span>2
Corinthians 13:10, and Titus 1:13; where it means rigidly, sharply,
severely. The adjective, ἀπότομος, is found in <span
id="xv.v-p5.9"></span>[Wis. 5:20](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#020),
[Wis. 6:6](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#006)<span id="xv.v-p5.9"></span>,
connected with “wrath” and “judgment,” and means rigid or severe. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc38014.htm#fr_360) <span
id="xv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p10"></span> “<span id="xv.vi-p10.1"></span>Ne apud vos
superbiatis;” ἵνα μὴ ὢτε παρ ἑαυτοῖς φρόνιμοι; “<span
id="xv.vi-p10.2"></span>ut ne sitis apud vosmetipsos sapientes — lest ye
should be wise in yourselves,” — <span id="xv.vi-p10.3"></span>Beza and
<span id="xv.vi-p10.4"></span>Piscator. The meaning, as given by <span
id="xv.vi-p10.5"></span>Grotius, is, “Lest ye think yourselves so wise
as to suppose that ye can by your own understanding know what it is to
come.” But the object of the Apostle seems to have been, to keep down
self-elevation on account of the privileges they had attained. The
phrase seems to have been taken from <span id="xv.vi-p10.6"></span>[Pr
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#007)<span id="xv.vi-p10.6"></span>;
where the *Septuagint* render, “in thine own eyes,” <span
id="xv.vi-p10.7"></span>בעיניך, παρὰ σεαυτῷ, “in thyself,” that is, in
thine own esteem. And it appears to be its meaning here, “Lest ye should
be wise in your own esteem,” which signifies, “Lest ye should be proud,”
or elated, that is, on account of your now superior privileges and
advantages. <span id="xv.vi-p10.8"></span>Doddridge*’s* version
expresses the idea, “Lest you should have too high an opinion of
yourselves.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc38014.htm#fr_361) <span
id="xv.vi-p10.9"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p11"></span> The mystery is accounted for in rather a
singular way. The most obvious meaning is, that the mystery was the fact
of the restoration, and not the manner of it. No doubt the word
sometimes means what is obscure, sublime, or profound, as “great is the
mystery of godliness,” <span id="xv.vi-p11.1"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="xv.vi-p11.1"></span>:
but here the mystery is made known, in the same manner as Paul mentions
a fact respecting the resurrection, <span id="xv.vi-p11.2"></span>[1Co
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span id="xv.vi-p11.2"></span>,
and also the call of the Gentiles, <span id="xv.vi-p11.3"></span>[Ro
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)<span id="xv.vi-p11.3"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc38014.htm#fr_362) <span
id="xv.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p13"></span> The explanation of this verse is by no
means satisfactory. It does not Correspond at all with what the Apostle
has already declared in <span id="xv.vi-p13.1"></span>[Rom.
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011), [Rom.
12:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#000), [Rom.
15:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#000)<span id="xv.vi-p13.1"></span>;
where the restoration of the Jews to the faith is most clearly set
forth. Besides, by making Israel, in the next verse, to mean generally
the people of God, the contrast, observable through the whole argument,
is completely destroyed.

<span id="xv.vi-p14"></span>The word for “blindness” is πώρωσις,
hardness, callousness, and hence contumacy. “In part,” is generally
regarded as having reference both to extent and duration: the hardness
did not extend to all the Jews, and it was not to endure, but to
continue for a time; and the time is mentioned, “until the fullness of
the Gentiles come in.” This is obviously the meaning, and confirmed by
the whole context. The attempt of <span id="xv.vi-p14.1"></span>Grotius
and <span id="xv.vi-p14.2"></span>Hammond, and of some of the Fathers,
to confine what is said to the Apostolic times, is wholly irreconcilable
with the drift of the whole passage and with facts.

<span id="xv.vi-p15"></span>Much as been written on the words, ἄχρις οὖ
τὸ πλήρωμα τῶν ἐθνῶν εἰσέλθὟ. That the event was future in the Apostle’s
time, (and future still as history proves) is evident, especially from
the following verse, “and so all Israel shall be saved.” The plain
construction of the passage is, “until the fullness of the Gentiles
shall come.” What this “fullness” is to be has been much controverted.
But by taking a view of the whole context, without regard to any
hypothesis, we shall, with no great difficulty, ascertain its meaning.
The “fullness” of the Jews in <span id="xv.vi-p15.1"></span>[Ro
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012)<span id="xv.vi-p15.1"></span>,
is determined by <span id="xv.vi-p15.2"></span>[Ro
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026)<span id="xv.vi-p15.2"></span>;
it includes the whole nation. Then the “fullness of the Gentiles” must
mean the same thing, the introduction of all nations into the Church.
The grafting more particularly signifies profession. It then follows
that all nations shall be brought publicly to profess the gospel prior
to the removal of the hardness from the whole nation of the Jews. There
may be isolated cases of conversion before this event, for “in part” as
to extent the hardness is to be: but all shall not be brought to the
faith, until the faith spread through the whole world: and the effect of
their restoration will be a great revival of vital religion among the
professing Gentiles, according to what is said in <span
id="xv.vi-p15.3"></span>[Ro 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015)<span
id="xv.vi-p15.3"></span>. This is clearly the view presented to us in
this extraordinary passage, when all its parts are compared with each
other.

<span id="xv.vi-p16"></span><span id="xv.vi-p16.1"></span>Hammond tells
us, that many of the Fathers wholly denied the future restoration of the
Jews, and we are told by <span id="xv.vi-p16.2"></span>Pareus*,* who
mentions some of the same Fathers, that they maintained it. But it
appears from the quotations made by the first, that the restoration
disallowed was that to their own land, and that the restoration referred
to by the latter was restoration to the faith; two things wholly
distinct. That “Israel” means exclusively the Jewish nation, was almost
the unanimous opinion of the Fathers, according to <span
id="xv.vi-p16.3"></span>Estius; and that their future restoration to the
faith is here foretold was the sentiment held by <span
id="xv.vi-p16.4"></span>Beza, <span id="xv.vi-p16.5"></span>Pareus,
*Willet*, <span id="xv.vi-p16.6"></span>Mede, and others, and is
generally held by modern divines. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc38014.htm#fr_363) <span
id="xv.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p24"></span> There is more discrepancy in this reference
than any we have met with. The Apostle follows not literally either the
Hebrew or the Septuagint, though the latter more than the former. In the
Hebrew, it is, “to Sion,” <span id="xv.vi-p24.1"></span>לציון, and in
the Septuagint, “for the sake of Sion,” ἕνεκεν Σιών. Then the following
clause is given verbatim from the *Septuagint*, and differs materially
from the Hebrew, at least as translated in our version. The Syriac and
Chaldee give the verb a causative meaning, so as to make the sense the
same as here. But it may be regarded as an infinitive with a pargogic
<span id="xv.vi-p24.2"></span>י, and in a transitive sense, which it
sometimes has. See <span id="xv.vi-p24.3"></span>[1Ki
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#016)<span id="xv.vi-p24.3"></span>;
<span id="xv.vi-p24.4"></span>[Ps
132:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#010)<span id="xv.vi-p24.4"></span>.
If so, the verse will agree with the Apostle’s words, and may be thus
rendered, —

<span id="xv.vi-p25"></span>Come to Sion shall a deliverer,  
And to turn away the ungodliness *that is* in Jacob.

<span id="xv.vi-p26"></span>He shall come to Sion, and shall come “to
turn away,” etc.; or the <span id="xv.vi-p26.1"></span>ו may be rendered
even, “Even to turn away,” etc. This rendering corresponds more than
that of our version with the substance of the verse which follows. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc38014.htm#fr_364) <span
id="xv.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p29"></span> The former part of it is, “This is my
covenant,” but not the latter, “when I shall take away their sins.” Some
suppose that this is taken from <span id="xv.vi-p29.1"></span>[Isa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009)<span id="xv.vi-p29.1"></span>,
where we find this phrase in the *Septuagint*, “When I shall take away
his sins,” τὴν ἁμαρτίαν αὐτου: but the Hebrew is somewhat different and
farther from the form of the sentence here. We must therefore consider
it as an abridgment of what is contained in <span
id="xv.vi-p29.2"></span>[Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span id="xv.vi-p29.2"></span>,
and quoted in <span id="xv.vi-p29.3"></span>[Heb
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010)<span id="xv.vi-p29.3"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc38014.htm#fr_365) <span
id="xv.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p8"></span> Ποτε — formerly, left out.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc38014.htm#fr_366) <span
id="xv.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p11"></span> Our common version departs here from the
original by connecting “your mercy” with the last clause. <span
id="xv.vii-p11.1"></span>Calvin keeps the proper order of the words,
though he paraphrases them, τῷ ὑμετέρῳ ἐλέει, “<span
id="xv.vii-p11.2"></span>eo quod adepti estis misericordiam.” They might
have been rendered, “through your mercy,” that is, the mercy shown to
you, or the mercy of which you are the objects. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc38014.htm#fr_367) <span
id="xv.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p16"></span> They were “enemies” to Paul and the
Church, say <span id="xv.vii-p16.1"></span>Grotius and <span
id="xv.vii-p16.2"></span>Luther, — to the gospel, says <span
id="xv.vii-p16.3"></span>Pareus, — to God, says <span
id="xv.vii-p16.4"></span>Mede and <span id="xv.vii-p16.5"></span>Stuart.
The parallel in the next clause, “beloved,” favors the last sentiment.
They were become God’s enemies, and alienated through their rejection of
the gospel; but they were still regarded as descendants of the Fathers
and in some sense on their account “beloved,” as those for whom God
entertained love, inasmuch as his “gifts and calling” made in their
behalf, were still in force and never to be changed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc38014.htm#fr_368) <span
id="xv.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p19"></span> *Hypallage* — transposition, a change in
the arrangement of a sentence.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc38014.htm#fr_369) <span
id="xv.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p20"></span> It is not desirable to amalgamate words in
this manner; nor is it necessary. The Apostle ascends; he mentions first
the “gifts,” the free promises which God made to the Jews; and then he
refers to the origin of them, the calling or the election of God, and
says that both are irreversible, or, as *Castellio* well explains the
word ἀμεταμέλητα, *irrevocable*. See a similar instance in <span
id="xv.vii-p20.1"></span>[Ro
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013)<span id="xv.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p21"></span><span id="xv.vii-p21.1"></span>Calvin seems
to regard “the gifts and calling” as having reference to the adoption of
the Jewish nation, and their adoption to certain privileges included in
the Abrahamic covenant, probably those mentioned in <span
id="xv.vii-p21.2"></span>[Ro 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)<span
id="xv.vii-p21.2"></span>. But <span id="xv.vii-p21.3"></span>Pareus,
<span id="xv.vii-p21.4"></span>Mede, and others, extend the meaning
farther, and consider “the gifts” as including those of “faith,
remission of sins, sanctification, perseverance and salvation;” and they
understand by “calling,” not the external, which often fails, but the
internal, made by the Spirit, and every efficacious, of which the
Apostle had spoken, when he said, “Those whom he has predestinated, he
has called, justified, and glorified.” According to this view the
Apostle must be considered to mean, that according to what is said in
<span id="xv.vii-p21.5"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span id="xv.vii-p21.5"></span>,
the gifts and callings of God shall be effectual towards *some* of the
Jews throughout all ages, and towards the whole nation, when the
fullness of the Gentiles shall come in; or, that though they may be
suspended, they shall yet be made evident at the appointed time; so that
what secures and renders certain the restoration of the Jews is the
covenant of free grace which God made with their fathers.

<span id="xv.vii-p22"></span>Some, as <span
id="xv.vii-p22.1"></span>Pareus informs us, have concluded from what is
here said, that no Gentile nation, once favored with “the gifts and
calling of God,” shall be wholly forsaken; and that though religion may
for a long season be in a degenerated state, God will yet, in his own
appointed time, renew his gifts and his calling, and restore true
religion. The ground of hope is the irrevocability of his gifts and
calling. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc38014.htm#fr_370) <span
id="xv.vii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p29"></span> The verb which <span
id="xv.vii-p29.1"></span>Calvin renders <span
id="xv.vii-p29.2"></span>*conclusi*, συνέκλεισε means to shut up
together. The paraphrase of <span id="xv.vii-p29.3"></span>Chrysostom
is, that “God has proved (ἤλεγξεν) all to be unbelieving.” <span
id="xv.vii-p29.4"></span>Wolfius considers the meaning the same with
<span id="xv.vii-p29.5"></span>[Ro
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009)<span id="xv.vii-p29.5"></span>,
and with <span id="xv.vii-p29.6"></span>[Ga
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022)<span id="xv.vii-p29.6"></span>.
God has in his providence, as well as in his word, proved and
demonstrated, that all mankind are by nature in a state of unbelief and
of sin and of condemnation.

<span id="xv.vii-p30"></span>God has shut up together, etc., “how?” asks
<span id="xv.vii-p30.1"></span>Pareus; then he answers, “by manifesting,
accusing, and condemning unbelief, but not by effecting or approving
it.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc38014.htm#fr_371) <span
id="xv.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p4"></span> “<span
id="xv.viii-p4.1"></span>Incomprehensibilia,” so the *Vulgate*;
“ἀνεξερεύνητα — inscrutabilia — inscrutable,” <span
id="xv.viii-p4.2"></span>Beza. It means what cannot be found out by
searching. Our version conveys the correct idea — “unsearchable.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc38014.htm#fr_372) <span
id="xv.viii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p5"></span> “<span
id="xv.viii-p5.1"></span>Impervestigabiles,” so <span
id="xv.viii-p5.2"></span>Beza; “ἀνεξιχνίαστοι — <span
id="xv.viii-p5.3"></span>investigabiles — ininvestigable,” *Vulgate*;
what cannot be investigated, and of which there are no footsteps —
untraceable; “cannot be traced out” is the version of <span
id="xv.viii-p5.4"></span>Doddridge. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc38014.htm#fr_373) <span
id="xv.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p15"></span> It has indeed been thought by many that
πλούτου, riches, is a noun belonging to wisdom and knowledge, used,
after the Hebrew manner, instead of an adjective. It means abundance or
exuberance. The sentence, according to our idiom, would then be, “O the
profundity of the abounding wisdom and knowledge of God!” The Apostle,
as in the words, “the gifts and calling of God,” adopts an ascending
scale, and mentions wisdom first, and then knowledge, which in point of
order precedes it. Then in the following clause, according to his usual
practice, he retrogrades, and states first what belongs to knowledge —
“judgments,” decisions, divine decrees, such as knowledge determines;
and then “ways,” actual proceedings, for the guiding of which wisdom is
necessary. Thus we see that his style is thoroughly Hebraistic.

<span id="xv.viii-p16"></span>It appears from Poole’s Syn., that <span
id="xv.viii-p16.1"></span>Origen, <span
id="xv.viii-p16.2"></span>Chrysostom, and <span
id="xv.viii-p16.3"></span>Theodoret connected “riches” with “depth,” “O
the abounding depth,” etc.; but that <span
id="xv.viii-p16.4"></span>Ambrose and <span
id="xv.viii-p16.5"></span>Augustine connected it with “wisdom,” etc. The
use of the term in <span id="xv.viii-p16.6"></span>[Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007)<span id="xv.viii-p16.6"></span>,
favors the last; for “the riches of his grace” mean clearly “his
abounding grace.”

<span id="xv.viii-p17"></span>But some, with <span
id="xv.viii-p17.1"></span>Stuart, suppose that by “riches” here is meant
God’s goodness or mercy, according to <span
id="xv.viii-p17.2"></span>[Ro
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012)<span id="xv.viii-p17.2"></span>,
and <span id="xv.viii-p17.3"></span>[Eph
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)<span id="xv.viii-p17.3"></span>.
And <span id="xv.viii-p17.4"></span>Stuart gives this version, “O the
boundless goodness, and wisdom, and knowledge of God!” But this destroys
the evident correspondence that is to be found in the latter clause of
the verse, except we take in the remaining portion of the chapter, and
this perhaps is what ought to be done. But if we do this, then πλούτου
means “treasures, or blessings,” or <span
id="xv.viii-p17.5"></span>copia beneficiorum,” as <span
id="xv.viii-p17.6"></span>Schleusner expresses it. “Riches of Christ”
mean the abounding blessings laid up in him, <span
id="xv.viii-p17.7"></span>[Eph
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)<span id="xv.viii-p17.7"></span>.
God may be viewed as set forth here as the source of all things, and as
infinite in wisdom and knowledge; and these *three* things are the
subjects to the end of the chapter, the two last verses referring to the
first, and the end of the thirty-third and the thirty-fourth to the two
others, and in an inverted order. The depth or vastness of his wealth or
bounty is such, that he has nothing but his own, no one having given him
anything, (<span id="xv.viii-p17.8"></span>[Ro
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#035)<span
id="xv.viii-p17.8"></span>,) and from him, and through him, and to him
are all things, (<span id="xv.viii-p17.9"></span>[Ro
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="xv.viii-p17.9"></span>.) Then as to the vastness of his wisdom and
of his knowledge; what his knowledge has decided cannot be searched out,
and what his wisdom has devised, as to the manner of executing his
purposes, cannot be investigated; and no one can measure the extent of
his knowledge, and no one has been his counselor, so as to add to the
stores of his wisdom, (<span id="xv.viii-p17.10"></span>[Ro
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034)<span
id="xv.viii-p17.10"></span>.) That we may see the whole passage in lines
—

<span id="xv.viii-p18"></span>**33.** Oh the depth of God’s bounty and
wisdom and knowledge!  
How inscrutable his judgments  
And untraceable his ways!

<span id="xv.viii-p19"></span>**34.** Who indeed hath known the Lord’s
mind,  
Or who has become his counselor?

<span id="xv.viii-p20"></span>**35.** Or who has first given to him?  
And it shall be repayed to him:

<span id="xv.viii-p21"></span>**36.** For from him and through him and
to him *are* all things:  
To him the glory for ever. — Amen. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc38014.htm#fr_374) <span
id="xv.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p25"></span> The words of this verse seem to have been
taken literally from <span id="xv.viii-p25.1"></span>[Isa
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013)<span id="xv.viii-p25.1"></span>,
as given in the *Septuagint*. The Hebrew is in some measure different,
but the words will admit of a rendering approaching nearer to the
meaning here than what is presented in our version, as follows —

<span id="xv.viii-p26"></span>Who has weighed the spirit of Jehovah,  
And, *being* a man of his counsel, has taught him?

<span id="xv.viii-p27"></span>To “weigh the spirit” is to know it
thoroughly: the same verb, <span id="xv.viii-p27.1"></span>תכן, is used
in this sense in <span id="xv.viii-p27.2"></span>[Pr
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#002)<span id="xv.viii-p27.2"></span>;
<span id="xv.viii-p27.3"></span>[Pr
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#012)<span id="xv.viii-p27.3"></span>.
It indeed means to compute by measure or by weight; so that it may be
rendered “measure” as well as “weigh,” and if we adopt “measure,” it
will then appear that to “know the mind of the Lord,” is to know the
*extent* of his understanding or knowledge; an idea which remarkably
corresponds with the passage. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_375"></span>[376](cc38014.htm#fr_375) <span
id="xv.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p32"></span> There is a passage in <span
id="xv.viii-p32.1"></span>[Job 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#012)<span id="xv.viii-p32.1"></span>,
(in the Hebrew Bible,) of which this verse seems to be a translation,
made by the Apostle himself, as totally another meaning is given in the
*Septuagint*. The person is alone changed. The Hebrew is literally this,

<span id="xv.viii-p33"></span>Who has anticipated me,  
And I will repay?

<span id="xv.viii-p34"></span>To “anticipate” means here with favor or
gift; for the remainder of the verse is the following, —

<span id="xv.viii-p35"></span>*Everything* under the whole heaven, mine
it is. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc38015)
