[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38008)  [Next](cc38010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
6:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** What shall we say then? Shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound?

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quid ergo dicemus? manebimus in peccato,
ut gratia abundet?

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** God forbid. How shall we, that are dead
to sin, live any longer therein?

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ne sit ita: qui mortui sumus peccato,
quomodo adhuc vivemus in eo?

<span id="x.i-p6"></span><span id="x.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**1.** *What then shall we say?* Throughout
this chapter the Apostle proves, that they who imagine that gratuitous
righteousness is given us by him, apart from newness of life, shamefully
rend Christ asunder: nay, he goes further, and refers to this objection,
— that there seems in this case to be an opportunity for the display of
grace, if men continued fixed in sin. We indeed know that nothing is
more natural than that the flesh should indulge itself under any excuse,
and also that Satan should invent all kinds of slander, in order to
discredit the doctrine of grace; which to him is by no means difficult.
For since everything that is announced concerning Christ seems very
paradoxical to human judgment, it ought not to be deemed a new thing,
that the flesh, hearing of justification by faith, should so often
strike, as it were, against so many stumbling-stones. Let us, however,
go on in our course; nor let Christ be suppressed, because he is to many
a stone of offense, and a rock of stumbling; for as he is for ruin to
the ungodly, so he is to the godly for a resurrection. We ought, at the
same time, ever to obviate unreasonable questions, lest the Christian
faith should appear to contain anything absurd.

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>The Apostle now takes notice of that most
common objection against the preaching of divine grace, which is this, —
“That if it be true, that the more bountifully and abundantly will the
grace of God aid us, the more completely we are overwhelmed with the
mass of sin; then nothing is better for us than to be sunk into the
depth of sin, and often to provoke God’s wrath with new offenses; for
then at length we shall find more abounding grace; than which nothing
better can be desired.” The refutation of this we shall here after meet
with.

<span id="x.i-p9"></span><span id="x.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>**2.** *By no means.* To some the Apostle
seems to have only intended indignantly to reprove a madness so
outrageous; but it appears from other places that he commonly used an
answer of this kind, even while carrying on a long argument; as indeed
he does here, for he proceeds carefully to disprove the propounded
slander. He, however, first rejects it by an indignant negative, in
order to impress it on the minds of his readers, that nothing can be
more inconsistent than that the grace of Christ, the repairer of our
righteousness, should nourish our vices.

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>*Who have died to sin,* *etc.* An argument
derived from what is of an opposite character. “He who sins certainly
lives to sin; we have died to sin through the grace of Christ; then it
is false, that what abolishes sin gives vigor to it.” The state of the
case is really this, — that the faithful are never reconciled to God
without the gift of regeneration; nay, we are for this end justified, —
that we may afterwards serve God in holiness of life. Christ indeed does
not cleanse us by his blood, nor render God propitious to us by his
expiation, in any other way than by making us partakers of his Spirit,
who renews us to a holy life. It would then be a most strange inversion
of the work of God were sin to gather strength on account of the grace
which is offered to us in Christ; for medicine is not a feeder of the
disease, which it destroys.  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) We
must further bear in mind, what I have already referred to — that Paul
does not state here what God finds us to be, when he calls us to an
union with his Son, but what it behoves us to be, after he has had mercy
on us, and has freely adopted us; for by an adverb, denoting a future
time, he shows what kind of change ought to follow righteousness.

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
6:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Know ye not, that so many of us as were
baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death?

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Num ignoratis quod quicunque baptizati
Sumus in Christum, in mortem ejus baptizati sumus?

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span>**4.** Therefore we are buried with him by
baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by
the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Consepulti ergo sumus ei per baptismum
in mortem; ut guemadmodum suscitatus est Christus ex mortuis per gloriam
Patris, sic et nos in novitate vitæ ambulemus.

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span><span id="x.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span>**3.** *Know ye not*, *etc.* What he intimated
in the last verse — that Christ destroys sin in his people, he proves
here by mentioning the effect of baptism, by which we are initiated into
his faith; for it is beyond any question, that we put on Christ in
baptism, and that we are baptized for this end — that we may be one with
him. But Paul takes up another principle — that we are then really
united to the body of Christ, when his death brings forth in us its
fruit; yea, he teaches us, that this fellowship as to death is what is
to be mainly regarded in baptism; for not washing alone is set forth in
it, but also the putting to death and the dying of the old man. It is
hence evident, that when we become partakers of the grace of Christ,
immediately the efficacy of his death appears. But the benefit of this
fellowship as to the death of Christ is described in what follows.
 <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183)

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span><span id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>**4.** *We have then been buried with him,*
*etc.* He now begins to indicate the object of our having been baptized
into the death of Christ, though he does not yet completely unfold it;
and the object is — that we, being dead to ourselves, may become new
creatures. He rightly makes a transition from a fellowship in death to a
fellowship in life; for these two things are connected together by an
indissoluble knot — that the old man is destroyed by the death of
Christ, and that his resurrection brings righteousness, and renders us
new creatures. And surely, since Christ has been given to us for life,
to what purpose is it that we die with him except that we may rise to a
better life? And hence for no other reason does he slay what is mortal
in us, but that he may give us life again.

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span>Let us know, that the Apostle does not simply
exhort us to imitate Christ, as though he had said that the death of
Christ is a pattern which all Christians are to follow; for no doubt he
ascends higher, as he announces a doctrine, with which he connects, as
it is evident, an exhortation; and his doctrine is this — that the death
of Christ is efficacious to destroy and demolish the depravity of our
flesh, and his resurrection, to effect the renovation of a better
nature, and that by baptism we are admitted into a participation of this
grace. This foundation being laid, Christians may very suitably be
exhorted to strive to respond to their calling. Farther, it is not to
the point to say, that this power is not apparent in all the baptized;
for Paul, according to his usual manner, where he speaks of the
faithful, connects the reality and the effect with the outward sign; for
we know that whatever the Lord offers by the visible symbol is confirmed
and ratified by their faith. In short, he teaches what is the real
character of baptism when rightly received. So he testifies to the
Galatians, that all who have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. (<span id="x.ii-p11.1"></span>[Ga
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span id="x.ii-p11.1"></span>.)
Thus indeed must we speak, as long as the institution of the Lord and
the faith of the godly unite together; for we never have naked and empty
symbols, except when our ingratitude and wickedness hinder the working
of divine beneficence.  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184)

<span id="x.ii-p14"></span>*By the glory of the Father,* that is, by
that illustrious power by which he exhibited himself as really glorious,
and as it were manifested the greatness of his glory. Thus often is the
power of God, which was exercised in the resurrection of Christ, set
forth in Scripture in sublime terms, and not without reason; for it is
of great importance, that by so explicit a record of the ineffable power
of God, not only faith in the last resurrection, which far exceeds the
perception of the flesh, but also as to other benefits which we receive
from the resurrection of Christ, should be highly commended to us.
 <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185)

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span><span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
6:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)<span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**5.** For if we have been planted together
in the likeness of his death, we shall be also *in the likeness* of
*his* resurrection:

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span>**5.** Nam si insititii facti sumus
similitudini mortis ejus, nimirum et resurrectionis participes erimus:

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span>**6.** Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with *him*, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin.

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span>**6.** Illud scientes, quod vetus noster homo
simul cum ipso crucifixus est. ut aboleretur corpus peccati, ut non
ultra serviamus peccato.

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span><span id="x.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span>**5.** *For if we have been ingrafted*,
*etc.* He strengthens in plainer words the argument he has already
stated; for the similitude which he mentions leaves now nothing
doubtful, inasmuch as grafting designates not only a conformity of
example, but a secret union, by which we are joined to him; so that he,
reviving us by his Spirit, transfers his own virtue to us. Hence as the
graft has the same life or death in common with the tree into which it
is ingrafted, so it is reasonable that we should be partakers of the
life no less than of the death of Christ; for if we are ingrafted
according to the likeness of Christ’s death, which was not without a
resurrection, then our death shall not be without a resurrection. But
the words admit of a twofold explanation, — either that we are ingrafted
in Christ into the likeness of his death, or, that we are simply
ingrafted in its likeness. The first reading would require the Greek
dative <span id="x.iii-p7.2"></span>ὁμοιώματι, to be understood as
pointing out the manner; nor do I deny but that it has a fuller meaning:
but as the other harmonizes more with simplicity of expression, I have
preferred it; though it signifies but little, as both come to the same
meaning. <span id="x.iii-p7.3"></span>Chrysostom thought that Paul used
the expression, “likeness of death,” for death, as he says in another
place, “being made in the likeness of men.” But it seems to me that
there is something more significant in the expression; for it not only
serves to intimate a resurrection, but it seems also to indicate this —
that we die not like Christ a natural death, but that there is a
similarity between our and his death; for as he by death died in the
flesh, which he had assumed from us, so we also die in ourselves, that
we may live in him. It is not then the same, but a similar death; for we
are to notice the connection between the death of our present life and
spiritual renovation.

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span>*Ingrafted*, *etc.* There is great force in
this word, and it clearly shows, that the Apostle does not exhort, but
rather teach us what benefit we derive from Christ; for he requires
nothing from us, which is to be done by our attention and diligence, but
speaks of the grafting made by the hand of God. But there is no reason
why you should seek to apply the metaphor or comparison in every
particular; for between the grafting of trees, and this which is
spiritual, a disparity will soon meet us: in the former the graft draws
its aliment from the root, but retains its own nature in the fruit; but
in the latter not only we derive the vigor and nourishment of life from
Christ, but we also pass from our own to his nature. The Apostle,
however, meant to express nothing else but the efficacy of the death of
Christ, which manifests itself in putting to death our flesh, and also
the efficacy of his resurrection, in renewing within us a spiritual
nature.  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186)

<span id="x.iii-p13"></span><span id="x.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p14"></span>**6.** *That our old man*, *etc.* The old
man, as the Old Testament is so called with reference to the New; for he
begins to be old, when he is by degrees destroyed by a commencing
regeneration. But what he means is the whole nature which we bring from
the womb, and which is so incapable of the kingdom of God, that it must
so far die as we are renewed to real life. This old man, he says, is
fastened to the cross of Christ, for by its power he is slain: and he
expressly referred to the cross, that he might more distinctly show,
that we cannot be otherwise put to death than by partaking of his death.
For I do not agree with those who think that he used the word crucified,
rather than dead, because he still lives, and is in some respects
vigorous. It is indeed a correct sentiment, but not suitable to this
passage. *The body of sin,* which he afterwards mentions, does not mean
flesh and bones, but the corrupted mass; for man, left to his own
nature, is a mass made up of sin.  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187)

<span id="x.iii-p16"></span>He points out the end for which this
destruction is effected, when he says, *so that we may no longer serve
sin*. It hence follows, that as long as we are children of Adam, and
nothing more than men, we are in bondage to sin, that we can do nothing
else but sin; but that being grafted in Christ, we are delivered from
this miserable thraldom; not that we immediately cease entirely to sin,
but that we become at last victorious in the contest.

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span><span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
6:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)<span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**7.** For he that is dead is freed from sin.

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span>**7.** Qui enim mortuus est, justificatus Est
a peccato.

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span>**8.** Now if we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him:

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span>**8.** Si vero mortui sumus cum Christo,
credimus quod et vivemus cum eo

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span>**9.** Knowing that Christ being raised from
the dead dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him.

<span id="x.iv-p7"></span>**9.** Scientes quad Christus suscitatus ex
mortuis, amplius non moritur, mors illi amplius non dominatur:

<span id="x.iv-p8"></span>**10.** For in that he died, he died unto sin
once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God.

<span id="x.iv-p9"></span>**10.** Quod enim mortuus est, peccato mortuus
est semel, quod autem vivit, vivit Deo.

<span id="x.iv-p10"></span>**11.** Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to
be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

<span id="x.iv-p11"></span>**11.** Sic et ipsi æstimate vosmet esse
mortuos quidem peccato, viventes autem Deo in Christo Iesu Domino
nostro.

<span id="x.iv-p12"></span><span id="x.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p13"></span>**7.** *For he who has died*, *etc.* This is
an argument derived from what belongs to death or from its effect. For
if death destroys all the actions of life, we who have died to sin ought
to cease from those actions which it exercised during its life. Take
*justified* for freed or reclaimed from bondage; for as he is freed from
the bond of a charge, who is absolved by the sentence of a judge; so
death, by freeing us from this life, sets us free from all its
functions.  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188)

<span id="x.iv-p15"></span>But though among men there is found no such
example, there is yet no reason why you should think, that what is said
here is a vain speculation, or despond in your minds, because you find
not yourselves to be of the number of those who have wholly crucified
the flesh; for this work of God is not completed in the day in which it
is begun in us; but it gradually goes on, and by daily advances is
brought by degrees to its end. So then take this as the sum of the
whole, — “If thou art a Christian, there must appear in thee an evidence
of a fellowship as to the death of Christ; the fruit of which is, that
thy flesh is crucified together with all its lusts; but this fellowship
is not to be considered as not existing, because thou findest that the
relics of the flesh still live in thee; but its increase ought to be
diligently labored for, until thou arrivest at the goal.” It is indeed
well with us, if our flesh is continually mortified; nor is it a small
attainment, when the reigning power, being taken away from it, is
wielded by the Holy Spirit. There is another fellowship as to the death
of Christ, of which the Apostle often speaks, as he does in <span
id="x.iv-p15.1"></span>[2Co 4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#000)<span
id="x.iv-p15.1"></span>, that is, the bearing of the cross, which is
followed by a joint-participation also of eternal life.

<span id="x.iv-p16"></span><span id="x.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p17"></span>**8.** *But if we have died*, *etc.* He
repeats this for no other end but that he might subjoin the explanation
which follows, that Christ, having once risen, dies no more. And hereby
he teaches us that newness of life is to be pursued by Christians as
long as they live; for since they ought to represent in themselves an
image of Christ, both by crucifying the flesh and by a spiritual life,
it is necessary that the former should be done once for all, and that
the latter should be carried on continually: not that the flesh, as we
have already said, dies in us in a moment, but that we ought not to
retrograde in the work of crucifying it. For if we roll again in our own
filth, we deny Christ; of whom we cannot be the participators except
through newness of life, inasmuch as he lives an incorruptible life.

<span id="x.iv-p18"></span><span id="x.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p19"></span>**9.** *Death no more rules over him,* *etc.*
He seems to imply that death once ruled over Christ; and indeed when he
gave himself up to death for us, he in a manner surrendered and
subjected himself to its power; it was however in such a way that it was
impossible that he should be kept bound by its pangs, so as to succumb
to or to be swallowed up by them. He, therefore, by submitting to its
dominion, as it were, for a moment, destroyed it for ever. Yet, to speak
more simply, the dominion of death is to be referred to the state of
death voluntarily undergone, which the resurrection terminated. The
meaning is, that Christ, who now vivifies the faithful by his Spirit, or
breathes his own life into them by his secret power from heaven, was
freed from the dominion of death when he arose, that by virtue of the
same dominion he might render free all his people.

<span id="x.iv-p20"></span><span id="x.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p21"></span>**10.** *He died once to sin,* *etc.* What he
had said — that we, according to the example of Christ, are for ever
freed from the yoke of death, he now applies to his present purpose, and
that is this — that we are no more subject to the tyranny of sin, and
this he proves from the designed object of Christ’s death; for he died
that he might destroy sin.

<span id="x.iv-p22"></span>But we must observe what is suitable to
Christ in this form of expression; for he is not said to die to sin, so
as to cease from it, as the words must be taken when applied to us, but
that he underwent death on account of sin, that having made himself
<span id="x.iv-p22.1"></span>ἀντίλυτρον, a ransom, he might annihilate
the power and dominion of sin.  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189)
And he says that he died *once*, not only because he has by having
obtained eternal redemption by one offering, and by having made an
expiation for sin by his blood, sanctified the faithful for ever; but
also in order that a mutual likeness may exist between us. For though
spiritual death makes continual advances in us, we are yet said properly
to die only once, that is, when Christ, reconciling us by his blood to
the Father, regenerates us at the same time by the power of his Spirit.

<span id="x.iv-p25"></span>*But that he lives*, *etc.* Whether you add
*with* or *in* God, it comes to the same meaning; for he shows that
Christ lives a life subject to no mortality in the immortal and
incorruptible kingdom of God; a type of which ought to appear in the
regeneration of the godly. We must here remember the particle of
likeness, *so*; for he says not that we shall now live in heaven, as
Christ lives there; but he makes the new life, which after regeneration
we live on earth, similar to his celestial life. When he says that we
ought to *die to sin*, according to his example, we are not to suppose
it to be the same kind of death; for we die to sin, when sin dies in us,
but it was otherwise with Christ; by dying it was that he conquered sin.
But he had just said before, that we believe that we shall have life in
common with him, he fully shows by the word *believing* that he speaks
of the grace of Christ: for if he only reminded us of a duty, his mode
of speaking would have been this, “Since we die with Christ, we ought
also to live with him.” But the word believing denotes that he treats
here of doctrine which is based on the promises; as though he had said,
that the faithful ought to feel assured that they are through the
kindness of Christ dead as to the flesh, and that the same Christ will
preserve them in newness of life to the end. But the future time of the
verb *live*, refers not to the last resurrection, but simply denotes the
continued course of a new life, as long as we peregrinate on the earth.

<span id="x.iv-p26"></span><span id="x.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p27"></span>**11.** *So count ye also yourselves*, *etc.*
Now is added a definition of that analogy to which I have referred. For
having stated that Christ once died to sin and lives for ever to God, he
now, applying both to us, reminds us how we now die while living, that
is, when we renounce sin. But he omits not the other part, that is, how
we are to live after having by faith received the grace of Christ: for
though the mortifying of the flesh is only begun in us, yet the life of
sin is destroyed, so that afterwards spiritual newness, which is divine,
continues perpetually. For except Christ were to slay sin in us at once
to the end, his grace would by no means be sure and durable.

<span id="x.iv-p28"></span>The meaning, then, of the words may be thus
expressed, “Take this view of your case, — that as Christ once died for
the purpose of destroying sin, so you have once died, that in future you
may cease from sin; yea, you must daily proceed with that work of
mortifying, which is begun in you, till sin be wholly destroyed: as
Christ is raised to an incorruptible life, so you are regenerated by the
grace of God, that you may lead a life of holiness and righteousness,
inasmuch as the power of the Holy Spirit, by which ye have been renewed,
is eternal, and shall ever continue the same.” But I prefer to retain
the words of Paul, *in Christ Jesus*, rather than to translate with
<span id="x.iv-p28.1"></span>Erasmus, *through Christ Jesus;* for thus
the grafting, which makes us one with Christ, is better expressed.

<span id="x.v"></span>

<span id="x.v-p1"></span><span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)<span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p2"></span>**12**. Let not sin therefore reign in your
mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof.

<span id="x.v-p3"></span>**12.** Ne ergo regnet peccatum in mortali
vestro corpore, ut illi obediatis in cupiditatibus suis:

<span id="x.v-p4"></span>**13.** Neither yield ye your members *as*
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: but yield yourselves unto God,
as those that are alive from the dead, and your members *as* instruments
of righteousness unto God.

<span id="x.v-p5"></span>**13.** Neque exhibeatis membra vestra arma
injustitiæ peccato, sed exhibeatis vosmetipsos Deo, tanquam ex mortuis
viventes, et membra vestra arma justitiæ Deo.

<span id="x.v-p6"></span><span id="x.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p7"></span>**12.** *Let not sin then*, *etc.* He now
begins with exhortation, which naturally arises from the doctrine which
he had delivered respecting our fellowship with Christ. Though sin
dwells in us, it is inconsistent that it should be so vigorous as to
exercise its reigning power; for the power of sanctification ought to be
superior to it, so that our life may testify that we are really the
members of Christ. I have already reminded you that the word *body* is
not to be taken for flesh, and skin, and bones, but, so to speak, for
the whole of what man is.  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) This
may undoubtedly be inferred from the passage; for the other clause,
which he immediately subjoins respecting the members of the body,
includes the soul also: and thus in a disparaging manner does Paul
designate earthly man, for owing to the corruption of our nature we
aspire to nothing worthy of our original. So also does God say in <span
id="x.v-p8.2"></span>[Ge 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)<span
id="x.v-p8.2"></span>; where he complains that man was become flesh like
the brute animals, and thus allows him nothing but what is earthly. To
the same purpose is the declaration of Christ, “What is born of the
flesh is flesh.” (<span id="x.v-p8.3"></span>[Joh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)<span id="x.v-p8.3"></span>.) But
if any makes this objection — that the case with the soul is different;
to this the ready answer is — that in our present degenerate state our
souls are fixed to the earth, and so enslaved to our bodies, that they
have fallen from their own superiority. In a word, the nature of man is
said to be corporeal, because he is destitute of celestial grace, and is
only a sort of empty shadow or image. We may add, that the body, by way
of contempt, is said by Paul to be *mortal*, and this to teach us, that
the whole nature of man tends to death and ruin. Still further, he gives
the name of sin to the original depravity which dwells in our hearts,
and which leads us to sin, and from which indeed all evil deeds and
abominations stream forth. In the middle, between sin and us, he places
lusts, as the former has the office of a king, while lusts are its
edicts and commands.

<span id="x.v-p9"></span><span id="x.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p10"></span>**13.** *Nor present your members*, *etc.*
When once sin has obtained dominion in our soul, all our faculties are
continually applied to its service. He therefore describes here the
reign of sin by what follows it, that he might more clearly show what
must be done by us, if we would shake off its yoke. But he borrows a
similitude from the military office, when he calls our members weapons
or arms (<span id="x.v-p10.1"></span>*arma*);  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) as though he said, “As the soldier has
ever his arms ready, that he may use them whenever he is ordered by his
general, and as he never uses them but at his command; so Christians
ought to regard all their faculties to be the weapons of the spiritual
warfare: if then they employ any of their members in the indulgence of
depravity, they are in the service of sin. But they have made the oath
of soldiers to God and to Christ, and by this they are held bound: it
hence behoves them to be far away from any intercourse with the camps of
sin.” — Those may also here see by what right they proudly lay claim to
the Christian name, who have all their members, as though they were the
prostitutes of Satan, prepared to commit every kind of abomination.

<span id="x.v-p12"></span>On the other hand, he now bids us to present
ourselves wholly to God, so that restraining our minds and hearts from
all wanderings into which the lusts of the flesh may draw us, we may
regard the will of God alone, being ready to receive his commands, and
prepared to execute his orders; and that our members also may be devoted
and consecrated to his will, so that all the faculties both of our souls
and of our bodies may aspire after nothing but his glory. The reason for
this is also added — that the Lord, having destroyed our former life,
has not in vain created us for another, which ought to be accompanied
with suitable actions.

<span id="x.vi"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p1"></span><span id="x.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
6:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)<span id="x.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p2"></span>**14.** For sin shall not have dominion over
you:  <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) for ye are not under the
law, but under grace.

<span id="x.vi-p4"></span>**14.** Peccatum enim vobis non dominabitur,
non enim estis sub Lege, sed Sub gratia.

<span id="x.vi-p5"></span>**15.** What then? shall we sin, because we
are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid.

<span id="x.vi-p6"></span>**15.** Quid ergo? Peccabimus, quia non sumus
sub Lege, sed sub gratia? Absit:

<span id="x.vi-p7"></span>**16.** Know ye not, that to whom ye yield
yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey;
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?

<span id="x.vi-p8"></span>**16.** Nescitis quod cui exhibuistis vos
servos in obedientiam, ejus servi estis cui obeditis, sive peccati in
mortem, sive obedientiæ in justitiam?

<span id="x.vi-p9"></span>**17.** But God be thanked, that ye were the
servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine
which was delivered you.

<span id="x.vi-p10"></span>**17.** Gratia autem Deo, quod fuistis servi
peccati, obeditis, vero ex animo typo doctrinæ in quem traducti estis:

<span id="x.vi-p11"></span>**18.** Being then made free from sin, ye
became the servants of righteousness.

<span id="x.vi-p12"></span>**18.** Manumissi vero peccato, servi facti
estis justitiæ.

<span id="x.vi-p13"></span><span id="x.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p14"></span>**14.** *For sin shall not rule over you,*
*etc.* It is not necessary to continue long in repeating and confuting
expositions, which have little or no appearance of truth. There is one
which has more probability in its favor than the rest, and it is this —
that by *law* we are to understand the letter of the law, which cannot
renovate the soul, and by *grace*, the grace of the Spirit, by which we
are freed from depraved lusts. But this I do not wholly approve of; for
if we take this meaning, what is the object of the question which
immediately follows, “Shall we sin because we are not under the law?”
Certainly the Apostle would never have put this question, had he not
understood, that we are freed from the strictness of the law, so that
God no more deals with us according to the high demands of justice.
There is then no doubt but that he meant here to indicate some freedom
from the very law of God. But laying aside controversy, I will briefly
explain my view.

<span id="x.vi-p15"></span>It seems to me, that there is here especially
a consolation offered, by which the faithful are to be strengthened,
lest they should faint in their efforts after holiness, through a
consciousness of their own weakness. He had exhorted them to devote all
their faculties to the service of righteousness; but as they carry about
them the relics of the flesh, they cannot do otherwise than walk
somewhat lamely. Hence, lest being broken down by a consciousness of
their infirmity they should despond, he seasonably comes to their aid,
by interposing a consolation, derived from this circumstance — that
their works are not now tested by the strict rule of the law, but that
God, remitting their impurity, does kindly and mercifully accept them.
The yoke of the law cannot do otherwise than tear and bruise those who
carry it. It hence follows, that the faithful must flee to Christ, and
implore him to be the defender of their freedom: and as such he exhibits
himself; for he underwent the bondage of the law, to which he was
himself no debtor, for this end — that he might, as the Apostle says,
redeem those who were under the law.

<span id="x.vi-p16"></span>Hence, *not to be under the law* means, not
only that we are not under the letter which prescribes what involves us
in guilt, as we are not able to perform it, but also that we are no
longer subject to the law, as requiring perfect righteousness, and
pronouncing death on all who deviate from it in any part. In like
manner, by the word *grace*, we are to understand both parts of
redemption — the remission of sins, by which God imputes righteousness
to us, — and the sanctification of the Spirit, by whom he forms us anew
unto good works. The adversative particle, \[<span
id="x.vi-p16.1"></span>ἀλλὰ, *but*,\] I take in the sense of alleging a
reason, which is not unfrequently the case; as though it was said — “We
who are under grace, are not therefore under the law.”

<span id="x.vi-p17"></span>The sense now is clear; for the Apostle
intended to comfort us, lest we should be wearied in our minds, while
striving to do what is right, because we still find in ourselves many
imperfections. For how much soever we may be harassed by the stings of
sin, it cannot yet overcome us, for we are enabled to conquer it by the
Spirit of God; and then, being under grace, we are freed from the
rigorous requirements of the law. We must further understand, that the
Apostle assumes it as granted, that all who are without the grace of
God, being bound under the yoke of the law, are under condemnation. And
so we may on the other hand conclude, that as long as they are under the
law, they are subject to the dominion of sin.  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193)

<span id="x.vi-p19"></span><span id="x.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p20"></span>**15.** *What then?* As the wisdom of the
flesh is ever clamorous against the mysteries of God, it was necessary
for the Apostle to subjoin what might anticipate an objection: for since
the law is the rule of life, and has been given to guide men, we think
that when it is removed all discipline immediately falls to the ground,
that restraints are taken away, in a word, that there remains no
distinction or difference between good and evil. But we are much
deceived if we think, that the righteousness which God approves of in
his law is abolished, when the law is abrogated; for the abrogation is
by no means to be applied to the precepts which teach the right way of
living, as Christ confirms and sanctions these and does not abrogate
them; but the right view is, that nothing is taken away but the curse,
to which all men without grace are subject. But though Paul does not
distinctly express this, yet he indirectly intimates it.

<span id="x.vi-p21"></span><span id="x.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p22"></span>**16.** *By no means: know ye not?* This is
not a bare denial as some think, as though he preferred to express his
abhorrence of such a question rather than to disprove it: for a
confutation immediately follows, derived from a contrary supposition,
and to this purpose, “Between the yoke of Christ and that of sin there
is so much contrariety, that no one can bear them both; if we sin, we
give ourselves up to the service of sin; but the faithful, on the
contrary have been redeemed from the tyranny of sin, that they may serve
Christ: it is therefore impossible for them to remain bound to sin.” But
it will be better to examine more closely the course of reasoning, as
pursued by Paul.

<span id="x.vi-p23"></span>*To whom we obey*, *etc.* This relative may
be taken in a causative sense, as it often is; as when one says, — there
is no kind of crime which a parricide will not do, who has not hesitated
to commit the greatest crime of all, and so barbarous as to be almost
abhorred even by wild beasts. And Paul adduces his reason partly from
the effects, and partly from the nature of correlatives. For first, if
they obey, he concludes that they are servants, for obedience proves
that he, who thus brings one into subjection to himself, has the power
of commanding. This reason as to service is from the effect, and from
this the other arises. “If you be servants, then of course sin has the
dominion.”

<span id="x.vi-p24"></span>*Or of obedience*, *etc.* The language is not
strictly correct; for if he wished to have the clauses correspondent, he
would have said, “or of righteousness unto life”  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) But as the change in the words does
not prevent the understanding of the subject, he preferred to express
what righteousness is by the word *obedience*; in which however there is
a metonymy, for it is to be taken for the very commandments of God; and
by mentioning this without addition, he intimated that it is God alone,
to whose authority consciences ought to be subject. Obedience then,
though the name of God is suppressed, is yet to be referred to him, for
it cannot be a divided obedience.

<span id="x.vi-p26"></span><span id="x.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p27"></span>**17.** *But thanks be to God*, *etc.* This
is an application of the similitude of the present subject. Though they
were only to be reminded that they were not now the servants of sin, he
yet adds a thanksgiving; first, that he might teach them, that this was
not through their own merit, but through the special mercy of God; and
secondly, that by this thanksgiving, they might learn how great was the
kindness of God, and that they might thereby be more stimulated to hate
sin. And he gives thanks, not as to that time during which they were the
servants of sin, but for the liberation which followed, when they ceased
to be what they were before. But this implied comparison between their
former and present state is very emphatical; for the Apostle touches the
calumniators of the grace of Christ, when he shows, that without grace
the whole race of man is held captive under the dominion of sin; but
that the kingdom of sin comes to an end, as soon as grace puts forth its
power.  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195)

<span id="x.vi-p30"></span>We may hence learn, that we are not freed
from the bondage of the law that we may sin; for the law does not lose
its dominion, until the grace of God restores us to him, in order to
renew us in righteousness: and it is hence impossible that we should be
subject to sin, when the grace of God reigns in us: for we have before
stated, that under this term grace, is included the spirit of
regeneration.

<span id="x.vi-p31"></span>*You have obeyed from the heart*, *etc.* Paul
compares here the hidden power of the Spirit with the external letter of
the law, as though he had said, “Christ inwardly forms our souls in a
better way, than when the law constrains them by threatening and
terrifying us.” Thus is dissipated the following calumny, “If Christ
frees us from subjection to the law, he brings liberty to sin.” He does
not indeed allow his people unbridled freedom, that they might frisk
about without any restraint, like horses let loose in the fields; but he
brings them to a regular course of life. — Though <span
id="x.vi-p31.1"></span>Erasmus, following the old version, has chosen to
translate it the “form” (<span id="x.vi-p31.2"></span>formam) *of
doctrine*, I have felt constrained to retain *type*, the word which Paul
uses: some may perhaps prefer the word pattern.  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) It seems indeed to me to denote the
formed image or impress of that righteousness which Christ engraves on
our hearts: and this corresponds with the prescribed rule of the law,
according to which all our actions ought to be framed, so that they
deviate not either to the right or to the left hand.

<span id="x.vi-p36"></span><span id="x.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p37"></span>**18.** *And having been made free from sin,*
*etc.* The meaning is, “It is unreasonable that any one, after having
been made free, should continue in a state of bondage; for he ought to
maintain the freedom which he has received: it is not then befitting,
that you should be brought again under the dominion of sin, from which
you have been set at liberty by Christ.” It is an argument derived from
the efficient cause; another also follows, taken from the final cause,
Ye have been liberated from the bondage of sin, that ye might pass into
the kingdom of righteousness; it is hence right that you should wholly
turn away from sin, and turn your minds wholly to righteousness, into
the service of which you have been transferred.”

<span id="x.vi-p38"></span>It must be observed, that no one can be a
servant to righteousness except he is first liberated by the power and
kindness of God from the tyranny of sin. So Christ himself testifies,

<span id="x.vi-p39"></span>“If the Son shall free you, you shall be free
indeed.”  
(<span id="x.vi-p39.2"></span>[Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)<span id="x.vi-p39.2"></span>.)

<span id="x.vi-p40"></span>What are then our preparations by the power
of free will, since the commencement of what is good proceeds from this
manumission, which the grace of God alone effects?

<span id="x.vii"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p1"></span><span id="x.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)<span id="x.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p2"></span>**19.** I speak after the manner of men
because of the infirmity of your flesh: for as ye have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so
now yield your members servants to righteousness unto holiness.

<span id="x.vii-p3"></span>**19.** Humanum dico propter infirmitatem
carnis vestræ, quemadmodum exhibuistis membra vestra serva immunditiæ et
iniquitati in iniquitatem, sic et nunc exhibite membra vestra serva
justitiæ in sanctificationem.

<span id="x.vii-p4"></span><span id="x.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p5"></span>**19.** *I speak what is human*, *etc.* He
says that he speaks after the manner of men, not as to the substance but
as to the manner. So Christ says, in <span id="x.vii-p5.1"></span>[Joh
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012)<span id="x.vii-p5.1"></span>,
that he announced earthly things, while yet he spoke of heavenly
mysteries, though not so magnificently as the dignity of the things
required, because he accommodated himself to the capacities of a people
ignorant and simple. And thus the Apostle says, by way of preface, that
he might more fully show how gross and wicked is the calumny, when it is
imagined, that the freedom obtained by Christ gives liberty to sin. He
reminds the faithful at the same time, that nothing is more
unreasonable, nay, base and disgraceful, than that the spiritual grace
of Christ should have less influence over them than earthly freedom; as
though he had said, “I might, by comparing sin and righteousness, show
how much more ardently ye ought to be led to render obedience to the
latter, than to serve the former; but from regard to your infirmity I
omit this comparison: nevertheless, though I treat you with great
indulgence, I may yet surely make this just demand — that you should not
at least obey righteousness more coldly or negligently than you served
sin.” It is a sort of reticence or silence, a withholding of something
when we wish more to be understood than what we express. He does yet
exhort them to render obedience to righteousness with so much more
diligence, as that which they served is more worthy than sin, though he
seems not to require this in so many words.  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197)

<span id="x.vii-p7"></span>*As ye have presented,* *etc.*; that is, “As
ye were formerly ready with all your faculties to serve sin, it is hence
sufficiently evident how wretchedly enslaved and bound did your
depravity hold you to itself: now then ye ought to be equally prompt and
ready to execute the commands of God; let not your activity in doing
good be now less than it was formerly in doing evil.” He does not indeed
observe the same order in the antithesis, by adapting different parts to
each other, as he does in <span id="x.vii-p7.1"></span>[1Th
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#007)<span id="x.vii-p7.1"></span>,
where he sets uncleanness in opposition to holiness; but the meaning is
still evident.

<span id="x.vii-p8"></span>He mentions first two kinds — uncleanness and
iniquity; the former of which is opposed to chastity and holiness, the
other refers to injuries hurtful to our neighbour. But he repeats
iniquity twice, and in a different sense: by the first he means
plunders, frauds, perjuries, and every kind of wrong; by the second, the
universal corruption of life, as though he had said, “Ye have
prostituted your members so as to perpetrate all wicked works, and thus
the kingdom of iniquity became strong in you”  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) By *righteousness* I understand the
law or the rule of a holy life, the design of which is sanctification,
as the case is when the faithful devote themselves to serve God in
purity.

<span id="x.viii"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p1"></span><span id="x.viii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
6:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020)<span id="x.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p2"></span>**20.** For when ye were the servants of
sin, ye were free from righteousness.

<span id="x.viii-p3"></span>**20.** Quando enim servi fuistis peccati,
liberi fuistis justitiæ.

<span id="x.viii-p4"></span>**21.** What fruit had ye then in those
things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things *is*
death.

<span id="x.viii-p5"></span>**21.** Quem ergo fructum habuistis tunc in
iis, de quibus nunc erubescitis? Siquidem finis eorum mors.

<span id="x.viii-p6"></span>**22.** But now being made free from sin,
and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the
end everlasting life.

<span id="x.viii-p7"></span>**22.** Nunc vero manumissi a peccato, Deo
autem in servitutem addicti, habetis fructum vestrum in
sanctificationem, finem vero vitam æternam.

<span id="x.viii-p8"></span>**23.** For the wages of sin *is* death; but
the gift of God *is* eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="x.viii-p9"></span>**23.** Stipendia enim peccati, mors; donum
vero Dei, vita æterna, in Christo lesu Domino nostro.

<span id="x.viii-p10"></span><span id="x.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p11"></span>**20.** *For when ye were,* *etc.* He still
repeats the difference, which he had before mentioned, between the yoke
of righteousness and that of sin; for these two things, sin and
righteousness, are so contrary, that he who devotes himself to the one,
necessarily departs from the other. And he thus represents both, that by
viewing them apart we may see more clearly what is to be expected from
each; for to set things thus apart enables us to understand better their
distinctive character. He then sets sin on one side, and righteousness
on the other; and having stated this distinction, he afterwards shows
what results from each of them.

<span id="x.viii-p12"></span>Let us then remember that the Apostle still
reasons on the principle of contraries, and in this manner, “While ye
were the servants of sin, ye were freed from righteousness; but now a
change having taken place, it behoves you to serve righteousness; for
you have been liberated from the yoke of sin. He calls those *free from
righteousness* who are held by no bridle to obey righteousness. This is
the liberty of the flesh, which so frees us from obedience to God, that
it makes us slaves to the devil. Wretched then and accursed is this
liberty, which with unbridled or rather mad frenzy, leads us exultingly
to our destruction.

<span id="x.viii-p13"></span><span id="x.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p14"></span>**21.** *What fruit, then*, *etc.* He could
not more strikingly express what he intended than by appealing to their
conscience, and by confessing shame as it were in their person. Indeed
the godly, as soon as they begin to be illuminated by the Spirit of
Christ and the preaching of the gospel, do freely acknowledge their past
life, which they have lived without Christ, to have been worthy of
condemnation; and so far are they from endeavouring to excuse it, that,
on the contrary, they feel ashamed of themselves. Yea, further, they
call to mind the remembrance of their own disgrace, that being thus
ashamed, they may more truly and more readily be humbled before God.

<span id="x.viii-p15"></span>Nor is what he says insignificant, *Of
which ye are now ashamed;* for he intimates that we are possessed with
extreme blind love for ourselves, when we are involved in the darkness
of our sins, and think not that there is so much filth in us. The light
of the Lord alone can open our eyes to behold the filthiness which lies
hid in our flesh. He only then is imbued with the principles of
Christian philosophy, who has well learnt to be really displeased with
himself, and to be confounded with shame for his own wretchedness. He
shows at last still more plainly from what was to follow, how much they
ought to have been ashamed, that is, when they came to understand that
they had been standing on the very precipice of death, and had been nigh
destruction; yea, that they would have already entered the gates of
death, had they not been reclaimed by God’s mercy.

<span id="x.viii-p16"></span><span id="x.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p17"></span>**22.** *Ye have your fruit unto holiness*,
*etc.* As he had before mentioned a twofold end of sin, so he does now
as to righteousness. Sin in this life brings the torments of an accusing
conscience, and in the next eternal death. We now gather the fruit of
righteousness, even holiness; we hope in future to gain eternal life.
These things, unless we are beyond measure stupid, ought to generate in
our minds a hatred and horror of sin, and also a love and desire for
righteousness. Some render <span id="x.viii-p17.1"></span>τελος,
“tribute” or reward, and not “end,” but not, as I think, according to
the meaning of the Apostle; for though it is true that we bear the
punishment of death on account of sin, yet this word is not suitable to
the other clause, to which it is applied by Paul, inasmuch as life
cannot be said to be the tribute or reward of righteousness.

<span id="x.viii-p18"></span><span id="x.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p19"></span>**23.** *For the wages of sin*, *etc.*
There are those who think that, Paul, by comparing death to allowances
of meat, (<span id="x.viii-p19.1"></span>*obsoniis*,) points out in a
disparaging manner the kind of wretched reward that is allotted to
sinners, as this word is taken by the Greeks sometimes for portions
allowed to soldiers. But he seems rather indirectly to condemn the blind
appetites of those who are ruinously allured by the enticements of sin,
as the fish are by the hook. It will however be more simple to render
the word “wages,” for surely death is a sufficiently ample reward to the
wicked. This verse is a conclusion to the former, and as it were an
epilogue to it. He does not, however, in vain repeat the same thing
again; but by doubling the terror, he intended to render sin an object
of still greater hatred.

<span id="x.viii-p20"></span>*But the gift of God.* They are mistaken
who thus render the sentence, “Eternal life is the gift of God,” as
though eternal life were the subject, and the gift of God the predicate;
for this does not preserve the contrast. But as he has already taught
us, that sin produces nothing but death; so now he subjoins, that this
gift of God, even our justification and sanctification, brings to us the
happiness of eternal life. Or, if you prefer, it may be thus stated, —
“As the cause of death is sin, so righteousness, which we obtain through
Christ, restores to us eternal life.”

<span id="x.viii-p21"></span>It may however be hence inferred with
certainty, that our salvation is altogether through the grace and mere
beneficence of God. He might indeed have used other words — that the
wages of righteousness is eternal life; and then the two clauses would
correspond: but he knew that it is through God’s gift we obtain it, and
not through our own merits; and that it is not one or a single gift; for
being clothed with the righteousness of the Son, we are reconciled to
God, and we are by the power of the Spirit renewed unto holiness. And he
adds, *in Christ Jesus*, and for this reason, that he might call us away
from every conceit respecting our own worthiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc38009.htm#fr_182) <span
id="x.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p12"></span> This phrase, “died to sin,” is evidently
misapprehended by <span id="x.i-p12.1"></span>Haldane Having been
offended, and justly so, by an unguarded and erroneous expression of
<span id="x.i-p12.2"></span>Stuart, derived from <span
id="x.i-p12.3"></span>Chrysostom, and by the false rendering of <span
id="x.i-p12.4"></span>Macknight, he went to another extreme, and
maintained, that to die, or to be dead to sin, means to be freed from
its guilt, while the whole context proves, that it means deliverance
from its power as a master, from the servitude or bondage of sin. To
live in it, does not mean to live under its guilt, but in its service
and under its ruling power; and this is what the Apostle represents as a
contrast to being dead to sin. Not to “serve sin,” in <span
id="x.i-p12.5"></span>[Ro 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="x.i-p12.5"></span>, is its true explanation. See also <span
id="x.i-p12.6"></span>[Rom. 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)<span id="x.i-p12.6"></span>.

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>The very argument requires this meaning. The
question in the first verse, — Shall we continue in sin?” does not
surely mean — shall we continue in or under the guilt of sin? but in its
service, and in the practice of it. It was the chapter of practical
licentiousness that the Apostle rebuts; and he employs an argument
suitable to the purpose, “If we are dead to sin, freed from it as our
master, how absurd it is to suppose that we can live any longer in its
service?” Then he shows in what follows how this had been effected. This
is clearly the import of the passage, and so taken by almost all
commentators.

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>But it must be added, that <span
id="x.i-p14.1"></span>Venema and <span id="x.i-p14.2"></span>Chalmers
materially agree with <span id="x.i-p14.3"></span>Haldane The former
says that to “die to sin” is to give to sin what it demands and that is,
death; and that when this is given, it can require nothing more. In this
sense, he adds, Christ died to sin (<span id="x.i-p14.4"></span>[Ro
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)<span id="x.i-p14.4"></span>); and
in the same sense believers die to sin, being, as they are, united to
Christ, his death being viewed as their death. However true this
theology may be, (and <span id="x.i-p14.5"></span>Chalmers shows this in
his own inimitable manner,) it does not seem to be taught here: though
there may be something in one or two expressions to favor it; yet the
whole tenor of the passage, and many of the phrases, seem clearly to
constrain us to adopt the other view. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc38009.htm#fr_183) <span
id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span> “Baptized into (εἰς) Christ,” “baptized into
(εἰς) Moses,” <span id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>[1Co
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002)<span id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>,
“baptized into (εἰς) one body,” <span id="x.ii-p8.2"></span>[1Co
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013)<span id="x.ii-p8.2"></span>, are
all the same forms of expression, and must mean, that by the rite of
baptism a professed union is made, and, in the two first instances, a
submission to the authority exercised is avowed. By “baptized into his
death,” we are to understand, “baptized,” in order to die with him, or
to die as he died; not that the death is the same; for it is a like
death, as it is expressed in <span id="x.ii-p8.3"></span>[Ro
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)<span id="x.ii-p8.3"></span>, as
the resurrection is a like resurrection. His death was natural, ours is
spiritual; the same difference holds as to the resurrection. It is the
*likeness* that is throughout to be regarded; and this is the key to the
whole passage. It is true, that through the efficacy of Christ’s death
alone the death of his people takes place, and through the operation of
his Spirit; but to teach this is not the design of the Apostle here; his
object seems to be merely to show that a change takes place in every
true Christian, symbolized by baptism, and that this change bears a
likeness to the death and resurrection of our Savior. He speaks of
baptism here not merely as a symbol, but as including what it
symbolizes; as he does in a similar passage, <span
id="x.ii-p8.4"></span>[Col. 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)<span id="x.ii-p8.4"></span>, where
he refers to this change, first under the symbol of circumcision, and
then of baptism; which clearly proves that the same thing is signified
by both. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc38009.htm#fr_184) <span
id="x.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p12"></span> That the *mode* of baptism, *immersion*, is
intimated by “buried,” has been thought by most, by <span
id="x.ii-p12.1"></span>Chrysostom, <span
id="x.ii-p12.2"></span>Augustine, <span id="x.ii-p12.3"></span>Hammond,
<span id="x.ii-p12.4"></span>Pareus, <span id="x.ii-p12.5"></span>Mede,
<span id="x.ii-p12.6"></span>Grotius, <span
id="x.ii-p12.7"></span>Doddridge, <span id="x.ii-p12.8"></span>Chalmers,
and others; while some, such as <span id="x.ii-p12.9"></span>Scott,
<span id="x.ii-p12.10"></span>Stuart, and <span
id="x.ii-p12.11"></span>Hodge, do not consider this as necessarily
intended, the word “buried” having been adopted to express more fully
what is meant by being “dead,” and there being another word, “planted,”
used to convey the same idea, which cannot be applied to the rite of
baptism.

<span id="x.ii-p13"></span>“Buried with him,” means buried like him, or
in like manner; and so “crucified with him,” in <span
id="x.ii-p13.1"></span>[Ro 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="x.ii-p13.1"></span>, is the same: συν prefixed to verbs, has clearly
this meaning. See <span id="x.ii-p13.2"></span>[Ro
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017)<span id="x.ii-p13.2"></span>;
<span id="x.ii-p13.3"></span>[Col
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span id="x.ii-p13.3"></span>;
<span id="x.ii-p13.4"></span>[2Ti
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)<span id="x.ii-p13.4"></span>.
“Into death” is not to be connected with “planted,” but with “baptism,”
it was “a baptism into death,’ that is, which represented death, even
death unto sin. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc38009.htm#fr_185) <span
id="x.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p15"></span> <span id="x.ii-p15.1"></span>Beza takes διὰ,
*by*, before “glory,” in the sense of εἰς, *to*, “to the glory of the
Father;” but this is unusual. It seems to be a metonymy, the effect for
the cause: it was done by power which manifested and redounded to the
glory of God. The word “glory, δόξα, is used for power in <span
id="x.ii-p15.2"></span>[Joh 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#040)<span
id="x.ii-p15.2"></span>. The Hebrew word, <span
id="x.ii-p15.3"></span>עוז strength, power, is sometimes rendered δόξα
by the Septuagint; see <span id="x.ii-p15.4"></span>[Ps
68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034)<span id="x.ii-p15.4"></span>;
<span id="x.ii-p15.5"></span>[Isa.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002), [Isa.
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024)<span id="x.ii-p15.5"></span>.
God’s power is often expressly mentioned in connection with the
resurrection; See <span id="x.ii-p15.6"></span>[1Co
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#014)<span id="x.ii-p15.6"></span>,
<span id="x.ii-p15.7"></span>[2Co
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span id="x.ii-p15.7"></span>;
<span id="x.ii-p15.8"></span>[Col
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#011)<span id="x.ii-p15.8"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc38009.htm#fr_186) <span
id="x.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span> The word σύμφυτοι, is rendered <span
id="x.iii-p9.1"></span>*insititii* by <span
id="x.iii-p9.2"></span>Calvin, and the same by <span
id="x.iii-p9.3"></span>Erasmus, <span id="x.iii-p9.4"></span>Pareus, and
<span id="x.iii-p9.5"></span>Hammond. The *Vulgate* has “<span
id="x.iii-p9.6"></span>complantati — planted together; <span
id="x.iii-p9.7"></span>Beza, “<span id="x.iii-p9.8"></span>*cum eo*
plantati coaluimus — being planted with him we grow together;” <span
id="x.iii-p9.9"></span>Doddridge, “grow together;” and <span
id="x.iii-p9.10"></span>Macknight, “planted together.” The word properly
means either to grow together, or to be born together; and φύω never
means to graft. It is only found here; and it is applied by the
*Septuagint*, in <span id="x.iii-p9.11"></span>[Zec
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002)<span id="x.iii-p9.11"></span>, to
a forest growing together. The verb συμφύω is once used in <span
id="x.iii-p9.12"></span>[Lu 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#007)<span
id="x.iii-p9.12"></span>, and refers to the thorns which *sprang up
with* the corn. It occurs as a participle in the same sense in the <span
id="x.iii-p9.13"></span>[Wis
13:13](../../../bib/apo/wis013.htm#013)<span id="x.iii-p9.13"></span>.
It appears from <span id="x.iii-p9.14"></span>Wolfius that the word is
used by Greek authors in a sense not strictly literal, to express
congeniality, conjoining, union, as the sameness of disposition, or the
joining together of a dismembered limb, or, as <span
id="x.iii-p9.15"></span>Grotius says, the union of friendship. It might
be so taken here, and the verse might be thus rendered, —

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span>For if we have been united (or, connected)
by a similarity to his death, we shall certainly be also *united by a
similarity* to his resurrection.

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span>The genitive case here may be regarded as
that of the object, as the love of God means sometimes love to God.
Evidently the truth intended to be conveyed is, that as the Christian’s
death to sin bears likeness to Christ’s death, so his rising to a
spiritual life is certain to bear a similar likeness to Christ’s
resurrection. Then in the following verses this is more fully explained.

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span>“The Apostle,” says <span
id="x.iii-p12.1"></span>Beza, “uses the future tense, ‘we shall be,’
because we are not as yet wholly dead, or wholly risen, but are daily
emerging.” But the future here, as <span id="x.iii-p12.2"></span>Stuart
remarks, may be considered as expressing what is to follow the death
previously mentioned, or as designating an *obligation*, as in <span
id="x.iii-p12.3"></span>[Mt 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010)<span
id="x.iii-p12.3"></span>; <span id="x.iii-p12.4"></span>[Luke
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#010),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014)<span id="x.iii-p12.4"></span>; or
a *certainty* as to the result. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc38009.htm#fr_187) <span
id="x.iii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p15"></span> It is thought by <span
id="x.iii-p15.1"></span>Pareus and others, that “body” is here assigned
to “sin,” in allusion to the crucifixion that is mentioned, as a body in
that case is fixed to the cross, and that it means the whole congeries,
or, as Calvin calls it, the whole mass of sins, such as pride, passion,
lust, etc. But the reason for using the word “body,” is more probably
this, because he called innate sin, man — “the old man;” and what
properly belongs to man is a body. The “body of sin” is a Hebraism, and
signifies a sinful body. It has no special reference to the material
body, as <span id="x.iii-p15.2"></span>Origen thought. The “man” here is
to be taken in a spiritual sense, as one who has a mind, reason, and
affections: therefore the body which belongs to him must be of the same
character: it is the whole of what appertains to “the old man,” as he is
corrupt and sinful, the whole of what is earthly, wicked, and depraved
in him. It is the sinful body of the old man. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc38009.htm#fr_188) <span
id="x.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p14"></span> This verse has occasioned various
explanations. The most obvious meaning of the first clause is, that to
“die” here means to die with or in a similar manner with Christ, for in
the next verse, where the idea is resumed, “with” or like “Christ,” is
expressly stated. The verb, δεδικαίωται, “is,” or has been “justified,”
has been considered by the early and most of the later commentators in
the sense of being *freed* or delivered. This is the view, among others,
of <span id="x.iv-p14.1"></span>Chrysostom, <span
id="x.iv-p14.2"></span>Basil, <span id="x.iv-p14.3"></span>Œcumenius,
<span id="x.iv-p14.4"></span>Beza, <span id="x.iv-p14.5"></span>Pareus,
<span id="x.iv-p14.6"></span>Hammond, <span
id="x.iv-p14.7"></span>Grotius, <span id="x.iv-p14.8"></span>Doddridge
and <span id="x.iv-p14.9"></span>Macknight But it must be added, that it
is a meaning of which there is no other clear instance in the New
Testament, though the verb occurs often. <span
id="x.iv-p14.10"></span>Scott, aware of this, gives it its common
meaning, “justified;” and though he does not take the view of <span
id="x.iv-p14.11"></span>Venema, <span id="x.iv-p14.12"></span>Chalmers,
and <span id="x.iv-p14.13"></span>Haldane, as to the general import of
the former part of this chapter, he yet considers that to be “justified
from sin” here, is to be justified from its guilt and penalty. Nor is it
irrelevant to the subject in hand to refer to justification: for it is a
very important truth to declare, that to die to sin is an evidence of
being justified from its guilt. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc38009.htm#fr_189) <span
id="x.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p23"></span> This difference may be gathered from the
general tenor of the whole passage; for his death and our death are said
to have a *likeness*, and not to be same. And farther, in mentioning our
death in this connection, in the next verse, he changes his phraseology;
it is νεκροὺς and not εἶναι, which means those deprived of life — the
lifeless. “The dead (νεκροὺς) in trespasses and sins,” are those who
have no spiritual life; and to be dead *to* sin is not to have life for
sin, to be freed from its ruling power. See <span
id="x.iv-p23.1"></span>[Ro 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)<span
id="x.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p24"></span>It is usual with the Apostle to adopt the
same form of words in different senses, which can only be distinguished
by the context or by other parts of Scripture, as it has been noticed in
a note on <span id="x.iv-p24.2"></span>[Romans
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="x.iv-p24.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc38009.htm#fr_190) <span
id="x.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p8"></span> That is, as a corrupt being: literally it is
“for the whole mass of man.” The “body” here may be the same with that
of “the old man” in <span id="x.v-p8.1"></span>[Ro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="x.v-p8.1"></span>; and
the word for “lusts,” ἐπιθυμίαις, is often applied to designate the
desires of the mind as well as the lusts of the natural body. The word,
θνητω, “mortal,” would in this case mean, doomed to die, having been
crucified; it is a body in the process of dying. Innate sin is here
personified as a king, a ruler, and as having a body, he being “the old
man;” and this body is represented as belonging to Christians — “your,”
as the old man is — “our old man.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc38009.htm#fr_191) <span
id="x.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="x.v-p11"></span> The idea of a king, a ruler, or a tyrant, is
preserved throughout. Innate sin is a ruler, carrying on a warfare, and
therefore has weapons which he employs. In the preceding verse are
mentioned the gratifications with which he indulges his subjects —
“lusts,” here the weapons by which he defends his kingdom, and carries
on an offensive warfare, committing acts of wickedness and wrong —
“weapons of injustice, ἀδικίας.” “He who sins,” says an old author,
“does wrong either to himself or to his neighbor, and always to God.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc38009.htm#fr_192) <span
id="x.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="x.vi-p3.1"></span>Vobis non
dominabitur,” ὀυ κυριεύσει — shall not be a lord over you, shall not
have power or authority or control over you; or, it may mean, shall not
domineer over you, so as to retain you, as it were by force, under its
power: and the reason given favors this idea; for he says, “Ye are not
under law, but under grace.” Law is the strength of sin; and by law it
binds its subjects under its service. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc38009.htm#fr_193) <span
id="x.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p18"></span> The word “law” here, is taken by <span
id="x.vi-p18.1"></span>Scott and others, indefinitely, as meaning law as
the ground of the covenant of works, written or unwritten; and the
literal rendering is, “under law” — ὑπὸ νόμου; and it is the same in the
next verse, “under law.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc38009.htm#fr_194) <span
id="x.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p25"></span> <span id="x.vi-p25.1"></span>Beza*’s* remark
on this is, — that obedience is not the cause of life, as sin is of
death, but is the way to life: and hence the want of correspondence in
the two clauses. But others, such as <span
id="x.vi-p25.2"></span>Venema, <span id="x.vi-p25.3"></span>Turrettin,
and <span id="x.vi-p25.4"></span>Stuart, consider that the clauses
really correspond. They take εἰς θάνατον — “unto death,” as signifying,
unto condemnation; and εἰς δικαιοσύνην, they render “unto
justification;” and ὑπακόη, “obedience,” is in their view the obedience
of faith. This construction might be admitted, were it not for the last
clause of <span id="x.vi-p25.5"></span>[Ro
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)<span id="x.vi-p25.5"></span>,
where we have, “Ye became the servants of righteousness,” the same word,
δικαιοσύνη; except we consider that also, as <span
id="x.vi-p25.6"></span>Venema does, as signifying the righteousness of
faith, by a sort of personification: and if so, we must attach the same
meaning to “righteousness” δικαιοσύνη, in <span
id="x.vi-p25.7"></span>[Ro 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)<span
id="x.vi-p25.7"></span>, which issues in, or leads to holiness; and also
to “righteousness,” δικαιοσύνη, in <span id="x.vi-p25.8"></span>[Ro
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#020)<span id="x.vi-p25.8"></span>. As
the Apostle personifies sin, he may also be supposed to personify
righteousness, that is, the righteousness of faith. In this case, we
might as well retain the word “righteousness” in this verse, and not
justification, which it never strictly means; for the correspondence in
the terms would be still essentially preserved, as with the
righteousness of faith eternal life is inseparably connected. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc38009.htm#fr_195) <span
id="x.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p28"></span> Our version of this verse conveys the idea,
that the Apostle gave thanks that they had been the servants of sin; but
ὅτι is often rendered *for*, as in <span id="x.vi-p28.1"></span>[Matt.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)<span id="x.vi-p28.1"></span>; <span
id="x.vi-p28.2"></span>[Lu 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#013)<span
id="x.vi-p28.2"></span>; and in <span id="x.vi-p28.3"></span>[Mt
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)<span id="x.vi-p28.3"></span>,
followed by δὲ as here, in <span id="x.vi-p28.4"></span>[Ro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="x.vi-p28.4"></span>. The
rendering may be this, —

<span id="x.vi-p29"></span>But thanks be to God; for ye have been the
servants of sin, but have obeyed the form of doctrine, in which ye have
been taught. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc38009.htm#fr_196) <span
id="x.vi-p31.3"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p32"></span> The version of Calvin is, “<span
id="x.vi-p32.1"></span>Obedistis vero et animo typo doctrinæ in quem
traducti estis.”

<span id="x.vi-p33"></span>The word τύπος, is rendered in <span
id="x.vi-p33.1"></span>[Joh 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025)<span
id="x.vi-p33.1"></span>, *print*, that is, of the nails, — in <span
id="x.vi-p33.2"></span>[Ac 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043)<span
id="x.vi-p33.2"></span>, in the plural, *fiqures*, that is, images, — in
<span id="x.vi-p33.3"></span>[Ac
7:44](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044)<span id="x.vi-p33.3"></span>,
*fashion*, that is, pattern or model, — in <span
id="x.vi-p33.4"></span>[Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)<span
id="x.vi-p33.4"></span>, *pattern*, — in <span
id="x.vi-p33.5"></span>[Ac 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#025)<span
id="x.vi-p33.5"></span>, *manner*, that is, form, — in <span
id="x.vi-p33.6"></span>[Ro 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span
id="x.vi-p33.6"></span>, *figure*, that is, representative, — in <span
id="x.vi-p33.7"></span>Titus 2:7, *pattern;* and in all other instances
in which it occurs, except in this place, it is rendered *example*, and
in the plural, *examp1es*, as afforded by the conduct of others, or by
events; see <span id="x.vi-p33.8"></span>[1 Cor.
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#006),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="x.vi-p33.8"></span>;
<span id="x.vi-p33.9"></span>[Php
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#017)<span id="x.vi-p33.9"></span>;
<span id="x.vi-p33.10"></span>[1Th
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#007)<span id="x.vi-p33.10"></span>;
<span id="x.vi-p33.11"></span>[2Th
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#009)<span id="x.vi-p33.11"></span>;
<span id="x.vi-p33.12"></span>[1Ti
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012)<span id="x.vi-p33.12"></span>;
<span id="x.vi-p33.13"></span>[1Pe
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003)<span id="x.vi-p33.13"></span>. The
idea of *mould*, which some give to it, is without an example in the New
Testament.

<span id="x.vi-p34"></span>Our version is that of <span
id="x.vi-p34.1"></span>Castellio, in the meaning of which most critics
agree. <span id="x.vi-p34.2"></span>Grotius gives this paraphrase,
“<span id="x.vi-p34.3"></span>Obedistis ad eum modum quem doctrina
evangelii præscribit — Ye became obedient to that rule which the
doctrine of the gospel prescribes.” <span id="x.vi-p34.4"></span>Wolfius
quotes from <span id="x.vi-p34.5"></span>Iamblichus, in his life of
<span id="x.vi-p34.6"></span>Pythagoras, passages in which τύπος is used
for *form, model,* or *manner*, —”τὢς παιδεύσεως ὁ τύπος — the form of
instruction;” and “τύπος διδασκαλίας — the form or manner of teaching.”

<span id="x.vi-p35"></span>The grammatical difficulty is best removed by
<span id="x.vi-p35.1"></span>Stuart, who considers τύπον to be for τυπω,
the case being changed by the preceding pronoun, no uncommon thing in
Greek: the literal rendering would then be, —”Ye have obeyed the form of
doctrine, respecting which (or, in which, see <span
id="x.vi-p35.2"></span>[Mr 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034)<span
id="x.vi-p35.2"></span>) ye have been instructed.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc38009.htm#fr_197) <span
id="x.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p6"></span> The phrase is taken differently: Ανθρώπινον
λέγω “I speak what is human,” that is, what is proportionable to man’s
strength, says <span id="x.vii-p6.1"></span>Chrysostom — what is done
and known in common life, as in <span id="x.vii-p6.2"></span>[Ga
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015)<span id="x.vii-p6.2"></span>, or,
what is moderate, says <span id="x.vii-p6.3"></span>Hammond — what is
level to man’s understanding, says <span id="x.vii-p6.4"></span>Vatablus
The first proposed by <span id="x.vii-p6.5"></span>Hammond is the
meaning most suitable here; for the Apostle had previously used reasons
and arguments, and sacred similitudes; but he comes now to what is known
in common life among men, the connection between masters and servants,
and he did this in condescension to their weakness, which he calls the
weakness of the flesh, that is, the weakness of which flesh, the
depravity of nature, was the cause; it was weakness arising from the
flesh. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc38009.htm#fr_198) <span
id="x.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p9"></span> The different clauses of this verse have
been a knotty point to all commentators. Probably the Apostle did not
intend to keep up a regular course of antithesis, the subject not
admitting of this; because the progress of evil and the progress of its
remedy may be different, and it seems to be so in the present case. Sin
is innate and inward, and its character, as here represented, is
vileness and iniquity, and it breaks out into acts of iniquity: he does
not repeat the other character, vileness; but when he comes to the
contrast he mentions holiness, and does not add what is antithetic to
iniquity. This is a striking instance of the elliptical style of the
Apostle. It is not neglect or carelessness, but no doubt an intentional
omission; it being the character of his mode of writing, which he had in
common with the ancient Prophets.

<span id="x.vii-p10"></span>Then comes the word “righteousness,” which I
am disposed to think is that which all along has been spoken of, the
righteousness of faith; this is not innate, not inward, but which comes
from without, and is apprehended by faith, by which sins are forgiven,
and God’s favor obtained; and they who become the servants of this are
to cultivate holiness both inward and outward; they ought to present all
their members, that is, all their faculties, to the service of this
master, so that they may become holy in all manner of conversation.

<span id="x.vii-p11"></span>But if this idea of righteousness be
disapproved of, we may still account for the apparent irregularity in
the construction of the passage. It is an instance of an inverted order,
many examples of which are found even in this Epistle. He begins with
“uncleanness,” he ends with “holiness,” and then the intervening words
which are in contrast correspond, “iniquity” and “righteousness.” Here
is also an inversion in the meaning; “uncleanness” is the principle, and
“holiness” is the action; while “iniquity” is the action, and
“righteousness” is the principle. If this view is right, we have here a
singular instance of the inverted parallelism, both as to words and
meaning. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc38010)
