[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38007)  [Next](cc38009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Therefore being justified by faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Iustificatus ergo ex fide, pacem
habemus apud Deum per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum;

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span>**2.** By whom also we have access by faith
into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of
God.

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Per quem accessum habiumus fide in
gratiam istam in qua stetimus, et gloriamur super spe gloriæ Dei.

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span><span id="ix.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>**1.** *Being then justified,* *etc.* The
Apostle begins to illustrate by the effects, what he has hitherto said
of the righteousness of faith: and hence the whole of this chapter is
taken up with amplifications, which are no less calculated to explain
than to confirm. He had said before, that faith is abolished, if
righteousness is sought by works; and in this case perpetual inquietude
would disturb miserable souls, as they can find nothing substantial in
themselves: but he teaches us now, that they are rendered quiet and
tranquil, when we have obtained righteousness by faith, *we have peace
with God;* and this is the peculiar fruit of the righteousness of faith.
When any one strives to seek tranquillity of conscience by works, (which
is the case with profane and ignorant men,) he labors for it in vain;
for either his heart is asleep through his disregard or forgetfulness of
God’s judgment, or else it is full of trembling and dread, until it
reposes on Christ, who is alone our peace.

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>Then peace means tranquillity of conscience,
which arises from this, — that it feels itself to be reconciled to God.
This the Pharisee has not, who swells with false confidence in his own
works; nor the stupid sinner, who is not disquieted, because he is
inebriated with the sweetness of vices: for though neither of these
seems to have a manifest disquietude, as he is who is smitten with a
consciousness of sin; yet as they do not really approach the tribunal of
God, they have no reconciliation with him; for insensibility of
conscience is, as it were, a sort of retreating from God. Peace with God
is opposed to the dead security of the flesh, and for this reason, —
because the first thing is, that every one should become awakened as to
the account he must render of his life; and no one can stand boldly
before God, but he who relies on a gratuitous reconciliation; for as
long as he is God, all must otherwise tremble and be confounded. And
this is the strongest of proofs, that our opponents do nothing but prate
to no purpose, when they ascribe righteousness to works; for this
conclusion of Paul is derived from this fact, — that miserable souls
always tremble, except they repose on the grace of Christ.

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span><span id="ix.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span>**2.** *Through whom we have access*,  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) *etc.* Our reconciliation with God
depends only on Christ; for he only is the beloved Son, and we are all
by nature the children of wrath. But this favor is communicated to us by
the gospel; for the gospel is the ministry of reconciliation, by the
means of which we are in a manner brought into the kingdom of God.
Rightly then does Paul set before our eyes in Christ a sure pledge of
God’s favor, that he might more easily draw us away from every
confidence in works. And as he teaches us by the word *access,* that
salvation begins with Christ, he excludes those preparations by which
foolish men imagine that they can anticipate God’s mercy; as though he
said, “Christ comes not to you, nor helps you, on account of your
merits.” He afterwards immediately subjoins, that it is through the
continuance of the same favor that our salvation becomes certain and
sure; by which he intimates, that perseverance is not founded on our
power and diligence, but on Christ; though at the same time by saying,
that *we stand*, he indicates that the gospel ought to strike deep roots
into the hearts of the godly, so that being strengthened by its truth,
they may stand firm against all the devices of Satan and of the flesh.
And by the word *stand*, he means, that faith is not a changeable
persuasion, only for one day; but that it is immutable, and that it
sinks deep into the heart, so that it endures through life. It is then
not he, who by a sudden impulse is led to believe, that has faith, and
is to be reckoned among the faithful; but he who constantly, and, so to
speak, with a firm and fixed foot, abides in that station appointed to
him by God, so as to cleave always to Christ.

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span>*And glory in the hope*, *etc.* The reason
that the hope of a future life exists and dares to exult, is this, —
because we rest on God’s favor as on a sure foundation: for Paul’s
meaning is, that though the faithful are now pilgrims on the earth, they
yet by hope scale the heavens, so that they quietly enjoy in their own
bosoms their future inheritance. And hereby are subverted two of the
most pestilent dogmas of the sophists. What they do in the first place
is, they bid Christians to be satisfied with moral conjecture as to the
perception of God’s favor towards them; and secondly, they teach that
all are uncertain as to their final perseverance; but except there be at
present sure knowledge, and a firm and undoubting persuasion as to the
future, who would dare to glory? The hope of the glory of God has shone
upon us through the gospel, which testifies that we shall be
participators of the Divine nature; for when we shall see God face to
face, we shall be like him. (<span id="ix.i-p16.1"></span>[2Pe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004)<span id="ix.i-p16.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p16.2"></span>[1Jo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="ix.i-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**3.** And not only *so*, but we glory in
tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience;

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Neque id modo, sed gloriamur  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) etiam in afflictionibus; scientes quod
tribulatio patientiam efficiat;

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>**4.** And patience, experience; and
experience, hope:

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>**4.** Patientia vero probationem; probatio
autem spem:

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>**5.** And hope maketh not ashamed; because
the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is
given unto us.

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span>**5.** Porro spes non pudefacit, quoniam
dilectio Dei diffusa est in cordibus nostris per Spiritum santum, qui
datus est nobis.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span><span id="ix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span>**3.** *Not only so*, *etc.* That no one
might scoffingly object and say, that Christians, with all their
glorying, are yet strangely harassed and distressed in this life, which
condition is far from being a happy one, — he meets this objection, and
declares, not only that the godly are prevented by these calamities from
being blessed, but also that their glorying is thereby promoted. To
prove this he takes his argument from the effects, and adopts a
remarkable gradation, and at last concludes, that all the sorrows we
endure contribute to our salvation and final good.

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span>By saying that the saints glory in
tribulations, he is not to be understood, as though they dreaded not,
nor avoided adversities, or were not distressed with their bitterness
when they happened, (for there is no patience when there is no feeling
of bitterness;) but as in their grief and sorrow they are not without
great consolation, because they regard that whatever they bear is
dispensed to them for good by the hand of a most indulgent Father, they
are justly said to glory: for whenever salvation is promoted, there is
not wanting a reason for glorying.

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>We are then taught here what is the design
of our tribulations, if indeed we would prove ourselves to be the
children of God. They ought to habituate us to patience; and if they do
not answer this end, the work of the Lord is rendered void and of none
effect through our corruption: for how does he prove that adversities do
not hinder the glorying of the faithful, except that by their patience
in enduring them, they feel the help of God, which nourishes and
confirms their hope? They then who do not learn patience, do not, it is
certain, make good progress. Nor is it any objection, that there are
recorded in Scripture some complaints full of despondency, which the
saints had made: for the Lord sometimes so depresses and straitens for a
time his people, that they can hardly breathe, and can hardly remember
any source of consolation; but in a moment he brings to life those whom
he had nearly sunk in the darkness of death. So that what Paul says is
always accomplished in them —

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span>“We are in every way oppressed, but not made
anxious; we are in danger, but we are not in despair; we suffer
persecution, but we are not forsaken; we are cast down but we are not
destroyed.”  
(<span id="ix.ii-p13.2"></span>[2Co
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008)<span id="ix.ii-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span>*Tribulation produces* (<span
id="ix.ii-p14.1"></span>efficiat) *patience*, *etc.* This is not the
natural effect of tribulation; for we see that a great portion of
mankind are thereby instigated to murmur against God, and even to curse
his name. But when that inward meekness, which is infused by the Spirit
of God, and the consolation, which is conveyed by the same Spirit,
succeed in the place of our stubbornness, then tribulations become the
means of generating patience; yea, those tribulations, which in the
obstinate can produce nothing but indignation and clamorous discontent.

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span><span id="ix.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span>**4.** *Patience, probation*, *etc.* James,
adopting a similar gradation, seems to follow a different order; for he
says, that patience proceeds from probation: but the different meaning
of the word is what will reconcile both. Paul takes probation for the
experience which the faithful have of the sure protection of God, when
by relying on his aid they overcome all difficulties, even when they
experience, whilst in patiently enduring they stand firm, how much
avails the power of the Lord, which he has promised to be always present
with his people. James takes the same word for tribulation itself,
according to the common usage of Scripture; for by these God proves and
tries his servants: and they are often called trials.  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154)

<span id="ix.ii-p19"></span>According then to the present passage, we
then only make advances in patience as we ought, when we regard it as
having been continued to us by God’s power, and thus entertain hope as
to the future, that God’s favor, which has ever succored us in our
necessities, will never be wanting to us. Hence he subjoins, that from
probation arises hope; for ungrateful we should be for benefits
received, except the recollection of them confirms our hope as to what
is to come.

<span id="ix.ii-p20"></span><span id="ix.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p21"></span>**5.** *Hope maketh not ashamed,* *etc.*;
 <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) that is, it regards salvation
as most certain. It hence appears, that the Lord tries us by adversities
for this end, — that our salvation may thereby be gradually advanced.
Those evils then cannot render us miserable, which do in a manner
promote our happiness. And thus is proved what he had said, that the
godly have reasons for glorying in the midst of their afflictions.

<span id="ix.ii-p23"></span>*For the love of God*, *etc.* I do not refer
this only to the last sentence, but to the whole of the preceding
passage. I therefore would say, — that by tribulations we are stimulated
to patience, and that patience finds an experiment of divine help, by
which we are more encouraged to entertain hope; for however we may be
pressed and seem to be nearly consumed, we do not yet cease to feel
God’s favor towards us, which affords the richest consolation, and much
more abundant than when all things happen prosperously. For as that
happiness, which is so in appearance, is misery itself, when God is
adverse to and displeased with us; so when he is propitious, even
calamities themselves will surely be turned to a prosperous and a joyful
issue. Seeing all things must serve the will of the Creator, who,
according to his paternal favor towards us, (as Paul declares in the
eighth chapter,) overrules all the trials of the cross for our
salvation, this knowledge of divine love towards us is instilled into
our hearts to the Spirit of God; for the good things which God has
prepared for his servants are hid from the ears and the eyes and the
minds of men, and the Spirit alone is he who can reveal them. And the
word *diffused*, is very emphatical; for it means that the revelation of
divine love towards us is so abounding that it fills our hearts; and
being thus spread through every part of them, it not only mitigates
sorrow in adversities, but also, like a sweet seasoning, it renders
tribulations to be loved by us.  <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156)

<span id="ix.ii-p26"></span>He says further, that the Spirit is *given*,
that is, bestowed through the gratuitous goodness of God, and not
conferred for our merits; according to what <span
id="ix.ii-p26.1"></span>Augustine has well observed, who, though he is
mistaken in his view of the love of God, gives this explanation, — that
we courageously bear adversities, and are thus confirmed in our hope,
because we, having been regenerated by the Spirit, do love God. It is
indeed a pious sentiment, but not what Paul means: for love is not to be
taken here in an active but a passive sense. And certain it is, that no
other thing is taught by Paul than that the true fountain of all love
is, when the faithful are convinced that they are loved by God, and that
they are not slightly touched with this conviction, but have their souls
thoroughly imbued with it.

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006)<span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>**6.** For when we were yet without
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>**6.** Christus enim, quum adhuc essemus
infirmi secundum rationem Temporis, pro impiis mortuus est:

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span>**7.** For scarcely for a righteous man will
one die; yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die.

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span>**7.** Vix sane pro justo quis moriatur; nam
pro bono forsan aliquis etiam mori audeat.

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span>**8.** But God commendeth his love toward
us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>**8.** Confimat autem erga nos charitatem
Deus quod peccatores quum Adhuc essemus, Christus pro nobis mortuus est:

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span>**9.** Much more then, being now justified
by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span>**9.** Multo igitur magis, justificati nunc
per sanguinem ejus, servabimur per ipsum ab ira.

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span><span id="ix.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span>**6.** *For Christ*, *etc.* I ventured not
in my version to allow myself so much liberty as to give this rendering,
“In the time in which we were weak;” and yet I prefer this sense. An
argument begins here, which is from the greater to the less, and which
he afterwards pursues more at large: and though he has not woven the
thread of his discourse so very distinctly, yet its irregular structure
does not disturb the meaning. “If Christ,” he says, “had mercy on the
ungodly, if he reconciled enemies to his Father, if he has done this by
the virtue of his death, much more easily will he save them when
justified, and keep those restored to favor in the possession of it,
especially when the influence of his life is added to the virtue of his
death.”  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) The time of weakness
some consider to be that, when Christ first began to be manifested to
the world, and they think that those are called weak, who were like
children under the tuition of the law. I apply the expression to every
one of us, and I regard that time to be meant, which precedes the
reconciliation of each one with God. For as we are all born the children
of wrath, so we are kept under that curse until we become partakers of
Christ. And he calls those weak, who have nothing in themselves but what
is sinful; for he calls the same immediately afterwards ungodly. And it
is nothing new, that weakness should be taken in this sense. He calls,
in <span id="ix.iii-p12.2"></span>[1Co
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#022)<span id="ix.iii-p12.2"></span>,
the covered parts of the body weak; and, in <span
id="ix.iii-p12.3"></span>[2Co
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#010)<span id="ix.iii-p12.3"></span>,
he designates his own bodily presence weak, because it had no dignity.
And this meaning will soon again occur. When, therefore, we were weak,
that is, when we were in no way worthy or fit that God should look on
us, at this very time Christ died for the ungodly: for the beginning of
religion is faith, from which they were all alienated, for whom Christ
died. And this also is true as to the ancient fathers, who obtained
righteousness before he died; for they derived this benefit from his
future death.  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span><span id="ix.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span>**7.** *For a just man*, *etc.* The meaning
of the passage has constrained me to render the particle <span
id="ix.iii-p15.1"></span>γὰρ as an affirmative or declarative rather
than as a causative. The import of the sentence is this, “Most rare,
indeed, is such an example to be found among men, that one dies for a
just man, though this may sometimes happen: but let this be granted, yet
for an ungodly man none will be found willing to die: this is what
Christ has done.”  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) Thus it is an
illustration, derived from a comparison; for such an example of
kindness, as Christ has exhibited towards us, does not exist among men.

<span id="ix.iii-p19"></span><span id="ix.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p20"></span>**8.** *But God confirms,* *etc.* The verb,
<span id="ix.iii-p20.1"></span>συνίστησι, has various meanings; that
which is most suitable to this place is that of confirming; for it was
not the Apostle’s object to excite our gratitude, but to strengthen the
trust and confidence of our souls. He then *confirms*, that is, exhibits
his love to us as most certain and complete, inasmuch as for the sake of
the ungodly he spared not Christ his own Son. In this, indeed, his love
appears, that being not moved by love on our part, he of his own good
will first loved us, as John tells us. (<span
id="ix.iii-p20.2"></span>[1Jo
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016)<span id="ix.iii-p20.2"></span>.)
— Those are here called *sinners*, (as in many other places,) who are
wholly vicious and given up to sin, according to what is said in <span
id="ix.iii-p20.3"></span>[Joh
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031)<span id="ix.iii-p20.3"></span>,
“God hears not sinners,” that is, men abandoned and altogether wicked.
The woman called “a sinner,” was one of a shameful character. (<span
id="ix.iii-p20.4"></span>[Lu 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037)<span
id="ix.iii-p20.4"></span>.) And this meaning appears more evident from
the contrast which immediately follows, — *for being now justified
through his blood*: for since he sets the two in opposition, the one to
the other, and calls those justified who are delivered from the guilt of
sin, it necessarily follows that those are sinners who, for their evil
deeds, are condemned.  <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) The
import of the whole is, — since Christ has attained righteousness for
sinner by his death, much more shall he protect them, being now
justified, from destruction. And in the last clause he applies to his
own doctrine the comparison between the less and the greater: for it
would not have been enough for salvation to have been once procured for
us, were not Christ to render it safe and secure to the end. And this is
what the Apostle now maintains; so that we ought not to fear, that
Christ will cut off the current of his favor while we are in the middle
of our course: for inasmuch as he has reconciled us to the Father, our
condition is such, that he purposes more efficaciously to put forth and
daily to increase his favor towards us.

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**10.** For if, when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled,
we shall be saved by his life.

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>**10.** Si enim quum inimici essemus,
reconciliati sumus Deo per mortem Filii ejus; multo magis, reconciliati,
servabimur per vitam ipsius.

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span><span id="ix.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span>**10.** This is an explanation of the former
verse, amplified by introducing a comparison between life and death. We
were enemies, he says, when Christ interposed for the purpose of
propitiating the Father: through this reconciliation we are now friends;
since this was effected by his death; much more influential and
efficacious will be his life.  <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)
We hence have ample proofs to strengthen our hearts with confidence
respecting our salvation. By saying that we were reconciled to God by
the death of Christ, he means, that it was the sacrifice of expiation,
by which God was pacified towards the world, as I have showed in the
fourth chapter.

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span>But the Apostle seems here to be inconsistent
with himself; for if the death of Christ was a pledge of the divine love
towards us, it follows that we were already acceptable to him; but he
says now, that we were enemies. To this answer, that as God hates sin,
we are also hated by him his far as we are sinners; but as in his secret
counsel he chooses us into the body of Christ, he ceases to hate us: but
restoration to favor is unknown to us, until we attain it by faith.
Hence with regard to us, we are always enemies, until the death of
Christ interposes in order to propitiate God. And this twofold aspect of
things ought to be noticed; for we do not know the gratuitous mercy of
God otherwise than as it appears from this — that he spared not his
only-begotten Son; for he loved us at a time when there was discord
between him and us: nor can we sufficiently understand the benefit
brought to us by the death of Christ, except this be the beginning of
our reconciliation with God, that we are persuaded that it is by the
expiation that has been made, that he, who was before justly angry with
us, is now propitious to us. Since then our reception into favor is
ascribed to the death of Christ, the meaning is, that guilt is thereby
taken away, to which we should be otherwise exposed.

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span><span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011)<span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>**11.** And not only *so*, but we also joy in
God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement.

<span id="ix.v-p3"></span>**11.** Non solum autem, sed etiam gloriamur
in Deo per Dominum Iesum Christum, per quem nunc reconciliationem
accepimus.

<span id="ix.v-p4"></span><span id="ix.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p5"></span>**11.** *And not this only*, *etc.* He now
ascends into the highest strain of glorying; for when we glory that God
is ours, whatever blessings can be imagined or wished, ensue and flow
from this fountain; for God is not only the chief of all good things,
but also possesses in himself the sum and substance of all blessings;
and he becomes ours through Christ. We then attain this by faith, — that
nothing is wanting to us as to happiness. Nor is it in vain that he so
often mentions reconciliation: it is, first, that we may be taught to
fix our eyes on the death of Christ, whenever we speak of our salvation;
and, secondly, that we may know that our trust must be fixed on nothing
else, but on the expiation made for our sins.

<span id="ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p1"></span><span id="ix.vi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span id="ix.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p2"></span>**12.** Wherefore, as by one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned:

<span id="ix.vi-p3"></span>**12.** Quamobrem sicut per unum hominem
peccatmn in mundum introiit, et per peccatum mors; atque ita in omnes
homines mors pervagata est. quandoquidem omnes peccaverunt:

<span id="ix.vi-p4"></span>**13.** (For until the law sin was in the
world: but sin is not imputed when there is no law.

<span id="ix.vi-p5"></span>**13.** (Nam usque ad legem peccatum erat in
mundo; peccatum autem non imputatur, quum non est lex:

<span id="ix.vi-p6"></span>**14.** Nevertheless death reigned from Adam
to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of
Adam’s transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come.

<span id="ix.vi-p7"></span>**14.** Sed regnavit mors ab Adam usque ad
Mosen, etiam in eos qui non peccaverunt ad similitudinem prævericationis
Adam, qui est figura futuri.

<span id="ix.vi-p8"></span><span id="ix.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p9"></span>**12** *Wherefore as*, *etc.* He now begins
to enlarge on the same doctrine, by comparing with it what is of an
opposite character. For since Christ came to redeem us from the calamity
into which Adam had fallen, and had precipitated all his posterity with
him, we cannot see with so much clearness what we have in Christ, as by
having what we have lost in Adam set before us, though all things on
both sides are not similar: hence Paul subjoins an exception, which we
shall notice in its place; and we shall also point out any other
difference that may occur. The incompleteness of the sentence sometimes
renders it obscure, as when the second clause, which answers to the
former, is not expressed. But we shall endeavor to make both plain when
we come to those parts.  <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162)

<span id="ix.vi-p16"></span>*Sin entered into the world,* *etc.* Observe
the order which he keeps here; for he says, that sin preceded, and that
from sin death followed. There are indeed some who contend, that we are
so lost through Adam’s sin, as though we perished through no fault of
our own, but only, because he had sinned for us. But Paul distinctly
affirms, that sin extends to all who suffer its punishment: and this he
afterwards more fully declares, when subsequently he assigns a reason
why all the posterity of Adam are subject to the dominion of death; and
it is even this — because we have all, he says, sinned. But to sin in
this case, is to become corrupt and vicious; for the natural depravity
which we bring, from our mother’s womb, though it brings not forth
immediately its own fruits, is yet sin before God, and deserves his
vengeance: and this is that sin which they call original. For as Adam at
his creation had received for us as well as for himself the gifts of
God’s favor, so by falling away from the Lord, he in himself corrupted,
vitiated, depraved, and ruined our nature; for having been divested of
God’s likeness, he could not have generated seed but what was like
himself. Hence we have all sinned; for we are all imbued with natural
corruption, and so are become sinful and wicked. Frivolous then was the
gloss, by which formerly the Pelagians endeavored to elude the words of
Paul, and held, that sin descended by imitation from Adam to the whole
human race; for Christ would in this case become only the exemplar and
not the cause of righteousness. Besides, we may easily conclude, that he
speaks not here of actual sin; for if everyone for himself contracted
guilt, why did Paul form a comparison between Adam and Christ? It then
follows that our innate and hereditary depravity is what is here
referred to.  <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163)

<span id="ix.vi-p21"></span><span id="ix.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p22"></span>**13.** *For until the law*, *etc.* This
parenthesis anticipates an objection: for as there seems to be no
transgression without the law, it might have been doubted whether there
were before the law any sin: that there was after the law admitted of no
doubt. The question only refers to the time preceding the law. To this
then he gives this answer, — that though God had not as yet denounced
judgment by a written law, yet mankind were under a curse, and that from
the womb; and hence that they who led a wicked and vicious life before
the promulgation of the law, were by no means exempt from the
condemnation of sin; for there had always been some notion of a God, to
whom honor was due, and there had ever been some rule of righteousness.
This view is so plain and so clear, that of itself it disproves every
opposite notion.

<span id="ix.vi-p23"></span>*But sin is not imputed*, *etc.* Without the
law reproving us, we in a manner sleep in our sins; and though we are
not ignorant that we do evil, we yet suppress as much as we can the
knowledge of evil offered to us, at least we obliterate it by quickly
forgetting it. While the law reproves and chides us, it awakens us as it
were by its stimulating power, that we may return to the consideration
of God’s judgment. The Apostle then intimates that men continue in their
perverseness when not roused by the law, and that when the difference
between good and evil is laid aside, they securely and joyfully indulge
themselves, as if there was no judgment to come. But that before the law
iniquities were by God imputed to men is evident from the punishment of
Cain, from the deluge by which the whole world was destroyed, from the
fate of Sodom, and from the plagues inflicted on Pharaoh and Abimelech
on account of Abraham, and also from the plagues brought on the
Egyptians. That men also imputed sin to one another, is clear from the
many complaints and expostulations by which they charged one another
with iniquity, and also from the defenses by which they labored to clear
themselves from accusations of doing wrong. There are indeed many
examples which prove that every man was of himself conscious of what was
evil and of what was good: but that for the most part they connived at
their own evil deeds, so that they imputed nothing as a sin to
themselves unless they were constrained. When therefore he denies that
sin without the law is imputed, he speaks comparatively; for when men
are not pricked by the goads of the law, they become sunk in
carelessness.  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)

<span id="ix.vi-p25"></span>But Paul wisely introduced this sentence, in
order that the Jews might hence more clearly learn how grievously they
offended, inasmuch as the law openly condemned them; for if they were
not exempted from punishment whom God had never summoned as guilty
before his tribunal, what would become of the Jews to whom the law, like
a herald, had proclaimed their guilt, yea, on whom it denounced
judgment? There may be also another reason adduced why he expressly
says, that sin reigned before the law, but was not imputed, and that is,
that we may know that the cause of death proceeds not from the law, but
is only made known by it. Hence he declares, that all became miserably
lost immediately after the fall of Adam, though their destruction was
only made manifest by the law. If you translate this adversative <span
id="ix.vi-p25.1"></span>δε, *though*, the text would run better; for the
meaning is, that though men may indulge themselves, they cannot yet
escape God’s judgment, even when there is no law to reprove them.

<span id="ix.vi-p26"></span>*Death reigned from Adam*, *etc.* He
explains more clearly that it availed men nothing that from Adam to the
time when the law was promulgated, they led a licentious and careless
life, while the difference between good and evil was willfully rejected,
and thus, without the warning of the law, the remembrance of sin was
buried; yea, that this availed them nothing, because sin did yet issue
in their condemnation. It hence appears, that death even then reigned;
for the blindness and obduracy of men could not stifle the judgment of
God.

<span id="ix.vi-p27"></span><span id="ix.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p28"></span>**14.** *Even over them*, *etc.* Though this
passage is commonly understood of infants, who being guilty of no actual
sin, die through original sin, I yet prefer to regard it as referring to
all those who sinned without the law; for this verse is to be connected
with the preceding clause, which says, that those who were without the
law did not impute sin to themselves. Hence they sinned not after the
similitude of Adam’s transgression; for they had not, like him, the will
of God made known to them by a certain oracle: for the Lord had
forbidden Adam to touch the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil; but to them he had given no command besides the testimony of
conscience. The Apostle then intended to imply, that it did not happen
through the difference between Adam and his posterity that they were
exempt from condemnation. Infants are at the same time included in their
number.

<span id="ix.vi-p29"></span>*Who is a type of him who was to come.* This
sentence is put instead of a second clause; for we see that one part
only of the comparison is expressed, the other is omitted — an instance
of what is called <span id="ix.vi-p29.1"></span>*anacoluthon*  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) You are then to take the meaning as
though it was said, “as by one man sin entered into the whole world, and
death through sin, so by one man righteousness returned, and life
through righteousness.” But in saying that Adam bore a resemblance to
Christ, there is nothing incongruous; for some likeness often appears in
things wholly contrary. As then we are all lost through Adam’s sin, so
we are restored through Christ’s righteousness: hence he calls Adam not
inaptly the type of Christ. But observe, that Adam is not, said to be
the type of sin, nor Christ the type of righteousness, as though they
led the way only by their example, but that the one is contrasted with
the other. Observe this, lest you should foolishly go astray with <span
id="ix.vi-p30.1"></span>Origen, and be involved in a pernicious error;
for he reasoned philosophically and profanely on the corruption of
mankind, and not only diminished the grace of Christ, but nearly
obliterated it altogether. The less excusable is <span
id="ix.vi-p30.2"></span>Erasmus, who labors much in palliating a notion
so grossly delirious.

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span><span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015)<span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>**15.** But not as the offence, so also *is*
the free gift. For if through the offence of one many be dead, much more
the grace of God, and the gift by grace, *which is* by one man, Jesus
Christ, hath abounded unto many.

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span>**15.** Sed non sicut delictum, ita et
donum; nam si unius delicto  <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166)
multi mortui sunt, multo magis gratia Dei et donum Dei in gratia, quæ
fuit unius hominis Christi, in multos abundavit.

<span id="ix.vii-p6"></span><span id="ix.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p7"></span>**15.** *But not as the offense*, *etc.* Now
follows the rectifying or the completion of the comparison already
introduced. The Apostle does not, however, very minutely state the
points of difference between Christ and Adam, but he obviates errors
into which we might otherwise easily fall, and what is needful for an
explanation we shall add. Though he mentions oftentimes a difference,
yet there are none of these repetitions in which there is not a want of
a corresponding clause, or in which there is not at least an ellipsis.
Such instances are indeed defects in a discourse; but they are not
prejudicial to the majesty of that celestial wisdom which is taught us
by the Apostle; it has, on the contrary, so happened through the
providence of God, that the highest mysteries have been delivered to us
in the garb of an humble style,  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167)
in order that our faith may not depend on the potency of human
eloquence, but on the efficacious working of the Spirit alone.

<span id="ix.vii-p10"></span>He does not indeed even now expressly
supply the deficiency of the former sentence, but simply teaches us,
that there is a greater measure of grace procured by Christ, than of
condemnation introduced by the first man. What some think, that the
Apostle carries on here a chain of reasoning, I know not whether it will
be deemed by all sufficiently evident. It may indeed be justly inferred,
that since the fall of Adam had such an effect as to produce the ruin of
many, much more efficacious is the grace of God to the benefit of many;
inasmuch as it is admitted, that Christ is much more powerful to save,
than Adam was to destroy. But as they cannot be disproved, who wish to
take the passage without this inference, I am willing that they should
choose either of these views; though what next follows cannot be deemed
an inference, yet it is of the same meaning. It is hence probable, that
Paul rectifies, or by way of exception modifies, what he had said of the
likeness between Christ and Adam.

<span id="ix.vii-p11"></span>But observe, that a larger number (<span
id="ix.vii-p11.1"></span>*plures*) are not here contrasted with many
(<span id="ix.vii-p11.2"></span>*multis*,) for he speaks not of the
number of men: but as the sin of Adam has destroyed many, he draws this
conclusion, — that the righteousness of Christ will be no less
efficacious to save many.  <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168)

<span id="ix.vii-p14"></span>When he says, *by the offense of one*,
*etc.*, understand him as meaning this, — that corruption has from him
descended to us: for we perish not through his fault, as though we were
blameless; but as his sin is the cause of our sin, Paul ascribes to him
our ruin: our sin I call that which is implanted in us, and with which
we are born.

<span id="ix.vii-p15"></span>*The grace of God and the gift of God
through grace*, *etc.* Grace is properly set in opposition to offense;
the gift which proceeds from grace, to death. Hence *grace* means the
free goodness of God or gratuitous love, of which he has given us a
proof in Christ, that he might relieve our misery: and *gift* is the
fruit of this mercy, and hath come to us, even the reconciliation by
which we have obtained life and salvation, righteousness, newness of
life, and every other blessing. We hence see how absurdly the schoolmen
have defined grace, who have taught that it is nothing else but a
quality infused into the hearts of men: for grace, properly speaking, is
in God; and what is in us is the effect of grace. And he says, that it
is by *one man;* for the Father has made him the fountain out of whose
fullness all must draw. And thus he teaches us, that not even the least
drop of life can be found out of Christ, — that there is no other remedy
for our poverty and want, than what he conveys to us from his own
abundance.

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span><span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016)<span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span>**16.** And not as *it was* by one that
sinned,  <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) *so is* the gift: for
the judgement *was* by one to condemnation, but the free gift *is* of
many offences unto justification.

<span id="ix.viii-p6"></span>**16.** Et non sicut per unum qui
peccaverat, ita donum; judicium enim ex uno in condemationem, donum
autem ex multis delictis in justificationem.

<span id="ix.viii-p7"></span><span id="ix.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p8"></span>**16.** This is especially an explanation
of what he had said before, — that by one offense guilt issued in the
condemnation of us all, but that grace, or rather the gratuitous gift,
is efficacious to our justification from many offenses. It is indeed an
expansion of what the last verse contains; for he had not hitherto
expressed, how or in what respect Christ excelled Adam. This difference
being settled, it appears evident, that their opinion is impious, who
have taught that we recover nothing else by Christ but a freedom from
original sin, or the corruption derived from Adam. Observe also, that
these many offenses, from which he affirms we are freed through Christ,
are not to be understood only of those which every one must have
committed before baptism, but also of those by which the saints contract
daily new guilt; and on account of which they would be justly exposed to
condemnation, were they not continually relieved by this grace.

<span id="ix.viii-p9"></span>He sets gift in opposition to judgment: by
the latter he means strict justice; by the former, gratuitous pardon.
From strict justice comes condemnation; from pardon, absolution. Or,
which is the same thing, were God to deal with us according to justice,
we should be all undone; but he justifies us freely in Christ.

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span><span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017)<span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p2"></span>**17.** For if by one man’s offence death
reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace and of
the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.)
 <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170)

<span id="ix.ix-p5"></span>**17.** Si enin unius delicto mors regnavit
per unum; multo magis qui exuberantiam gratiæ et doni justitiæ
acceperunt, in vita regnabunt per unum Iesum Christum.)

<span id="ix.ix-p6"></span><span id="ix.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p7"></span>**17.** *For if the offense of one*, *etc.*
He again subjoins a general explanation, on which he dwells still
further; for it was by no means his purpose to explain every part of the
subject, but to state the main points. He had before declared, that the
power of grace had surpassed that of sin: and by this he consoles and
strengthens the faithful, and, at the same time, stimulates and
encourages them to meditate on the benignity of God. Indeed the design
of so studious a repetition was, — that the grace of God might be
worthily set forth, that men might be led from self-confidence to trust
in Christ, that having obtained his grace they might enjoy full
assurance; and hence at length arises gratitude. The sum of the whole is
this — that Christ surpasses Adam; the sin of one is overcome by the
righteousness of the other; the curse of one is effaced by the grace of
the other; from one, death has proceeded, which is absorbed by the life
which the other bestows.

<span id="ix.ix-p8"></span>But the parts of this comparison do not
correspond; instead of adding, “the gift of life shall more fully reign
and flourish through the exuberance of grace,” he says, that “the
faithful shall reign;” which amounts to the same thing; for the reign of
the faithful is in life, and the reign of life is in the faithful.

<span id="ix.ix-p9"></span>It may further be useful to notice here the
difference between Christ and Adam, which the Apostle omitted, not
because he deemed it of no importance, but unconnected with his present
subject.

<span id="ix.ix-p10"></span>The first is, that by Adam’s sin we are not
condemned through imputation alone, as though we were punished only for
the sin of another; but we suffer his punishment, because we also
ourselves are guilty; for as our nature is vitiated in him, it is
regarded by God as having committed sin. But through the righteousness
of Christ we are restored in a different way to salvation; for it is not
said to be accepted for us, because it is in us, but because we possess
Christ himself with all his blessings, as given to us through the
bountiful kindness of the Father. Hence the gift of righteousness is not
a quality with which God endows us, as some absurdly explain it, but a
gratuitous imputation of righteousness; for the Apostle plainly declares
what he understood by the word *grace*. The other difference is, that
the benefit of Christ does not come to all men, while Adam has involved
his whole race in condemnation; and the reason of this is indeed
evident; for as the curse we derive from Adam is conveyed to us by
nature, it is no wonder that it includes the whole mass; but that we may
come to a participation of the grace of Christ, we must be ingrafted in
whim by faith. Hence, in order to partake of the miserable inheritance
of sin, it is enough for thee to be man, for it dwells in flesh and
blood; but in order to enjoy the righteousness of Christ it is necessary
for thee to be a believer; for a participation of him is attained only
by faith. He is communicated to infants in a peculiar way; for they have
by covenant the right of adoption, by which they pass over unto a
participation of Christ.  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) Of the
children of the godly I speak, to whom the promise of grace is
addressed; for others are by no means exempted from the common lot.

<span id="ix.x"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p1"></span><span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018)<span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p2"></span>**18.** Therefore as by the offence of one
*judgment came* upon all men to condemnation; even so by the
righteousness of one *the free gift came* upon all men unto
justification of life.

<span id="ix.x-p3"></span>**18.** Itaque quemadmodum, per unius
delictum, in omnes homines in condemnationem; sic et per unius
justificationem, in omnes homines in justificationem vitæ.

<span id="ix.x-p4"></span><span id="ix.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p5"></span>**18.** *Therefore*, *etc.* This is a
defective sentence; it will be complete if the words *condemnation* and
*justification* be read in the nominative case; as doubtless you must do
in order to complete the sense. We have here the general conclusion from
the preceding comparison; for, omitting the mention of the intervening
explanation, he now completes the comparison, “As by the offense of one
we were made (<span id="ix.x-p5.1"></span>*constitute*) sinners; so the
righteousness of Christ is efficacious to justify us. He does not say
the righteousness — <span id="ix.x-p5.2"></span>δικαιοσύνην, but the
justification — <span id="ix.x-p5.3"></span>δικαίωμα,  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) of Christ, in order to remind us that
he was not as an individual just for himself, but that the righteousness
with which he was endued reached farther, in order that, by conferring
this gift, he might enrich the faithful. He makes this favor common to
all, because it is propounded to all, and not because it is in reality
extended to all; for though Christ suffered for the sins of the whole
world, and is offered through God’s benignity indiscriminately to all,
yet all do not receive him.  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173)

<span id="ix.x-p8"></span>These two words, which he had before used,
*judgment* and *grace*, may be also introduced here in this form, “As it
was through God’s judgment that the sin of one issued in the
condemnation of many, so grace will be efficacious to the justification
of many.” *Justification of life* is to be taken, in my judgment, for
remission, which restores life to us, as though he called it
life-giving.  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) For whence comes
the hope of salvation, except that God is propitious to us; and we must
be just, in order to be accepted. Then life proceeds from justification.
 <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span>**19.** For as by one man’s disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous.

<span id="ix.xi-p3"></span>**19.** Quemadmodum enim per disobedientiam
unius hominis peccatores constitute sunt multi; sic et per obedientiam
unius justi constituentur multi.

<span id="ix.xi-p4"></span><span id="ix.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p5"></span>**19.** This is no tautology, but a necessary
explanation of the former verse. For he shows that we are guilty through
the offense of one man, in such a manner as not to be ourselves
innocent. He had said before, that we are condemned; but that no one
might claim for himself innocence, he also subjoined, that every one is
condemned because he is a sinner. And then, as he declares that we are
made righteous through the obedience of Christ, we hence conclude that
Christ, in satisfying the Father, has provided a righteousness for us.
It then follows, that righteousness is in Christ, and that it is to be
received by us as what peculiarly belongs to him. He at the same time
shows what sort of righteousness it is, by calling it obedience. And
here let us especially observe what we must bring into God’s presence,
if we seek to be justified by works, even obedience to the law, not to
this or to that part, but in every respect perfect; for when a just man
falls, all his former righteousness will not be remembered. We may also
hence learn, how false are the schemes which they take to pacify God,
who of themselves devise what they obtrude on him. For then only we
truly worship him when we follow what he has commanded us, and render
obedience to his word. Away then with those who confidently lay claim to
the righteousness of works, which cannot otherwise exist than when there
is a full and complete observance of the law; and it is certain that
this is nowhere to be found. We also learn, that they are madly foolish
who vaunt before God of works invented by themselves, which he regards
as the filthiest things; for obedience is better than sacrifices.

<span id="ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
5:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p2"></span>**20.** Moreover the law entered, that the
offence might abound.  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) But where
sin abounded, grace did much more abound:

<span id="ix.xii-p4"></span>**20.** Lex vero intervenit, ut abundaret
delictum; ubi vero abundavit delictum, superabundavit et gratia:

<span id="ix.xii-p5"></span>**21.** That as sin hath reigned unto death,
even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by
Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="ix.xii-p6"></span>**21.** Quo, sicut regnavit peccatum per
mortem, sic et gratia regnet per justitiam in vitam æternam per Iesum
Christum Dominum nostrum.

<span id="ix.xii-p7"></span><span id="ix.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p8"></span>**20.** *But the law intervened*, *etc.*
This subject depends on what he had said before — that there was sin
before the law was published. This being the case, then follows
immediately this question — For what purpose was the law given? It was
therefore necessary to solve this difficulty; but as a longer digression
was not suitable, he deferred the subject and handled it in another
place: and now by the way he only says, that the law entered,  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) that sin might abound; for he
describes not here the whole office and use of the law, but only touches
on one part, which served his present purpose. He indeed teaches us,
that it was needful that men’s ruin should be more fully discovered to
them, in order that a passage might be opened for the favor of God. They
were indeed shipwrecked before the law was given; as however they seemed
to themselves to swim, while in their destruction, they were thrust down
into the deep, that their deliverance might appear more evident, when
they thence emerge beyond all human expectation. Nor was it
unreasonable, that the law should be partly introduced for this end —
that it might again condemn men already condemned; for nothing is more
reasonable than that men should, through all means be brought, nay,
forced, by being proved guilty, to know their own evils.

<span id="ix.xii-p10"></span>*That offense might abound,* *etc.* It is
well known how some, following <span id="ix.xii-p10.1"></span>Augustine,
usually explain this passage, — that lust is irritated the more, while
it is checked by the restraints of the law; for it is man’s nature to
strive for what is forbidden. But I understand no other increase to be
intended here than that of knowledge and of obstinacy; for sin is set by
the law before the eyes of man, that he may be continually forced to see
that condemnation is prepared for him. Thus sin disturbs the conscience,
which, when cast behind them, men forget. And farther, he who before
only passed over the bounds of justice, becomes now, when the law is
introduced, a despiser of God’s authority, since the will of God is made
known to him, which he now wantonly tramples under feet. It hence
follows, that sin is increased by the law, since now the authority of
the lawgiver is despised and his majesty degraded.  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178)

<span id="ix.xii-p12"></span>*Grace has superabounded.* After sin has
held men sunk in ruin, grace then comes to their help: for he teaches
us, that the abundance of grace becomes for this reason more
illustrious. — that while sin is overflowing, it pours itself forth so
exuberantly, that it not only overcomes the flood of sin, but wholly
absorbs it.  <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) And we may hence
learn, that our condemnation is not set before us in the law, that we
may abide in it; but that having fully known our misery, we may be led
to Christ, who is sent to be a physician to the sick, a deliverer to the
captives, a comforter to the afflicted, a defender to the oppressed.
(<span id="ix.xii-p13.1"></span>[Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span id="ix.xii-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xii-p14"></span><span id="ix.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p15"></span>**21.** *That as sin has reigned*, *etc.*
As sin is said to be the sting of death, and as death has no power over
men, except on account of sin; so sin executes its power by death: it is
hence said to exercise thereby its dominion. In the last clause the
order of the words is deranged, but yet not without reason. The simple
contrast might have been thus formed, — “That righteousness may reign
through Christ.” But Paul was not content to oppose what is contrary to
what is contrary, but adds the word *grace*, that he might more deeply
print this truth on the memory — that the whole is to be ascribed, not
to our merit, but to the kindness of God.  <span
id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) He had previously said, that death
reigned; he now ascribes reigning to sin; but its end or, effect is
death. And he says, that it has reigned, in the past tense; not that it
has ceased to reign in those who are born only of flesh, and he thus
distinguishes between Adam and Christ, and assigns to each his own time.
Hence as soon as the grace of Christ begins to prevail in any one, the
reign of sin and death ceases.  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc38008.htm#fr_152) <span
id="ix.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span> Calvin leaves out καὶ, “also.” <span
id="ix.i-p11.1"></span>Griesbach retains it. The omission is only in one
MS., and in the *Syriac* and *Ethiopic* versions: it is rendered νυν by
<span id="ix.i-p11.2"></span>Theodoret But its meaning here seems not to
be “also,” but “even” or “yea:” for this verse contains in part the same
truth as the former. The style of Paul is often very like that of the
Prophets, that is, the arrangement of his sentences is frequently on
their model. In the Prophets, and also in the Psalms, we find often two
distichs and sometimes two verses containing the same sentiment, only
the latter distich states it differently, and adds something to it. See,
for example, <span id="ix.i-p11.3"></span>[Ps.
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span id="ix.i-p11.3"></span>. such
is exactly the case here. “Justified by faith,” and “this grace in which
we stand,” are the same. “Through our Lord Jesus Christ” and “through
whom we have access,” are identical in their import. The additional idea
in the second verse is the last clause. That we may see how the whole
corresponds with the Prophetic style, the two verses shall be presented
in lines, —

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span>**1.** Having then been justified by faith,  
We have peace with God,  
Through our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span>**2.** Through whom we have had, yea, the
access by faith  
To this grace, in which we stand,  
And exult in the hope of the glory of God.

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span>The illative, *then*, is to be preferred to
*therefore*, as it is an inference, not from a particular verse or a
clause, but from what the Apostle had been teaching. By the phrase, “the
glory of God,” is meant the glory which God bestows: it is, to use the
words of Professor <span id="ix.i-p14.1"></span>Stuart, “<span
id="ix.i-p14.2"></span>genitivus auctoris.”

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span>The word “access,” προσαγωγὴν has two
meanings, — introduction (<span id="ix.i-p15.1"></span>adductio) — and
access (<span id="ix.i-p15.2"></span>accessio.) The verb προσάγειν, is
used in <span id="ix.i-p15.3"></span>[1Pe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018)<span id="ix.i-p15.3"></span>, in
the sense of introducing, leading or bringing to. So Christ, as <span
id="ix.i-p15.4"></span>Wolfius remarks, may be considered to be here
represented as the introducer and reconciler, through whom believers
come to God and hold intercourse with him. “Introduction” is the version
of <span id="ix.i-p15.5"></span>Macknight; and <span
id="ix.i-p15.6"></span>Doddridge has also adopted this idea. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc38008.htm#fr_153) <span
id="ix.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> <span id="ix.ii-p4.1"></span>Gloriamur —
καυχώμεθα. The same as in the preceding verse, and rendered “boast” by
<span id="ix.ii-p4.2"></span>Macknight, and in the former verse by <span
id="ix.ii-p4.3"></span>Doddridge and here, “glory.” “Boast” is certainly
not a proper word, for it is commonly used in a bad sense. “Rejoice” is
too feeble, for it means exultation and triumph. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc38008.htm#fr_154) <span
id="ix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span> The word in James is δοκίμιον while here it
is δοκιμὴ. The first means a test, or the act of testing — trial; and
the second, the result of testing — experience, and is rendered in our
version “proof,” <span id="ix.ii-p17.1"></span>[2Co
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#009)<span id="ix.ii-p17.1"></span>, —
“experiment,” <span id="ix.ii-p17.2"></span>[2Co
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013)<span id="ix.ii-p17.2"></span>, —
and in <span id="ix.ii-p17.3"></span>[2Co
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002)<span id="ix.ii-p17.3"></span>,
“trial,” which ought to be experience. <span
id="ix.ii-p17.4"></span>Beza says, that the first bears to the second a
similar relation as cause bears to effect: the one thing is testing or
probation, and the other is the experience that is thereby gained.

<span id="ix.ii-p18"></span>The word is rendered here, not very
intelligibly, “approbation,” both by <span
id="ix.ii-p18.1"></span>Macknight and <span
id="ix.ii-p18.2"></span>Stuart*;* but more correctly, “experience,” by
<span id="ix.ii-p18.3"></span>Beza and <span
id="ix.ii-p18.4"></span>Doddridge. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc38008.htm#fr_155) <span
id="ix.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p22"></span> <span id="ix.ii-p22.1"></span>Chalmers
observes, that there are two hopes mentioned in this passage, — the hope
of faith in the second verse, and the hope of experience in this. “The
hope of the fourth verse,” he says, “is distinct from and posterior to
the hope of the second; and it also appears to be derived from another
source. The first hope is hope in believing, a hope which hangs direct
on the testimony of God...The second hope is grounded on distinct
considerations — not upon what the believer sees to be in the testimony
of God, but upon what he finds to be in himself. — It is the fruit not
of faith, but of experience; and is gathered not from the word that is
without, but from the feeling of what passes within.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc38008.htm#fr_156) <span
id="ix.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p24"></span> “The love of God” in this passage may mean
either the love of which God is the object — love to God, or the love
which he possesses — God’s love to us: the <span
id="ix.ii-p24.1"></span>*usus loquendi* would admit either of these
meanings; and hence commentators have differed on the point. The
expression, τὴν ἀγάπην τοῦ Θεοῦ, in <span id="ix.ii-p24.2"></span>[Lu
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#042)<span id="ix.ii-p24.2"></span>,
<span id="ix.ii-p24.3"></span>[Joh
5:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#042)<span id="ix.ii-p24.3"></span>,
and in other places, means “love to God;” ἡ ἀγάπη τοῦ Θεοῦ, in <span
id="ix.ii-p24.4"></span>[1Jo 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#009)<span
id="ix.ii-p24.4"></span>, signifies clearly the love of God to us. The
meaning then can alone be ascertained by the context and by the wording
of the sentence. It stands connected with Christian graces, patience and
hope; and this favors the first view, that it is love to God produced
within by the Spirit. Then the verb, ἐκκέχυται — is poured out or poured
forth, seems more suitable to the idea of love being communicated as a
gift, or as a holy feeling within. It is further what prevents hope from
being disappointed; it is some good or enjoyment that now strengthens
and satisfies hope; and to love God who first loved us is to realize in
a measure what hope expects; and when it is said that it is diffused by
the Spirit, we are reminded of what Paul says in (<span
id="ix.ii-p24.5"></span>[Ga 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span
id="ix.ii-p24.5"></span>, that “love” is one of the fruits of the
Spirit. But it may, on the other hand, be alleged, that the verse stands
connected with what follows, as the next verse begins with “for,” and
that the subsequent context most clearly refers to the love of God to
us; and this evidently decides the question.

<span id="ix.ii-p25"></span>The first view, our love to God, has been
adopted by <span id="ix.ii-p25.1"></span>Augustine, <span
id="ix.ii-p25.2"></span>Mede, <span id="ix.ii-p25.3"></span>Doddridge,
<span id="ix.ii-p25.4"></span>Scott, and <span
id="ix.ii-p25.5"></span>Stuart*;* and the other, God’s love to us, by
<span id="ix.ii-p25.6"></span>Chrysostom, <span
id="ix.ii-p25.7"></span>Beza, <span id="ix.ii-p25.8"></span>Pareus,
<span id="ix.ii-p25.9"></span>Grotius, <span
id="ix.ii-p25.10"></span>Hodge, and <span
id="ix.ii-p25.11"></span>Chalmers, and also by <span
id="ix.ii-p25.12"></span>Schleusner who gives this paraphrase, “<span
id="ix.ii-p25.13"></span>Amor Dei abunde nobis declaratus est — the love
of God is abundantly declared to us.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc38008.htm#fr_157) <span
id="ix.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span> On the argument of this verse, and on what
follows to the tenth verse, Professor <span
id="ix.iii-p12.1"></span>Stuart makes this remark, — “The passage before
us seems to be more direct, in respect to the *perseverance of the
saints*, than almost any other passage in the Scriptures which I can
find. The sentiment here is not dependent on the *form* of a particular
expression, (as it appears to be in some other passages); but it is
fundamentally connected with the very nature of the argument.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc38008.htm#fr_158) <span
id="ix.iii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span> Others, as well as <span
id="ix.iii-p13.1"></span>Calvin, such as <span
id="ix.iii-p13.2"></span>Chrysostom and <span
id="ix.iii-p13.3"></span>Erasmus, have connected κατὰ καιρὸν with the
preceding, and not with the following words. <span
id="ix.iii-p13.4"></span>Pareus, who inclined to the same view, gives
this explanation, — “He distinguishes the former from the present state,
as though he said, ‘We who are now justified by faith were formerly
ungodly.’” <span id="ix.iii-p13.5"></span>Chrysostom refers to the time
of the law, and considers the weakness here to be that of man under the
law. This gives an emphatic meaning to “weak,” which otherwise it seems
not to have, and is countenanced by what is said in <span
id="ix.iii-p13.6"></span>[Ro 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="ix.iii-p13.6"></span>, where the law is said to be weak, but weak on
account of the weakness of the flesh. At the same time it must be
observed, that most commentators, like <span
id="ix.iii-p13.7"></span>Beza, connect these words, κατὰ καιρὸν, with
the death of Christ, as having taken place “in due time,” appointed by
God, and pre-signified by the prophets, according to what is said in
<span id="ix.iii-p13.8"></span>[Ga
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="ix.iii-p13.8"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc38008.htm#fr_159) <span
id="ix.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span> <span id="ix.iii-p16.1"></span>Calvin has
omitted what is said of the “good” man; for whom, it is said, one would
perhaps even dare to die. The “just,” δίκαιος, is he who acts according
to what justice requires, and according to what the Rabbins say, “What
is mine is mine, and what is thine is thine,” <span
id="ix.iii-p16.2"></span>שלי שלי ושלך שלך: but the “good,” ἀγαθὸς, is
the kind, the benevolent, the beneficient, called <span
id="ix.iii-p16.3"></span>טוב in Hebrew; who is described by <span
id="ix.iii-p16.4"></span>Cicero as one who does good to those to whom he
can, (<span id="ix.iii-p16.5"></span>vir bonus est is, qui prodest
quibus potest.)

<span id="ix.iii-p17"></span>There is here an evident contrast between
these words and those employed in <span id="ix.iii-p17.1"></span>[Rom.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)<span id="ix.iii-p17.1"></span>, to
designate the character of those for whom Christ died. The just,
δίκαιος, is the opposite of the “ungodly,” ἀσέβης; who, by not
worshipping and honoring God, is guilty of injustice of the highest
kind, and in this sense of being unjust it is found in <span
id="ix.iii-p17.2"></span>[Ro 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span
id="ix.iii-p17.2"></span>, where God is said to “justify the ungodly,”
that is, him who is unjust by withholding from God the homage which
rightly belongs to him. <span id="ix.iii-p17.3"></span>Phavorinus gives
ἀθέμιτος, unlawful, unjust, as one of its meanings. — What forms a
contrast with “good” is sinner, ἁμαρτωλός, which often means wicked,
mischievous, one given to vice and the doing of evil. <span
id="ix.iii-p17.4"></span>Suidas describes ἁμαρτωλοί as those who
determine to live in transgression, οἱ παρανομίᾳ συζὢν προαιρούμενοι;
and <span id="ix.iii-p17.5"></span>Schleusner gives “<span
id="ix.iii-p17.6"></span>scelestus — wicked,” “<span
id="ix.iii-p17.7"></span>flagitiosus — full of mischief,” as being
sometimes its meaning.

<span id="ix.iii-p18"></span>But the description goes farther, for in
<span id="ix.iii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span id="ix.iii-p18.1"></span>
the word “enemies ἐχθροὶ,” is introduced in order to complete the
character of those for whom Christ died. They were not only “ungodly,”
and therefore unjust towards God, and “wicked,” given to all evils; but
also “enemies,” entertaining hatred to God, and carrying on war, as it
were, against him. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc38008.htm#fr_160) <span
id="ix.iii-p20.5"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p21"></span> The meaning given to συνίστησι is not
peculiar. It is used with an accusative in two senses, — to recommend,
to commend, to praise, as in <span id="ix.iii-p21.1"></span>[Ro
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii-p21.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.iii-p21.2"></span>[2Co
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii-p21.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.iii-p21.3"></span>[2Co
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012)<span id="ix.iii-p21.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.iii-p21.4"></span>[2 Cor.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#018)<span id="ix.iii-p21.4"></span>;
and also, to prove, to demonstrate, to shew, to render manifest or
certain, and thus to confirm, as in <span id="ix.iii-p21.5"></span>[Ro
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005)<span id="ix.iii-p21.5"></span>;
<span id="ix.iii-p21.6"></span>[2 Cor.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004), [2 Cor.
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)<span id="ix.iii-p21.6"></span>;
<span id="ix.iii-p21.7"></span>[Ga
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)<span id="ix.iii-p21.7"></span>;
<span id="ix.iii-p21.8"></span>Schleusner refers to this passage as an
instance of the latter meaning. That God proved, or rendered manifest,
or conspicuously shewed, his love, seems to be the most suitable idea,
as the proof or the evidence is stated in the words which follow. The
*Syriac* version gives the sense of shewing or proving. <span
id="ix.iii-p21.9"></span>Vatablus has “proves” or verifies; <span
id="ix.iii-p21.10"></span>Grotius, “renders conspicuous,” <span
id="ix.iii-p21.11"></span>Beza, “commends,” as our version and <span
id="ix.iii-p21.12"></span>Macknight*;* <span
id="ix.iii-p21.13"></span>Doddridge, “recommends;” <span
id="ix.iii-p21.14"></span>Hodge, “renders conspicuous.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc38008.htm#fr_161) <span
id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span> “By his life,” the abstract for the
concrete; it means, “through him being alive,” being at God’s right
hand, having every power committed to him, and making intercession for
us <span id="ix.iv-p6.1"></span>[Ro
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="ix.iv-p6.1"></span>.
“Because *I live*, ye shall live also.” <span
id="ix.iv-p6.2"></span>[Joh 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019)<span
id="ix.iv-p6.2"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc38008.htm#fr_162) <span
id="ix.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p10"></span> The beginning of this verse has occasioned
a vast number of conjectures, both as to the connection and as to the
corresponding clause to the first sentence. Most agree in the main with
<span id="ix.vi-p10.1"></span>Calvin on these two points. <span
id="ix.vi-p10.2"></span>Hodge announces a similar view as to the
connection in these words, — “The idea of men being regarded and
treated, not according to their own merits, but the merit of another, is
contrary to the common mode of thinking among men. The Apostle
illustrates and enforces it by an appeal to the great analogous fact in
the history of the world.”

<span id="ix.vi-p11"></span>As to the corresponding clause, that it is
found in <span id="ix.vi-p11.1"></span>[Ro
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018)<span id="ix.vi-p11.1"></span>,
there is a common consent, — <span id="ix.vi-p11.2"></span>Pareus, <span
id="ix.vi-p11.3"></span>Willet, <span id="ix.vi-p11.4"></span>Grotius,
<span id="ix.vi-p11.5"></span>Doddridge, <span
id="ix.vi-p11.6"></span>Scott, <span id="ix.vi-p11.7"></span>Stuart,
<span id="ix.vi-p11.8"></span>Chalmers, etc.; the intervening verses are
viewed as parenthetic.

<span id="ix.vi-p12"></span>The phrase, διὰ τοῦτο, and also διὸ and οὖν,
are sometimes used anticipatively as well as retrospectively, as their
corresponding particles are often in Hebrew. See note on <span
id="ix.vi-p12.2"></span>[Ro 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001)<span
id="ix.vi-p12.2"></span>. That Paul uses διὰ τοῦτο in this way appears
evident from <span id="ix.vi-p12.3"></span>[Ro
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016)<span id="ix.vi-p12.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.vi-p12.4"></span>[Ro
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi-p12.4"></span>;
<span id="ix.vi-p12.5"></span>[1Co
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi-p12.5"></span>.
It anticipates here, as I think, what is afterwards expressed by ἐφ ᾧ,
as in <span id="ix.vi-p12.6"></span>[Ro
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016)<span id="ix.vi-p12.6"></span>, by
ἵνα, in <span id="ix.vi-p12.7"></span>[Ro
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi-p12.7"></span>, by
γὰρ, and in <span id="ix.vi-p12.8"></span>[1Co
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi-p12.8"></span>,
by διὰ before angels. Then the meaning of the verse would be conveyed by
the following rendering, —

<span id="ix.vi-p13"></span>**12.** For this reason — as through one man
sin entered into the world, and through sin death, even so death came on
all men, because all have sinned.

<span id="ix.vi-p14"></span>According to this view, the corresponding
clause is in the verse itself. The sentiment of the passage is this, —
through one man sin entered and death followed; and death followed as to
all mankind, because all had sinned. Then, according to his usual
manner, the Apostle takes up the last subject, “sin,” issuing in the
death of all; and at the end of the <span id="ix.vi-p14.1"></span>[Ro
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="ix.vi-p14.1"></span> he
goes back to “the one man,” Adam, who he says was a type of another: and
this sentence is made the text of what follows till the end of the <span
id="ix.vi-p14.2"></span>[Ro 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="ix.vi-p14.2"></span>. Having before referred to the state of things
before the “law,” in the two remaining verses he refers to the bearing
of the law on his subject, and shows that there is in Christ an abundant
provision for the increase of sin occasioned by the law.

<span id="ix.vi-p15"></span>So abundant is grace that it is fully
sufficient to remove *original* sin, *actual* sins — its fruits, and the
sins discovered by the law, and by its means increased and enhanced.
Hence superabundance is ascribed to it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc38008.htm#fr_163) <span
id="ix.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p17"></span> The particles ἐφ ᾦ, at the end of this
verse, have been variously rendered, without much change in the meaning.
“<span id="ix.vi-p17.1"></span>In quo — in which,” i.e., sin, <span
id="ix.vi-p17.2"></span>Augustine*;* “<span id="ix.vi-p17.3"></span>in
quo — in whom,” i.e., man, <span id="ix.vi-p17.4"></span>Chrysostom and
<span id="ix.vi-p17.5"></span>Beza*;* “<span id="ix.vi-p17.6"></span>per
quem — by or through whom,” <span id="ix.vi-p17.7"></span>Grotius*;*
“<span id="ix.vi-p17.8"></span>propterea quod,” vel, “<span
id="ix.vi-p17.9"></span>quia,” vel, “<span
id="ix.vi-p17.10"></span>quoniam — because,” <span
id="ix.vi-p17.11"></span>Luther, <span id="ix.vi-p17.12"></span>Pareus,
and <span id="ix.vi-p17.13"></span>Raphelius*;* which is the same with
that of <span id="ix.vi-p17.14"></span>Calvin See <span
id="ix.vi-p17.15"></span>[Mt
26:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#050)<span id="ix.vi-p17.15"></span>;
<span id="ix.vi-p17.16"></span>[2Co
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span id="ix.vi-p17.16"></span>;
<span id="ix.vi-p17.17"></span>[Php
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)<span id="ix.vi-p17.17"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p18"></span><span id="ix.vi-p18.1"></span>Wolfius quotes
a singular passage from a Jewish Rabbi, <span
id="ix.vi-p18.2"></span>Moses Tranensis, “In the sin which the first man
sinned, the whole world through him (or in him, <span
id="ix.vi-p18.3"></span>בו) sinned: for he was every man, or all mankind
— <span id="ix.vi-p18.4"></span>כי זה כל אדם.” The idea is exactly the
same with that of the Apostle.

<span id="ix.vi-p19"></span>“There are three things,” says <span
id="ix.vi-p19.1"></span>Pareus, “which are to be considered in Adam’s
sin, — the sinful act, the penalty of the law, and the depravity of
nature; or in other words, the transgression of the command, the
punishment of death, and natural corruption, which was the loss of God’s
image, and in its stead came deformity and disorder. From none of these
his posterity are free, but all these have descended to them; there is a
participation of the transgression, an imputation of guilt, and the
propagation of natural depravity. There is a *participation* of the sin;
for all his posterity were seminally in his loins, so that all sinned in
his sin, as Levi paid tithes in the loins of Abraham; and as children
are a part of their parents, so children are in a manner partakers of
their parents’ sin. There is also an *imputation* of guilt, for the
first man so stood in favor, that when he sinned, not only he, but also
all his posterity fell with him, and became with him subject to eternal
death. And lastly, there is the *propagation* or the generation of a
dreadful deformity of nature; for such as Adam became after the fall,
such were the children he begat, being after his own image, and not
after the image of God. <span id="ix.vi-p19.2"></span>[Ge
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi-p19.2"></span>. All
these things, as to the first sin, apply to the parent and also to the
children, with only this difference — that Adam sinning first
transgressed, first contracted guilt, and first depraved his nature, —
and that all these things belong to his posterity by participation,
imputation, and propagation.”

<span id="ix.vi-p20"></span>Both <span id="ix.vi-p20.1"></span>Stuart
and <span id="ix.vi-p20.2"></span>Barnes stumble here; and though they
denounce theorizing, and advocate adherence to the language of
Scripture, they do yet theorize and attempt to evade the plain and
obvious meaning of this passage. But in trying to avoid one difficulty,
they make for themselves another still greater. The penalty, or the
imputation of guilt, they admit; which is indeed undeniable, as facts,
as well as Scripture, most clearly prove: but the participation they
deny, though words could hardly be framed to express it more distinctly
than the words of this verse; and thus, according to their view, a
punishment is inflicted without a previous implication in an offense;
while the Scriptural account of the matter is, according to what Calvin
states, that “sin extends to all who suffer its punishment,” though he
afterwards explains this in a way that is not altogether consistent. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc38008.htm#fr_164) <span
id="ix.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p24"></span> This verse, as bearing on the argument,
maybe viewed rather differently. This and the following verse contain an
explanation or an illustration of the last, <span
id="ix.vi-p24.1"></span>[Ro 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vi-p24.1"></span>. He states in this verse two things: a fact and
a general principle; the fact is, that sin, the first sin in its evident
effects, (for he speaks throughout of *no other sin*, as to Adam, or as
producing death,) was in the world before the law of Moses was given;
and the general principle he avows is, that no sin is imputed where
there is no law. Having made this last admission, he proceeds in the
<span id="ix.vi-p24.2"></span>[Ro
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="ix.vi-p24.2"></span> to
say, that “nevertheless,” or notwithstanding, death, the effect of sin,
prevailed in the world, and prevailed even as to those who did not
*actually* or personally sin as Adam did. He takes no account of
personal sins, for his object was to show the effects of the first sin.
And then he says, that in is respect Adam was a kind of type, a figure,
a representative of Christ who was to come; and in the three verses
which follow, <span id="ix.vi-p24.3"></span>[Ro
5:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015)<span id="ix.vi-p24.3"></span>,
he traces the similitude between the two, pointing out at the same time
the difference, which in every instance is in favor of the last Adam.
That τύπος signifies here *likeness* and not identity, is quite certain,
whatever may be its common meaning because its import is exemplified and
illustrated in the verses which follow. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc38008.htm#fr_165) <span
id="ix.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p30"></span> Ανακόλουθον, not consequent: a figure in
grammar when a word or a clause, required by a former one, is not put
down. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc38008.htm#fr_166) <span
id="ix.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span> <span id="ix.vii-p4.1"></span>*Delicto* —
fault, παράπτωμα — stumbling, fall, transgression. Perhaps the last
would be the best word here. It is rendered sometimes in the plural
number “trespasses,” <span id="ix.vii-p4.2"></span>[Matt.
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#035), [2 Cor.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019), [Eph.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)<span id="ix.vii-p4.2"></span>
<span id="ix.vii-p4.3"></span>Macknight renders it here “fall,” but most
“offense.” The comparison here is between the sin of *one*, which
produced death, and the grace of God through *one*, which brings the
“gift” of life; and the difference, “much more,” seems to refer to the
exuberance of grace by which man is to be raised to a higher state than
that from which Adam fell. “A little lower than the angels” was man in
his first creation; he is by exuberance of grace to be raised to a state
as high as that of angels, if not higher; or we may take “much more” as
intimating the greater power of grace to recover than sin to destroy.
Sin is the act of man, and issued in death; but grace is the act of God,
and will therefore with greater certainty issue in life.

<span id="ix.vii-p5"></span>“Adam’s life after his fall was even as a
slow dying, that reached its completion in his physical death; Christ’s
ζωοποίησις of mankind is also gradual, the height of which is in the
glorification of the body.” — <span id="ix.vii-p5.1"></span>Olshausen

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc38008.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ix.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.vii-p8.1"></span>Sub
contemptibili verborum humilitate.” This sort of derogatory language as
to the style of Scripture, <span id="ix.vii-p8.2"></span>Calvin had
evidently learnt from the fathers. <span
id="ix.vii-p8.3"></span>Chrysostom and <span
id="ix.vii-p8.4"></span>Jerome did sometimes say most unwarrantable
things in this respect, and that in a great measure because they did not
understand the style of the New Testament, and in part with the view of
taking away, by an admission, the force of objections alleged by
admirers of Grecian and refined diction. The style of the New Testament
is that of the Old; and hardly any of the fathers, except <span
id="ix.vii-p8.5"></span>Origen and <span id="ix.vii-p8.6"></span>Jerome
knew Hebrew, and the latter learnt it only in his old age, so that he
could have had no great insight into its peculiarities. One like <span
id="ix.vii-p8.7"></span>Chrysostom brought up in the refinements of
Grecian literature, was a very unfit judge of the style of the New
Testament, and hence it is that the criticisms of the Greek fathers in
general are comparatively of very little value.

<span id="ix.vii-p9"></span>The whole of this passage, 12-19, is
constructed according to the model of the Hebrew style; and when rightly
understood, it will appear to contain none of those defects ascribed to
it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc38008.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ix.vii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p12"></span> It is evident that is the many οἱ πολλοί,
include those connected with the two parties — the many descendants of
Adam, and the many believers in Christ. And “the many” was adopted to
form a contrast with the “one.”

<span id="ix.vii-p13"></span>“The many” are termed “all” in verse <span
id="ix.vii-p13.1"></span>[Ro 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018)<span
id="ix.vii-p13.1"></span>, and again, “the many,” in <span
id="ix.vii-p13.2"></span>[Ro 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="ix.vii-p13.2"></span>. They are called “the many” and “all” alike
with regard both to Adam and to Christ. Some maintain that the terms are
coextensive in the two instances. That the whole race of man is meant in
the one instances cannot be doubted: and is there any reason why the
whole race of man should not be included in the second? Most clearly
there is. The Apostle speaks of *Adam* and his posterity, and also of
*Christ* and his people, or those “who receive abundance of grace,” or,
“are made righteous;” and “the many” and the “all” are evidently those
who belong to each separately. In no other way can the words with any
consistency be understood. All who fell in Adam do not certainly
“receive abundance of grace,” and are not “made righteous.” And it is
not possible, as Professor <span id="ix.vii-p13.3"></span>Hodge
observes, “so to eviscerate such declarations as these, as to make them
to contain nothing more than that the chance of salvation is offered to
all men.” This is indeed contrary to evident facts. Nor can they mean,
that a way of acceptance has been opened, which is suitable to all; for
though this is true, it yet cannot be the meaning here. Hence “the many”
and the “all,” as to Adam, are all his descendants; and “the many” and
the “all,” as to Christ, are those who believe. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc38008.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ix.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p3"></span> Many copies have ἁμαρτήματος — sin; but it
is a reading deemed by <span id="ix.viii-p3.1"></span>Griesbach of less
authority than the received text, ἁμαρτήσαντος — sinning: yet there
being good MSS. in its favor, and several versions, especially the
*Syriac* and the *Vulgate*, and the passage requiring it, this reading
is to be preferred. Then the rendering would be the following, —

<span id="ix.viii-p4"></span>And not as through one sin, is the free
gift — (δώρημα;) for judment was indeed from one sin to condemnation,
but the free favor (χάρισμα) is from many trespasses to justification.

<span id="ix.viii-p5"></span>It is the character of the Apostle’s style
to change his words, while the same idea is often intended. The
comparison here is between the *one sin* which issued in condemnation,
and the *many trespasses* or offenses, from which a justification is the
favor obtained. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc38008.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ix.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p3"></span> This verse, according to the usual manner of
the Apostle, whose style is that of the Prophets, includes the two main
ideas of the two preceding verses, in another form, and in an inverted
order, as it refers first to the *one offense* and then to the *one
man*, in the first clause; and the same order is followed in the second;
“the exuberance of grace” is to cover the *many offenses* before
mentioned, as opposed to the *one offense,* and to *one man* is opposed
*one* Christ Jesus.

<span id="ix.ix-p4"></span>The reading ἐν τῷ ἑνι, though according to
<span id="ix.ix-p4.1"></span>Griesbach, it is not, as to MSS., of equal
authority with the received text, is yet to be preferred; for τοῦ ἑνὸς
makes a tautology, and destroys the order which we find preserved in the
second clause. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc38008.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ix.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p11"></span> The original is, “<span
id="ix.ix-p11.1"></span>Habent enim in fœdere jus adoptionis, quo in
Christi communionem transeunt.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc38008.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ix.x-p5.4"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p6"></span> The meaning of this word is evident here; for
it stands in contrast with παράπτωμα — offense or transgression, in the
former clause, and is identical in sense with ὑπακόη — obedience, in the
next verse. It means what is *appointed* and adjudged as right; and
hence it is rendered “ordinance,” <span id="ix.x-p6.1"></span>[Lu
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006)<span id="ix.x-p6.1"></span>;
“judgment,” <span id="ix.x-p6.2"></span>[Ro
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032)<span id="ix.x-p6.2"></span>; and,
in <span id="ix.x-p6.3"></span>[Ro
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#016)<span id="ix.x-p6.3"></span>,
“justification,” when it stands opposed to κατάκριμα — condemnation, and
means absolution, acquittal, as the determination of the judge. It
signifies here, that what Christ did was according to God’s appointment;
it was something directly contrary to offense or transgression; and what
it was is explained in the next verse by the word “obedience.” <span
id="ix.x-p6.4"></span>Wolfius says, that δικαίωμα is the satisfaction of
Christ, or his active and passive obedience, <span
id="ix.x-p6.5"></span>[Ro 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="ix.x-p6.5"></span>, — that δικαιοσύνη is the merit of Christ,
obtained by has death and applied to us by faith, <span
id="ix.x-p6.6"></span>[Ro 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022)<span
id="ix.x-p6.6"></span>, — and that δικαίωσις is the act of justification
which follows from the satisfaction of Christ, apprehended by faith. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc38008.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ix.x-p6.7"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.x-p7.1"></span>Nam etsi passus
est Christus pro peccatis totius mundi. atque omnibus indifferenter Dei
benignitate offertur; non tamen omnes apprehendum.” It appears from this
sentence that <span id="ix.x-p7.2"></span>Calvin held general
redemption. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc38008.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ix.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p9"></span> It is an Hebraistic form of speaking, <span
id="ix.x-p9.1"></span>*genitivus effectûs* Its meaning is that it is a
justification unto life, whose end is life, or, which issues in life,
that is, eternal life, according to its import in <span
id="ix.x-p9.2"></span>[Ro 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017)<span
id="ix.x-p9.2"></span>, when reigning in life — ἐν ζωὟ, is spoken of;
and the word “eternal,” is added to it in the last verse. This life
commences with justification, and therefore this view includes what
<span id="ix.x-p9.3"></span>Calvin says, though it extends farther. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc38008.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ix.x-p9.4"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p10"></span> In our version are introduced “judgment” and
“free-gift,” from verse 16; and it is what has been done by most
interpreters. The words are found here in no MSS.; but there is another
reading countenanced by four MSS., as given by <span
id="ix.x-p10.1"></span>Griesbach, and two of them ancient; the word for
offense is put in the nominative case, τὸ παράπτωμα, and the word for
righteousness the same, τὸ δικαίωμα. Then the reading would be —

<span id="ix.x-p11"></span>**18.** So then, as through one the
transgression *was*, as to all men, unto condemnation; so also through
one the righteousness *is*, as to all men, unto justification of life.

<span id="ix.x-p12"></span>This agrees better with the following verse,
though the meaning is substantially the same with what is given in our
version. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc38008.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ix.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p3"></span> Πλεονάση, which means to grow more and
more, to increase, to multiply: it is a different verb from that in the
last clause. What he calls “offense” or “fall” in this member of the
sentence, he calls “sin” in the next. It is still “the fall” or “the
sin” which caused it: for that is the parent of every other sin. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc38008.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ix.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p9"></span> “<span
id="ix.xii-p9.1"></span>Intercessisse legem — that the law came
between,” i.e., Adam and Christ; παρεισὢλθεν from παρὰ, with, besides,
or between, and εἰσέρχομαι, to enter. It occurs elsewhere only in <span
id="ix.xii-p9.2"></span>[Ga 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)<span
id="ix.xii-p9.2"></span>, where it is rendered, “came in privily,” as
required by the context. But it cannot be so rendered here. <span
id="ix.xii-p9.3"></span>Schleusner says, that it simply means to enter,
and that it is so used by <span id="ix.xii-p9.4"></span>Philo. It is
thus rendered by the *Syriac* and *Arabic* versions. <span
id="ix.xii-p9.5"></span>Erasmus has “<span
id="ix.xii-p9.6"></span>obiter subiit, *vel*, irrepsit — came, or, crept
in by the by;” <span id="ix.xii-p9.7"></span>Hammond has the same; but
<span id="ix.xii-p9.8"></span>Beza attaches the idea of *besides* to
παρὰ, — <span id="ix.xii-p9.9"></span>præterea introiit — entered in
besides,” *i.e*., in addition to the disease under which all men
labored, having been contaminated by that of the first sin. “<span
id="ix.xii-p9.10"></span>Intervenit — intervened,” is the rendering of
<span id="ix.xii-p9.11"></span>Grotius*;* that is, the law intervened
between the beginning of sin and the beginning of new righteousness.
“The law,” says <span id="ix.xii-p9.12"></span>Hodge, “was
*superinduced* on a plan already laid. It was not designed for the
accomplishment of man’s salvation, that is, either for his justification
or sanctification, but for the accomplishment of a very subordinate part
in the great scheme of mercy.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc38008.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ix.xii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p11"></span> <span id="ix.xii-p11.1"></span>Chrysostom
regarded ἵνα here as denoting not the *final cause*, but the *event*,
and thought the meaning to be, that the law entered, so that the effect
or event was, that sin increased. Its rendering would then be, *so
that:* and this seems to be the meaning given to it by Calvin. The law
did not create sin, but made it known, and by discovering it, increased
its guilt when persisted in, and by discovering it showed the necessity
of a Savior.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc38008.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ix.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p13"></span> The superabounding has a reference to the
increasing of sin by means of the law. Grace not only abounded so as to
be sufficient to remedy the first sin and the sins which followed it;
but it abounded still more, so as to be an adequate provision for sin
when increased by the law, through the perverseness of human nature. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc38008.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ix.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p16"></span> The antithesis to “sin” is properly
“righteousness;” but, as <span id="ix.xii-p16.1"></span>Calvin observes,
“grace” is connected with it. To preserve the contrast, the sentence
might be rendered, “grace through righteousness;” and then to show the
medium or channel through which this “grace through righteousness” is to
reign so as to issue in “eternal life,” it is added, “through Jesus
Christ our Lord.” So that in this single sentence, we have the origin,
“grace,” the means or the meritorious cause, “righteousness,” the agent,
or the procurer of it, “Jesus Christ,” and the end, “eternal life.” Some
take “grace” as antithetic to sin, and connect “righteousness” with
“eternal life,” and render it “justification;” but this does not so well
preserve the antithetic character of the clause. Those who render it
“holiness” completely misunderstand the drift of the passage.

<span id="ix.xii-p17"></span>The first part is differently rendered:
instead of “unto death,” <span id="ix.xii-p17.1"></span>Hammond renders
it, like <span id="ix.xii-p17.2"></span>Calvin, “through death,” and
<span id="ix.xii-p17.3"></span>Grotius, “by (<span
id="ix.xii-p17.4"></span>per) death.” The preposition is εν and not εἰ,
and its common meaning is “in,” and it may be here translated, “in
death,” *i.e*., in a state of death. The reign of sin was that of death
and misery; the reign of grace through Christ’s righteousness is that of
life and happiness, which is never to end. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc38008.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ix.xii-p17.5"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p18"></span> That the antitheses of this remarkable
passage, from verse 12 to the end, may be more clearly seen, it shall be
presented in lines. The contrast in <span id="ix.xii-p18.1"></span>[Rom.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="ix.xii-p18.1"></span>
will be found in the first and last line and in the second and the
third; and as to all the other verses, in the first and the third line
and in the second and the fourth, except <span
id="ix.xii-p18.2"></span>[Rom. 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="ix.xii-p18.2"></span>,
which are an explanation of the 12th. The 17th includes the *two* ideas
of the 15th and 16th, in an inverted order. The 18th and l9th contain
the summing up of the argument, —

<span id="ix.xii-p19"></span>**12.** For this reason, — as by one man
sin entered into the world, And death by sin, Even so death came upon
all men, — Because all had sinned:

<span id="ix.xii-p20"></span>**13.** Sin indeed was until the law in the
world, But sin is not imputed when there is no law;

<span id="ix.xii-p21"></span>**14.** Yet reign did death from Adam to
Moses. Even over those who had not sinned, After the likeness of the
transgression of Adam, Who is the type of him who was to come.

<span id="ix.xii-p22"></span>**15.** But not as the transgression, So
also the free favor; For if through the transgression of one Many died.
Much more has God’s grace, and his free gift through the grace of one
man, Jesus Christ, Abounded unto many:

<span id="ix.xii-p23"></span>**16.** And not as through one sin, *So*
the free gift; For judgment was indeed Through one sir to condemnation,
But the free favor *Is* from many transgressions to justification, —

<span id="ix.xii-p24"></span>**17.** For if for one transgression, Death
reigned through one; Much more shall they, who receive abundance of
grace and of the gift of righteousness, Reign in life through one, Jesus
Christ.

<span id="ix.xii-p25"></span>**18.** So then, as through one
transgression, *Judgment* was on all men to condemnation; So also
through one righteousness, *The free favor* is on all men to
justification of life:

<span id="ix.xii-p26"></span>**19.** For as through the disobedience of
one man, Sinful were made many; So also through the obedience of one,
Righteous shall be made many.

<span id="ix.xii-p27"></span>**20.** But the law entered in, That
multiplied might be transgression; But where sin multiplied,
Superabounded has grace: So that as sin reigned Into death; So also
grace shall reign through righteousness, Into eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc38009)
