[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38012)  [Next](cc38014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Romans
10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Brethren, my heart’s desire and prayer
to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Fratres, benevolentia certe cordis
mei, et deprecatio ad Deum super Israel, est in salutem.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>**2.** For I bear them record that they have
a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Testimonium enim reddo illis, quod
zelum Dei habent, sed non secundum scientiam:

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>**3.** For they being ignorant of God’s
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness,
have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ignorantes enim Dei justitiam, et
propriam justitiam quaerentes statuere, justitiae Dei subjecti non
fuerunt;

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>**4.** For Christ *is* the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believeth.

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Finis enim Legis Christus in justitiam
omni credenti.  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317)

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span><span id="xiv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**1.** We here see with what solicitude the
holy man obviated offenses; for in order to soften whatever sharpness
there may have been in his manner of explaining the rejection of the
Jews, he still testifies, as before, his goodwill towards them, and
proves it by the effect; for their salvation was an object of concern to
him before the Lord, and such a feeling arises only from genuine love.
It may be at the same time that he was also induced by another reason to
testify his love towards the nation from which he had sprung; for his
doctrine would have never been received by the Jews had they thought
that he was avowedly inimical to them; and his defection would have been
also suspected by the Gentiles, for they would have thought, as we have
said in the last chapter, that he became an apostate from the law
through his hatred of men.  <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318)

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span><span id="xiv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>**2.** *For I bear to them a testimony,
etc.* This was intended to secure credit to his love. There was indeed a
just cause why he should regard them with compassion rather than hatred,
since he perceived that they had fallen only through ignorance, and not
through malignancy of mind, and especially as he saw that they were not
led except by some regard for God to persecute the kingdom of Christ.
Let us hence learn where our good intentions may guide us, if we yield
to them. It is commonly thought a good and a very fit excuse, when he
who is reproved pretends that he meant no harm. And this pretext is held
good by many at this day, so that they apply not their minds to find out
the truth of God, because they think that whatever they do amiss through
ignorance, without any designed maliciousness, but with good intention,
is excusable. But no one of us would excuse the Jews for having
crucified Christ, for having cruelly raged against the Apostles, and for
having attempted to destroy and extinguish the gospel; and yet they had
the same defense as that in which we confidently glory. Away then with
these vain evasions as to good intention; if we seek God sincerely, let
us follow the way by which alone we can come to him. For it is better,
as <span id="xiv.i-p16.1"></span>Augustine says, even to go limping in
the right way than to run with all our might out of the way. If we would
be really religious, let us remember that what *Lactantius* teaches is
true, that true religion is alone that which is connected with the word
of God.  <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319)

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>And further, since we see that they perish,
who with good intention wander in darkness, let us bear in mind, that we
are worthy of thousand deaths, if after having been illuminated by God,
we wander knowingly and willfully from the right way.

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span><span id="xiv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span>**3.** *For being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, etc.* See how they went astray through
inconsiderate zeal! for they sought to set up a righteousness of their
own; and this foolish confidence proceeded from their ignorance of God’s
righteousness. Notice the contrast between the righteousness of God and
that of men. We first see, that they are opposed to one another, as
things wholly contrary, and cannot stand together. It hence follows,
that God’s righteousness is subverted, as soon as men set up their own.
And again, as there is a correspondence between the things contrasted,
the righteousness of God is no doubt his gift; and in like manner, the
righteousness of men is that which they derive from themselves, or
believe that they bring before God. Then he who seeks to be justified
through himself, submits not to God’s righteousness; for the first step
towards obtaining the righteousness of God is to renounce our own
righteousness: for why is it, that we seek righteousness from another,
except that necessity constrains us?

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>We have already stated, in another place,
how men put on the righteousness of God by faith, that is, when the
righteousness of Christ is imputed to them. But Paul grievously
dishonors the pride by which hypocrites are inflated, when they cover it
with the specious mask of zeal; for he says, that all such, by shaking
off as it were the yoke, are adverse to and rebel against the
righteousness of God.

<span id="xiv.i-p22"></span><span id="xiv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p23"></span>**4***. For the end of the law is Christ,
etc.* The word *completion,*  <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320)
seems not to me unsuitable in this place; and <span
id="xiv.i-p25.8"></span>Erasmus has rendered it *perfection:* but as the
other reading is almost universally approved, and is not inappropriate,
readers, for my part, may retain it.

<span id="xiv.i-p26"></span>The Apostle obviates here an objection which
might have been made against him; for the Jews might have appeared to
have kept the right way by depending on the righteousness of the law. It
was necessary for him to disprove this false opinion; and this is what
he does here. He shows that he is a false interpreter of the law, who
seeks to be justified by his own works; because the law had been given
for this end, — to lead us as by the hand to another righteousness: nay,
whatever the law teaches, whatever it commands, whatever it promises,
has always a reference to Christ as its main object; and hence all its
parts ought to be applied to him. But this cannot be done, except we,
being stripped of all righteousness, and confounded with the knowledge
of our sin, seek gratuitous righteousness from him alone.

<span id="xiv.i-p27"></span>It hence follows, that the wicked abuse of
the law was justly reprehended in the Jews, who absurdly made an
obstacle of that which was to be their help: nay, it appears that they
had shamefully mutilated the law of God; for they rejected its soul, and
seized on the dead body of the letter. For though the law promises
reward to those who observe its righteousness, it yet substitutes, after
having proved all guilty, another righteousness in Christ, which is not
attained by works, but is received by faith as a free gift. Thus the
righteousness of faith, (as we have seen in the first chapter,) receives
a testimony from the law. We have then here a remarkable passage, which
proves that the law in all its parts had a reference to Christ; and
hence no one can rightly understand it, who does not continually level
at this mark.

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
10:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** For Moses describeth the
righteousness which is of the law, That the man which doeth those things
shall live by them.

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Moses enim describit justitiam quae
est ex Lege, Quod qui fecerit ea homo rivet in ipsis.

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span>**6.** But the righteousness which is of
faith speaketh on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend
into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down *from above*:)

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Quae vero est ex fide justitia sic
dicit, Ne dixeris in corde tuo, Quis ascendet in coelum? hoc est
Christum deducere:

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span>**7.** Or, Who shall descend into the deep?
(that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.)

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>**7.** Aut, Quis descendet in abyssum? hoc
est Christum ex mortuis reducere:

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span>**8.** But what saith it? The word is nigh
thee, *even* in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith,
which we preach;

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span>**8.** Sed quid dicit? Prope est verbum, in
ore tuo et in corde tuo; hoc est verbum fidei quod praedicamus,

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span>**9.** That if thou shalt confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath
raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span>**9.** Quod si confessus fueris in ore tuo
Dominum Iesum, et credideris in corde tuo quod Deus suscitavit illum ex
mortuis, salvus eris:

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span>**10.** For with the heart man believeth
unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation.

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span>**10.** Corde enim creditur in justitiam,
ore fit confessio in salutem.

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span>**5.** *For Moses, etc.* To render it
evident how much at variance is the righteousness of faith and that of
works, he now compares them; for by comparison the opposition between
contrary things appears more clear. But he refers not now to the oracles
of the Prophets, but to the testimony of Moses, and for this reason, —
that the Jews might understand that the law was not given by Moses in
order to detain them in a dependence on works, but, on the contrary, to
lead them to Christ. He might have indeed referred to the Prophets as
witnesses; but still this doubt must have remained, “How was it that the
law prescribed another rule of righteousness?” He then removes this, and
in the best manner, when by the teaching of the law itself he confirms
the righteousness of faith.

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span>But we ought to understand the reason why
Paul harmonizes the law with faith, and yet sets the righteousness of
one in opposition to that of the other: — The law has a twofold meaning;
it sometimes includes the whole of what has been taught by Moses, and
sometimes that part only which was peculiar to his ministration, which
consisted of precepts, rewards, and punishments. But Moses had this
common office — to teach the people the true rule of religion. Since it
was so, it behooved him to preach repentance and faith; but faith is not
taught, except by propounding promises of divine mercy, and those
gratuitous: and thus it behooved him to be a preacher of the gospel;
which office he faithfully performed, as it appears from many passages.
In order to instruct the people in the doctrine of repentance, it was
necessary for him to teach what manner of life was acceptable to God;
and this he included in the precepts of the law. That he might also
instill into the minds of the people the love of righteousness, and
implant in them the hatred of iniquity, promises and threatening were
added; which proposed rewards to the just, and denounced dreadful
punishments on sinners. It was now the duty of the people to consider in
how many ways they drew curses on themselves, and how far they were from
deserving anything at God’s hands by their works, that being thus led to
despair as to their own righteousness, they might flee to the haven of
divine goodness, and so to Christ himself. This was the end or design of
the Mosaic dispensation.

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span>But as evangelic promises are only found
scattered in the writings of Moses, and these also somewhat obscure, and
as the precepts and rewards, allotted to the observers of the law,
frequently occur, it rightly appertained to Moses as his own and
peculiar office, to teach what is the real righteousness of works, and
then to show what remuneration awaits the observance of it, and what
punishment awaits those who come short of it. For this reason Moses is
by John compared with Christ, when it is said,

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span>“That the law was given by Moses, but that
grace  
and truth came by Christ.” (<span id="xiv.ii-p18.2"></span>[Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span id="xiv.ii-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.ii-p19"></span>And whenever the word law is thus strictly
taken, Moses is by implication opposed to Christ: and then we must
consider what the law contains, as separate from the gospel. Hence what
is said here of the *righteousness* of the law, must be applied, not to
the whole office of Moses, but to that part which was in a manner
peculiarly committed to him. I come now to the words.

<span id="xiv.ii-p20"></span>*For Moses describes, etc.* Paul has <span
id="xiv.ii-p20.1"></span>γράφει *writes*; which is used for a verb which
means to describe, by taking away a part of it \[<span
id="xiv.ii-p20.2"></span>ἐπιγράφει.\] The passage is taken from <span
id="xiv.ii-p20.3"></span>[Le 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span
id="xiv.ii-p20.3"></span>, where the Lord promises eternal life to those
who would keep his law; for in this sense, as you see, Paul has taken
the passage, and not only of temporal life, as some think. Paul indeed
thus reasons, — “Since no man can attain the righteousness prescribed in
the law, except he fulfills strictly every part of it, and since of this
perfection all men have always come far short, it is in vain for any one
to strive in this way for salvation: Israel then were very foolish, who
expected to attain the righteousness of the law, from which we are all
excluded.” See how from the promise itself he proves, that it can avail
us nothing, and for this reason, because the condition is impossible.
What a futile device it is then to allege legal promises, in order to
establish the righteousness of the law! For with these an unavoidable
curse comes to us; so far is it, that salvation should thence proceed.
The more detestable on this account is the stupidity of the Papists, who
think it enough to prove merits by adducing bare promises. “It is not in
vain,” they say, “that God has promised life to his servants.” But at
the same time they see not that it has been promised, in order that a
consciousness of their own transgressions may strike all with the fear
of death, and that being thus constrained by their own deficiency, they
may learn to flee to Christ.

<span id="xiv.ii-p21"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p22"></span>**6***. But the righteousness*  <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) *which is by faith, etc.* This passage
is such as may not a little disturb the reader, and for two reasons —
for it seems to be improperly applied by Paul — and the words are also
turned to a different meaning. Of the words we shall hereafter see what
may be said: we shall first notice the application. It is a passage
taken from <span id="xiv.ii-p23.1"></span>[De
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)<span id="xiv.ii-p23.1"></span>,
where, as in the former passage, Moses speaks of the doctrine of the
law, and Paul applies it to evangelic promises. This knot may be thus
untied: — Moses shows, that the way to life was made plain: for the will
of God was not now hid from the Jews, nor set far off from them, but
placed before their eyes. If he had spoken of the law only, his
reasoning would have been frivolous, since the law of God being set
before their eyes, it was not easier to do it, than if it was afar off.
He then means not the law only, but generally the whole of God’s truth,
which includes in it the gospel: for the word of the law by itself is
never in our heart, no, not the least syllable of it, until it is
implanted in us by the faith of the gospel. And then, even after
regeneration, the word of the law cannot properly be said to be in our
heart; for it demands perfection, from which even the faithful are far
distant: but the word of the gospel has a seat in the heart, though it
does not fill the heart; for it offers pardon for imperfection and
defect. And Moses throughout that chapter, as also in the fourth,
endeavors to commend to the people the remarkable kindness of God,
because he had taken them under his own tuition and government, which
commendation could not have belonged to the law only. It is no objection
that Moses there speaks of forming the life according to the rule of the
law; for the spirit of regeneration is connected with the gratuitous
righteousness of faith. Nor is there a doubt but that this verse depends
on that main truth, “the Lord shall circumcise thine heart,” which he
had recorded shortly before in the same chapter. They may therefore be
easily disproved, who say that Moses speaks only in that passage of good
works. That he speaks of works I indeed allow; but I deny it to be
unreasonable, that the keeping of the law should be traced from its own
fountain, even from the righteousness of faith. The explanation of the
words must now follow.  <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322)

<span id="xiv.ii-p25"></span>*Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend?
etc.* Moses mentions *heaven* and the *sea,* as places remote and
difficult of access to men. But Paul, as though there was some spiritual
mystery concealed under these words, applies them to the death and
resurrection of Christ. If any one thinks that this interpretation is
too strained and too refined, let him understand that it was not the
object of the Apostle strictly to explain this passage, but to apply it
to the explanation of his present subject. He does not, therefore,
repeat verbally what Moses has said, but makes alterations, by which he
accommodates more suitably to his own purpose the testimony of Moses. He
spoke of inaccessible places; Paul refers to those, which are indeed hid
from the sight of us all, and may yet be seen by our faith. If then you
take these things as spoken for illustration, or by way of improvement,
you cannot say that Paul has violently or inaptly changed the words of
Moses; but you will, on the contrary, allow, that without loss of
meaning, he has, in a striking manner, alluded to the words *heaven* and
the *sea.*

<span id="xiv.ii-p26"></span>Let us now then simply explain the words of
Paul: As the assurance of our salvation lies on two foundations, that
is, when we understand, that life has been obtained for us, and death
has been conquered for us, he teaches us that faith through the word of
the gospel is sustained by both these; for Christ, by dying, destroyed
death, and by rising again he obtained life in his own power. The
benefit of Christ’s death and resurrection is now communicated to us by
the gospel: there is then no reason for us to seek anything farther.
That it may thus appear, that the righteousness of faith is abundantly
sufficient for salvation, he teaches us, that included in it are these
two things, which are alone necessary for salvation. The import then of
the words, *Who shall ascend into heaven?* is the same, as though you
should say, “Who knows whether the inheritance of eternal and celestial
life remains for us?” And the words, *Who shall descend into the deep?*
mean the same, as though you should say, “Who knows whether the
everlasting destruction of the soul follows the death of the body?” He
teaches us, that doubt on those two points is removed by the
righteousness of faith; for the one would draw down Christ from heaven,
and the other would bring him up again from death. Christ’s ascension
into heaven ought indeed fully to confirm our faith as to eternal life;
for he in a manner removes Christ himself from the possession of heaven,
who doubts whether the inheritance of heaven is prepared for the
faithful, in whose name, and on whose account he has entered thither.
Since in like manner he underwent the horrors of hell to deliver us from
them, to doubt whether the faithful are still exposed to this misery, is
to render void, and, as it were, to deny his death.

<span id="xiv.ii-p27"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p28"></span>**8.** *What does it say?*  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) For the purpose of removing the
impediments of faith, he has hitherto spoken negatively: but now in
order to show the way of obtaining righteousness, he adopts an
affirmative mode of speaking. Though the whole might have been announced
in one continuous sentence, yet a question is interposed for the sake of
exciting attention: and his object at the same time was to show how
great is the difference between the righteousness of the law and that of
the gospel; for the one, showing itself at a distance, restrains all men
from coming nigh; but the other, offering itself at hand, kindly invites
us to a fruition of itself, *Nigh thee is the word*

<span id="xiv.ii-p30"></span>It must be further observed, that lest the
minds of men, being led away by crafts, should wander from the way of
salvation, the limits of the word are prescribed to them, within which
they are to keep themselves: for it is the same as though he had bidden
them to be satisfied with the word only, and reminded them, that in this
mirror those secrets of heaven are to be seen, which would otherwise by
their brightness dazzle their eyes, and would also stun their ears and
overpower the mind itself.

<span id="xiv.ii-p31"></span>Hence the faithful derive from this passage
remarkable consolation with regard to the certainty of the word; for
they may no less safely rest on it, than on what is actually present. It
must also be noticed, that the word, by which we have a firm and calm
trust as to our salvation, had been set forth even by Moses:

<span id="xiv.ii-p32"></span>*This is the word of faith.* Rightly does
Paul take this as granted; for the doctrine of the law does by no means
render the conscience quiet and calm, nor supply it with what ought to
satisfy it. He does not, however, exclude other parts of the word, no,
not even the precepts of the law; but his design is, to show that
remission of sins stands for righteousness, even apart from that strict
obedience which the law demands. Sufficient then for pacifying minds,
and for rendering certain our salvation, is the word of the gospel; in
which we are not commanded to earn righteousness by works, but to
embrace it, when offered gratuitously, by faith.

<span id="xiv.ii-p33"></span>*The* *word of faith* is to be taken for
the word of promise, that is, for the gospel itself, because it bears a
relation to faith.  <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) The
contrast, by which the difference between the law and the gospel
appears, is indeed to be understood: and from this distinction we learn,
— that as the law demands works, so the gospel requires nothing else,
but that men bring faith to receive the grace of God. The words, *which
we preach,* are added, that no one might have the suspicion that Paul
differed from Moses; for he testifies, that in the ministration of the
gospel there was complete consent between him and Moses; inasmuch as
even Moses placed our felicity in nothing else but in the gratuitous
promise of divine favor.

<span id="xiv.ii-p35"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p36"></span>**9.** *That if thou wilt confess, etc.*
Here is also an allusion, rather than a proper and strict quotation: for
it is very probable that Moses used the word *mouth,* by taking a part
for the whole, instead of the word *face,* or sight. But it was not
unsuitable for the Apostle to allude to the word mouth, in this manner:
— “Since the Lord sets his word before our face, no doubt he calls upon
us to confess it.” For wherever the word of the Lord is, it ought to
bring forth fruit; and the fruit is the confession of the mouth.

<span id="xiv.ii-p37"></span>By putting *confession* before *faith,* he
changes the order, which is often the case in Scripture: for the order
would have been more regular if the faith of the heart had preceded, and
the confession of the mouth, which arises from it, had followed.  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) But he rightly confesses the Lord
Jesus, who adorns him with his own power, acknowledging him to be such
an one as he is given by the Father, and described in the gospel.

<span id="xiv.ii-p43"></span>Express mention is made only of Christ’s
resurrection; which must not be so taken, as though his death was of no
moment, but because Christ, by rising again, completed the whole work of
our salvation: for though redemption and satisfaction were effected by
his death, through which we are reconciled to God; yet the victory over
sin, death, and Satan was attained by his resurrection; and hence also
came righteousness, newness of life, and the hope of a blessed
immortality. And thus is resurrection alone often set before us as the
assurance of our salvation, not to draw away our attention from his
death, but because it bears witness to the efficacy and fruit of his
death: in short, his resurrection includes his death. On this subject we
have briefly touched in the sixth chapter.

<span id="xiv.ii-p44"></span>It may be added, that Paul requires not
merely an historical faith, but he makes the resurrection itself its
end. For we must remember the purpose for which Christ rose again; — it
was the Father’s design in raising him, to restore us all to life: for
though Christ had power of himself to reassume his soul, yet this work
is for the most part ascribed in Scripture to God the Father.

<span id="xiv.ii-p45"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p46"></span>**10.** *For with the heart we believe*
 <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) *unto righteousness, etc.* This
passage may help us to understand what justification by faith is; for it
shows that righteousness then comes to us, when we embrace God’s
goodness offered to us in the gospel. We are then for this reason just,
because we believe that God is propitious to us in Christ. But let us
observe this, — that the seat of faith is not in the head, *(*<span
id="xiv.ii-p47.5"></span>*in cerebro* — in the brain,) but in the heart.
Yet I would not contend about the part of the body in which faith is
located: but as the word *heart* is often taken for a serious and
sincere feeling, I would say that faith is a firm and effectual
confidence, *(*<span id="xiv.ii-p47.6"></span>*fiducia* — trust,
dependence,) and not a bare notion only.

<span id="xiv.ii-p48"></span>*With the mouth confession is made unto
salvation* It may seem strange, that he ascribes no part of our
salvation to faith, as he had before so often testified, that we are
saved by faith alone. But we ought not on this account to conclude that
confession is the cause of our salvation. His design was only to show
how God completes our salvation, even when he makes faith, which he
implants in our hearts, to show itself by confession: nay, his simple
object was, to mark out true faith, as that from which this fruit
proceeds, lest any one should otherwise lay claim to the empty name of
faith alone: for it ought so to kindle the heart with zeal for God’s
glory, as to force out its own flame. And surely, he who is justified
has already obtained salvation: hence he no less believes with the heart
unto salvation, than with the mouth makes a confession. You see that he
has made this distinction, — that he refers the cause of justification
to faith, — and that he then shows what is necessary to complete
salvation; for no one can believe with the heart without confessing with
the mouth: it is indeed a necessary consequence, but not that which
assigns salvation to confession.

<span id="xiv.ii-p49"></span>But let them see what answer they can give
to Paul, who at this day proudly boast of some sort of imaginary faith,
which, being content with the secrecy of the heart, neglect the
confession of the mouth, as a matter superfluous and vain; for it is
extremely puerile to say, that there is fire, when there is neither
flame nor heat.

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Romans
10:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011)<span
id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**11.** For the scripture saith, Whosoever
believeth on him shall not be ashamed.

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Dicit enim scriptura, onmis qui
credit in eum non pudefiet:

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span>**12.** For there is no difference between
the Jew and the Greek: for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that
call upon him.

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Non enim est distinctio Iudaei et
Graeci; unus enim Dominus omnium, dives in omnes qui invocant eum;

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span>**13.** For whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord shall be saved.

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span>**13.** Quisquis enim invocaverit nomen
Domini salvus erit.

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p9"></span>**11.** *For the Scripture saith, etc.*
Having stated the reasons why God had justly repudiated the Jews, he
returns to prove the calling of the Gentiles, which is the other part of
the question which he is discussing. As then he had explained the way by
which men obtain salvation, and one that is common and opened to the
Gentiles no less than to the Jews, he now, having first hoisted an
universal banner, extends it expressly to the Gentiles, and then invites
the Gentiles by name to it: and he repeats the testimony which he had
before adduced from Isaiah, that what he said might have more authority,
and that it might also be evident, how well the prophecies concerning
Christ harmonize with the law.  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327)

<span id="xiv.iii-p11"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p12"></span>**12.** *For there is no distinction,
etc.* Since faith alone is required, wherever it is found, there the
goodness of God manifests itself unto salvation: there is then in this
case no difference between one people or nation and another. And he adds
the strongest of reasons; for since he who is the Creator and Maker of
the whole world is the God of all men, he will show himself kind to all
who will acknowledge and call on him as their God: for as his mercy is
infinite, it cannot be but that it will extend itself to all by whom it
shall be sought.

<span id="xiv.iii-p13"></span>*Rich* is to be taken here in an active
sense, as meaning kind and bountiful.  <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) And we may observe, that the wealth of
our Father is not diminished by his liberality; and that therefore it is
not made less for us, with whatever multiplied affluence of his grace he
may enrich others. There is then no reason why some should envy the
blessings of others, as though anything were thereby lost by them.

<span id="xiv.iii-p15"></span>But though this reason is sufficiently
strong, he yet strengthens it by the testimony of the Prophet Joel;
which, according to the general term that is used, includes all alike.
But readers can see much better by the context, that what Joel declares
harmonizes with the present subject; for he prophesies in that passage
of the kingdom of Christ: and further, after having said, that the wrath
of God would burn in a dreadful manner, in the midst of his ardor, he
promises salvation to all who would call on the name of the Lord. It
hence follows, that the grace of God penetrates into the abyss of death,
if only it be sought there; so that it is not by any means to be
withheld from the Gentiles.  <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329)

<span id="xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Romans
10:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p2"></span>**14.** How then shall they call on him in
whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher?

<span id="xiv.iv-p3"></span>**14.** Quomodo ergo invocabunt eum in quem
non crediderint? quomodo vero in eum credent de quo non audiverint?
quomodo autem audient absque praedicante?

<span id="xiv.iv-p4"></span>**15.** And how shall they preach, except
they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!

<span id="xiv.iv-p5"></span>**15.** Quomodo autem praedicabunt nisi
mittantur? Quemadmodum scriptum est, Quam pulchri pedes annuntiantium
pacem, annuntiantium bona!

<span id="xiv.iv-p6"></span>**16.** But they have not all obeyed the
gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who hath believed our report?

<span id="xiv.iv-p7"></span>**16.** Sed non omnes obedierunt evangelio;
Iesaias enim dicit, Domine, quis credidit sermoni nostro?

<span id="xiv.iv-p8"></span>**17.** So then faith *cometh* by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God?

<span id="xiv.iv-p9"></span>**17.** Ergo fides ex auditu, auditus autem
per verbum Dei.

<span id="xiv.iv-p10"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p11"></span>I shall not engage the reader long in
reciting and disproving the opinions of others. Let every one have his
own view; and let me be allowed to bring forward what I think. That you
may then understand the design of this gradation, bear in mind first,
that there was a mutual connection between the calling of the Gentiles
and the ministry of Paul, which he exercised among them; so that on the
evidence for the one depended the evidence for the other. It was now
necessary for Paul to prove, beyond a doubt, the calling of the
Gentiles, and, at the same time, to give a reason for his own ministry,
lest he should seem to extend the favor of God without authority, to
withhold from the children the bread intended for them by God, and to
bestow it on dogs. But these things he therefore clears up at the same
time.

<span id="xiv.iv-p12"></span>But how he connects the thread of his
discourse, will not be fully understood, until every part be in order
explained. The import of what he advances is the same as though he had
said, “Both Jews and Gentiles, by calling on the name of God, do thereby
declare that they believe on him; for a true calling on God’s name
cannot be except a right knowledge of him were first had. Moreover,
faith is produced by the word of God, but the word of God is nowhere
preached, except through God’s special providence and appointment. Where
then there is a calling on God, there is faith; and where faith is, the
seed of the word has preceded; where there is preaching there is the
calling of God. Now where his calling is thus efficacious and fruitful,
there is there a clear and indubitable proof of the divine goodness. It
will hence at last appear, that the Gentiles are not to be excluded from
the kingdom of God, for God has admitted them into a participation of
his salvation. For as the cause of faith among them is the preaching of
the gospel, so the cause of preaching is the mission of God, by which it
had pleased him in this manner to provide for their salvation.” We shall
now consider each portion by itself.

<span id="xiv.iv-p13"></span>**14.** *How shall they call? etc.* Paul
intends here to connect prayer with faith, as they are indeed things
most closely connected, for he who calls on God betakes himself, as it
were, to the only true haven of salvation, and to a most secure refuge;
he acts like the son, who commits himself into the bosom of the best and
the most loving of fathers, that he may be protected by his care,
cherished by his kindness and love, relieved by his bounty, and
supported by his power. This is what no man can do who has not
previously entertained in his mind such a persuasion of God’s paternal
kindness towards him, that he dares to expect everything from him.

<span id="xiv.iv-p14"></span>He then who calls on God necessarily feels
assured that there is protection laid up for him; for Paul speaks here
of that calling which is approved by God. Hypocrites also pray, but not
unto salvation; for it is with no conviction of faith. It hence appears
how completely ignorant are all the schoolmen, who doubtingly present
themselves before God, being sustained by no confidence. Paul thought
far otherwise; for he assumes this as an acknowledged axiom, that we
cannot rightly pray unless we are surely persuaded of success. For he
does not refer here to hesitating faith, but to that certainty which our
minds entertain respecting his paternal kindness, when by the gospel he
reconciles us to himself, and adopts us for his children. By this
confidence only we have access to him, as we are also taught in <span
id="xiv.iv-p14.1"></span>[Eph
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span id="xiv.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="xiv.iv-p15"></span>But, on the other hand, learn that true
faith is only that which brings forth prayer to God; for it cannot be
but that he who has tasted the goodness of God will ever by prayer seek
the enjoyment of it.

<span id="xiv.iv-p16"></span>*How shall they believe on him? etc.* The
meaning is, that we are in a manner mute until God’s promise opens our
mouth to pray, and this is the order which he points out by the Prophet,
when he says, “I will say to them, my people are ye;” and they shall say
to me, “Thou art our God.” (<span id="xiv.iv-p16.1"></span>[Zec
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009)<span id="xiv.iv-p16.1"></span>.)
It belongs not indeed to us to imagine a God according to what we may
fancy; we ought to possess a right knowledge of him, such as is set
forth in his word. And when any one forms an idea of God as good,
according to his own understanding, it is not a sure nor a solid faith
which he has, but an uncertain and evanescent imagination; it is
therefore necessary to have the word, that we may have a right knowledge
of God. No other word has he mentioned here but that which is preached,
because it is the ordinary mode which the Lord has appointed for
conveying his word. But were any on this account to contend that God
cannot transfer to men the knowledge of himself, except by the
instrumentality of preaching, we deny that to teach this was the
Apostle’s intention; for he had only in view the ordinary dispensation
of God, and did not intend to prescribe a law for the distribution of
his grace.

<span id="xiv.iv-p17"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p18"></span>**15.** *How shall they preach except they
be sent? etc.* He intimates that it is a proof and a pledge of divine
love when any nation is favored with the preaching of the gospel; and
that no one is a preacher of it, but he whom God has raised up in his
special providence, and that hence there is no doubt but that he visits
that nation to whom the gospel is proclaimed. But as Paul does not treat
here of the lawful call of any one, it would be superfluous to speak at
large on the subject. It is enough for us to bear this only in mind,
that the gospel does not fall like rain from the clouds, but is brought
by the hands of men wherever it is sent from above.

<span id="xiv.iv-p19"></span>*As it is written, How beautiful, etc.* We
are to apply this testimony to our present subject in this manner, The
Lord, when he gave hope of deliverance to his people, commended the
advent of those who brought the glad tidings of peace, by a remarkable
eulogy; by this very circumstance he has made it evident that the
apostolic ministry was to be held in no less esteem, by which the
message of eternal life is brought to us. And it hence follows, that it
is from God, since there is nothing in the world that is an object of
desire and worthy of praise, which does not proceed from his hand.
 <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330)

<span id="xiv.iv-p21"></span>But hence we also learn how much ought all
good men to desire, and how much they ought to value the preaching of
the gospel, which is thus commended to us by the mouth of the Lord
himself. Nor is there indeed a doubt, but that God has thus highly
spoken of the incomparable value of this treasure, for the purpose of
awakening the minds of all, so that they may anxiously desire it. Take
*feet,* by metonymy, for *coming.*  <span
id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331)

<span id="xiv.iv-p24"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p25"></span>**16.** *But all have not obeyed the
gospel, etc.* This belongs not to the argument, which Paul designed to
follow in the gradation he lays down; nor does he refer to it in the
conclusion which immediately follows. It was yet expedient for Paul to
introduce the sentence here, in order to anticipate an objection, lest
any one should build an argument on what he had said, — that the word in
order always precedes faith, as the seed the corn, — and draw this
inference, that faith everywhere follows the word: for Israel, who had
never been without the word, might have made a boast of this kind. It
was therefore necessary, that, in passing, he should give them this
intimation, — that many are called, who are yet not chosen.

<span id="xiv.iv-p26"></span>He also quotes a passage from <span
id="xiv.iv-p26.1"></span>[Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="xiv.iv-p26.1"></span>;
where the Prophet, before he proceeds to announce a remarkable
prediction respecting the death and the kingdom of Christ, speaks with
astonishment of the few number of believers, who appeared to him in the
Spirit to be so few, that he was constrained to exclaim, “O Lord, who
has believed our report?” that is, the word which we preach. For though
in Hebrew the term <span id="xiv.iv-p26.2"></span>שמועה, *shimuoe,*
means passively a word,  <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) yet the
Greeks have rendered it, <span id="xiv.iv-p27.9"></span>ἀκοὴν —
*hearing,* and the Latins, <span id="xiv.iv-p27.10"></span>*auditum* —
*hearing;* incorrectly indeed, but with no ambiguity in the meaning.

<span id="xiv.iv-p28"></span>We now see why this exception was by the
way introduced; it was, that no one might suppose that faith necessarily
follows where there is preaching. He however does afterwards point out
the reason, by saying, “To whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?”
by which he intimates that there is no benefit from the word, except
when God shines in us by the light of his Spirit; and thus the inward
calling, which alone is efficacious and peculiar to the elect, is
distinguished from the outward voice of men. It is hence evident, how
foolishly some maintain, that all are indiscriminately the elect,
because the doctrine of salvation is universal, and because God invites
all indiscriminately to himself. But the generality of the promises does
not alone and by itself make salvation common to all: on the contrary,
the peculiar revelation, mentioned by the Prophet, confines it to the
elect.

<span id="xiv.iv-p29"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p30"></span>**17.** *Faith then is by hearing, etc.* We
see by this conclusion what Paul had in view by the gradation which he
formed; it was to show, that wherever faith is, God has there already
given an evidence of his *election;* and then, that he, by pouring his
blessing on the ministration of the gospel, to illuminate the minds of
men by faith, and thereby to lead them to call on his name, had thus
testified, that the Gentiles were admitted by him into a participation
of the eternal inheritance.

<span id="xiv.iv-p31"></span>And this is a remarkable passage with
regard to the efficacy of preaching; for he testifies, that by it faith
is produced. He had indeed before declared, that of itself it is of no
avail; but that when it pleases the Lord to work, it becomes the
instrument of his power. And indeed the voice of man can by no means
penetrate into the soul; and mortal man would be too much exalted, were
he said to have the power to regenerate us; the light also of faith is
something sublimer than what can be conveyed by man: but all these
things are no hindrances, that God should not work effectually through
the voice of man, so as to create faith in us through his ministry.

<span id="xiv.iv-p32"></span>It must be further noticed, that faith is
grounded on nothing else but the truth of God; for Paul does not teach
us that faith springs from any other kind of doctrine, but he expressly
restricts it to the word of God; and this restriction would have been
improper if faith could rest on the decrees of men. Away then with all
the devices of men when we speak of the certainty of faith. Hence also
the Papal conceit respecting implicit faith falls to the ground, because
it tears away faith from the word; and more detestable still is that
blasphemy, that the truth of the word remains suspended until the
authority of the Church establishes it.

<span id="xiv.v"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p1"></span><span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>[Romans
10:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p2"></span>**18.** But I say, Have they not heard? Yes
verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the
ends of the world.

<span id="xiv.v-p3"></span>**18.** Sed dico, Nunquid non audierunt?
Quinimo, In omnem terram exivit sonus eorum, et in fines orbis verba
eorum.

<span id="xiv.v-p4"></span>**19.** But I say, Did not Israel know? First
Moses saith, I will provoke you to jealousy by *them that are* no
people, *and* by a foolish nation I will anger you.

<span id="xiv.v-p5"></span>**19.** Sed dico, Nunquid non cognovit
Israel? Primus Moses dicit, Ego ad aemulationem provocabo vos in eo qui
non est populus, et in gente stulta irritabo vos.

<span id="xiv.v-p6"></span>**20.** But Esaias is very bold, and saith, I
was found of them that sought me not; I was made manifest unto them that
asked not after me.

<span id="xiv.v-p7"></span>**20.** Iesaias autem audet et dicit,
Inventus sum a non quaerentibus me, conspicuus factus sum iis qui me non
interrogabant.

<span id="xiv.v-p8"></span>**21.** But to Israel he saith, All day long
I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying
people.

<span id="xiv.v-p9"></span>**21.** De Israele autem dicit, Quotidie
expandi manus meas ad populum contumacem et contradicentem (vel, non
credentem.)

<span id="xiv.v-p10"></span><span id="xiv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p11"></span>**18.** *But I say, have they not heard?
etc.* Since the minds of men are imbued, by preaching, with the
knowledge of God, which leads them to call on God, it remained a
question whether the truth of God had been proclaimed to the Gentiles;
for that Paul had suddenly betaken himself to the Gentiles, there was by
that novelty no small offense given. He then asks, whether God had ever
before directed his voice to the Gentiles, and performed the office of a
teacher towards the whole world. But in order that he might show that
the school, into which God collects scholars to himself from any part,
is open in common to all, he brings forward a Prophet’s testimony from
<span id="xiv.v-p11.1"></span>[Ps
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="xiv.v-p11.1"></span>;
which yet seems to bear apparently but little on the subject: for the
Prophet does not speak there of Apostles but of the material works of
God; in which he says the glory of God shines forth so evidently, that
they may be said to have a sort of tongue of their own to declare the
perfections of God.

<span id="xiv.v-p12"></span>This passage of Paul gave occasion to the
ancients to explain the whole Psalm allegorically, and posterity have
followed them: so that, without doubt, the sun going forth as a
bridegroom from his chamber, was Christ, and the heavens were the
Apostles. They who had most piety, and showed a greater modesty in
interpreting Scripture, thought that what was properly said of the
celestial architecture, has been transferred by Paul to the Apostles by
way of allusion. But as I find that the Lord’s servants have everywhere
with great reverence explained Scripture, and have not turned them at
pleasure in all directions, I cannot be persuaded, that Paul has in this
manner misconstrued this passage. I then take his quotation according to
the proper and genuine meaning of the Prophet; so that the argument will
be something of this kind, — God has already from the beginning
manifested his divinity to the Gentiles, though not by the preaching of
men, yet by the testimony of his creatures; for though the gospel was
then silent among them, yet the whole workmanship of heaven and earth
did speak and make known its author by its preaching. It hence appears,
that the Lord, even during the time in which he confined the favor of
his covenant to Israel, did not yet so withdraw from the Gentiles the
knowledge of himself, but that he ever kept alive some sparks of it
among them. He indeed manifested himself then more particularly to his
chosen people, so that the Jews might be justly compared to domestic
hearers, whom he familiarly taught as it were by his own mouth; yet as
he spoke to the Gentiles at a distance by the voice of the heavens, he
showed by this prelude that he designed to make himself known at length
to them also.

<span id="xiv.v-p13"></span>But I know not why the Greek interpreter
rendered the word <span id="xiv.v-p13.1"></span>קום, *kum,* <span
id="xiv.v-p13.2"></span>φθόγγον αὐτῶν, *their sound;* for it means a
line, sometimes in building, and sometimes in writing.  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) As it is certain that the same thing
is mentioned twice in this passage, it seems to me probable, that the
heavens are introduced as declaring by what is written as it were on
them, as well as by voice, the power of God; for by the word *going
forth* the Prophet reminds us, that the doctrine, of which the heavens
are the preachers, is not included within the narrow limits of one land,
but is proclaimed to the utmost regions of the world.

<span id="xiv.v-p19"></span><span id="xiv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p20"></span>**19.** *But I say, has not Israel known?*
This objection of an opponent is taken from the comparison of the less
with the greater. Paul had argued, that the Gentiles were not to be
excluded from the knowledge of God, since he had from the beginning
manifested himself to them, though only obscurely and through shadows,
or had at least given them some knowledge of his truth. What then is to
be said of Israel, who had been illuminated by a far different light of
truth? for how comes it that aliens and the profane should run to the
light manifested to them afar off, and that the holy race of Abraham
should reject it when familiarly seen by them? For this distinction must
be ever borne in mind, “What nation is so renowned, that it has gods
coming nigh to it, as thy God at this day descends to thee?” It was not
then without reason asked, why knowledge had not followed the doctrine
of the law, with which Israel was favored.

<span id="xiv.v-p21"></span>*First, Moses saith, etc.* He proves by the
testimony of Moses, that there was nothing inconsistent in God in
preferring the Gentiles to the Jews. The passage is taken from that
celebrated song, in which God, upbraiding the Jews with their
perfidiousness, declares, that he would execute vengeance on them, and
provoke them to jealousy by taking the Gentiles into covenant with
himself, because they had departed to fictitious gods. “Ye have,” he
says, “by despising and rejecting me, transferred my right and honor to
idols: to avenge this wrong, I will also substitute the Gentiles in your
place, and I will transfer to them what I have hitherto given to you.”
Now this could not have been without repudiating the Jewish nation: for
the emulation, which Moses mentions, arose from this, — that God formed
for himself a nation from that which was not a nation, and raised up
from nothing a new people, who were to occupy the place from which the
Jews had been driven away, inasmuch as they had forsaken the true God
and prostituted themselves to idols. For though, at the coming of
Christ, the Jews were not gone astray to gross and external idolatry,
they had yet no excuse, since they had profaned the whole worship of God
by their inventions; yea, they at length denied God the Father, as
revealed in Christ, his only-begotten Son, which was an extreme kind of
impiety.

<span id="xiv.v-p22"></span>Observe, that a *foolish nation,* and *no*
*nation,* are the same; for without the hope of eternal life men have
properly no existence. Besides, the beginning or origin of life is from
the light of faith: hence spiritual existence flows from the new
creation; and in this sense Paul calls the faithful the work of God, as
they are regenerated by his Spirit, and renewed after his image. Now
from the word *foolish,* we learn that all the wisdom of men, apart from
the word of God, is mere vanity.  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334)

<span id="xiv.v-p25"></span><span id="xiv.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p26"></span>**20.** *But Isaiah is bold, and says, etc.*
As this prophecy is somewhat clearer, that he might excite greater
attention he says that it was expressed with great confidence; as though
he had said, — “The Prophet did not speak in a figurative language, or
with hesitation, but had in plain and clear words declared the calling
of the Gentiles.” But the things which Paul has here separated, by
interposing a few words, are found connected together in the prophet
<span id="xiv.v-p26.1"></span>[Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)<span id="xiv.v-p26.1"></span>,
where the Lord declares, that the time would come when he should turn
his favor to the Gentiles; and he immediately subjoins this reason, —
that he was wearied with the perverseness of Israel, which, through very
long continuance, had become intolerable to him. He then speaks thus, —
“They who inquired not of me before, and neglected my name, have now
sought me, (the perfect tense for the future to denote the certainty of
the prophecy.)  <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335)

<span id="xiv.v-p28"></span>I know that this whole passage is changed by
some Rabbins, as though God promised that he would cause that the Jews
should repent of their defection: but nothing is more clear than that he
speaks of aliens; for it follows in the same context, — “I have said,
Behold I come to a people, on whom my name is not called.” Without
doubt, then, the Prophet declares it as what would take place, that
those who were before aliens would be received by a new adoption unto
the family of God. It is then the calling of the Gentiles; and in which
appears a general representation of the calling of all the faithful; for
there is no one who anticipates the Lord; but we are all, without
exception, delivered by his free mercy from the deepest abyss of death,
when there is no knowledge of him, no desire of serving him, in a word,
no conviction of his truth.

<span id="xiv.v-p29"></span><span id="xiv.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p30"></span>**21.** *But of Israel, etc.* A reason is
subjoined why God passed over to the Gentiles; it was because he saw
that his favor was become a mockery to the Jews. But that readers may
more fully understand that the blindness of the people is pointed out in
the second clause, Paul expressly reminds us that the elect people were
charged with their own wickedness. Literally it is, “He says to Israel;”
but Paul has imitated the Hebrew idiom; for <span
id="xiv.v-p30.1"></span>ל, *lamed,* is often put for <span
id="xiv.v-p30.2"></span>מן, men. And he says, that to Israel he
stretched forth his hands, whom he continually by his word invited to
himself, and ceased not to allure by every sort of kindness; for these
are the two ways which he adopts to call men, as he thus proves his
goodwill towards them. However, he chiefly complains of the contempt
shown to his truth; which is the more abominable, as the more remarkable
is the manner by which God manifests his paternal solicitude in inviting
men by his word to himself.

<span id="xiv.v-p31"></span>And very emphatical is the expression, that
he *stretches out his hands;* for by seeking our salvation through the
ministers of his word, he stretches forth to us his hands no otherwise
than as a father who stretches forth his arms, ready to *receive* his
son kindly into his bosom. And he says *daily,* that it might not seem
strange to any one if he was wearied in showing kindness to them,
inasmuch as he succeeded not by his assiduity. A similar representation
we have in <span id="xiv.v-p31.1"></span>[Jer
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013)<span id="xiv.v-p31.1"></span>;
and <span id="xiv.v-p31.2"></span>[Jer
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#007)<span id="xiv.v-p31.2"></span>,
where he says that he rose up early to warn them.

<span id="xiv.v-p32"></span>Their unfaithfulness is also set forth by
two most suitable words. I have thought it right to render the
participle <span id="xiv.v-p32.1"></span>ἀπειθούντα*, refractory,* or
rebellious, and yet the rendering of <span
id="xiv.v-p32.2"></span>Erasmus and of the Old Translator, which I have
placed in the margin, is not to be wholly disapproved. But since the
Prophet accuses the people of perverseness, and then adds that they
wandered through ways which were not good, I doubt not but that the
Greek Translator meant to express the Hebrew word <span
id="xiv.v-p32.3"></span>סורר, *surer,* by two words, calling them first
disobedient or rebellious, and then gainsaying; for their contumacy
showed itself in this, because the people, with untamable pride and
bitterness, obstinately rejected the holy admonitions of the Prophets.
 <span id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc38013.htm#fr_317) <span
id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span> The γὰρ, “for,” at the beginning of <span
id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>[Ro 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span
id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>, connects it with the latter part of the
preceding, as the γὰρ, “for,” in the preceding connects it with the
latter part of <span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>[Ro
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>;
and γὰρ also in <span id="xiv.i-p10.3"></span>[Ro
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)<span id="xiv.i-p10.3"></span>
expresses a reason for what <span id="xiv.i-p10.4"></span>[Ro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="xiv.i-p10.4"></span>
contains. So that we have a regular chain; the following sentence gives
a reason for the one immediately preceding in four instances. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc38013.htm#fr_318) <span
id="xiv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span> <span id="xiv.i-p13.1"></span>Calvin*’s*
Latin for this verse is: “<span id="xiv.i-p13.2"></span>Fratres,
benevolentia certe cordis mei et deprecatio ad Deum super Israel est in
salutem — Brethren, the goodwill indeed of my heart and prayer to God
for Israel is for *their* salvation.” The word for “goodwill,” εὐδοκία,
means a kind disposition towards another, it means here a benevolent or
a sincere desire, or, according to <span
id="xiv.i-p13.3"></span>Theophylact, an earnest desire. <span
id="xiv.i-p13.4"></span>Doddridge renders it “affectionate desire;”
<span id="xiv.i-p13.5"></span>Beza, “<span
id="xiv.i-p13.6"></span>propensa voluntas — propense wish;” and <span
id="xiv.i-p13.7"></span>Stuart, “kind desire.”

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>At the beginning of the last chapter the
Apostle expressed his great *grief* for his brethren the Jews, he now
expresses his great *love* towards them, and his strong desire for their
highest good — their salvation. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc38013.htm#fr_319) <span
id="xiv.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span> “A zeal of God,” ζήλον Θεοῦ, is a zeal
*for* God, a genitive case of the object. Some regard “God” here as
meaning something great, as it is sometimes used in Hebrew, and render
the phrase, as <span id="xiv.i-p17.1"></span>Macknight does, “a great
zeal;” but this is not required by the context. The Jews had professedly
“a zeal for God,” but not accompanied with knowledge. The necessity of
knowledge as the guide of zeal is noted by <span
id="xiv.i-p17.2"></span>Turrettin in four particulars: 1. That we may
distinguish truth from falsehood, as there may be zeal for error and
false doctrine as well as for that which is true; 2. That we may
understand the comparative *importance* of things, so as not to make
much of what is little, and make little account of what is great; 3.
That we may prosecute and defend the truth in the *right way*, with
prudence, firmness, fidelity, and meekness; 4. That our zeal may have
the *right object*, not our own interest and reputation, but the glory
of God and the salvation of men. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc38013.htm#fr_320) <span
id="xiv.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p24"></span> “Complementum — the complement,” the
filling up, the completion. The word τέλος, “end,” is used in various
ways, as signifying — 1. The *terminations* of any thing, either of
evils, or of life, etc., <span id="xiv.i-p24.1"></span>[Mt
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span id="xiv.i-p24.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p24.2"></span>[Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p24.2"></span>; —
2. Completion or fulfillment, <span id="xiv.i-p24.3"></span>[Lu
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#037)<span id="xiv.i-p24.3"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p24.4"></span>[1Ti
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="xiv.i-p24.4"></span>; —
3. The *issue*, the effect, the consequence, the result, <span
id="xiv.i-p24.5"></span>[Ro 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)<span
id="xiv.i-p24.5"></span>; <span id="xiv.i-p24.6"></span>[1Pe
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009)<span id="xiv.i-p24.6"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p24.7"></span>[2Co
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015)<span id="xiv.i-p24.7"></span>; —
4. *Tribute* or custom, <span id="xiv.i-p24.8"></span>[Ro
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007)<span id="xiv.i-p24.8"></span>; —
5. The *chief* *thing*, summary or substance, <span
id="xiv.i-p24.9"></span>[1Pe 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#008)<span
id="xiv.i-p24.9"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p25"></span>The meaning of the word depends on what is
connected with it. The end of *evils*, or of life, is their termination;
the end of a *promise* is its fulfillment; the end of a *command*, its
performance or obedience; the end of *faith* is salvation. In such
instances, the general idea is the result, or the effect, or the
consequence. Now the law may be viewed as an economy, comprising the
whole Jewish law, not perfect, but introductory; in this view Christ may
be said to be its end — its perfection or “its landing place.” But we
may also regard the law in its moral character, as the rule and
condition of life; then the end of the law is its fulfillment, the
performance of what it requires to attain life: and Christ in this
respect is its end, having rendered to it perfect obedience. This last
meaning is most consistent with the words which follow, and with the
Apostle’s argument. The first view is taken by <span
id="xiv.i-p25.1"></span>Chrysostom, <span id="xiv.i-p25.2"></span>Beza,
<span id="xiv.i-p25.3"></span>Turrettin, as well as <span
id="xiv.i-p25.4"></span>Calvin; the second, by <span
id="xiv.i-p25.5"></span>Mede*,* <span id="xiv.i-p25.6"></span>Stuart*,*
and <span id="xiv.i-p25.7"></span>Chalmers. There is really not much
difference in the two views; only the sequel of the verse, “for
righteousness to every one who believes,” and the opposite sentiment in
the next verse, “the man who doeth these shall live in (or through)
them,” seem to favor the latter view. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc38013.htm#fr_321) <span
id="xiv.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p23"></span> Righteousness is here personified,
according to the usual manner of the Apostle: law and sin had before
been represented in the same way. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc38013.htm#fr_322) <span
id="xiv.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p24"></span> It seems not necessary to have recourse to
the distinctions made in the foregoing section. The character of the
quotation given is correctly described in the words of <span
id="xiv.ii-p24.1"></span>Chrysostom, as quoted by <span
id="xiv.ii-p24.2"></span>Poole, “<span id="xiv.ii-p24.3"></span>Paulus
ea transtulit et aptavit ad jusitiam fidei — Paul transferred and
accommodated these things to the righteousness of faith.” He evidently
borrowed the words of Moses, not literally, but substantially, for the
purpose of setting forth the truth he was handling. The speaker is not
Moses, but “the righteousness of faith,” represented as a person. <span
id="xiv.ii-p24.4"></span>Luther, as quoted by <span
id="xiv.ii-p24.5"></span>Wolfius, says, that “Paul, under the influence
of the Spirit, took from Moses the occasion to form, as it were, a new
and a suitable text against the justiciaries.” It appears to be an
application, by way of analogy, of the words of Moses to the gospel; but
<span id="xiv.ii-p24.6"></span>Pareus, <span
id="xiv.ii-p24.7"></span>Wolfius, <span
id="xiv.ii-p24.8"></span>Turrettin, and <span
id="xiv.ii-p24.9"></span>Doddridge, consider the words as applied by way
of accommodation. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc38013.htm#fr_323) <span
id="xiv.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p29"></span> “The righteousness of faith” is evidently
the “it” in this question: See <span id="xiv.ii-p29.1"></span>[Ro
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span id="xiv.ii-p29.1"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc38013.htm#fr_324) <span
id="xiv.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p34"></span> It is “the word” which requires “faith,”
and is received by faith; or it is the word entitled to faith, worthy of
being believed; or it is the word which generates and supports faith. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc38013.htm#fr_325) <span
id="xiv.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p38"></span> “He puts ‘mouth’ before ‘heart,’” says
<span id="xiv.ii-p38.1"></span>Pareus, “for he follows the order in
which they are given by Moses, and for this reason, because we know not
faith otherwise than by profession.”

<span id="xiv.ii-p39"></span>This is one of the many instances both in
the New and Old Testament, in which the most apparent act is mentioned
first, and then the most hidden, or in which the deed is stated first,
and then the principle from which it proceeds. See <span
id="xiv.ii-p39.1"></span>[Rom. 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013),
[Rom. 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013)<span
id="xiv.ii-p39.1"></span>. And we have here another instance of the
Apostle’s style; he reverses the order in <span
id="xiv.ii-p39.2"></span>[Ro
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="xiv.ii-p39.2"></span>,
mentioning faith first, and confession last. The two verses may be thus
rendered, —

<span id="xiv.ii-p40"></span>**9.** That if thou wilt confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus,  
And believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead,  
Thou shalt be saved.

<span id="xiv.ii-p41"></span>**10.** For with the heart we believe unto
righteousness,  
And with the mouth we confess unto salvation.

<span id="xiv.ii-p42"></span>He begins and ends with confession, and in
the middle clauses he mentions faith. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc38013.htm#fr_326) <span
id="xiv.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p47"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p47.1"></span>Creditur;”
πιστεύεται, “it is believed.” It is an impersonal verb, and so is the
verb in the next clause. The introduction of a person is necessary in a
version, and we may say, “We believe;” or, as “thou” is used in the
preceding verse, it may be adopted here, — “For by the heart thou
believest unto righteousness,” *i.e.,* in order to attain righteousness;
“and with the mouth thou confessest unto salvation,” *i.e.,* in order to
attain salvation. “God knows our faith,” as <span
id="xiv.ii-p47.2"></span>Pareus observes, “but it is made known to man
by confession.” <span id="xiv.ii-p47.3"></span>Turrettin*’s* remarks on
this verse are much to the purpose. He says, that Paul loved antitheses,
and that we are not to understand faith and confession as separated and
applied only to the two things here mentioned, but ought to be viewed as
connected, and that a similar instance is found in <span
id="xiv.ii-p47.4"></span>[Ro 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)<span
id="xiv.ii-p47.4"></span>, where Christ is said to have been delivered
for our offenses, and to have risen again for our justification; which
means, that by his death and resurrection our offenses are blotted out,
and justification is obtained. In the same manner the import of what is
here said is, that by sincere faith and open confession we obtain
justification and salvation. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc38013.htm#fr_327) <span
id="xiv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p10"></span> As in <span id="xiv.iii-p10.1"></span>[Ro
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span id="xiv.iii-p10.1"></span>,
the Apostle quotes from the *Septuagint*; for to “make haste,” as the
Hebrew is, conveys the same idea as “to be ashamed:” for he who hastens,
acts for the most part foolishly and brings himself to shame, as Saul
did, when he did not wait for Samuel, but hastened to sacrifice, and
thereby brought shame on himself. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc38013.htm#fr_328) <span
id="xiv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p14.1"></span>Pro
benigno et benefico:” the word “rich,” is rather to be taken as meaning
one who possesses abundance, or an exuberance of things, and here, of
gifts and blessings, of mercy and grace to pardon, to cleanse, and to
endow with spiritual privileges. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_329"></span>[330](cc38013.htm#fr_329) <span
id="xiv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p16"></span> The passage referred to is in <span
id="xiv.iii-p16.1"></span>[Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span id="xiv.iii-p16.1"></span>.
It is taken <span id="xiv.iii-p16.2"></span>*verbatim* from the
*Septuagint*; and it is literally according to the Hebrew, except that
the last verb <span id="xiv.iii-p16.3"></span>מלט, in that language,
means to be set free, rescued, or delivered, rather than to be saved;
but the idea is nearly the same. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_330"></span>[331](cc38013.htm#fr_330) <span
id="xiv.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p20"></span> “This prophecy,” say <span
id="xiv.iv-p20.1"></span>Gomarus, “has not two meanings — the proper and
the allegorical, as the Papists foolishly assert, but two fulfillments;
the first when heralds announced the return of the people from Babylon
to their own country; and the second, (shadowed forth by the first as
its destined type,) when the heralds of the gospel announced and
proclaimed its tidings to the world.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_331"></span>[332](cc38013.htm#fr_331) <span
id="xiv.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p22"></span> This passage is taken from <span
id="xiv.iv-p22.1"></span>[Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span id="xiv.iv-p22.1"></span>.
This is a striking instance that the Apostle quotes not from the
*Septuagint*, when that version materially departs from the Hebrew, as
is the case here. Though it appears to be a version of his own, he yet
gives not the original literally, but accommodates it to his own
purpose: he leaves out “on the mountains,” and adopts the plural number
instead of the singular, both as to the participle “announcing” or
evangelizing, and as to the word “good.” The words peace, good, and
salvation, in Hebrew, seem to refer to the same thing, according to the
usual style of the Prophets.

<span id="xiv.iv-p23"></span>The words of Paul, as rendered by <span
id="xiv.iv-p23.1"></span>Calvin, coincide more with the Hebrew, than as
they are rendered in our common version. The verb εὐαγγελίζω, is often
used simply in the sense of announcing, publishing, declaring or
preaching, as in <span id="xiv.iv-p23.2"></span>[Luke
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#018), [Luke
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#043)<span id="xiv.iv-p23.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iv-p23.3"></span>[Ac
5:42](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#042)<span id="xiv.iv-p23.3"></span>,
etc.; and in this sense it exactly corresponds with <span
id="xiv.iv-p23.4"></span>בשר, which means the same, though the other
idea of the Greek verb, that of evangelizing, has been wrongly given to
it; for it is applied to the *announcing* of bad as well as of good
news. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc38013.htm#fr_332) <span
id="xiv.iv-p26.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p27"></span> Or, what is heard; it being a noun from
<span id="xiv.iv-p27.1"></span>שמע, to hear, in its passive sense, it
signifies a report, a message, or any tidings conveyed to the hearing of
men. The Greek word ἀκοή is used in various senses, as signifying the
*act* of hearing, <span id="xiv.iv-p27.2"></span>[Mt
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014)<span id="xiv.iv-p27.2"></span>,
— the *faculty* of hearing, <span id="xiv.iv-p27.3"></span>[1Co
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#017)<span id="xiv.iv-p27.3"></span>,
— the *organ* of hearing, the ear, <span id="xiv.iv-p27.4"></span>[Mr
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#035)<span id="xiv.iv-p27.4"></span>, —
and *what is heard*, a word, a report, as here and in <span
id="xiv.iv-p27.5"></span>[Joh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038)<span id="xiv.iv-p27.5"></span>
<span id="xiv.iv-p27.6"></span>Schleusner refers to instances in the
classics in which the word is used in all these meanings. It is not
necessary, nor is it in accordance with the usual manner of the Apostle,
to give the word the same meaning in the next verse as in this. It is
the practice of the Apostle to use the same words in different senses in
the same passage. See <span id="xiv.iv-p27.7"></span>[Ro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018)<span id="xiv.iv-p27.7"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iv-p27.8"></span>[Ro
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="xiv.iv-p27.8"></span>.
Here it means what is heard, report; and in the following verse, the
act, that is, hearing. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc38013.htm#fr_333) <span
id="xiv.v-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p14"></span> Intepreters have been very much at a loss
to account for this difference. The Apostle adopts the rendering of the
*Septuagint*, as though the Hebrew word had been <span
id="xiv.v-p14.1"></span>קולם. Though there is no copy, yet consulted,
that favors this reading, it is yet the probable one; not only because
the Apostle sanctions it, but it is what the context demands, and
especially the parallelism which prevails in Hebrew poetry. In the next
line “words” are mentioned, and “voice” here would be the most suitable
corresponding term. But we may go back to the preceding distich, and
find not only a confirmation of this, but also an instance of terms
being used in the same passage in different senses, while yet the
meaning is obvious to a common reader, and at the same time intricate
and puzzling to a critic. The two distichs may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xiv.v-p15"></span>**4.** Without speech, and without words!  
Not heard is their voice! —

<span id="xiv.v-p16"></span>**5.** Through all the earth goes forth
their voice,  
And through the extremity of the world their words.

<span id="xiv.v-p17"></span>They have no words, and yet they have words;
they have no voice, and yet they have a voice. Here the first and the
last line Correspond, and the second and the third. There is indeed a
different term used for “words” in the last line from that which is
adopted in the first, but in the first there are two, “speech,” <span
id="xiv.v-p17.1"></span>אמר, and “words,” <span
id="xiv.v-p17.2"></span>דברים, which are expressed by one, <span
id="xiv.v-p17.3"></span>מלים, in the last. It seems then most probable,
that the true reading has been retained by the *Septuagint*

<span id="xiv.v-p18"></span>The “sound,” or voice, as applied in this
passage, means the report, the news, respecting the gospel; and the
“words,” the actual preaching of it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc38013.htm#fr_334) <span
id="xiv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p23"></span> The quotation is from <span
id="xiv.v-p23.1"></span>[De 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)<span
id="xiv.v-p23.1"></span>, and it is literally the Hebrew as well as the
*Septuagint*, except that “you” is put for “them.” The contrast in
Hebrew is very striking; the whole verse is this, —

<span id="xiv.v-p24"></span>**21.** They have made me jealous by a
no-God,  
They have provoked me by their foolish idols;  
And I will make them jealous by a no-people,  
By a foolish nation will I provoke them. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc38013.htm#fr_335) <span
id="xiv.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p27"></span> <span id="xiv.v-p27.1"></span>[Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)<span id="xiv.v-p27.1"></span>.
The two sentences are reversed; the *Septuagint* and the Hebrew are the
same. The reason for changing the order does not appear; but it may be
observed, that it is an instance common in Hebrew, where essentially the
same idea is expressed in two successive lines, so that it is immaterial
which of them is put first. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc38013.htm#fr_336) <span
id="xiv.v-p32.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p33"></span> The passage is taken from <span
id="xiv.v-p33.1"></span>[Isa 65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)<span
id="xiv.v-p33.1"></span>. The *Septuagint* is followed, except that the
order of the words in the first part of the sentence is changed, thought
the *Septuagint* has preserved the order of the original. The version is
according to the Hebrew, with the exception of the last word, which from
its form, the last radical letter being doubled, can hardly be expressed
in another language by a single term, and so the *Septuagint* has
employed two. It means “revolting again and again,” or willfully
revolting. The simple verb <span id="xiv.v-p33.2"></span>סר, signifies
to turn aside, to revolt, to apostatize: and in a reduplicate form, as
here, it means either a repeated or an obstinate revolt. Indeed the
revolt or the apostasy of the Jews was both reiterated and perverse, as
their history abundantly testifies. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc38014)
