[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc38000)  [Next](cc38002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 38: Romans*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>On no portion of The New Testament have so many
Commentaries been written as on The Epistle To The Romans. We have
indeed no separate Comment extant by any of the Fathers on this Epistle;
though it has been explained, together with other parts of Scripture, by
<span id="ii-p2.1"></span>Origen in the third century; by <span
id="ii-p2.2"></span>Jerome*,* <span id="ii-p2.3"></span>Chrysostom*,*
and in part by <span id="ii-p2.4"></span>Augustine, in the fourth; by
<span id="ii-p2.5"></span>Theodoret in the fifth; by <span
id="ii-p2.6"></span>Œcumenius in the tenth; and by <span
id="ii-p2.7"></span>Theophylact in the eleventh century. But since the
Reformation, many separate Expositions have been published, beside a
learned Introduction by <span id="ii-p2.8"></span>Luther, and Notes or
*Scholia* by <span id="ii-p2.9"></span>Zuingle and <span
id="ii-p2.10"></span>Melancthon.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>The first complete Commentary, as it appears,
was written by <span id="ii-p3.1"></span>Bullinger; the second by <span
id="ii-p3.2"></span>Bucer, a Professor of Theology at Cambridge for a
short time in the reign of Edward the Sixth; and the next in order of
time was this Work by Calvin, composed at Strasbourg in the year 1539.
The fourth was by <span id="ii-p3.3"></span>Peter Martyr; and this was
translated into English in the year 1568. Another was afterwards
published by Rodolph <span id="ii-p3.4"></span>Gualter, Minister at
Zurich.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>Early in the next century the learned <span
id="ii-p4.1"></span>Pareus  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) delivered
lectures on this Epistle, as Professor of Theology in the University of
Heidelberg — a work of great learning and of great merits though written
in a style too scholastic to suit the taste of the present day. His
special object was to rebut the arguments and expose the sophistries of
Popish writers, particularly those of <span
id="ii-p5.3"></span>Bellarmine, the acutest, the subtlest and the most
learned of all the Jesuits of his own age, and perhaps of any in after
ages. There is hardly a subject in any measure connected with the
contents of this Epistle which <span id="ii-p5.4"></span>Pareus does not
discuss: at the end of every chapter a number of questions are stated
and answered, especially such as refer to the disputes between Papists
and Protestants. He also controverts the perversions of Socinianism.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>The next work that requires particular notice is
that of <span id="ii-p6.1"></span>Turrettin, a Professor of Theology in
the University of Geneva. It was published about the commencement of the
last century; the author died in the year 1737. The doctrine of <span
id="ii-p6.2"></span>Calvin had somewhat degenerated in his time, though
the work on the whole takes the side of orthodoxy. It yet shows a
leaning to those views, which commonly issue its sentiments subversive
of the essentials of true Christianity.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>The first Commentary published in this country,
composed in English, was by Elnathan <span id="ii-p7.1"></span>Parr,
B.D., Rector of Palgrave in Suffolk. He was, as it appears the personal
friend of Sir Nathaniel *Bacon*, an elder brother of Lord *Bacon*. He
dedicated his work to Sir Nathaniel, and speaks of him a having been a
hearer of what he published when delivered from the pulpit.  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) His style is that of his age, and appear
quaint now; but his thoughts are often very striking and truly
excellent, and his sentiments are wholly in accordant with those of the
Reformers.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>Since that time until this century, no work of
any note has appeared separately on this Epistle. But within the last
thirty years several Commentaries have been published. Besides those of
<span id="ii-p9.1"></span>Flatt and <span id="ii-p9.2"></span>Tholuck in
Germany, three at least have appeared in this country, and three in
America. The authors in America are Moses <span
id="ii-p9.3"></span>Stuart, M.A., Professor of Sacred Literature at
Andover in Massachusetts, the Rev Albert <span
id="ii-p9.4"></span>Barnes, and Charles <span id="ii-p9.5"></span>Hodge,
Professor of Biblical Literature at Princeton. Those in this country are
the Rev F. <span id="ii-p9.6"></span>Fry*,* Rector of Desford,
Leicestershire, Robert <span id="ii-p9.7"></span>Haldane Esq., and Dr
<span id="ii-p9.8"></span>Chalmers. The doctrine held by <span
id="ii-p9.9"></span>Calvin is essentially maintained in all these works,
and in most of them in its fullest extent.

<span id="ii-p10"></span>Of our American brethren, the most learned and
the most versed in criticisms is Professor <span
id="ii-p10.1"></span>Stuart; the fullest and the minutest expositor is
the Rev. A. <span id="ii-p10.2"></span>Barnes; and the acutest and the
most concise commentator is Professor <span id="ii-p10.3"></span>Hodge.
The two first seem, in some instances, like <span
id="ii-p10.4"></span>Turrettin, to deviate somewhat from what may be
considered strict orthodoxy, at least in their mode of explaining some
subjects: the last is liable to no charge of this kind.

<span id="ii-p11"></span>Respecting our own countrymen, there is a more
perfect unanimity, though they belonged to different Churches. The
Lectures of the Rev. J. <span id="ii-p11.1"></span>Fry are those of a
strict Predestinarian, and yet replete with remarks, both experimental
and practical. The layman, R. <span id="ii-p11.2"></span>Haldane, Esq.,
has displayed very high qualifications as an expositor; he is strictly
and even stiffly orthodox, and can brook no deviation from what he
regards as the truth. Of Dr. <span id="ii-p11.3"></span>Chalmers’
Lectures, comprised in four volumes, 12mo, it is difficult to pronounce
an opinion. They are the productions of a philosopher’s and one of the
highest grade, who, at the same time, possessed the heart and the
experience of an humble Christian. He expatiates over the whole field of
truth with the eye of an eagle, and with the docility of a child,
without ever overleaping the boundaries of revelation. He was evidently
a man by himself, taller by his shoulders than most men, either in this
or in any other age, having a mind as sound as at was vigorous, an
imagination as sober as it was creative, and a capacity to illustrate
and to amplify quite unequaled.

<span id="ii-p12"></span>All these works have their peculiar
excellencies, adapted to different tastes and capacities, and no doubt
they have their defects. The same must be said of <span
id="ii-p12.1"></span>Calvin*’s* work. But as a concise and lucid
commentator he certainly excels. He is not so much an expounder of
words, as of principles. He carries on an unbroken chain of reasoning
throughout, in a brief and clear manner. Having well considered the main
drift of a passage, he sets before us what it contains, by a brief
statement or by a clear process of reasoning; and often by a single
sentence he throws light on a whole passage: and though his mind
possessed more vigour of intellect and sound good sense, than what is
called imagination; yet there are some fine thoughts occasionally
occurring, beautifully expressed, to which that faculty must have given
birth. There is also a noble grandeur and dignity in his sentiments,
rarely to be found in other writers.

<span id="ii-p13"></span>Professor <span id="ii-p13.1"></span>Stuart has
justly characterized this Work by saying, that it contains “fundamental
investigation of the logic and course of thought contained in the
Epistle;” and that it embraces “very little verbal criticism. Many a
difficulty is solved without any appearance of effort, or any show of
learning. <span id="ii-p13.2"></span>Calvin,” he adds, “is by far the
most distinguished of all the Commentators of his times.”

<span id="ii-p14"></span>It was mainly to supply the defect named above,
the want of verbal criticism, that Notes have been added in the present
Edition. They are also designed to furnish the reader with such
expositions as have been suggested by posterior critics and
commentators. And as we are generally desirous of knowing the names of
authors, they have been for the most part given. Much light is thrown on
a passage by conveying the full meaning of the original. This has been
done partly by giving such different versions as seemed most entitled to
approbation, and partly by referring to other passages where such words
occur: so that a common reader, unacquainted with the original, may, to
a certain extent, have the advantage of one well versed in the Greek
language.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>Variety of meanings given to words, and also to
passages, has been deemed by some to lessen the certainty of truth, but
without any solid reason; for this variety as found in the works of all
sound and judicious critics, seldom or *ever* affects any thing
important, either in doctrine, experience, or practice, and tends often
to expand the meaning and to render it clearer and more prominent. There
has been indeed sometimes a pruriency in this respect, an unholy
ambition for novelty, a desire for new discoveries, an indulgence of
mere curiosity, which have been very injurious. Much of this sort of
mania prevailed among some of the German divines in the last century, as
<span id="ii-p15.1"></span>Wolfius clearly shows in his works, in which
he notices and disproves many vagaries assuming the name of critical
expositions; and much of a similar kind of spirit seems to prevail still
in that country. It is a mania for criticism, for its own sake, without
any concern or solicitude for the truth: and ingenious criticism has
often been resorted to by the oppugners of vital Christianity as means
for supporting heterodoxical sentiments. But there is a palpable
difference between men of this character, the mere gladiators of
criticism, and those who embrace the truth, and whose object it is
faithfully to explain it in consistency with the general tenor of what
is revealed, and who have what is indispensably necessary for such a
work, a spiritual experience, which often affords better assistance than
any critical acumen that can ever be possessed. The man who has seen a
thing has a much better idea of it than the man who has only heard it
described.

<span id="ii-p16"></span>Attempts have been made by various authors to
show and prove, that the Style Of The Epistles, especially those of
Paul, is consonant with that of classical writers. <span
id="ii-p16.1"></span>Blackwall laboured much to do this in this country,
as well as many German divines, particularly in the last century. In
common with some of the Fathers, they thought to recommend in this way
the Apostolic Writings to the attention of literary men. But it was a
labour not wisely undertaken, as it must have necessarily proved
abortive: for though some phrases may be classical, yet the general
style is what might have been naturally expected from the writers,
brought up, as they had all been, in the Jewish religion, and
accustomed, as they had been, to the writings of the Old Testament.
Hence their style throughout is Hebraistic; and the meaning of many of
the Greek words which they use is not to be sought from the Classics,
but from the Greek Translation of the ancient Scriptures, and sometimes
from the Hebrew itself, of which that is a translation.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

<span id="ii-p18"></span>Much evil and no good must result from a claim
that cannot be supported: nor is it at all necessary to make such a
claim. It has been long ago repudiated, and repudiated by Paul himself.
Writers have often ascribed to Paul what he himself distinctly and
entirely disclaimed, and never *attempted* to attain or to practice, and
that on principle, “Lest the cross of Christ should be made of none
effect.” It was not by “excellency of speech” that he courted the
attention of the classical and refined Grecians, that he recommended the
gospel to them; it was not by the tinsel of mere eloquence that he
succeeded in his preaching, nor by the elegance and beauty of his
diction; but by something much higher, much greater, much more powerful
and efficient. We ought to follow his example, and stand on his high
ground, and not to descend to that which is no better than a quagmire.
It is a happy thing, and no doubt so designed by God, that the shell
should not be made of fine materials, lest men’s minds should be
attracted by it and neglect the kernel. God might, if he chose, have
easily endued his Apostles with eloquence more than human, and enabled
them to write with elegance more than Grecian; but He did not do so, and
Paul expressly gives us the reason, “that our faith should not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.”

<span id="ii-p19"></span>It is generally agreed, that the Epistle To The
Romans was written at Corinth, and about the end of the year 57, or at
the beginning of the year 58, and that it is the *fifth* Epistle in
order of time; the two Epistles to the <span
id="ii-p19.1"></span>Thessalonians, the Epistle to the <span
id="ii-p19.2"></span>Galatians, and the first to the <span
id="ii-p19.3"></span>Corinthians, having been previously written. Then
followed the second Epistle to the <span
id="ii-p19.4"></span>Corinthians, the Epistles to the <span
id="ii-p19.5"></span>Ephesians, <span id="ii-p19.6"></span>Philippians,
<span id="ii-p19.7"></span>Colossians, <span
id="ii-p19.8"></span>Philemon, and the <span
id="ii-p19.9"></span>Hebrews, the first to <span
id="ii-p19.10"></span>Timothy, the Epistle to <span
id="ii-p19.11"></span>Titus, and the second to <span
id="ii-p19.12"></span>Timothy

<span id="ii-p20"></span>The common date assigned to Paul’s conversion
is AD 35. He wrote his first Epistle, that is, the first to the <span
id="ii-p20.1"></span>Thessalonians, in 52, seventeen years after his
conversion. His second Epistle to <span id="ii-p20.2"></span>Timothy,
his last, was written from Rome in 65. So that he wrote his fourteen
Epistles during these thirteen years. The whole extent of his ministry
seems to have been about thirty years; for it is not supposed that he
long outlived the date of his second Epistle to Timothy. Tradition says,
that he was beheaded at Rome, June 29; AD 66.

<span id="ii-p21"></span>Paul’s first coming to Rome was in the spring
of the year 61. He continued there as a prisoner for two years.  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) When he was released, most writers are of
the opinion, that he returned early in 63 to Judea, in company with
Timothy, and left Titus at Crete; that he visited the Churches in Asia
Minor, then the Churches in Macedonia; that he wintered at Nicopolis, a
city of Epirus, in 64; that afterwards he proceeded to Crete and also to
Corinth; and that early in 65 he again visited Rome, was taken prisoner,
and beheaded in the following year.  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)
This account clearly shows that he did not accomplish his purpose of
visiting Spain, as tradition has recorded.

<span id="ii-p24"></span>The first introduction of the Gospel into Rome
is involved in uncertainty. The probability is, that some of the
“strangers of Rome,” present at the day of Pentecost, were converted,
and at their return promoted the spread of the Gospel. Paul mentions
two, “Andronicus and Junia,” as having professed the faith before him,
and as having been noted among the Apostles. He makes mention, too, of
another eminent Christian, “Rufus” whose father, as it is supposed
carried our Savior’s cross, <span id="ii-p24.1"></span>[Mr
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#021)<span id="ii-p24.1"></span>. It
is not improbable, that these were afterwards assisted by such as had
been converted under the ministry of Paul; for he speaks of some of
those whom he salutes at Rome as being “beloved,” and as having been his
“fellow-workers.”

<span id="ii-p25"></span>What some of the Fathers have related was in
the first instance a tradition, as there was nothing recorded on the
subject before the latter part of the second century, except what has
been ascribed to <span id="ii-p25.1"></span>Dionysius of Corinth,
preserved by <span id="ii-p25.2"></span>Eusebius. <span
id="ii-p25.3"></span>Irenœus and <span id="ii-p25.4"></span>Tertullian
were the first retailers of the tradition, that Peter, in conjunction
with Paul, was the founder of the Church at Rome. This tradition
increased considerably by the time of <span id="ii-p25.5"></span>Jerome,
who, in the fourth century, says, that Peter had been bishop of Rome for
twenty-five years! But this account is so clearly inconsistent with what
we learn from the Acts of the Apostles respecting Peter, that some of
the most reasonable of the Papists themselves have given it up as
unworthy of credit.  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

<span id="ii-p27"></span>It appears next to a certainty that Peter was
not at Rome when Paul wrote his Epistle in 57 or 58, for he sends no
salutation to Peter: — And also that he had not been there previous to
that time; for it is wholly unreasonable to suppose, that, had he been
there, Paul would have made no reference to his labours. It further
amounts almost to a certainty, that Peter was not at Rome when Paul was
for two years a prisoner there, from 61 to 63; for he makes no mention
of him in any way, not even in the four or five Epistles which he wrote
during that time: And that Peter was not at Rome during Paul’s last
imprisonment in 65 and 66, is evident from the second Epistle to
Timothy; for he makes no mention of Peter, and what he says of
Christians there, that they “all forsook him,” would have been highly
discreditable to Peter, if he was there. So that we have the strongest
reasons to conclude, that Peter had no part in forming and establishing
a Church in Rome during Paul’s life, whatever share in the work he might
have had afterwards.  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) But the first
tradition, or the first account, given by <span
id="ii-p28.1"></span>Irenœus and <span id="ii-p28.2"></span>Tertullian,
refers only to a co-operation: and yet this co-operation is wholly
inconsistent with what has been stated, the force of which no reasonable
man can resist.

<span id="ii-p29"></span>The learned <span id="ii-p29.1"></span>Pareus
proceeds in a different way to prove that Peter was never at Rome. He
shows from different parts of the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistle
to the Galatians, that Peter was in Judea at the time when tradition
declares that he was at Rome. Peter was in Judea when Paul was
converted, <span id="ii-p29.2"></span>[Ac
9](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#000)<span id="ii-p29.2"></span>; and
*three* years after this — that is, in the year 38, <span
id="ii-p29.3"></span>[Ga 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span
id="ii-p29.3"></span>. He was in Judea in the year 45, when he was
imprisoned by Herod, <span id="ii-p29.4"></span>[Ac
12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#000)<span id="ii-p29.4"></span>, and in
49, fourteen years after Paul’s conversion, <span
id="ii-p29.5"></span>[Ac 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#000)<span
id="ii-p29.5"></span>, <span id="ii-p29.6"></span>[Ga
2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)<span id="ii-p29.6"></span>. Had
he been to Rome during this time, some account of such a journey must
surely have been given. After this time we find that he was at Antioch,
<span id="ii-p29.7"></span>[Ga
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)<span id="ii-p29.7"></span>. If it
be asked, where did he afterwards exercise his ministry? Where more
likely than among the Jews, as he had hitherto most clearly done; for he
was the Apostle of the Circumcision, and among those to whom he sent his
Epistles. The dating of the first at “Babylon,” has led some to
conjecture that it was a figurative term for Rome; but why not for
Jerusalem, or for Antioch? for Christians were at that time treated
everywhere like captives or aliens, and especially in the land of Judea.

<span id="ii-p30"></span>What then are we to say as to this tradition?
The same, according to the just remark of <span
id="ii-p30.1"></span>Pareus, as what we must say of many other
traditions of that age, that it is nothing but a fable, which, like many
others, would have passed away, had it not been allied to a growing
superstition. With respect to what <span id="ii-p30.2"></span>Eusebius
says of the testimony of a presbyter, named <span
id="ii-p30.3"></span>Caius, that about the beginning of the third
century he saw the graves of Peter and Paul at Rome, it may be easily
accounted for: it was the age of pious fraud, when the relics of saints
could be found almost everywhere; and, in the next century, the wood and
the nails of the Cross were discovered! Those who can believe these
things, may have a credulity large enough to swallow up the testimony of
<span id="ii-p30.4"></span>Caius.  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

<span id="ii-p33"></span>The most probable account, then, of the
commencement of a Christian Church at Rome, is what has been already
stated. The condition of that Church, when Paul wrote to it, we may in a
great measure learn from the Epistle itself. It had a high character,
viewed in a general way; but there were some defects and blemishes. Its
faith had been widely reported: there were at the same time some
contentions and divisions among its members, arising especially from the
prejudices of the Jewish believers. To remove the causes of this
dissension, was evidently one of the main objects of Paul in this
Epistle.

<span id="ii-p34"></span>The Order And Arrangement Of The Epistle have
been somewhat differently viewed by different authors. <span
id="ii-p34.1"></span>Pareus includes the whole in this brief summary —
“The Jews and Gentiles are equally guilty; they are equally justified
freely by faith in Christ, without works; they are equally bound to lead
a holy life, to be humble, and to love one another.” <span
id="ii-p34.2"></span>Stuart says, that the whole of what the Epistle
contains may be expressed in a single brief sentence — “Christ our
justification and sanctification.”

<span id="ii-p35"></span>In giving a more specific view of the contents
of this Epistle, the former author divides it into two parts —
*doctrinal*, 1-11.; and *hortative*, 12-16.: but the latter divides it
into three parts — *doctrinal*, 1-8.; *answers* to objections, 9-11.;
and *hortatory*, 12-16. The analysis of Professor <span
id="ii-p35.1"></span>Hodge, who takes the same view with Professor <span
id="ii-p35.2"></span>Stuart is the following: —

<span id="ii-p36"></span>“The Epistle consists of three parts. The
*first*, which includes the first eight chapters, is occupied in the
discussion of The Doctrine of Justification and its consequences. The
*second*, embracing chapters 9, 10, 11, treats of The Calling of the
Gentiles, The Rejection and Future Conversion of the Jews. The *third*
consists of Practical Exhortations and Salutations to the Christians at
Rome.”

<span id="ii-p37"></span>A more particular Analysis may be thus given: —

<span id="ii-p38"></span>**I. Address** - A desire to visit Rome - a
brief View of The Gospel<span id="ii-p38.1"></span>; 1:1-18.

<span id="ii-p39"></span>II. Justification,

<span id="ii-p40"></span>**1.** A proof of its necessity — the sin and
guilt of both Gentiles and Jews, <span id="ii-p40.1"></span>1:18-3:21

<span id="ii-p41"></span>**2.** Its Nature and Character — Examples,
Abraham and David, <span id="ii-p41.1"></span>3:21-4

<span id="ii-p42"></span>**3.** Its Effects or Fruits — Peace and
Fullness of Grace, <span id="ii-p42.1"></span>5.; Death unto Sin and
Eternal Life, <span id="ii-p42.2"></span>6.; Immunity from The Law and
The Reigning Power of Sin, <span id="ii-p42.3"></span>7. Holiness, The
Spirit’s help, Patience in Afflictions, Perseverance, <span
id="ii-p42.4"></span>8.

<span id="ii-p43"></span>**III. God’s Dealings Vindicated** —

<span id="ii-p44"></span>**l.** Election and Reprobation, <span
id="ii-p44.1"></span>9

<span id="ii-p45"></span>**2.** Unbelief and Faith, <span
id="ii-p45.1"></span>10

<span id="ii-p46"></span>**3.** The Rejection of the Jews, The Adoption
of the Gentiles, The Restoration of the Jews, <span
id="ii-p46.1"></span>11

<span id="ii-p47"></span>IV Christian Duties

<span id="ii-p48"></span>**1.** Devotedness to God, Proper Use of Gifts,
Love, Doing Good, <span id="ii-p48.1"></span>12.

<span id="ii-p49"></span>**2.** Obedience to Authority, Love to all,
Purity, <span id="ii-p49.1"></span>13.

<span id="ii-p50"></span>**3.** Forbearance towards Weak Brethren, <span
id="ii-p50.1"></span>14.

<span id="ii-p51"></span>**4.** Help to the Weak, Unanimity, Christ the
Savior of Jews and Gentiles, <span id="ii-p51.1"></span>15:1-13.

<span id="ii-p52"></span>V. Conclusion, —

<span id="ii-p53"></span>**1.** Paul’s Labours and Purpose to Visit
Rome, <span id="ii-p53.1"></span>15:13

<span id="ii-p54"></span>**2.** Salutations, Avoiding Disturbers,
Promise of Victory, Praise to God, <span id="ii-p54.1"></span>16

<span id="ii-p55"></span>We have set before us in this Epistle
especially two things, which it behoves us all rightly to understand —
the righteousness of man and the righteousness of God — merit and grace,
or salvation by works and salvation by faith. The light in which they
are exhibited here is clearer and brighter than what we find in any
other portion of Scripture, with the exception, perhaps, of the Epistle
to the Galatians. Hence the great value which has in every age been
attached to this Epistle by all really enlightened Christians; and hence
also the strenuous efforts which have often been made to darken and
wrest its meaning by men, though acute and learned, yet destitute of
spiritual light. But let not the simple Christian conclude from the
contrariety that is often found in the expositions on these two points,
that there is no certainty in what is taught respecting them. There are
no contrary views given of them by spiritually-minded men. Though on
other subjects discussed here, such men have had their differences, yet
on these they have ever been found unanimous: that salvation is from
first to last by grace, and not by works, has ever been the conviction
of really enlightened men in every age, however their opinion may have
varied in other respects.

<span id="ii-p56"></span>It may seem very strange, when we consider the
plain and decisive language, especially of this Epistle, and the clear
and conclusive reasoning which it exhibits, that any attempt should ever
be made by a reasonable being, acknowledging the authority of Scripture,
to pervert what it plainly teaches, and to evade what it clearly proves.
But a right view of what human nature is, when unrenewed, as exhibited
in God’s Word, and as proved by history and made evident by observation,
enables us fully to account for what would otherwise remain an enigma.
No truth is more fully confirmed by facts (and it ought ever to be
remembered) than that “the natural man receiveth not the things of the
Spirit of God,” and that he “cannot know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.” This declaration clearly accounts for the fact,
that men of great learning have often misunderstood many things in
Scripture, and such things as are plain enough even to the unlettered
when spiritually enlightened. The learned Scribes and Rabbins were blind
leaders of the blind, when even babes understood the mysteries of the
kingdom of God: and no better than the Scribes are many learned men,
professing Christianity, in our day.

<span id="ii-p57"></span>There is indeed a special reason why, on these
points, unenlightened men should contrive means to evade the obvious
meaning of Scripture; for they are such things as come in constant
contact with a principle, the strongest that belongs to human nature in
its fallen state. Other doctrines may be held as speculations, and kept,
as it were, at a distance; but when we come to merit and grace, to work
and faith, man’s pride is touched; and as long as he is under its
prevailing influence, he will be certain, in some way or another, direct
or evasive, to support merit in opposition to grace, or works in
opposition to faith. When the authority of tradition supplanted the
authority of Scripture, the doctrine of merit so prevailed, that the
preposterous idea, that merits were a salable and a transferable
commodity, gained ground in the world. A notion of this kind is too
gross and absurd to be entertained by any who acknowledge God’s Word as
the only umpire in religion; and yet what is not essentially different
has often been maintained; for to say that salvation is partly by faith
and partly by works, is really the same thing, inasmuch as the principle
of merit is thereby admitted. Man naturally cleaves to his own
righteousness; all those who are ignorant are self-righteous, and all
the learned who understand not the gospel; and it is wonderful what
ingenious evasions and learned subtleties men will have recourse to in
order to resist the plain testimony of Scripture. When they cannot
maintain their ground as advocates of salvation alone by merits, they
will attempt to maintain it as advocates of a system, which allows a
part to grace and a part to works — an amalgamation which Paul expressly
repudiates, <span id="ii-p57.1"></span>[Ro
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span id="ii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="ii-p58"></span>But it is remarkable how the innate disposition
of man has displayed itself in this respect. Conscious, as it were, in
some measure of *moral* imperfections, he has been striving for the most
part to merit his salvation by *ceremonial* works. This has been the
case in all ages with heathens: their sacrifices, austerities, and
mechanical devotions were their merits; they were the works by which
they expected to obtain happiness. God favored the people of Israel with
the rituals of religion, which were designed merely as aids and means to
attain and preserve true religion; but they converted them to another
purpose, and, like the heathens, regarded them as meritorious
performances, and expected God’s acceptance for the very religious acts
which they exercised: and in order to make up, as it were, a sufficient
quantity of merit, they made additions to those services which God had
appointed, as though to multiply acts of this kind was to render their
salvation more certain. The very same evil crept early into the
Christian Church, and still continues to exist. The accumulation of
ceremonies is of itself a sufficient proof, that salvation by faith was
in a great measure lost sight of: we want no other evidence; it is what
has been ever done whenever the light of truth has become dim and
obscure. We see the same evil in the present day. Outward privileges and
outward acts of worship are in effect too often substituted for that
grace which changes the heart, and for that living faith which unites us
to the Savior, which works by love and overcomes the world. The very
disposition to over-value external privileges and the mere performances
of religious duties, is an unequivocal evidence, that salvation by faith
is not understood, or very imperfectly understood, and not really
embraced.

<span id="ii-p59"></span>The only remedy, as means for this evil, is
that which we find employed by Paul in this Epistle. He begins by
showing what every man, Jew and Gentile, is by nature; he proves by the
clearest evidence, that all have sinned and become guilty before God.
And having done this, he discloses the way of salvation which God
himself has planned and revealed; and he teaches us, that it is
altogether by grace and through faith that we can be saved, and not by
works. In order cordially to embrace this latter truth, it is necessary
to know the first, that we are sinners under condemnation. It is
impossible, according to the very constitution of man’s mind, that he
should really and truly accede to the one, without a real and deep
knowledge of the other. The whole need not a physician, but the sick. It
is only he who is really convinced of sin and who feels its guilt and
its burden intolerable, that ever will, or indeed ever can, really lay
hold on that free salvation which God has provided. And when this free
salvation is really known, all other things compared with it will be
deemed as nothing; and then all outward privileges will be viewed only
as means, and all outward acts of religion only as aids and helps; and
then also all our works, however great and self-denying, will be
regarded in no way meritorious, but imperfect and defective, and
acceptable only through the merits of our High Priest at God’s right
hand.

<span id="ii-p60"></span>It has not been deemed necessary to give in
this Edition any specimens of title-pages, etc., from former Editions,
either In Latin or in English; as they are to be found in the Old
Translation already in the hands of the subscribers.

<span id="ii-p61"></span>J. O.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc38001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p5"></span> His original name was <span
id="ii-p5.1"></span>Wangler, but he Grecised it, as <span
id="ii-p5.2"></span>Erasmus had done, and as others did in that age.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc38001.htm#fr_1) <span id="ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p8"></span> This work must have been published before the
year 1615, for his patron died in that year. The copy seen by the writer
is the *third* edition and was published in 1633.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc38001.htm#fr_2) <span id="ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p17"></span> “The writers of the New Testament, or rather
(with reverence be it Spoken!) the Holy Spirit, whose penmen they were,
wisely chose, in expressing evangelical notions, to employ such *Greek*
terms as had been long before used for the same purposes by the *Greek*
Translators of the New Testament: and thus the *Septuagint* version,
however *imperfect* and *faulty* in many particulars, became in this
respect, not to the first age of the Church only, but also to all
succeeding generations, the connecting link between the languages of the
Old and New Testament, and will be regarded in this view as long as
sound judgment and real learning shall continue among men.”
—*ParkHurst.*

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc38001.htm#fr_3) <span id="ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p22"></span> It was while a prisoner at this time at Rome
that he wrote his Epistles to the *Ephesians*, *Philippians*,
*Colossians*, *Philemon*, and the *Hebrews* also, as it is generally
supposed.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc38001.htm#fr_4) <span id="ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p23"></span> See <span id="ii-p23.1"></span>Horne*’s*
Introduction, volume 4 part 2 chapter; 3 section 1.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc38001.htm#fr_5) <span id="ii-p25.6"></span>

<span id="ii-p26"></span> The inconsistencies of what the retailers of
this tradition say, are quite palpable. <span
id="ii-p26.1"></span>Irenœus affirms, that “the Church at Rome was
founded and constituted (<span id="ii-p26.2"></span>fundata et
constituta) by the two Apostles, Peter and Paul.” <span
id="ii-p26.3"></span>Epiphanius says, that they were the first
“*Bishops*” at Rome, as well as Apostles, while <span
id="ii-p26.4"></span>Irenœus declares, that they both “delivered the
episcopal office into the hands of Linus;” and it is said in what are
called the Apostolic Constitutions, that “Linus was ordained bishop by
Paul, and Clement after the death of Linus by Peter.” — see <span
id="ii-p26.5"></span>Dr. Barrow on the Pope’s Supremacy, pages 127-129.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc38001.htm#fr_6) <span id="ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p28"></span> But this cannot be admitted, as the same
informant, Tradition, tells us, that Peter and Paul suffered martyrdom
at the same time. The only thing which Peter appears to have had to do
in forming and founding a church at Rome, was to have been the
instrument in the conversion, at the day of Pentecost, of those who in
all probability were the first who introduced the gospel into Rome: and
it is probable that it was this circumstance which occasioned the
tradition, that he had been the founder of that church. Less occasion
has often produced tales of this kind.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc38001.htm#fr_7) <span id="ii-p30.5"></span>

<span id="ii-p31"></span> Let it not be supposed, that by discrediting
*some* things, we discredit *every* thing said by the Fathers. They
ought to be treated as all other historians. What we find on examination
to be unfounded, ought to be so viewed: and what we have every reason to
believe to be true, ought to be so received. Even such a man as <span
id="ii-p31.1"></span>Dr. Lardner seemed unwilling to reject this tale,
from fear of lessening the credit of history; evidently mistaking the
ground on which history has a title to credit. The many authorities
adduced respecting Peter being at Rome may be reduced almost to two —
<span id="ii-p31.2"></span>Irenœus and <span
id="ii-p31.3"></span>Tertullian. They were the first to stamp as it were
a kind of authority on this report, and also on others to which no
credit is given even by those who would have the Fathers to have been
almost infallible.

<span id="ii-p32"></span>The learned <span id="ii-p32.1"></span>Dr.
Copleston, the present Bishop of Landaff, in his pamphlet on the Errors
of Romanism, justly says, “It is even a matter of serious doubt whether
St. Peter was ever at Rome. There is no good historical evidence of the
fact; and there is much probability against it.” —P. 87.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dedication to Simon Grynaeus](cc38002)
