[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](choc03)  [Next](choc05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481558/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Occultism*, by Paul Carus, \[1907\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### URIM AND THUMMIM.

The Chinese method of divination may help us to understand the Urim and
Thummim of the Hebrews which are so ancient that details of their method
are practically forgotten.

We notice first that the Urim and Thummim are two sets of symbols
apparently forming a contrast similar to that of yin and

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

yang. It is not probable that they were a set of twelve gems
representing the twelve tribes of Israel. Secondly, like the yin and
yang, the two sets must have been a plurality of elements and not only
two symbols as is sometimes assumed; and thirdly, they served the
purpose of divination, for they are referred to in connection with the
ephod which must have had something to do with the determining oracle.

The Urim and Thummim <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14) are translated
in the Septuagint <span id="fr_15"></span>[†](#fn_15) by "manifestation
and truth," or, as it has been rendered in English, "light and
perfection." It appears that the vowel in the first word is wrong, and
we ought to read *Orim*, which is the plural form of *Or*, "light," and
might be translated by "the shining things." If Thummim is to be derived
from the root <span class="smallcaps">THaMaM</span>, its vocalisation
ought to be *thamim* (not *thummim*) and would mean "the completed
things."

We cannot doubt that the Urim and Thummim form a contrast, and if the
Urim represent "light" or yang, the Thummim would represent "darkness"
or yin, the former being compared to the rise of the sun, the latter to
the consummation of the day.

Sometimes the answer of the Urim and Thummim is between two alternatives
(as in 1 Sam. xiv. 36 ff), some times a definite reply is given which
would presuppose a more or less complicated system similar to the
answers recorded in the Yih King. In the history of Saul (1 Sam. x. 22)
the answer comes out, "Behold, he hath hid himself among the stuff," and
in the time of the Judges (Judges xx. 28) the question is asked about
the advisability of a raid against the tribe of Benjamin, and the oracle
declares, "Go up; for to-morrow I will deliver them into thine hand." On
other occasions the oracle does not answer at all, <span
id="fr_16"></span>[‡](#fn_16) and its silence is interpreted as due to
the wrath of God.

The answer received by consulting the Urim and Thummim was regarded as
the decision of God, and was actually called the voice of God. This view
seems to have led in later times, when the process of divination was no
longer understood, to the assumption

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

that Yahveh's voice could be heard in the Holy of Holies, a
misinterpretation which is plainly recognisable in the story of the high
priest Eleazar (Num. vii. 89).

The Urim and Thummim are frequently mentioned in close connection with
the ephod which has been the subject of much discussion. It is commonly
assumed that the word is used in two senses, first as an article of
apparel and secondly as a receptacle for Urim and Thummim. Unless we can
find an interpretation which shows a connection between the two, we can
be sure not to have rightly understood the original significance of this
mysterious article. The description of the ephod in Exodus ii. 28, (an
unquestionably postexilic passage) is irreconcilable with the
appearance, use or function which this curious object must have
possessed according to our historical sources, and the latter alone can
be regarded as reliable. After considering all the passages in which the
ephod is mentioned we have come to the conclusion that it was a pouch
worn by the diviner who hung it around his loins using the string as a
girdle.

The original meaning of *ephod* is "girdle" and the verb *aphad* means
"to put on, to gird." David, a strong believer in the Urim and Thummim,
danced before the Lord "girded with an ephod," and we must assume that
according to the primitive fashion the diviner was otherwise naked.
Hence he incurred the contempt of his wife Michal whose piety did not go
so far as the king's in worshiping Yahveh in this antiquated manner.

The main significance of the ephod in connection with the Urim and
Thummim was to serve as a receptacle for the lots, and so it may very
well have become customary to make it of a more costly and enduring
material in the form of a vase. This will explain those passages in
which the ephod is spoken of as being made of gold and standing on the
altar, as where we are informed that the sword of Goliath had been
deposited as a trophy wrapped in a mantle "behind the ephod."

There are other passages in which "ephod" seems to be identical with an
idol, but if our interpretation be accepted there is no

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

difficulty in this, for the receptacle of the Urim and Thummim may very
well have come to be regarded as an object of worship.

It is difficult to say whether the ephod is identical with the
*khoshen*, the breastplate of the high priest, which in later postexilic
usage was ornamented with twelve precious stones representing the twelve
tribes of Israel. It is sure, however, that the Urim and Thummim cannot
be identified with the twelve jewels, and the Hebrew words plainly
indicate that they were placed inside as into a pouch. In Lev. xiii. 8
the verb *nathan el*, "to put into," is used and not *nathan ‘al*, "to
put upon."

The breastplate of the high priest seems to be the same as what is
called in Babylonian history the "tables of judgment," which also were
worn on the breast. But the identification does not seem convincing. We
would have to assume that the ephod was first worn around the loins
after the fashion of a loin cloth and that later in a more civilised age
when the priests were dressed in sacerdotal robes, it was suspended from
the shoulders and hung upon the breast.

After Solomon's time there is no longer any historical record of the use
of the Urim and Thummim. It seems certain that in the post-exilic age
the rabbis knew no more about it than we do to-day and regretted the
loss of this special evidence of grace. They supposed their high priests
must be no longer fit to consult the oracle (Esdras ii. 63; Neh. vii.
65) and Josephus states (*Antiq*. iii. 8–9) that two hundred years
before his time, it had ceased. According to common tradition, however,
it was never reintroduced into the temple service after the exile.

While Josephus identified the Urim and Thummim with the twelve jewels in
the breastplate of the high priest, Philo <span
id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17) claims that they were pictures exhibited
in the embroidery of the breastplate representing the symbols of light
and truth. His conception is untenable, but it is noteworthy because his
view seems to be influenced by his knowledge of the sacerdotal vestments
of Egypt. We are told that the high priest in his capacity as judge used
to wear a breastplate bearing the image of truth or justice. One such

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

shield has been found, upon which were two figures recognisable by the
emblems on their heads: one with a solar disk as Ra, the sun-god or
light, the other with a feather, as Maat or truth. If the Urim and
Thummim were not plural and were not contrasts, and if we did not know
too well that they were placed in an ephod, Philo's interpretation would
have much to recommend itself. Perhaps he and also the Septuagint were
under Egyptian influence.

While we do not believe that the Urim and Thummim were exactly like the
yang and yin we are fully convinced that the Chinese method of
divination throws some light upon the analogous Hebrew practice and will
help us to understand the meaning of the terms. If the two systems are
historically connected, which is not quite impossible, we must assume
that they were differentiated while yet in their most primitive forms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[37:\*](choc04.htm#fr_14) ‏הָאוּרִים
וְהַתֻּמִּים‎.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[37:†](choc04.htm#fr_15) δήλωσις καὶ ἀλήθεια.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[37:‡](choc04.htm#fr_16) See Sam. xiv. 37 and
xxviii. 6.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[39:\*](choc04.htm#fr_17) *De vita Mosis*, p.
670 C; 671, D.E.; *De Monarchia*, p. 824, A.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: P‘an-Ku](choc05)
