[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm70)  [Next](gafm72) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book VII: The Pursuit

AND as to Finn, son of Cumhal, I will tell out his story now.

All that were in Teamhair rose up early in the morning of the morrow,
and they found Diarmuid and Grania were wanting from them, and there
came a scorching jealousy and a weakness on Finn. He sent out his
trackers then on the plain, and bade them to follow Diarmuid and Grania.
And they followed the track as far as the ford on the Sionnan, and Finn
and the Fianna followed after them, but they were not able to carry the
track across the ford. And Finn gave them his word that unless they
would find the track again without delay, he would hang them on each
side of the ford.

Then the sons of Neamhuin went up against the stream, and they found a
horse on each side of it, and then they went on with the stream
westward, and they found the track going along the side of the Province
of Connacht, and Finn and the Fianna of Ireland followed it on. And Finn
said. "I know well where we will find Diarmuid and Grania now; it is in
Doire-da-Bhoth they are." Oisin and Osgar and Caoilte and Diorraing were
listening when Finn said those words. And Osgar spoke to the others, and
it is what he said: "There is danger they might be there, and it would
be right for us to give them some warning; and look now, Osgar, where is
Bran the hound, for Finn himself is no dearer to him than Diarmuid, and
bid him go now with a warning to him."

So Osgar told Bran, and Bran understood him well, and she went to the
rear of the whole troop the way Finn would not see her, and she followed
on the track of Diarmuid and Grania till she came to Doire-de-Bhoth, and
she put her head into Diarmuid's bosom, and he in his sleep.

Diarmuid started up out of his sleep then, and he awoke Grania, and said
to her: "Here is Bran, Finn's hound, and she is coming with a warning to
tell us Finn himself is coming." "Let us take that warning, then," said
Grania, "and make your escape." "I will not take it," said Diarmuid,
"for if I cannot escape Finn, I would as soon he took me now as any
other time." When Grania heard that, great fear came on her.

Bran went away from them then, and when Oisin saw her coming back, he
said: "I am in dread Bran found no chance to get to Diarmuid, and we
should send him some other warning. And look where is Fearghoin," he
said, "Caoilte's serving-man." Now it was the way with Fearghoin, every
shout he would give would be heard in the three nearest hundreds to him.
So they made him give out three shouts the way Diarmuid would hear him.
And Diarmuid heard him, and be said to Grania: "I hear Caoilte's
serving-man, and it is with Caoilte he is, and it is along with Finn
Canilte is, and those shouts were sent as a warning to me." "Take that
warning," said Grania. "I will not take it," said Diarmuid, "for Finn
and the Fianna will come up with us before we leave the wood." And fear
and great dread came on Grania when she heard him say that.

As for Finn, he did not leave off following the track till he came to
Doire-na-Bhoth, and he sent the sons of Neamhuin to search through the
wood, and they saw Diarmuid, and the woman along with him. They came
back then where Finn was, and he asked them were Diarmuid and Grania in
the wood? "Diarmuid is in it," they said, "and there is some woman with
him, but we knew Diarmuid, and we do not know Grania." "May no good news
come to the friends of Diarmuid for his sake," said Finn, "and he will
not quit that wood till he has given me satisfaction for everything he
has done to me."

"It is jealousy has put you astray, Finn," said Oisin; "you to think
Diarmuid would stop here on the plain of Maen Mhagh, and no close place
in it but Doire-da-Bhoth, and you following after him." "Saying that
will do you no good," said Finn, "for I knew well when I heard the three
shouts Caoilte's serving-man gave out, it was you sent them to Diarmuid
as a warning. And another thing," he said, "it was you sent my hound
Bran to him. But none of those things you have done will serve you, for
he will not leave Doire-da-Bhoth till he gives me satisfaction for
everything he has done to me, and every disgrace he has put on me." "It
is great foolishness for you, Finn," said Osgar then, "to be thinking
Diarmuid would stop in the middle of this plain and you waiting here to
strike the head off him." "Who but himself cut the wood this way," said
Finn, "and made this close sheltered place with seven woven narrow doors
to it. And O Diarmuid," he said out then, "which of us is the truth
with, myself or Oisin?" "You never failed from your good judgment,
Finn," said Diarmuid, "and indeed I myself and Grania are here." Then
Finn called to his men to go around Diarmuid and Gránia, and to take
them.

Now it was shown at this time to Angus Og, at Brugh na Boinne, the great
danger Diarmuid was in, that was his pupil at one time, and his dear
foster-son. He set out then with the clear cold wind, and did not stop
in any place till he came to Doire-da-Bhoth. And he went unknown to Finn
or the Fianna into the place where Diarmuid and Grania were, and he
spoke kind words to Diarmuid, and he said: "What is the thing you have
done, grandson of Duibhne?" "It is," said Diarmuid, "the daughter of the
King of Ireland that has made her escape with me from her father and
from Finn, and it is not by my will she came." "Let each of you come
under a border of my cloak, so," said Angus, "and I will bring you out
of the place where you are without knowledge of Finn or his people."
"Bring Grania with you," said Diarmuid, "but I will never go along with
you; but if I am alive I will follow you before long. And if I do not,"
he said, "give Grania to her father, and he will do well or ill to her."

With that Angus put Grania under the border of his cloak, and brought
her out unknown to Finn or the Fianna, and there is no news told of them
till they came to Ros-de-Shoileach, the Headland of the Two Sallows.

And as to Diarmuid, after Angus and Grania going from him, be stood up
as straight as a pillar and put on his armour and his arms, and after
that he went to a door of the seven doors he had made, and he asked who
was at it. "There is no enemy to you here," they said, "for there are
here Oisin and Osgar and the best men of the sons of Baiscne along with
us. And come out to us now, and no one will have the daring to do any
harm or hurt on you." "I will not go out to you," said Diarmuid, "till I
see at what door Finn himself is." He went then to another door of the
seven and asked who was at it. "Caoilte, son of Ronan, and the rest of
the Sons of Ronan along with him; and come out to us now, and we will
give ourselves for your sake." "I will not go out to you," said
Diarmuid, "for I will not put you under Finn's anger for any well-doing
to myself." He went on to another door then and asked who was at it.
"There is Conan, son of Morn; and the rest of the sons of Morna along
with him; and it is enemies to Finn we are, and you are a great deal
more to us than he is, and you may come out and no one will dare lay a
hand on you." "I will not indeed," said Diarmuid, "for Finn would be
better pleased to see the death of every one of you than to let me
escape." He went then to another door and asked who was at it. "A friend
and a comrade of your own, Fionn, son of Cuadan, head of the Fianna of
Munster, and his men along with him; and we are of the one country and
the one soil, and we will give our bodies and our lives for your sake."
"I will not go out to you," said Diarmuid, "for I would not like Finn to
have a grudge against you for any good you did to me." He went then to
another door and asked who was at it. "It is Fionn, son of Glor, head of
the Fianna of Ulster, and his men along with him; and come out now to us
and there is no one will dare hurt or harm you." "I will not go out to
you," said Diarmuid, "for you are a friend to me, and your father along
with you, and I would not like the unfriendliness of Finn to be put on
you for my sake." He went then to another door, and he asked who was at
it. "There is no friend of yours here," they said, "for there is here
Aodh Beag the Little from Eamhuin, and Aodh Fada the Long from Eamhuin,
and Caol Crodha the Fierce, and Goineach the Wounder, and Gothan the
White-fingered, and Aoife his daughter, and Cuadan the Tracker from
Eamhuin; and we are unfriendly people to you, and if you come out to see
us we will not spare you at all, but will make an end of you." "It is a
bad troop is in it," said Diarmuid; "you of the lies and of the tracking
and of the one shoe, and it is not fear of your hands is upon me, but
because I am your enemy I will not go out."

He went then to the last of the seven doors and asked who was at it. "No
friend of yours," they said, "but it is Finn, son of Cumhal, and four
hundred paid fighting men along with him; and if you will come out to us
we will make split marrow of you." "I give you my word, Finn," said
Diarmuid, "that the door you are at yourself is the first door I will
pass out of."

When Finn heard that, he warned his battalions on pain of lasting death
not to let Diarmuid past them unknown. But when Diarmuid heard what he
said, he rose on the staves of his spears and he went with a very high,
light leap on far beyond Finn and his people, without their knowledge.
He looked back at them then, and called out that he had gone past them,
and he put his shield on his back and went straight towards the west,
and it was not long before he was out of sight of Finn and the Fianna.
Then when he did not see any one coming after him, he turned back to
where he saw Angus and Grania going out of the wood, and he followed on
their track till he came to Ros-da-Shoileach.

He found Angus and Grania there in a sheltered, well-lighted cabin, and
a great blazing fire kindled in it, and the half of a wild boar on
spits. Diarmuid greeted them, and the life of Grania all to went out of
her with joy before him.

Diarmuid told them his news from beginning to end, and they ate their
share that night, and they went to sleep till the coming of the day and
of the full light on the morrow. And Angus rose up early, and he said to
Diarmuid: "I am going from you now, grandson of Duibhne; and I leave
this advice with you," he said, "not to go into a tree with one trunk,
and you flying before Finn, and not to be going into a cave of the earth
that has but one door, and not to be going to an island of the sea that
has but one harbour. And in whatever place you roast your share of
food," he said, "do not eat it there; and in whatever place you eat it,
do not lie down there; and in whatever place you lie down, do not rise
up there on the morrow." He said farewell to them after that, and went
his way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book VII: The Green Champions](gafm72)
