[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm28)  [Next](gafm30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book I: Birth of Bran

THIS, now, is the story of the birth of Bran.

Finn's mother, Muirne, came one time to Almhuin, and she brought with
her Tuiren, her sister. And lollan Eachtach, a chief man of the Fianna
of Ulster, was at Almhuin at the time, and he gave his love to Tuiren,
and asked her in marriage, and brought her to his own house. But before
they went, Finn made him gave his word be would bring her back safe and
sound if ever he asked for her, and he bade him find sureties for
himself among the chief men of the Fianna. And lollan did that, and the
sureties he got were Caoilte and Goll and Lugaidh Lamha, and it was
Lugaidh gave her into the hand of lollan Eachtach.

But before lollan made that marriage, he had a sweetheart of the Sidhe,
Uchtdealb of the Fair Breast; and there came great jealousy on her when
she knew he had taken a wife. And she took the appearance of Finn's
woman-messenger, and she came to the house where Tuiren was, and she
said: "Finn sends health and long life to you, queen, and he bids, you
to make a great feast; and come with me now," she said, "till I speak a
few words with you, for there is hurry on me."

So Tuiren went out with her, and when they were away from the house the
woman of the Sidhe took out her dark Druid rod from under her cloak and
gave her a blow of it that changed her into a hound, the most beautiful
that was ever seen. And then she went on, bringing the hound with her,
to the house of Fergus Fionnliath, king of the harbour of Gallimh. And
it is the way Fergus was, he was the most unfriendly man to dogs in the
whole world, and he would not let one stop in the same house with him.
But it is what Uchtdealb said to him: "Finn wishes you life and health,
Fergus, and he says to you to take good care of his hound till he comes
himself; and mind her well," she said, "for she is with young, and do
not let her go hunting when her time is near, or Finn will be no way
thankful to you." "I wonder at that message," said Fergus, "for Finn
knows well there is not in the world a man has less liking for dogs than
myself. But for all that," he said, "I will not refuse Finn the first
time he sent a hound to me."

And when he brought the hound out to try her, she was the best he ever
knew, and she never saw the wild creature she would not run down; and
Fergus took a great liking for hounds from that out.

And when her time came near, they did not let her go hunting any more,
and she gave birth to two whelps.

And as to Finn, when he beard his mother's sister was not living with
Iollan Eachtach, he called to him for the fulfilment of the pledge that
was given to the Fianna. And lollan asked time to go looking for Tuiren,
and he gave his word that if he did not find her, he would give himself
up in satisfaction for her. So they agreed to that, and lollan went to
the hill where Uchtdealb was, his sweetheart of the Sidhe, and told her
the way things were with him, and the promise he had made to give
himself up to the Fianna. "If that is so," said she, "and if you will
give me your pledge to keep me as your sweetheart to the end of your
life, I will free you from that danger." So lollan gave her his promise,
and she went to the house of Fergus Fionnliath, and she brought Tuiren
away and put her own shape on her again, and gave her up to Finn. And
Finn gave her to Lugaidh Lamha that asked her in marriage.

And as to the two whelps, they stopped always with Finn, and the names
he gave them were Bran and Sceolan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book I: Oisin's Mother](gafm30)
