[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm35)  [Next](gafm37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book III: The Enemies of Ireland

OF all the great battles the Fianna fought to keep the foreigners out of
Ireland, the greatest was the one that was fought at Finntraigh the
White Strand, in Munster; and this is the whole story of it, and of the
way the Fianna came to have so great a name.

One time the enemies of Ireland gathered together under Daire Donn, High
King of the Great World, thinking to take Ireland and to put it under
tribute.

The King of Greece was of them, and the King of France, and the King of
the Eastern World, and Lughman of the Broad Arms, King of the Saxons,
and Fiacha of the Long Hair, King of the Gairean, and Tor the son of
Breogan, King of the Great Plain, and Sligech, son of the King of the
Men of Cepda, and Comur of the Crooked Sword, King of the Men of the
Dog-Heads, and Caitchenn, King of the Men of the Cat-Heads, and Caisel
of the Feathers, King of Lochlann, and Madan of the Bent Neck, son of
the King of the Marshes, and three kings from the rising of the sun in
the east, and Ogarmach, daughter of the King of Greece, the best
woman-warrior that ever came into the world, and a great many other
kings and great lords.

The King of the World asked then: "Who is there can give me knowledge of
the harbours of Ireland?" "I will do that for you, and I will bring you
to a good harbour," said Glas, son of Dremen, that had been put out of
Ireland by Finn for doing some treachery.

Then the armies set out in their ships, and they were not gone far when
the wind rose and the waves, and they could hear nothing but the wild
playing of the sea-women, and the screams of frightened birds, and the
breaking of ropes and of sails. But after a while, when the wind found
no weakness in the heroes, it rose from them and went up into its own
high place. And then the sea grew quiet and the waves grew tame and the
harbours friendly, and they stopped for a while at an island that was
called the Green Rock. But the King of the World said then: "It is not a
harbour like this you promised me, Glas, son of Dremen, but a shore of
white sand where my armies could have their fairs and their gatherings
the time they would not be *fighting."* "I know a harbour of that sort
in the west of Ireland," said Glas, "the Harbour of the White Strand in
Corca Duibhne." So they went into their ships again, and went on over
the sea towards Ireland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book III: Cael and Credhe](gafm37)
