[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm42)  [Next](gafm44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book III: The King of Ulsters Son

Now it chanced at that time that news of the great battle was going on
reached to the court of the King of Ulster. And the king's son, that was
only twelve years of age, and that was the comeliest of all. the young
men of Ireland, said to his father: "Let me go to help Finn, son of
Cumhal, and his men." "You are not old enough, or strong enough, boy;
your bones are too soft," said the king. And when the boy went on
asking, his father shut him up in some close place, and put twelve young
men, his foster-brothers, in charge of him.

There was great anger on the young lad then, and he said to his
foster-brothers: "It is through courage and daring my father won a great
name for himself in his young youth, and why does he keep me from
winning a name for myself? And let you help me now," he said, "and I
will be a friend to you for ever." And he went on talking to them and
persuading them till he got round them all, and they agreed to go with
him to join Finn and the Fianna. And when the king was asleep, they went
into the house where the arms were kept, and every lad of them brought
away with him a shield and a sword and a helmet and two spears and two
greyhound whelps. And they went across Ess Ruadh in the north, and
through Connacht of many tribes, and through Caille an Chosanma, the
Woods of Defence, that were called the choice of every king and the true
honour of every poet, and into Ciarraighe, and so on to the White
Strand.

And when they came there Dolar Durba was on the strand, boasting before
the men of Ireland. And Oisin was rising up to go against him, for he
said he would sooner die fighting with him than see the destruction he
was doing every day on his people. And all the wise men and the fighting
men and the poets and the musicians of the Fianna gave a great cry of
sorrow when they heard Oisin saying that.

And the King of Ulster's son went to Finn and stood before him and
saluted him, and Finn asked who he was, and where did he come from. "I
am the son of the King of Ulster," he said; "and I am come here, myself
and my twelve foster-brothers, to give you what help we can." "I give
you a welcome," said Finn.

Just then they heard the voice of Dolar Durba, very loud and boastful.
"Who is that I hear?" said the king's son. "It is a man of the
foreigners asking for a hundred men to go and meet him," said Finn.

Now, when the twelve foster-brothers heard that, they said no word but
went down to the strand, unknown to the king's son and to Finn.

"You are not a grown man," said Conan; "neither yourself nor your
comrades are fit to face any fighting man at all." "I never saw the
Fianna of Ireland till this day," said the young lad; "but I know well
that you are Conan Maol, that never says a good word of any man. And you
will see now," he said, "if I am in dread of that man on the strand, or
of any man in the world, for I will go out against him by myself."

But Finn kept him back and was talking with him; but then Conan began
again, and he said: "It is many men Dolar Durba has made an end of, and
there was not a man of all those that could not have killed a hundred of
the like of you every day."

When the king's son heard that, there was great anger on him, and he
leaped up, and just then Dolar Durba gave a great shout on the strand.
"What is he giving that shout for?" said the king's son. "He is shouting
for more men to come against him," said Conan, "for he is just after
killing your twelve comrades." "That is a sorrowful story," said the
king's son.

And with that he took hold of his arms, and no one could hold him or
hinder him, and he rushed down to the strand where Dolar Durba was. And
all the armies of the strangers gave a great shout of laughter, for they
thought all Finn's men had been made an end of, when he sent a young lad
like that against their best champion.

And when the boy heard that, his courage grew the greater, and he fell
on Dolar Durba and gave him many wounds before he knew he was attacked
at all. And they fought a very hard fight together, till their shields
and their swords were broken in pieces. And that did not stop the
battle, but they grappled together and fought and wrestled that way,
till the tide went over them and drowned them both. And when the sea
went over them the armies on each side gave out a great sorrowful cry.

And after the ebb-tide on the morrow, the two bodies were found cold and
quiet, each one held fast by the other. But Dolar Durba was beneath the
king's son, so they knew it was the young lad was the best and had got
the victory. And they buried him, and put a flag-stone over his grave,
and keened him there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book III: The High King's Son](gafm44)
