[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm72)  [Next](gafm74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book VII: The Wood of Dubhros

AND as to Diarmuid and Grania and Muadhan, they went on through Ui
Chonaill Gabhra, and left-hand ways to Ros-da-Shoileach, and Diarmuid
killed a wild deer that night, and they had their fill of meat and of
pure water, and they slept till the morning of the morrow. And Muadhan
rose up early, and spoke to Diarmuid, and it is what he said, that he
himself was going away. "It is not right for you to do that," said
Diarmuid, "for everything I promised you I fulfilled it, without any
dispute."

But he could not hinder him, and Muadhan said farewell to them and left
them there and then, and it is sorrowful and downhearted Diarmuid and
Grania were after him.

After that they travelled on straight to the north, to Slieve Echtge,
and from that to the hundred of Ui Fiachrach; and when they got there
Grania was tired out, but she took courage and went on walking beside
Diarmuid till they came to the wood of Dubhros.

Now, there was a wonderful quicken-tree in that wood, and the way it
came to be there is this:

There rose a dispute one time between two women of the Tuatha de Danaan,
Aine and Aoife, daughters of Manannan, son of Lir, for Aoife had given
her love to Lugaidh's Son, and Aine had given her love to a man of her
own race, and each of them said her own man was a better hurler than the
other. And it came from that dispute that there was a great hurling
match settled between the Men of Dea and the Fianna of Ireland, and the
place it was to be played was on a beautiful plain near Loch Lein.

They all came together there, and the highest men and the most daring of
the Tuatha de Danaan were there, the three Garbhs of Slieve Mis, and the
three Mases of Slieve Luachra, and the three yellow-haired Murchadhs,
and the three Eochaidhs of Aine, and the three Fionns of the White
House, and the three Sgals of Brugh na Boinne, and the three Ronans of
Ath na Riogh, and the Suirgheath Suaire, the Pleasant Wooer from Lionan,
and the Man of Sweet Speech from the Boinn, and Ilbrec, the
Many-Coloured, son of Mannanan, and Neamhanach, son of Angus Og, and
Bodb Dearg, son of the Dagda, and Manannan, son of Lir.

They themselves and the Fianna were playing the match through the length
of three days and three nights, from Leamhain to the valley of the
Fleisg, that is called the Crooked Valley of the Fianna, and neither of
them winning a goal. And when the Tuatha de Danaan that were watching
the game on each side of Leamhain saw it was so hard for their hurlers
to win a goal against the Fianna, they thought it as well to go away
again without playing out the game.

Now the provision the Men of Dea had brought with them from the Land of
Promise was crimson nuts, and apples, and sweet-smelling rowan berries.
And as they were passing through the district of Ui Fiachrath by the
Muaidh, a berry of the rowan berries fell from them, and a tree grew up
from it. And there was virtue in its berries, and no sickness or disease
would ever come on any person that would eat them, and those that would
eat them would feel the liveliness of wine and the satisfaction of mead
in them, and any old person. of a hundred years that would eat them
would go back to be young again, and any young girl that would eat them
would grow to be a flower of beauty.

And it happened one time after the tree was grown, there were messengers
of the Tuatha de Danaan going through the wood of Dubhros. And they
heard a great noise of birds and of bees, and they went where the noise
was, and they saw the beautiful Druid tree. They went back then and told
what they bad seen, and all the chief men of the Tuatha de Danaan when
they heard it knew the tree must have grown from a berry of the Land of
the Ever-Living Ones. And they enquired among all their people, till
they knew it was a young man of them, that was a musician had dropped
the berry.

And it is what they agreed, to send him in search of a man of Lochlann
that would guard the tree by day and sleep in it by night. And the women
of the Sidhe were very downhearted to see him going from them, for there
was no harper could play half so sweetly on his harp as he could play on
an ivy leaf.

He went on then till he came to Lochlann, and he sat down on a bank and
sleep came on him. And he slept till the rising of the sun on the
morrow; and when he awoke he saw a very big man coming towards him, that
asked him who was he. "I am a messenger from the Men of Dea," he said;
"and I am come looking for some very strong man that would be willing to
guard a Druid tree that is in the wood of Dubhros. And here are some of
the berries he will be eating from morning to nigh;" he said.

And when the big man had tasted the berries, he said: "I will go and
guard all the trees of the wood to get those berries."

And his name was the Searbhan Lochlannach, the Surly One of Lochlann.
Very black and ugly he was, having crooked teeth, and one eye only in
the middle of his forehead. And he had a thick collar of iron around his
body, and it was in the prophecy that he would never die till there
would be three strokes of the iron club he had, struck upon himself. And
he slept in the tree by night and stopped near it in the daytime, and he
made a wilderness of the whole district about him, and none of the
Fianna dared go hunt there because of the dread of him that was on them.

But when Diarmuid came to the wood of Dubhros, he went into it to where
the Surly One was, and he made bonds of agreement with him, and got
leave from him to go hunting in the wood, so long as he would not touch
the berries of the tree. And he made a cabin then for himself and for
Grania in the wood.

As for Finn and his people, they were not long at Almhuin till they saw
fifty armed men coming towards them, and two that were taller and
handsomer than the rest in the front of them. Finn asked did any of his
people know them. "We do not know them," they said, "but maybe you
yourself know them, Finn." "I do not" he said; "but it seems to be they
are enemies to myself." The troop of armed men came up to them then and
they greeted him, and Finn asked news of them, and from what county they
came. "I am Aonghus, son of Art Og of the children of Morna," one of
them said, "and this is Aodh, son of Andela; and we are enemies of your
own, and our fathers were at the killing of your father, and they
themselves died for that deed. And it is to ask peace we are come now to
you" they said. "Where were you the time my father was killed?" "In our
mothers' wombs," said they; "and our mothers were two women of the
Tuatha de Danaan, and it is time for us now to get our father's place
among the Fianna." "I will give you that," said Finn, "but I must put a
fine on you first in satisfaction for my father's death." "We have
neither gold or silver or goods or cattle to give you, Finn," said they.
"Do not put a fine on them, Finn," said Oisin, "beyond the death of
their fathers for your father." "It is what I think," said Finn, "if any
one killed myself, Oisin, it would be easy to pay the fine you would
ask. And there will no one come among the Fianna," he said, "without
giving what I ask in satisfaction for my father's death." "What is it
you are asking of us?" said Aonghus, son of Art Og. "I am asking but the
head of a champion, or the full of a fist of the berries of the
quicken-tree at Dubhros." "I will give you a good advice, children of
Morna," said Oisin, "to go back to the place you were reared, and not to
ask peace of Finn through the length of your lives. For it is not an
easy thing Finn is asking of you; and do you know whose head he is
asking you to bring him?" "We do no;" said they. "The head of Diarmuid,
grandson of Duibhne, is the head he is asking of you. And if you were
twenty hundred men in their full strength, Diarmuid would not let you
take that head." "And what are the berries Finn is asking of us?" they
said then. "There is nothing is harder for you to get than those
berries," said Oisin.

He told them then the whole story of the tree, and of the Searbhan, the
Surly One of Lochlann, that was put to mind it by the Tuatha de Danaan.
But Aodh, son of Andela, spoke then, and it is what he said, that he
would sooner get his death looking for those berries than to go home
again to his mother's county. And he said to Oisin to care his people
till he would come back again, and if anything should happen himself and
his brother in their journey, to send them back again to the Land of
Promise. And the two said farewell then to Oisin and to the chief men of
the Fianna, and they went forward till they reached Dubhros. And they
went along the wood till they found a track, and they followed it to the
door of the hunting-cabin where Diarmuid and Grania were.

Diarmuid heard them coming, and he put his hand on his weapons and asked
who was at the door. "We are the children of Morna," they said, "Aodh,
son of Andela, and Aonghus, son of Art Og." "What brings you to this
wood?" said Diarmuid. "Finn, son of Cumhal, that put us looking for your
head, if you are Diarmuid, grandson of Duibhne," said they. "I am
indeed," said Diarmuid. "If that is so," they said, "Finn will take
nothing from us but your head, or a fistful of the berries of the
quicken-tree of Dubhros as satisfaction for the death of his father."
"It is not easy for you to get either of those things," said Diarmuid,
"and it is a pity for any one to be under the power of that man. And
besides that," he said, "I know it was he himself made an end of your
fathers, and that was enough satisfaction for him to get; and if you do
bring him what he asks, it is likely he will not make peace with you in
the end." "Is it not enough for you," said Aodh, "to have brought his
wife away from Finn without speaking ill of him?" "It is not for the
sake of speaking ill of him I said that," said Diarmaid, "but to save
yourselves from the danger he has sent you into."

"What are those berries Finn is asking?" said Grania, "that they cannot
be got for him?"

Diarmuid told her then the whole story of the berry the Tuatha de Danaan
had lost, and of the tree that had sprung up from it, and of the man of
Lochlann that was keeping the tree. "And at the time Finn sent me hiding
here and became my enemy," he said, "I got leave from the Surly One to
hunt, but he bade me never to meddle with the berries. And now, sons of
Morna," he said, "there is your choice, to fight with me for my head, or
to go asking the berries of the Surly One." "I swear by the blood of my
people," said each of them, "I will fight you yourself first."

With that the two young men made ready for the fight. And it is what
they chose, to fight with the strength of their hands alone. And
Diarmuid put them down and bound the two of them there and then. "That
is a good fight you made," said Grania. "But, by my word," she said,
"although the children of Morna do not go looking for those berries, I
will not lie in a bed for ever till I get a share of them; and I will
not live if I do not get them," she said. "Do not make me break my peace
with the Surly One," said Diarmaid, "for he will not let me take them."
"Loose these tyings from us," said the two young men, "and we will go
with you, and we will give ourselves for your sake." "You must not come
with me," said Diarmuid; "for if you got the full of your eyes of that
terrible one, you would be more likely to die than to live." "Well, do
us this kindness," they said then; "loosen these bonds on us, and give
us time to go by ourselves and see the fight before you strike off our
heads." So Diarmuid did that for them.

Then Diarmuid went to the Surly One, and he chanced to be asleep before
him, and he gave him a stroke of his foot the way he lifted his head and
looked up at him, and he said: "Have you a mind to break our peace,
Grandson of Duibhne?" "That is not what I want," said Diarmuid; "but it
is Grania, daughter of the High King," he said, "has a desire to taste
those berries, and it is to ask a handful of them I am come." "I give my
word," said he, "if she is to die for it, she will never taste a berry
of those berries." "I would not do treachery on you," said Diarmuid;
"and so I tell you, willing or unwilling, I will take those berries from
you."

When the Surly One heard that, he rose up on his feet and lifted his
club and struck three great blows on Diarmuid, that gave him some little
hurt in spite of his shield. But when Diarmuid saw him not minding
himself, he threw down his weapons, and made a great leap and took hold
of the club with his two hands. And when he had a hold of the club he
struck three great blows on him that put his brains out through his
head. And the two young men of the sons of Morna were looking at the
whole fight; and when they saw the Surly One was killed they came out.
And Diarmuid sat down, for he was spent with the dint of the fight, and
be bid the young men to bury the body under the thickets of the wood,
the way Grania would not see it. "And after that," he said, "let you go
back to her and bring her here." So they dragged away the body and
buried it, and they went then for Grania and brought her to Diarmuid.

"There are the berries you were asking, Grania," he said, "and you may
take what you like of them now." "I give my word," said Grania, "I will
not taste a berry of those berries but the one your own hand will pluck
Diarmuid." Diarmuid rose up then and plucked the berries for Grarna, and
for the children of Morna, and they ate their fill of them. And he said
then to the young men: "Take all you can of these berries, and bring
them with you to Finn, and tell him it was yourselves made an end of the
Surly One of Lochlann." "We give you our word," said they, "we begrudge
giving any of them to Finn."

But Diarmuid plucked a load of the berries for them, and they gave him
great thanks for all he had done; and they went back to where Finn was
with the Fianna. And Diarmuid and Grania went up into the top of the
tree where the bed of the Surly One was. And the berries below were but
bitter berries beside the ones above in the tree. And when the two young
men came to Finn, he asked news of them. "We have killed the Surly One
of Lochlann," they said; "and we have brought you berries from the
quicken-tree of Dubhros, in satisfaction for your father, that we may
get peace from you." They gave the berries then into Finn's hand, and he
knew them, and be said to the young men: "I give you my word," he said,
"it was Diarmuid himself plucked those berries, for I know the smell of
his hand on them; and I know well it was he killed the Surly One, and I
will go now and see is he himself alive at the quicken-tree."

After that he called for the seven battalions of the Fianna, and he set
out and went forward to Dubhros. And they followed the track of Diarmuid
to the foot of the quicken-tree, and they found the berries without
protection, so they ate their fill of them. And the great heat of the
day came on them, and Finn said they would stop where they were till the
heat would be past; "for I know well," he said, "Diarmuid is up in the
quicken-tree." "It is a great sign of jealousy in you, Finn," said
Oisin, "to think that Diarmuid would stop there up in the quicken-tree
and he knowing you are wanting to kill him."

Finn asked for a chess-board after that, and he said to Oisin: "I will
play a game with you now on this." They sat down then, Oisin and Osgar
and Lugaidh's Son and Diorraing on the one side of the board, and Finn
on the other side.

And they were playing that game with great skill and knowledge, and Finn
pressed Oisin so hard that he had no move to make but the one, and Finn
said: "There is one move would win the game for you, Oisin, and I defy
all that are with you to show you that move." Then Diarmuid said up in
the tree where he was, and no one heard him but Grania: "It is a pity
you be in straits and without myself to show you that move." "It is
worse off you are yourself," said Grania, "to be in the bed of the Surly
One of Lochlann in the top of the quicken-tree, and the seven battalions
of the Fianna round about it to take your life."

But Diarmuid took a berry of the tree, and aimed at the one of the
chessmen that ought to be moved and Oisin moved it and turned the game
against Finn by that move. It was not long before the game was going
against Oisin the second time, and when Diarmuid saw that he threw
another berry at the chessman it was right to move, and Oisin moved it
and turned the game against Finn in the same way. And the third time
Finn was getting the game from Oisin, and Diarmuid threw the third berry
on the man that would give the game to Oisin, and the Fianna gave a
great shout when the game was won. Finn spoke then, and it is what he
said: "It is no wonder you to win the game, Oisin, and you having the
help of Osgar, and the watchfulness of Diorraing, and the skill of
Lugaidh's Son, and the teaching of the grandson of Duibhne with you."
"That is a great sign of jealousy in you, Finn," said Osgar, "to think
Diarmuid would stop in this tree, and you so near him." "Which of us has
the truth, Diarmuid, grandson of Duibhne," Finn said out then, "myself
or Osgar?" *"*You never lost your good judgment, Finn," said Diarmuid
then; "and I myself and Grania are here, in the bed of the Surly One of
Lochlann." Then Diarmuid rose up and gave three kisses to Grania in the
sight of Finn and the Fianna. And a scorching jealousy and a weakness
came on Finn when he saw that, and he said: "It was worse to me,
Diarmuid, the seven battalions of the Fianna to see what you did at
Teamhair, taking away Grania the night you were yourself my guard. But
for all that," he said, "you will give your head for the sake of those
three kisses."

With that Finn called to the four hundred paid fighting men that were
with him that they might make an end of Diarmuid; and he put their hands
into one another's hands around that quicken-tree, and bade them, if
they would not lose their lives, not to let Diarmuid pass out through
them. And he said that to whatever man would take Diarmuid, he would
give his arms and his armour, and a place among the Fianna of Ireland.

Then one of the Fianna, Garbh of Slieve Cua, said it was Diarmuid had
killed his own father, and he would avenge him now, and he went up the
quicken-tree to make an end of him.

Now, about that time it was made known to Angus Og, in Brugh na Boinne,
the danger Diarmuid was in, and he came to his help, unknown to the
Fianna. And when Garbh of Slieve Cua was coming up the tree, Diarmuid
gave him a kick of his foot, and he fell down among the hiredmen, and
they struck off his head, for Angus Og had put the appearance of
Diarmuid on him. But after he was killed, his own shape came on him
again, and the Fianna knew that it was Garbh was killed.

Then Garbh of Slieve Crot said it was Diarmuid had killed his father,
and he went up to avenge him, and the same thing happened. And in the
end all the nine Garbhs, of Slieve Guaire, and Slieve Muice, and Slieve
Mor, and Slieve Lugha, and Ath Fraoch, and Slieve Mis and Drom-mor, went
trying to take Diarmuid's life and lost their own lives, every one of
them having the shape and appearance of Diarmuid when he died. And Finn
was very sorry and discouraged when he saw that these nine men had come
to their death.

Then Angus said he would bring away Grania with him. "Do so," said
Diarmuid; "and if I am living at evening I will follow you." Then Angus
said farewell to Diarmuid, and he put his Druid cloak about Grania and
about himself, and they went away in the safety of the cloak, unknown to
Finn and the Fianna, till they came to Brugh na Boinne.

Then Diarmuid, grandson of Duibhne, spoke, and it is what he said: "I
will come down to you, Finn, and to the Fianna. And I will do death and
destruction on you and on your people, for I am certain your mind is
made up to give me no rest, but to bring me to my death in some place.
And I have nowhere to go from this danger," he said, "for I have no
friend or comrade under whose protection I could go in any far part of
the great world, for it is often I fought against the men of the great
world for love of you. For there never came battle or fight, danger or
trouble on you, but I would go into it for your sake and the sake of the
Fianna; and not only that, but I would fight before you and after you.
And I give my word, Finn," he said, "you will pay hard for me, and you
will not get me as a free gift." "It is the truth Diarmuid is speaking,"
said Osgar, "and give him forgiveness now, and peace." "I will not do
that," said Finn, "to the end of life and time; and he will not get
peace or rest for ever till I get satisfaction from him for every
reproach he has put on me." "It is a great shame and a great sign of
jealousy you to say that," said Osgar. "And I give the word of a true
champion," he said, "that unless the skies come down upon me, or the
earth opens under my feet, I will not let you or any one of the Fianna
of Ireland give him cut or wound; and I take his body and his life under
the protection of my valour, and I will keep him safe against all the
men of Ireland." "Those are big words you have, Osgar," said Goll then,
"to say you would bring a man away in spite of all the men of Ireland."
"It is not you will raise them up against me, Goll," said Osgar, "for
none of than would mind what you would say." "If that is what you are
saying, you champion of great fights," said Goll, "let us see now what
you can do." "You will have to go through with the fight you have taken
on yourself," said Corrioll, son of Goll, in a loud voice. And Osgar
answered him fiercely: "If I do I will shorten your bones, and your
father's bones along with them. And come down now, Diarmuid," he said,
"since Finn has no mind to leave you in peace, and I promise on my body
and my life there will no harm be done to you to-day."

Then Diarmuid stood up on a high bough of the boughs of the tree, and he
rose with a light leap by the shaft of his spear, and lit on the grass
far beyond Finn and the Fianna. And he himself and Osgar went towards
one another, in spite of the Fianna that went between them, and Diarmuid
struck down those that were in his way; and as to Osgar, the throwing of
his spears as he scattered the Fianna was like the sound of the wind
going through a valley, or water falling over flag-stones. And Conan,
that was always bitter, said: "Let the sons of Baiscne go on killing one
another." But Finn, when he saw Diarmuid was gone from him, bade them
put their weapons up, and turn back again to Almhuin.

And he sent those of his men that could be healed to places of healing,
and the nine Garbhs, and the others of his men that were killed, he put
into wide-sodded graves. And it is tired and downhearted and sorrowful
he was after that, and he made an oath he would take no great rest till
he would have avenged on Diarmuid all that he had done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book VII: The Quarrel](gafm74)
