[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm10)  [Next](gafm12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part I Book IV: Bodb Deag

BUT as to the Tuatha de Danaan after they were beaten, they would not go
under the sway of the sons of Miled, but they went away by themselves.
And because Manannan, son of Lir, understood all enchantments, they left
it to him to find places for them where they would be safe from their
enemies. So he chose out the most beautiful of the hills and valleys of
Ireland for them to settle in; and he put hidden walls about them, that
no man could see through, but they themselves could see through them and
pass through them.

And he made the Feast of Age for them, and what they drank at it was the
ale of Goibniu the Smith, that kept whoever tasted it from age and from
sickness and from death. And for food at the feast he gave them his own
swine, that though they were killed and eaten one day, would be alive
and fit for eating again the next day, and that would go on in that way
for ever.

And after a while they said: "It would be better for us one king to be
over us, than to be scattered the way we are through the whole of
Ireland."

Now the men among them that had the best chance of getting the kingship
at that time were Bodb Dearg, son of the Dagda; and llbrech of Ess
Ruadh; and Lir of Sidhe Fionnachaidh, the Hill of the White Field, on
Slieve Fuad; and Midhir the Proud of Bri Leith, and Angus Og, son of the
Dagda; but he did not covet the kingship at all, but would sooner be
left as he was. Then all the chief men but those five went into council
together, and it is what they agreed, to give the kingship to Bodb
Dearg, for the sake of his father, for his own sake, and because he was
the eldest among the children of the Dagda.

It was in Sidhe Femen Bodb Dearg had his house, and he put great
enchantments about it. Cliach, the Harper of the King of the Three
Rosses in Connacht, went one time to ask one of his daughters in
marriage, and he stayed outside the place through the whole length of a
year, playing his harp, and able to get no nearer to Bodb or to his
daughter. And he went on playing till a lake burst up under his feet,
the lake that is on the top of a mountain, Loch Bel Sead.

It was Bodb's swineherd went to Da Derga's Inn, and his squealing pig
along with him, the night Conaire, the High King of Ireland, met with
his death; and it was said that whatever feast that swineherd would go
to, there would blood be shed before it was over.

And Bodb had three sons, Angus, and Artrach, and Aedh. And they used
often to be living among men in the time of the Fianna afterwards.
Artrach had a house with seven doors, and a free welcome for all that
came, and the king's son of Ireland, and of Alban, used to be coming to
Angus to learn the throwing of spears and darts; and troops of poets
from Alban and from Ireland used to be with Aedh, that was the comeliest
of Bodb's sons, so that his place used to be called "The Rath of Aedh of
the Poets". And indeed it was a beautiful rath at that time, with
golden-yellow apples in it and crimson-pointed nuts of the wood. But
after the passing away of the Fianna, the three brothers went back to
the Tuatha de Danaan.

And Bodb Dearg was not always in his own place, but sometimes he was
with Angus at Brugh na Boinne.

Three sons of Lugaidh Menn, King of Ireland, Eochaid, and Fiacha, and
Ruide, went there one time, for their father refused them any land till
they would win it for themselves. And when be said that, they rose with
the ready rising of one man, and went and sat down on the green of Brugh
na Boinne, and fasted there on the Tuatha de Danaan, to see if they
could win some good thing from them.

And they were not long there till they saw a young man, quiet and with
pleasant looks, coming towards them, and he wished them good health, and
they answered him the same way. "Where are you come from?" they asked
him then. "From the rath beyond, with the many lights," he said. "And I
am Bodb Dearg, son of the Dagda," he said, "and come in with me now to
the rath."

So they went in, and supper was made ready for them, but they did not
use it. Bodb Dearg asked them then why was it they were using nothing.
"It is because our father has refused land to us," said they; "and there
are in Ireland but the two races, the Sons of the Gael and the Men of
Dea, and when the one failed us we are come to the other."

Then the Men of Dea consulted together. And the chief among them was
Midhir of the Yellow Hair, and it is what he said: "Let us give a wife
to every one of these three men, for it is from a wife that good or bad
fortune comes."

So they agreed to that, and Midhir's three daughters, Doirenn, and Aife,
and Aillbhe, were given to them. Then Midhir asked Bodb to say what
marriage portion should be given to them. "I will tell you that," said
Bodb. "We are three times fifty sons of kings in this hill; let every
king's son give three times fifty ounces of red gold. And I myself," he
said, "will give them along with that, three times fifty suits of
clothing of all colours." "I will give them a gift," said a young man of
the Tuatha de Danaan, from Rachlainn in the sea. "A horn l will give
them, and a vat. And there is nothing wanting but to fill the vat with
pure water, and it will turn into mead, fit to drink, and strong enough
to make drunken. And into the horn," he said, "you have but to put salt
water from the sea, and it will turn into wine on the moment." "A gift
to them from me," said Lir of Sidhe Fionnachaidh, "three times fifty
swords, and three times fifty well-riveted long spears." "A gift from
me," said Angus Og, son of the Dagda, "a rath and a good town with high
walls, and with bright sunny houses, and with wide houses, in whatever
place it will please them between Rath Chobtaige and Teamhair." "A gift
to them from me," said Aine, daughter of Modharn, "a woman-cook that I
have, and there is *geasa* on her not to refuse food to any; and
according as she serves it out, her store fills up of itself again."
"Another gift to them from me," said Bodb Dearg, "a good musician that I
have, Fertuinne, son of Trogain; and although there were women in the
sharpest pains of childbirth, and brave men wounded early in the day, in
a place where there were saws going through wood, they would sleep at
the sweetness of the music he makes. And whatever house he may be in,
the people of the whole country round will hear him."

So they stopped in Brugh na Boinne three days and three nights, and when
they left it, Angus bade them bring away from the oak-wood three
apple-trees, one in full bloom, and one shedding its blossom, and the
third covered with ripe fruit.

They went then to their own dun that was given them, and it is a good
place they had there, and a troop of young men, and great troops of
horses and of greyhounds; and they had three sorts of music that comely
kings liked to be listening to, the music of harps and of lutes, and the
chanting of Trogain's son; and there were three great sounds, the
tramping on the green, and the uproar of racing, and the lowing of
cattle; and three other sounds, the grunting of good pigs with the fat
thick on them, and the voices of the crowd on the green lawn, and the
noise of men drinking inside the house. And as to Eochaid, it was said
of him that he never took a step backwards in flight, and his house was
never without music or drinking of ale. And it was said of Fiacha that
there was no man of his time braver than himself, and that he never said
a word too much. And as to Ruide, he never refused any one, and never
asked anything at all of any man.

And when their lifetime was over, they went back to the Tuatha de
Danaan, for they belonged to them through their wives, and there they
have stopped ever since.

And Bodb Dearg had a daughter, Scathniamh, the Flower of Brightness,
that gave her love to Caoilte in the time of the Fianna; and they were
forced to part from one another, and they never met again till the time
Caoilte was old and withered, and one of the last that was left of the
Fianna. And she came to him out of the cave of Cruachan, and asked him
for the bride-price he bad promised her, and that she was never able to
come and ask for till then. And Caoilte went to a cairn that was near
and that was full up of gold, that was wages earned by Conan Maol and
hidden there, and be gave the gold to Bodb Dearg's daughter. And the
people that were there wondered to see the girl so young and comely, and
Caoilte so grey and bent and withered. "There is no wonder in that,"
said Caoilte, "for I am of the sons of Miled that wither and fade away,
but she is of the Tuatha de Danaan that never change and that never
die."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I Book IV: The Dagda](gafm12)
