[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm29)  [Next](gafm31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book I: Oisin's Mother

IT happened one time Finn and his men were coming back from the hunting,
a beautiful fawn started up before them, and they followed after it, men
and dogs, till at last they were all tired and fell back, all but Finn
himself and Bran and Sceolan. And suddenly as they were going through a
valley, the fawn stopped and lay down on the smooth grass, and Bran and
Sceolan came up with it, and they did not harm it at all, but went
playing about it, licking its neck and its face.

There was wonder on Finn when he saw that, and he went on home to
Almhuin, and the fawn followed after him playing with the hounds, and it
came with them into the house at Almhuin. And when Finn was alone late
that evening, a beautiful young woman having a rich dress came before
him, and she told him it was she herself was the fawn he was after
hunting that day. "And it is for refusing the love of Fear Doirche, the
Dark Druid of the Men of Dea," she said, "I was put in this shape. And
through the length of three years," she said, "I have lived the life of
a wild deer in a far part of Ireland, and I am hunted like a wild deer.
And a serving-man of the Dark Druid took pity on me," she said, "and he
said that if I was once within the dun of the Fianna of Ireland, the
Druid would have no more power over me. So I made away, and I never
stopped through the whole length of a day till I came into the district
of Almhuin. And I never stopped then till there was no one after me but
only Bran and Sceolan, that have human wits; and I was safe with them,
for they knew my nature to be like their own."

Then Finn gave her his love, and took her as his wife, and she stopped
in Almhuin. And so great was his love for her, he gave up his hunting
and all the things he used to take pleasure in, and gave his mind to no
other thing but herself.

But at last the men of Lochlann came against Ireland, and their ships
were in the bay below Beinn Edair, and they landed there.

And Finn and the battalions of the Fianna went out against them, and
drove them back. And at the end of seven days Finn came back home, and
he went quickly over the plain of Almhuin, thinking to see Sadbh his
wife looking out from the dun, but there was no sign of her. And when he
came to the dun, all his people came out to meet him, but they had a
very downcast look. "Where is the flower of Almhuin, beautiful gentle
Sadbh?" he asked them. And it is what they said: "While you were away
fighting, your likeness, and the likeness of Bran and of Sceolan
appeared before the dun, and we thought we heard the sweet call of the
Dord Fiann. And Sadbh, that was so good and so beautiful, came out of
the house," they said, "and she went out of the gates, and she would not
listen to us, and we could not stop her." "Let me go meet my love," she
said, "my husband, the father of the child that is not born." And with
that she went running out towards the shadow of yourself that was before
her, and that had its arms stretched out to her. But no sooner did she
touch it than she gave a great cry, and the shadow lifted up a hazel
rod, and on the moment it was a fawn was standing on the grass. Three
times she turned and made for the gate of the dun, but the two hounds
the shadow had with him went after her and took her by the throat and
dragged her back to him. "And by your hand of valour, Finn," they said,
"we ourselves made no delay till we went out on the plain after her. But
it is our grief, they had all vanished, and there was not to be seen
woman, or fawn or Druid, but we could hear the quick tread of feet on
the hard plain, and the howling of dogs. And if you would ask every one
of us in what quarter he heard those sounds, he would tell you a
different one."

When Finn heard that, he said no word at all, but he struck his breast
over and over again with his shut hands. And he went then to his own
inside room, and his people saw him no more for that day, or till the
sun rose over Magh Lifé on the morrow.

And through the length of seven years from that time, whenever he was
not out fighting against the enemies of Ireland, he went searching and
ever searching in every far corner for beautiful Sadbh. And there was
great trouble on him all the time, unless be might throw it off for a
while in hunting or in battle. And through all that time he never
brought out to any hunting but the five hounds he had most trust in,
Bran and Sceolan and Lomaire and Bred and Lomluath, the way there would
be no danger for Sadbh if ever he came on her track.

But after the end of seven years, Finn and some of his chief men were
hunting on the sides of Beinn Gulbain, and they heard a great outcry
among the hounds, that were gone into some narrow place. And when they
followed them there, they saw the five hounds of Finn in a ring, and
they keeping back the other hounds, and in the middle of the ring was a
young boy, with high looks, and he naked and having long hair. And be
was no way daunted by the noise of the hounds, and did not look at them
at all, but at the men that were coming up. And as soon as the fight was
stopped Bran and Sceolan went up to the little lad, and whined and
licked him, that any one would think they had forgotten their master.
Finn and the others came up to him then, and put their hands on his
head, and made much of him. And they brought him to their own hunting
cabin, and he ate and drank with them, and before long he lost his
wildness and was the same as themselves. And as to Bran and Sceolan,
they were never tired playing about him.

And it is what Finn thought, there was some look of Sadbh in his face,
and that it might be he was her son, and he kept him always beside him.
And little by little when the boy had learned their talk, he told them
all he could remember. He used to be with a deer he loved very much, he
said, and that cared and sheltered him, and it was in a wide place they
used to be, having hills and valleys and streams and woods in it, but
that was shut in with high cliffs on every side, that there was no way
of escape from it. And he used to be eating fruits and roots in the
summer, and in the winter there was food left for him in the shelter of
a cave. And a dark-looking man used to be coming to the place, and
sometimes he would speak to the deer softly and gently, and sometimes
with a loud angry voice. But whatever way he spoke, she would always
draw away from him with the appearance of great dread on her, and the
man would go away in great anger. And the last time he saw the deer, his
mother, the dark man was speaking to her for a long time, from softness
to anger. And at the end he struck her with a hazel rod, and with that
she was forced to follow him, and she looking back all the while at the
child, and crying after him that any one would pity her. And he tried
hard to follow after her, and made every attempt, and cried with grief
and rage, but he had no power to move, and when he could hear his mother
no more he fell on the grass and his wits went from him. And when he
awoke it is on the side of the hill he was, where the hounds found him.
And he searched a long time for the place where he was brought up, but
he could not find it.

And the name the Fianna gave him was Oisin, and it is he was their maker
of poems, and their good fighter afterwards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book I: The Best Men of the Fianna](gafm31)
