[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm27)  [Next](gafm29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book I: Finns Household

AND the number of the Fianna of Ireland at that time was seven score and
ten chief men, every one of them having three times nine fighting men
under him. And every man of them was bound to three things, to take no
cattle by oppression, not to refuse any man, as to cattle or riches; no
one of them to fall back before nine fighting men. And there was no man
taken into the Fianna until his tribe and his kindred would give
securities for him, that even if they themselves were all killed he
would not look for satisfaction for their death. But if he himself would
harm others, that harm was not to be avenged on his people. And there
was no man taken into the Fianna till he knew the twelve books of
poetry. And before any man was taken, he would be put into a deep hole
in the ground up to his middle, and he having his shield and a hazel rod
in his hand. And nine men would go the length of ten furrows from him
and would cast their spears at him at the one time. And if he got a
wound from one of them, he was not thought fit to join with the Fianna.
And after that again, his hair would be fastened up, and he put to run
through the woods of Ireland, and the Fianna following after him to try
could they wound him, and only the length of a branch between themselves
and himself when they started. And if they came up with him and wounded
him, he was not let join them; or if his spears had trembled in his
hand, or if a branch of a tree had undone the plaiting of his hair, or
if he had cracked a dry stick under his foot, and he running. And they
would not take him among them till he had made a leap over a stick the
height of himself, and till he had stooped under one the height of his
knee, and till he had taken a thorn out from his foot with his nail, and
he running his fastest. But if he had done all these things, he was of
Finn's people.

It was good wages Finn and the Fianna got at that time; in every
district a townland, in every house the fostering of a pup or a whelp
from Samhain to Beltaine, and a great many things along with that. But
good as the pay was, the hardships and the dangers they went through for
it were greater. For they had to hinder the strangers and robbers from
beyond the seas, and every bad thing, from coming into Ireland. And they
had hard work enough in doing that.

And besides the fighting men, Finn had with him his five Druids, the
best that ever came into the west, Cainnelsciath, of the Shining Shield,
one of them was, that used to bring down knowledge from the clouds in
the sky before Finn, and that could foretell battles. And he had his
five wonderful physicians, four of them belonging to Ireland, and one
that came over the sea from the east. And he had his five high poets and
his twelve musicians, that had among them Daighre, son of Morna, and
Suanach, son of Senshenn, that was Finn's teller of old stories, the
sweetest that ever took a harp in his hand in Ireland or in Alban. And
he had his three cup-bearers and his six door-keepers and his
horn-players and the stewards of his house and his huntsman, Comhrag of
the five hundred hounds, and his serving-men that were under
Garbhcronan, of the Rough Buzzing; and a great troop of others along
with them.

And there were fifty of the best sewing-women in Ireland brought
together in a rath on Magh Feman, under the charge of a daughter of the
King of Britain, and they used to be making clothing for the Fianna
through the whole of the year. And three of them, that were a king's
daughters, used to be making music for the rest on a little silver harp;
and there was a very great candlestick of stone in the middle of the
rath, for they were not willing to kindle a fire more than three times
in the year for fear the smoke and the ashes might harm the needlework.

And of all his musicians the one Finn thought most of was Cnu Deireoil,
the Little Nut, that came to him from the Sidhe.

It was at Slieve-nam-ban, for hunting, Finn was the time he came to him.
Sitting down he was on the turf-built grave that is there; and when he
looked around him he saw a small little man about four feet in height
standing on the grass. Light yellow hair he had, hanging down to his
waist, and he playing music on his harp. And the music he was making had
no fault in it all, and it is much that the whole of the Fianna did not
fall asleep with the sweetness of its sound. He came up then, and put
his hand in Finn's hand. "Where do you come from, little one, yourself
and your sweet music?" said Finn. "I am come," he said, "out of the
place of the Sidhe in Slieve-nam-ban, where ale is drunk and made; and
it is to be in your company for a while I am come here." "You will get
good rewards from me, and riches and red gold," said Finn, 'and my full
friendship, for I like you well." "That is the best luck ever came to
you, Finn," said all the rest of the Fianna, for they were well pleased
to have him in their company. And they gave him the name of the Little
Nut; and he was good in speaking, and he had so good a memory he never
forgot anything he heard east or west; and there was no one but must
listen to his music, and all the Fianna liked him well. And there were
some said he was a son of Lugh Lamh-Fada, of the Long hand.

And the five musicians of the Fianna were brought to him, to learn the
music of the Sidhe he had brought from that other place; for there was
never any music heard on earth but his was better. These were the three
best things Finn ever got, Bran and Sceolan that were without fault, and
the Little Nut from the House of the Sidhe in Slieve-nam-ban.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book I: Birth of Bran](gafm29)
