[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm80)  [Next](gafm82) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book IX: The Quarrel with the Sons of Morna

ONE time when the Fianna were gone here and there hunting, Black
Garraidh and Caoilte were sitting beside Finn, and they were talking of
the battle where Finn's father was killed. And Finn said then to
Garraidh: "Tell me now, since you were there yourself, what way was it
you brought my father Cumhal to his death?" "I will tell you that since
you ask me," said Garraidh; "it was my own hand and the hands of the
rest of the sons of Morna that made an end of him." "That is cold
friendship from my followers the Sons of Morna," said Finn. "If it is
cold friendship," said Garraidh, "put away the liking you are letting on
to have for us, and show us the hatred you have for us all the while."
"If I were to lift my hand against you now, Sons of Morna," said Finn,
"I would be well able for you all without the help of any man." "It was
by his arts Cumhal got the upper hand of us," said Garraidh; "and when
he got power over us," he said, "he banished us to every far country; a
share of us he sent to Alban, and a share of us to dark Lochlann, and a
share of us to bright Greece, parting us from one another; and for
sixteen years we were away from Ireland, and it was no small thing to us
to be without seeing one another through that time. And the first day we
came back to Ireland," he said, 'we killed sixteen hundred men, and no
lie in it, and not a man of them but would be keened by a hundred. And
we took their duns after that," he said, "and we went on till we were
all around one house in Munster of the red walls. But so great was the
bravery of the man in that house, that was your father, that it was
easier to find him than to kill him. And we killed all that were of his
race out on the bill, and then we made a quick rush at the house where
Cumhal was, and every man of us made a wound on his body with his spear.
And I myself was in it, and it was I gave him the first wound. And
avenge it on me now, Finn, if you have a mind to," he said.

 

  
It was not long after that, Finn gave a feast at Almhuin for all his
chief men, and there came to it two sons of the King of Alban, and sons
of the kings of the great world. And when they were all sitting at the
feast, the serving-men rose up and took drinking-horns worked by skilled
men, and having shining stones in them, and they poured out strong drink
for the champions; and it is then mirth rose up in their young men, and
courage in their fighting men, and kindness and gentleness in their
women, and knowledge and foreknowledge in their poets.

And then a crier rose up and shook a rough iron chain to silence the
clowns and the common lads and idlers, and then he shook a chain of old
silver to silence the high lords and chief men of the Fianna, and the
learned men, and they all listened and were silent.

And Fergus of the True Lips rose up and sang before Finn the songs and
the good poems of his forefathers; and Finn and Oisin and Lugaidh's Son
rewarded him with every good thing. And then he went on to Goll, son of
Morna, and told the fights and the destructions and the cattle-drivings
and the courtings of his fathers; and it is well-pleased and high-minded
the sons of Morna were, listening to that.

And Goll said then: "Where is my woman-messenger?" "I am here, King of
the Fianna," said she. "Have you brought me my hand-tribute from the men
of Lochlann?" "I have brought it surely," said she. And with that she
rose up and laid on the floor of the hail before Goll a load of pure
gold, the size of a good pig, and that would be a heavy load for a
strong man. And Goll loosened the covering that was about it, and he
gave Fergus a good reward from it as he used to do; for there never was
a wise, sharp-worded poet, or a sweet harp-player, or any learned man of
Ireland or of Alban, but Goll would give him gold or silver or some good
thing.

And when Finn saw that, he said: "How long is it, Goll, you have this
rent on the men of Lochlann, and my own rent being on them always with
it, and one of my own men, Ciaran son of Latharne, and ten hundred men
of his household, guarding it and guarding my right of hunting?" And
Goll saw there was anger on Finn, and he said: "It is a long time, Finn,
I have that rent on the men of Lochlann, from the time your father put
war and quarrels on me, and the King of Ireland joined with him, and I
was made to quit Ireland by them. And I went into Britain," he said,
"and I took the country and killed the king himself and did destruction
on his people, but Cumhal put me out of it; and from that I went to
Fionn-lochlann, and the king fell by me, and his household, and Cumhal
put me out of it and I went from that to the country of the Saxons, and
the king and his household fell by me, and Cumhal put me out of it. But
I came back then to Ireland, and I fought a battle against your father,
and he fell by me there. And it was at that time I put this rent upon
the men of Lochlann. And, Finn," he said, "it is not a rent of the
strong hand you have put on them, but it is a tribute for having the
protection of the Fianna of Ireland, and I do not lessen that. And you
need not begrudge that tribute to me," he said, "for if I had more than
that again, it is to you and to the men of Ireland I would give it."

There was great anger on Finn then, and he said: "You tell me, Goll," he
said, "by your own story, that you came from the city of Beirbhe to
fight against my father, and that you killed him in the battle; and it
is a bold thing you to tell that to me." "By your own hand," said Goll,
"if you were to give me the same treatment your father gave me, I would
pay you the same way as I paid him." "It would be hard for you to do
that," said Finn, "for there are a hundred men in my household against
every man there is in your household." "That was the same with your
father," said Goll, "and I avenged my disgrace on him; and I would do
the same on yourself if you earned it," he said.

Then Cairell of the White Skin, son of Finn, said: "It is many a man of
Finn's household you have put down, Goll!" And Bald Conan when he heard
that said: "I swear by my arms, Goll was never without having a hundred
men in his household, every one of them able to get the better of
yourself." "And is it to them you belong, crooked-speaking, bare-headed
Conan?" said Cairell. "It is to them I belong, you black, feeble,
nail-scratching, rough-skinned Cairell; and I will make you know it was
Finn was in the wrong," said Conan.

With that Cairell rose up and gave a furious blow of his fist to Conan,
and Conan took it with no great patience, but gave him back a blow in
his teeth, and from that they went on to worse blows again. And the two
sons of Goll rose up to help Conan, and Osgar went to the help of
Cairell, and it was not long till many of the chief men of the Fianna
were fighting on the one side or the other, on the side of Finn or on
the side of the sons of Morna.

But then Fergus of the True Lips rose up, and the rest of the poets of
the Fianna along with him, and they sang their songs and their poems to
check and to quiet them. And they left off their fighting at the sound
of the poets' songs, and they let their weapons fall on the floor, and
the poets took them up, and made peace between the fighters; and they
put bonds on Finn and on Goll to keep the peace for a while, till they
could ask for a judgment from the High King of Ireland. And that was the
end for that time of the little quarrel at Almhuin.

But it broke out again, one time there was a falling out between Finn
and Goll as to the dividing of a pig of the pigs of Manannan. And at
Daire Tardha, the Oak Wood of Bulls, in the province of Connacht, there
was a great fight between Finn's men and the sons of Morna. And the sons
of Morna were worsted, and fifteen of their men were killed; and they
made their mind up that from that time they would set themselves against
any friends of Finn or of his people. And it was Conan the Bald gave
them that advice, for he was always bitter, and a maker of quarrels and
of mischief in every place.

And they kept to their word, and spared no one. There was a
yellow-haired queen that Finn loved, Berach Brec her name was, and she
was wise and comely and worthy of any good man, and she had her house
full of treasures, and never refused the asking of any. And any one that
came to her house at Samhain time might stay till Beltaine, and have his
choice then to go or to stay. And the sons of Morna had fostered her,
and they went where she was and bade her to give up Finn and she need be
in no dread of them. But she said she would not give up her kind lover
to please them; and she was going away from them to her ship, and Art,
son of Morna, made a cast of his spear that went through her body, that
she died, and her people brought her up from the strand and buried her.

And as to Goll, he took a little hound that Finn thought a great deal
of, Conbeg its name was, and he drowned it in the sea; and its body was
brought up to shore by a wave afterwards, and it was buried under a
little green hill by the Fianna. And Caoilte made a complaint over it,
and he said how swift the little hound was after deer, or wild pigs, and
how good at killing them, and that it was a pity it to have died, out on
the cold green waves. And about that time, nine women of the Tuatha de
Dannan came to meet with nine men of the Fianna, and the sons of Morna
saw them coming and made an end of them.

And when Caoilte met with Goll, he made a cast of his spear at him that
struck the golden helmet off his head and a piece of his flesh along
with it. But Goll took it very proudly, and put on the helmet again and
took up his weapons, and called out to his brothers that he was no way
ashamed.

And Finn went looking for the sons of Morna in every place to do
vengeance on them. They were doing robbery and destruction one time in
Slieve Echtge, that got its name from Echtge, daughter of Nuada of the
Silver Hand, and Finn and the Fianna were to the west, at Slieve Cairn
in the district of Corcomruadh. And Finn was in doubt if the sons of
Morna were gone southward into Munster or north into Connacht. So he
sent Aedan and Cahal, two sons of the King of Ulster, and two hundred
fighting men with them, into the beautiful pleasant province of
Connacht, and every day they used to go looking for the sons of Morna
from place to place. But after a while the three battalions of the
Fianna that were in Corcomruadh saw the track of a troop of men, and
they thought it to be the track of the sons of Morna; and they closed
round them at night, and made an end of them all. But when the full
light came on the morrow, they knew them to be their own people, that
were with the King of Ulster's sons, and they gave three great heavy
cries, keening the friends they had killed in mistake.

And Caoilte and Oisin went to Rath Medba and brought a great stone and
put it over the king's sons, and it was called Lia an Imracail, the
Stone of the Mistake. And the place where Goll brought his men the time
he parted from Finn in anger got the name of Druimscarha, the Parting
Hill of Heroes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book IX: Death of Goll](gafm82)
