[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gafm51)  [Next](gafm53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BH3EVC/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Gods and Fighting Men*, by Lady Gregory, \[1904\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Part II Book IV: Hospitality of Cuanna's House

IT happened one day Finn and Oisin and Caoilte and Diarmuid and
Lugaidh's Son went up on the top of Cairn Feargall, and their five
hounds with them, Bran and Sceolan, Sear Dugh, Luath Luachar and
Adhnuall. And they were not long there till they saw a giant coming
towards them, very tall and rough and having an iron fork on his back
and a squealing pig between the prongs of the fork. And there was a
beautiful eager young girl behind the giant, shoving him on before her.
"Let some one go speak with those people," said Finn. So Diarmuid went
towards them, but they turned away before he came to them. Then Finn and
the rest rose up and went after them, but before they came to the giant
and the girl, a dark Druid mist rose up that hid the road. And when the
mist cleared away, Finn and the rest looked about them, and they saw a
good light-roofed house at the edge of a ford near at hand. They went on
to the house, and there was a green lawn before it, and in the lawn two
wells, and on the edge of one well there was a rough iron vessel, and on
the edge of the other a copper vessel. They went into the house then,
and they found there a very old white-haired man, standing to the right
hand of the door, and the beautiful young girl they saw before, sitting
near him, and the great rough giant beside the fire, and he boiling a
pig. And on the other side of the fire there was an old countryman,
having dark-grey hair and twelve eyes in his head, and his twelve eyes
were twelve sons of battle. And there was a ram in the house having a
white belly and a very black head, and dark-blue horns and green feet.
And there was a hag in the end of the house and a worn grey gown on her,
and there was no one in the house but those.

And the man at the door gave them a welcome, and then the five of them
sat down on the floor of the house, and their hounds along with them.

"Let great respect be shown to Finn, son of Cumhal, and to his people,"
said the man at the door. "It is the way I am," said the giant, "to be
asking always and getting nothing." But for all that he rose up and
showed respect to Finn.

Presently there came a great thirst on Finn, and no one took notice of
it but Caoilte, and he began complaining greatly. "Why are you
complaining, Caoilte?" said the man at the door; "you have but to go out
and get a drink for Finn at whichever of the wells you will choose."
Caoilte went out then, and he brought the full of the copper vessel to
Finn, and Finn took a drink from it, and there was the taste of honey on
it while he was drinking, and the taste of gall on it after, so that
fierce windy pains and signs of death came on him, and his appearance
changed, that he would hardly be known. And Caoilte made greater
complaints than he did before on account of the way he was, till the man
at the door bade him to go out and to bring him a drink from the other
well. So Caoilte did that, and brought in the full of the iron vessel.
And Finn never went through such great hardship in any battle as he did
drinking that draught, from the bitterness of it; but no sooner did he
drink it than his own colour and appearance came back to him and he was
as well as before, and his people were very glad when they saw that.

Then the man of the house asked was the pig ready that was in the
cauldron. "It is ready," said the giant; "and leave the dividing of it
to me," he said. "What way will you divide it?" said the man of the
house. "I will give one hind quarter to Finn and his dogs," said the
giant, "and the other hind quarter to Finn's four comrades; and the fore
quarter to myself, and the chine and the rump to the old man there by
the fire and the hag in the corner; and the entrails to yourself and to
the young girl that is beside you." "I give my word," said the man of
the house, "you have shared it well." "I give my word," said the ram,
"it is a bad division to me, for you have forgotten my share in it."
With that he took hold of the quarter that was before the Fianna, and
brought in into a corner and began to eat it. On that the four of them
attacked him with their swords, but with all the hard strokes they gave
they could not harm him at all, for the swords slipped from his back the
same as they would from a rock. "On my word it is a pity for any one
that has the like of you for comrades," said the man with the twelve
eyes, "and you letting a sheep bring away your food from you." With that
he went up to the ram and took him by the feet and threw him out of the
door that he fell on his back, and they saw him no more. It was not long
after that, the hag rose up and threw her pale grey gown over Finn's
four comrades, and they turned to four old men, weak and withered, their
heads hanging. When Finn saw that there came great dread on him, and the
man at the door saw it, and he bade him to come over to him, and to put
his head in his breast and to sleep. Finn did that, and the hag took her
covering off the four men, the way that when Finn awoke they were in
their shape again, and it is well pleased he was to see that.

"Is there wonder on you, Finn?" said the man at the door, "at the ways
of this house?" "I never wondered more at anything I ever saw," said
Finn. "I will tell you the meaning of them, so," said the man. "As to
the giant you saw first," he said, "having the squealing pig in the
prongs of his fork, Sluggishness is his name; and the girl here beside
me that was shoving him along is Liveliness, for liveliness pushes on
sluggishness, and liveliness goes farther in the winking of an eye than
the foot can travel in a year. The old man there beyond with the twelve
bright eyes, betokens the World, and he is stronger than any other, and
he showed that when he made nothing of the ram. The ram you saw betokens
the Desires of Men. The hag is Old Age, and her gown withered up your
four comrades. And the two wells you drank the two draughts out of," he
said, "betoken Lying and Truth; for it is sweet to people to be telling
a lie, but it is bitter in the end. And as to myself," he said, "Cuanna
from Innistuil is my name, and it is not here I am used to be, but I
took a very great love for you, Finn, because of your wisdom and your
great name, and so I put these things in your way that I might see you.
And the hospitality of Cuarina's house to Finn will be the name of this
story to the end of the world. And let you and your men come together
now," he said, "and sleep till morning."

So they did that, and when they awoke in the morning, it is where they
were, on top of the Cairn Feargall, and their dogs and their arms beside
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II Book IV: Cats Heads and Dog Heads](gafm53)
