[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft41)  [Next](eft43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### THE THUNDER SPIRITS

TWO sisters, men say, were playing together, and their father could not
bear to hear the noise they made, for he had but few children, and was
thus not wont to hear any kind of noise. At last he began to scold them,
and told them to go farther away with their playing.

 When the girls grew up, and began to understand things, they desired to
run away on account of their father's scolding. And at last they set
out, taking with them only a little dogskin, and a piece of boot skin,
and a fire stone. They went up into a high mountain to build themselves
a house there.

 Their father and mother made search for them in vain, for the girls
kept hiding themselves; they had grown to be true mountain dwellers,
keeping far from the places of men. Only the reindeer hunters saw them
now and again, but the girls always refused to go back to their kin.

 And when at last the time came when they must die of hunger, they
turned into evil spirits, and became thunder.

 When they shake their dried boot skin, then the gales come up, the
south-westerly gales. And great fire is seen in the heavens whenever
they strike their fire stone, and the rain pours down whenever they shed
tears.

 Their father held many spirit callings, hoping to make them return. But
this he ceased to do when he found that they were dead.

 But men say that after those girls had become spirits, they returned to
the places of men, frightening many to death. They came first of all to
their father and mother, because of the trouble they had made. The only
one they did not kill was a woman bearing a child on her back. And they
let her live, that she might tell how terrible they were. And tales are
now told of how terrible they were.

 When the thunder spirits come, even the earth itself is stricken <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> with terror. And stones, even those which
lie on level ground, and not on any slope at all, roll in fear towards
men.

 Thus the thunder comes with the south-westerly gales; there is a noise
and crackling in the air, as of dry skins shaken, and the sky glows from
time to time with the fire from their firestone. Great rocks, and
everything which stands up high in the air, begin to glow.

 When this happens, men use to take out a red dog, and cut its ear until
the blood comes, and then lead the beast round about the house, letting
the blood drip everywhere, for then the house will not take fire.

 A red dog was the only thing they feared, those girls who were turned
to thunder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: NERRIVIK](eft43)
