[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft51)  [Next](eft53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

### PUAGSSUAQ

THERE was once a wifeless man who always went out hunting ptarmigan. It
became his custom always to go out hunting ptarmigan every day.

 And when he was out one day, hunting ptarmigan as was his custom, he
came to a place whence he could see out over a rocky valley. And it
looked a good place to go. And he went there.

 But before he had come to the bottom of the valley, he caught sight of
something that looked like a stone. And when he could see quite clearly
that it was not a stone at all, he went up to it. He walked and walked,
and came to it at last.

 Then he looked in, and saw an old couple sitting alone in there. And
when he had seen this, he crawled very silently in through the passage
way. And having come inside, he looked first a long time at them, and
then he gave a little whistle. But nothing happened when he did so, and
therefore he whistled a second time. And this time they heard the
whistle; and the man nudged his wife and said:

 "You, Puagssuaq, you can talk with the spirits. Take counsel with them
now."

 When he had said this, the wifeless man whistled again. And at this
whistling, the man looked at his wife again and said earnestly:

 "Listen! It sounds as if that might be the voice of a shore-dweller;
one who catches miserable fish."

 And now the wifeless man saw that the old one's wife was letting down
her hair. And this was because she was now about to ask counsel of the
spirits.

 And he was now about to look at them again, when he saw that the
passage way about him was beginning to close up. And it was already
nearly closed up. But then it opened again of itself. Then the wifeless
man thought only of coming out again from that place, <span
id="page_147">p. 147</span> and when the passage way again opened, he
slipped out. And then he began running as fast as he could.

 For a long time he ran on, with the thought that some one would surely
come after him. But at last he came up the hillside, without having been
pursued at all.

 And when he came home, he told what had happened.

 Here ends this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: TUNGUJULUK AND SAUNIKOQ](eft53)
