[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Inuit](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eft52)  [Next](eft54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548624798/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eskimo Folk-Tales*, by Knud Rasmussen, \[1921\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

### TUNGUJULUK AND SAUNIKOQ

TUNGUJULUK and Saunikoq were men from one village. And both were
wizards. When they heard a spirit calling, one would change into a bear,
and the other into a walrus.

 Tungujuluk had a son, but Saunikoq had no children.

 As soon as his son was old enough, Tungujuluk taught him to paddle a
kayak. At this the other, Saunikoq, grew jealous, and began planning
evil.

 One morning when he awoke, he went out hunting seal as usual. He had
been out some time, when he went up to an island, and called for his
bearskin. When it came, he got into it, and moved off towards
Tungujuluk's house. He landed a little way off, and then stole up to
kill Tungujuluk's son. And when he came near, he saw him playing with
the other children. But he did not know that his father had already come
home, and was sitting busily at work on the kayak he was making for his
son. He was just about to go up to them, when the boy went weeping home
to his father, and when his father looked round, there was a big bear
already close to them. He took a knife and ran towards it, and was just
about to stab that bear, when it began to laugh. And then suddenly
Tungujuluk remembered that his neighbour Saunikoq was able to take the
shape of a bear. And he was now so angry that he had nearly stabbed him
in spite of all, and it was a hard matter for him to hold back his
knife.

 But he did not forget that happening. He waited until a long time had
passed, and at last, many days later, when he awoke in the morning, he
went out in his kayak. On the way he came to an island. And going up on
to that island, he called his other shape to him. When it came, he
crawled into it, and became a walrus. And when he had thus become a
walrus, he went to that place where it was the custom for kayaks to hunt
seal. And when he came near, he looked round, and sighted Saunikoq, who
lay there waiting for seal.

<span id="img_148a"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Flying race between
two wizards, one of whom, unable to keep up, has fallen to earth, and is
vainly kegging the other to stop.](tn/148a.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/148a.jpg)  
Flying race between two wizards, one of whom, unable to keep up, has
fallen to earth, and is vainly kegging the other to stop.  
</span>

<span id="img_148b"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Angiut, a ''helping
spirit,'' who knows all about everyone.](tn/148b.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/148b.jpg)  
Angiut, a ''helping spirit,'' who knows all about everyone.  
</span>

<span id="p148"></span>

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

 Now he rose to the surface quite near him, and when Saunikoq, saw him,
he came over that way. And Saunikoq lifted his harpoon to throw it, and
the stroke could not fail. Therefore he made himself small, and crept
over to one side of the skin. And when he was struck, he floundered
about a little, but not too violently, lest he should break the line.
Then he swam away under water with the bladder float, and folded it up
under his arm, and took out the air from it, and swam in towards land,
and swam and swam until he came to the land near by where his kayak was
lying. Then he went to it, and having taken out the point of the
harpoon, he went out hunting.

 He struck a black seal, and rowed home at once. And when he had come
home, he said to his wife:

 "Make haste and cook the breast piece."

 And when that breast piece was cooked, and the other kayaks had come
home, he made a meat feast, and Saunikoq, thinking nothing of any
matter, came in with the others. When he came in, Tungujuluk made no
sign of knowing anything, but went and took out the bladder and line
from his kayak. And then all sat down to eat together. And they ate and
were satisfied. And then each man began telling of his day's hunting.

 At last Saunikoq said:

 "To-day, when I struck a walrus, I did not think at all that it should
cause me to lose my bladder float. Where that came up again is a thing
we do not know. That bladder float of mine was lost."

 And when Saunikoq had said this, Tungujuluk took that bladder and line
and laid them beside the meat dish, and said:

 "Whose can this bladder be, now, I wonder? Aha, at last I have paid you
for the time when you came in the shape of a bear, and mocked us."

 And when these words were said, the many who sat there laughed greatly.
But Saunikoq got up and went away. And then next morning very early, he
set out and rowed northward in his umiak. And since then he has not been
seen.

 So great a shame did he feel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: ANARTEQ](eft54)
