[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m07052.md) 
[Next](m07054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LVI

"Narada said, 'King Suhotra also, O Srinjaya, we hear, fell a prey to
death. He was the foremost of heroes, and invincible in battle. The very
gods used to come for seeing him. Acquiring his kingdom virtuously, he
sought the advice of his *Ritwijas* and domestic priests and Brahmanas
for his own good, and enquiring of them, used to obey their behests.
Well-acquainted with the duty of protecting his subjects, possessed of
virtue and liberality, performing sacrifices and subjugating foes, king
Suhotra wished for the increase of his wealth. He adored the gods by
following the ordinances of the scriptures, and defeated his foes by
means of his arrows. He gratified all creatures by means of his own
excellent accomplishments. He ruled the earth, freeing her from
*Mlecchas* and the forest-thieves. <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md)
The deity of the clouds showered gold unto him from year's end to year's
end. In those olden days, therefore, the rivers (in his kingdom) ran
(liquid) gold, and were open to everybody for use. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91.md) The deity of the clouds showered on his
kingdom large number of alligators and crabs and fishes of diverse
species and various objects of desire, countless in number, that were
all made of gold. The artificial lakes in that king's dominions each
measured full two miles. Beholding thousands of dwarfs and humpbacks and
alligators and *Makaras*, and tortoises all made of gold, king Suhotra
wondered much. That unlimited wealth of gold, the royal sage Suhotra
performing a sacrifice at Kurujangala, gave away unto the Brahmanas,
before the completion of the sacrifice. Having performed a thousand
Horse-sacrifices, a hundred *Rajasuyas*, many sacred
Kshatriya-sacrifices <span id="fr_92"></span>[3](#fn_92.md) in all of which
he made abundant presents to the Brahmanas and having performed daily
rites, almost countless in number, undergone from specified desires, the
king ultimately obtained a very desirable end. When, O Srinjaya, such a
king died, who was superior to thee as regards the four cardinal virtues
and who, superior to thee, was

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

therefore, much superior to thy son, thou shouldst not grieve saying,
'*Oh Swaitya*, *Oh, Swaitya*,' for thy son performed no sacrifice and
made no sacrificial present.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[118:1](m07053.htm#fr_90.md) The word in the
original *Atavika*, literally meaning one dwelling in the woods. It is
very generally used in the sense of thieves or robbers, thus showing
that these depredators from the earliest times, had the woods and the
forests for their home.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[118:2](m07053.htm#fr_91.md) *Vahinyas* rivers.
*Swairinyas*, open to every body. The Bengal reading is *abhavan*; the
Bombay reading *Vyatahan*. If the former reading be, adopted, it would
mean the rivers were of liquid gold.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[118:3](m07053.htm#fr_92.md) *i.e.*, sacrifices
ordained for Kshatriyas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LVII](m07054.md)
