[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m07071) 
[Next](m07073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXXV

"Sanjaya said, 'After Partha had vowed the death of the ruler of the
Sindhus, the mighty-armed Vasudeva addressed Dhananjaya and said,--With
the consent of thy brothers (alone, but without consulting me), thou
hast sworn, saying--*I will slay the ruler of the Sindhus*! This hath
been an act of great rashness (on thy part)! Without consulting me, thou
hast taken up a great weight (upon thy shoulders)! Alas, how shall we
escape the ridicule of all men? I had sent some spies into the camp of
[Dhritarashtra's](errata.htm#49) son. Those spies, quickly coming unto
me, gave me this information, *viz*., that after thou, O lord, hadst
vowed to slay the ruler of the Sindhus, loud leonine shouts, mingled
with the sounds of (our) musical instruments, were heard by the
Dhritarashtras. In consequence of that uproar, the Dhritarashtras, with
their well-wishers, became terrified,--These *leonine shouts are not,
causeless*!--thought they, and waited (for what would ensue). O thou of
mighty arms, an uproarious din

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

then arose amongst the Kauravas, of their elephants and steeds and
infantry. And a terrible rattle was also heard of their cars.--Having
heard of the death of Abhimanyu, Dhananjaya, deeply afflicted will in
wrath come out in the night for battle!--Than king even thus, they
waited (ready for battle). While preparing themselves. O thou of eyes
like lotus-petals, they then learnt truly the vow about the slaughter of
the ruler of the Sindhus, made by thee that art wedded to truth. <span
id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127) Then all the counsellors of Suyodhana
became heartless and frightened like little animals. As regards king
Jayadratha, that ruler of the Sindhus and the Sauviras, overwhelmed with
grief and becoming thoroughly cheerless he stood up and entered his own
tent with all his counsellors. Having consulted (with them) about every
remedy that could benefit him at a time when he stood in need of
consultation, he proceeded to the assembly of the (allied) kings and
there said these words unto Suyodhana--Dhananjaya thinking me to be the
slayer of his son, will tomorrow encounter me in battle! He hath, in the
midst of his army, vowed to stay me! That vow of Savyasachin the very
gods and Gandharvas and Asuras and Uragas and Rakshasas cannot venture
to frustrate! Protect me, therefore, ye all in battle! Let not
Dhananjaya, placing his foot on your head, succeed in hitting the mark!
Let proper arrangements be made in respect of this matter! Or, if, O
delighter of the Kurus, you think that you will not succeed in
protecting me in battle, grant me permission then, O king, so that I may
return home! Thus addressed (by Jayadratha), Suyodhana became cheerless
and sat, hanging down his head. Ascertaining that Jayadratha was in a
great fright, Suyodhana began to reflect in [silence](errata.htm#50).
Beholding the Kuru king to be greatly afflicted, king Jayadratha, the
ruler of the Sindhus, slowly said these words having a beneficial
reference to himself--I do not behold here that bowman of superior
energy who can baffle with his arms the weapons of Arjuna in great
battle! Who, even if it be Satakratu himself, will stay in front of
Arjuna having Vasudeva for his ally, while wielding the bow Gandiva? It
is heard that lord Maheswara himself of supreme energy had been
encountered, before this, by Partha on foot, on the mountains of Himvat!
Urged by the chief of the celestials, he slew on a single car, a
thousand Danavas dwelling in Hiranyapura! That son of Kunti is now
allied with Vasudeva of great intelligence. I think that he is competent
to [destroy](errata.htm#51) the three worlds including the very gods. I
wish that you will either grant me permission (to leave the field for my
home) or that the high-souled and heroic Drona with his son will protect
me! Or, I would await thy pleasure!--O Arjuna, (thus addressed by
Jayadratha) king Suyodhana humbly beseeched the preceptor in this
matter. <span id="fr_128"></span>[2](#fn_128) All remedial measures have
been adopted. Cars and steeds have been arranged. Karna and Bhurisravas,
and Drona's son, and the invincible Vrishasena,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

and Kripa, and the ruler of the Madras, these six will be in
(Jayadratha's) van. Drona will form an array half of which will be a
*Sakata* <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129) and half a lotus. In the
middle of the leaves of that *lotus* will be a *needle*-mouthed array.
Jayadratha, that ruler of the Sindhus, difficult of being conquered in
battle, will take his stand, by it, protected by heroes! In (the use of)
the bow, in weapons, in prowess, in strength, and also in lineage, those
six car-warriors, O Partha are without doubt, exceedingly difficult of
being borne. Without first vanquishing those six car-warriors, access to
Jayadratha will not to be had. Think, O Arjuna, of the prowess of each
of those six, O tiger among men, when united together, they are not
capable of being easily vanquished! We should, therefore, once again,
take counsel with well-wishing counsellors, conversant with policy, for
our benefit and for the success of our object!'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[146:1](m07072.htm#fr_127) The Bengal reading
*Satyavrataiv* in the first line of 9 is vicious. I adopt the Bombay
reading *Satyaratas*, qualifying *tara*. To suppose that Krishna paid
such a complement to the Kauravas as is implied by the Bengal reading is
an absurdity.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[146:2](m07072.htm#fr_128) *i.e.* added his
voice to that of Jayadratha, requesting Drona to protect the latter.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[147:1](m07072.htm#fr_129) A kind of car or
vehicle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXXVI](m07073)
