[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m07051.md) 
[Next](m07053.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sections LIV and LV were not found in the source edition. The text of
these sections was probably merged in Section LIII by the publisher of
the source edition. Hence our section numbering skips to LVI after this
section.--JBH

### SECTION LIII

"Sanjaya said, 'Hearing of the origin of Death and her strange acts,
king Yudhishthira, humbly addressing Vyasa, once more said these words
unto him.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Many kings there were in blessed countries, of
righteous deeds and of prowess equal to that of Indra himself. They were
royal sages, O regenerate one, that were sinless and truth-speaking.
Once more, address me in words of grave import, and console me with
(accounts of) the feats of those royal sages of ancient times. What was
the measure of the sacrificial gifts made by them? Who were those
high-souled royal sages of righteous deeds that made them? Tell me all
this, O illustrious one!'

"Vyasa said, 'There was a king of the name of Switya. He had a son who
was called Srinjaya. The *Rishis* Narada and Parvata were his friends.
One day, the two ascetics, for paying Srinjaya a visit, came to his
palace. Duly worshipped by Srinjaya, they became pleased with him, and
continued to live with him happily. Once on a time as Srinjaya was
seated at his case with the two ascetics, his beautiful daughter of
sweet smiles came to him. Saluted with reverence by his daughter,
Srinjaya delighted that girl standing by his side with proper
benedictions of the kind she desired. Beholding that maiden, Parvata
smilingly asked Srinjaya, saying, 'Whose daughter is this damsel of
restless glances and possessed of every auspicious mark? Is she the
splendour of Surya, or the flame of Agni? Or, is she any of these,
*viz*., Sri, Hri, Kirti, Dhriti, Pushti, Siddhi, and the splendour of
Soma?' After the celestial *Rishi* (Parvata) said these words, king
Srinjaya answered, saying, 'O illustrious one, this girl is my daughter.
She beggeth my blessings.' Then Narada addressed king Srinjaya and said.
'If, O monarch, thou wishest for great good (to thyself), then give this
daughter of thine unto me for a wife.' Delighted (with the *Rishi's*
proposal), Srinjaya addressed Narada, saying, 'I give her unto thee.' At
this, the other Rishi, *viz*., Parvata, indignantly addressed Narada,
saying, 'Chosen before this by me, within my heart, thou hast taken this
damsel as thy

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

wife. And since thou hast done this, thou, O Brahmana, shalt not go to
heaven as thy will.' Thus addressed by him, Narada answered him, saying,
'The husband's heart and speech (directed thereto), (the giver's)
consent, the speeches (of both), the actual gift made by sprinkling
water, and the (recital of the *mantras*) ordained for the seizure of
the (bride's hand),--these have been declared to be indications by which
one is constituted a husband. Even this ceremonial is not all. That
which (above all) is essential is the walk for seven paces (by the bride
in circumambulating the bridegroom). <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87.md)
Without these thy purpose (about marriage) have been unaccomplished.
Thou hast cursed. Therefore, thou also shalt not go to heaven without
me.' Having cursed each other those two *Rishis* continued to live
there. Meanwhile, king Srinjaya, desirous of (obtaining) a son, began,
with cleansed soul, to carefully entertain the Brahmanas, to the utmost
of his power, with food and robes. After a certain time, those foremost
of Brahmanas devoted to the study of the *Vedas* and fully conversant
with those scriptures and their branches became gratified with that
monarch, desirous of getting a son. Together they came to Narada and
said unto him, 'Give this king a son of the kind he desires.'--Thus
addressed by the Brahmanas, Narada replied unto them, saying, 'So be
it.'--and then the celestial *Rishi* addressed Srinjaya saying, 'O royal
sage, the Brahmanas have been pleased and they wish thee a son! Solicit
thou the boon, blessed be thou, about the kind of son thou desirest.'
Thus addressed by him, the king, with joined hands, asked for a son
possessed of every accomplishment, famous, of glorious feats, of great
energy, and capable of chastising all foes. And he further asked that
the urine, the excreta, the phlegm and the sweat of that child should be
gold. And in due time the king had a son born unto him, who came to be
named *Suvarnashthivin* <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88.md) on earth.
And in consequence of the boon, that child began to increase (his
father's) wealth beyond all limits. And king Srinjaya caused all
desirable things of his to be made of gold. And his houses and walls and
forts, and the houses of all Brahmanas (within his dominions), and his
beds, vehicles, and plates, and all manners of pots and cups, and palace
that he owned, and all implements and utensils, domestic and otherwise
were made of gold. And in time his stock increased. Then certain robbers
hearing of the prince and seeing him to be such, assembled together and
sought to injure the king. And some amongst them said, 'We will seize
the king's son himself. He is his father's mine of gold. Towards that
end, therefore, we should strive.' Then those robbers inspired with
avarice, penetrating into the king's palace, forcibly took away prince
Suvarnashthivin. Having seized and taken him to the woods, those
senseless idiots, inspired with avarice but ignorant of what to do with
him, slew him there and cut his body in [fragments](errata.htm#37.md). They
saw not, however, any gold in him. After the prince was slain, all the
gold, obtained in consequence of the *Rishi's* boon, disappeared. The
ignorant and senseless

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

robbers struck one another. And striking one another thus, they perished
and with them that wonderful prince on the earth. And those men of
wicked deeds sank in an unimaginable and awful hell. Seeing that son of
his, obtained through the *Rishi's* boon thus slain, that great ascetic,
*viz*., king Srinjaya, afflicted with deep sorrow, began to lament in
piteous accents. Beholding the king afflicted with grief on account of
his son, and thus weeping, the celestial *Rishi* Narada showed himself
in his presence. Listen, O Yudhishthira, to what Narada said unto
Srinjaya, having approached that king, who afflicted with grief and
deprived of his senses, was indulging in piteous lamentations. Narada
said, 'Srinjaya, with thy desires unfulfilled, thou shalt have to die,
although we utterers of *Brahma*, live in thy house. Avikshit's son
Marutta even, O Srinjaya, we hear, had to die. Piqued with Vrihaspati,
he had caused Samvatta <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) himself to
officiate at his great sacrifices! Unto that royal sage the illustrious
lord (Mahadeva) himself had given wealth in the shape of a golden
plateau of Himavat. (With that wealth) king Marutta had performed
diverse sacrifices. Unto him, after the completion of his sacrifices
diverse tribes of celestials, those creators of the universe, with Indra
himself in their company and with Vrihaspati at their head, used to
come. All the carpets and furnitures of his sacrificial compound were of
gold. The regenerate classes, desirous of food, all ate as they pleased,
at his sacrifices, food that was clean and agreeable to their desires.
And in all his sacrifices, milk and cards and clarified butter and
honey, and other kinds of food and edibles, all of the best order, and
robes and ornaments covetable for their costliness, gratified Brahmanas,
thoroughly conversant with the Vedas. The very gods used to become
distributors of food in king Marutta's palace. The *Viswedevas* were the
courtiers of that royal sage, the son of Avikshit. By him were gratified
the denizens of heaven with libations of clarified butter. And gratified
(therewith), these, in their turn, increased that powerful ruler's
wealth of crops with copious showers of rain. He always contributed to
the gratification of the *Rishis*, the *Pitris*, and the gods, and
thereby made them happy, by practising Brahmacharya, study of the
*Vedas*, obsequial rites, and all kinds of gifts. And his beds and
carpets and vehicles, and his vast stores of gold difficult to be given
away, in fact, all that untold wealth of his, was given away voluntarily
unto the Brahmanas, Sakra himself used to wish him well. His subjects
were made happy (by him), Acting always with piety, he (ultimately)
repaired to those eternal regions of bliss, acquired by his religious
merit. With his children and counsellors and wives and descendants and
kinsmen, king Marutta, in his youth, ruled his kingdom for a thousand
years. When such a king, O Srinjaya, died who was superior to thee, in
respect of the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

four cardinal virtues (*viz*., ascetic penances, truth, compassion, and
liberality), and who, superior to thee, was much superior to thy son, do
not grieve saying 'O *Swaitya*, for thy son who performed no sacrifice
and gave no sacrificial present.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[116:1](m07052.htm#fr_87.md) I follow Nilakantha in
rendering these two verses.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[116:2](m07052.htm#fr_88.md) Of golden excreta.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[117:1](m07052.htm#fr_89.md) The Bengal reading is
*Samvartam*. The Bombay text makes Samvarta a nominative. I have adopted
the Bengal reading. If the Bombay reading be accepted, the meaning would
be that Samvarta himself, piqued with Vrihaspati, caused Marutta to
perform a sacrifice. K. P. Singha makes a ludicrous blunder in supposing
Samvarta to have been a kind of sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LVI](m07053.md)
