[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m07065) 
[Next](m07067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION LXIX

"Narada said, 'Vena's son, king Prithu, O Srinjaya, we hear, fell a prey
to death, In the *Rajasuya* sacrifice he performed, the great Rishis
installed

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

him as Emperor (of the world). He vanquished all, and his achievements,
became known (all over the world). For this he came to be called Prithu
(the celebrated). And because he protected all people from wounds and
injuries, for this he became a true *Kshatriya*. <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114) Beholding Vena's son, Prithu, all his
subjects said, We are highly pleased with him. In consequence of this
affection that he enjoyed of his subjects he came to be called a
*Raja*. <span id="fr_115"></span>[2](#fn_115) During the time of Prithu,
the earth, without being cultivated, yielded crops in sufficiency. All
the kine, again, yielded milk whenever they were touched. Every lotus
was full of honey. The *Kusa* blades were all of gold, agreeable to the
touch, and otherwise delightful. And the subjects of Prithu made clothes
of these blades and the beds also on which they lay. All the fruits were
soft and sweet and like unto *Amrita* (in taste). And these constituted
the food of his subjects, none amongst whom had ever to starve. And all
men in Prithu's time were hale and hearty. And all their wishes were
crowned with fruition. They had nothing to fear. On trees, or in caves,
they dwelt as they liked. His dominions were not distributed into
provinces and towns. The people lived happily and in joy as each
desired. When king Prithu went to the sea, the waves became solid. The
very mountains used to yield him openings that he might pass through
them. The standard of his car never broke (obstructed by anything). Once
on a time, the tall trees of the forest, the mountains, the gods, the
Asuras, men, the snakes, the seven Rishis, the Apsaras, and the Pitris,
all came to Prithu, seated at his ease, and addressing him, said, 'Thou
art our Emperor. Thou art our king. Thou art our protector and Father.
Thou art our Lord. Therefore, O great king, give us boons after our own
hearts, through which we may, for ever, obtain gratification and joy.'
Unto them Prithu, the son of Vena, said, So be it. Then taking up his
*Ajagava* bow <span id="fr_116"></span>[3](#fn_116) and some terrible
arrows the like of which existed not, he reflected for a moment. He then
addressed the Earth, saying, 'Coming quickly, O Earth! Yield to these
the milk they desire. From that, blessed be thou, I will give them the
food they solicit.' Thus addressed by him, the Earth said, 'It behoveth
thee, O hero, to regard me as thy daughter.' Prithu answered, So be
it!--And then that great ascetic, his passions under control, made all
arrangements (for milking the Earth. Then the entire assemblage of
creatures began to milk the Earth). And first of all, the tall trees of
the forest rose for milking her, The Earth then, full of affection,
stood there desiring a calf, a milker, and vessels (wherein to hold the
milk). Then the blossoming Sala became the calf, the Banian became the
milker, torn buds became the milk, and the auspicious fig tree became
the vessel. (Next, the mountains milked her). The Eastern hill, whereon
the Sun rises, became the calf; the prince of mountains, *viz*., Meru,
became the milker; the diverse gems and deciduous herbs became the milk;
and the

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

stones became the vessels (for holding that milk). Next, one of the gods
became the milker, and all things capable of bestowing energy and
strength became the coveted milk. The Asuras then milked the Earth,
having wine for their milk, and using an unbaked pot for their vessel.
In that act, Dwimurddhan became the milker, and Virochana, the calf. The
human beings milked the Earth for cultivation and crops. The
self-created Manu became their calf, and Prithu himself the milker.
Next, the Snakes milked the Earth, getting poison as the milk, and using
a vessel made of a gourd, Dhritarashtra became the milker, and Takshaka
the calf. The seven *Rishis*, capable of producing everything by their
fiat, <span id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117) then milked the Earth,
getting the Vedas as their milk. Vrihaspati became the milker, the
Chhandas were the vessel, and the excellent Soma, the calf. The Yakshas,
milking the Earth, got the power of disappearance at will as the milk in
an unbaked pot. Vaisravana (Kuvera) became their milker, and
Vrishadhvaja their calf. The Gandharvas and the Apsaras milked all
fragrant perfumes in a vessel made of a lotus-leaf. Chitraratha became
their calf, and the puissant Viswaruchi their milker. The Pitris milked
the Earth, getting Swaha as their milk in a vessel of silver. Yama, the
son of Vivaswat, [became](errata.htm#40) their calf, and (the Destroyer
Antaka) their milker. Even thus was the Earth milked by that assemblage
of creatures who all got for milk what they each desired. The very
calves and vessels employed by them are existing to this day and may
always be seen. The powerful Prithu, the son of Vena, performing various
sacrifices, gratified all creatures in respect of all their desires by
gifts of articles agreeable to their hearts. And he caused golden images
to be made of every article on earth, and bestowed them all on the
Brahmanas as his great Horse-sacrifice, <span
id="fr_118"></span>[2](#fn_118) The king caused six and sixty thousand
elephants to be made of gold, and all those he gave away unto the
[Brahmanas](errata.htm#41). And this whole earth also the king caused to
be decked with jewels and gems and gold, and gave her away unto the
Brahmanas. When he died, O Srinjaya, who was superior to thee as regards
the four cardinal virtues and who, superior to thee, was, therefore,
much superior to thy son thou shouldst not, saying '*Oh, Swaitya, Oh,
Swaitya*,' grieve for the latter who performed no sacrifice and made no
sacrificial present.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_114"></span>[132:1](m07066.htm#fr_114) Literally, a
*Kshatriya* is one that rescues another from wounds and injuries.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[132:2](m07066.htm#fr_115) A *raja* is one who
enjoys the affection of his people, and with whom they are delighted.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[132:3](m07066.htm#fr_116) The bow of Siva,
otherwise called Pinaka.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[133:1](m07066.htm#fr_117) *Aklishtakarman*,
literally, one who is never fatigued with work; hence one capable of
obtaining the results of action by a mere fiat of the will. It may also
mean, of unspotted acts.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[133:2](m07066.htm#fr_118) *Parthivas*, *i.e.*,
relating to the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LXX](m07067)
