[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m07133) 
[Next](m07135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CXXXVII

"Dhritarashtra said, 'O Suta, O Sanjaya, this grievous result that has
now overtaken us is, I think, certainly due to my evil policy. I had
hitherto thought that what is past. But, O Sanjaya, what measures should
I now adopt? I am now once more calm, O Sanjaya, therefore, tell me how
this slaughter of heroes is going on, having my evil policy for its
cause.'

"Sanjaya said, 'Indeed, O king, Karna and Bhima, both endued with great
prowess, continued in that battle to pour their arrowy showers like two
rain-charged clouds. The arrows, winged with gold and whetted on stone
and marked with Bhima's name, approaching Karna, penetrated into his
body, as if piercing into his very life. Similarly, Bhima also, in that
battle was shrouded with the shafts of Karna in hundreds and thousands,
resembling snakes of virulent poison. With their arrows, O king, failing
on all sides, an agitation was produced among the troops resembling that
of the very ocean. Many were the combatants, O chastiser of foes, in thy
host that were deprived of life by arrows, resembling snakes of virulent
poison shot from Bhima's bow. Strewn with fallen elephants and steeds
mixed with the bodies of men, the field of battle looked like one
covered with trees broken by a tempest. Slaughtered in battle with the
arrows from Bhima's bow, thy warriors fled away, 'saying, *What is
this*?' Indeed, that host of the Sindhus, the Sauviras, and the
Kauravas, afflicted with the impetuous shafts of both Karna and Bhima,
was removed to a great distance. The remnant of those brave soldiers,
with their steeds and elephants killed, leaving the vicinity of both
Karna and Bhima, fled away in all directions. (And they cried out),
'Verily, for the sake of the Parthas, the gods are stupefying us, since
those arrows shot by both Bhima and Karna are slaying our forces. Saying
those words, these troops of thine afflicted with fear avoiding the
range of (Karna's and Bhima's) arrows, stood at a distance for
witnessing that combat. Then, on the field of battle there began to flow
a terrible river enhancing the joy of the heroes and the fears of the
timid. And it was caused by the blood of elephants and steeds and men.
And covered with the lifeless forms of men and elephants and steeds,
with flagstaffs and the bottoms of cars, with the adornments of cars and
elephants and steeds with broken cars and wheels and *Akshas* and
*Kuveras*, with loud-twanged bows decked with gold, and gold-winged
arrows and shafts in thousands, shot by Karna and Bhima, resembling
snakes just freed from their sloughs, with countless lances and spears
and scimitars and battleaxes, with maces and clubs and axes, all adorned
with gold, with standards of diverse shapes, and darts and spiked clubs,
and with beautiful *Sataghnis*, the earth, O Bharata, looked
resplendent. And strewn all over with earrings and necklaces of gold and
bracelets loosened (from wrists), and rings, and precious gems worn on
diadems and crowns, and head-gears, and golden ornaments of diverse
kinds, O sire, and coats of mail, and leathern fences, and elephants'
ropes, and umbrellas displaced (from their places)

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

and Yak-tails, and fans with the pierced bodies of elephants and steeds
and men, with blood-dyed arrows, and with diverse other objects, lying
about and loosened from their places, the field of battle looked
resplendent like the firmament bespangled with stars. Beholding the
wonderful, inconceivable, and superhuman feats of those two warriors,
the *Charanas* and the *Siddhas* were exceedingly amazed. As a blazing
conflagration, having the wind for its ally, courses through an
(extended) heap of dry grass, even so, Adhiratha's son, engaged with
Bhima, coursed fiercely in that battle. <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160) Both of them felled countless standards
and cars and slew steeds and men and elephants, like a pair of elephants
crushing a forest of reeds while engaged in battle with other. Thy host
looked like a mass of clouds, O king, of men, and great was the carnage
caused in that battle by Karna and Bhima.'" <span
id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_161)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[295:1](m07134.htm#fr_160) The sense seems to
be that Karna and Bhima were like fire and wind.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[295:2](m07134.htm#fr_161) Verse 28 is a
triplet. The second line is obscure. It seems that a line has been
omitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CXXXVIII](m07135)
