[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](palf01)  [Next](palf03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### PREFACE

The purpose of this book is to present, in as brief and systematic a
way, the whole philosophy of Alfarabi and the influence it exerted on
Medieval Thought. My efforts in this field were prompted by a sincere
desire to render service to philosophy and to those who are fond of
philosophy. Therefore, in outlining Alfarabi's Philosophy I shall bring
out, as far as possible, the elements it has in common with
Scholasticism.

My efforts will have been amply rewarded if the study of this book
enables the reader to find through its pages two facts: first, that
Alfarabi was well acquainted with Greek philosophy; so well acquainted,
in fact, that he was able, through diligent study, to perfect some of
its old theories and work out new ones. Second, that the Schoolmen
borrowed from him a great amount of material which hitherto has been
regarded by many as a product of their speculation, while in reality it
is not. In all justice to Alfarabi and other Arabian thinkers, we should
candidly admit that Christian philosophy owes a great deal to them.

It is good for the reader to know that in writing this book, I used the
Arabic works of Alfarabi. I read them with care, and when anything
attracted my attention, I tried to examine it closely.

My heartfelt thanks are due to my many friends for their kind
encouragement and valuable suggestions. To Father Arnold Rodriguez, O.
F. M., of St. Francis Cathedral, Santa Fe, I am especially indebted for
his kindness in editing and typing this manuscript.

Robert Hammond

Tucumcari, New Mexico

August 10, 1946

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Life and Works](palf03)
