[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index) [Index](index) [Next](nt1.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

## INTRODUCTION

 Posthumous works are always unfair, unfair to author and unfair to
editor. When writing the author always makes mental reservations about
the finished product which no editor can supply. The editor realizes his
deficiencies and the best he can do is to choose between two
interpretations. He fears that the one he selects may not have been the
author’s final choice, but has no alternative. He can rarely fill in
gaps left by queries. This is particularly true of the work presented in
the following pages. The Navajo texts were collected in 1923 and 1924 by
Doctor Pliny Earle Goddard who died July 12, 1928. Doctor Goddard had
recorded the texts at the dictation of Sandoval, a Navajo, learned in
his lore, but not a medicine man. Since the untimely death of Doctor
Goddard, Sandoval has also died. There is therefore no immediate means
of checking over the text as it is written. It had been typed, carefully
translated, and worked over several times. But, as is always the case in
matters of this kind, queries were noted with the hope that on a
subsequent trip the author would be able to get more accurate
translations or explanations.

 Doctor Goddard had devoted practically a lifetime to the study of the
Athapascan languages. He therefore omitted much in his notes which
cannot now be filled in, for he kept common words and phrases in his
head. Fortunately in this paper the full text had been transcribed. It
is here presented with a keen appreciation of the editor’s shortcomings.
I realize thoroughly its deficiencies due to lack of detailed knowledge
of the Navajo language and of Doctor Goddard’s specific intentions.

 It seems expedient to print these texts which are practically the first
to be published in standardized orthography. We have some texts of
Matthews which, however, do not give a true picture of the language, as
his purpose was to describe the chants and not primarily to study the
language. There is at the present time a movement afoot, led by Doctor
Edward Sapir of Yale University, to collect a large body of text and
grammatical material of the Navajo. This material will differ from
Doctor Goddard’s when published, in that special care is being taken to
record pitch accent and length.

 From the literary standpoint it is almost impossible to have too much
Navajo material. The texts here presented illustrate weIl the beauty of
Navajo narrative. “He made his mind forked,” that is, “He made him think
two ways so he could not concentrate on what he was doing,” is only one
example of the unusual type of Navajo thought. <span id="page_6">p.
6</span> The texts are also abundantly illustrative of the Navajo use of
direction, color, natural beauty, abstract and all-inclusive beauty,
four-fold repetition, etc. It is deeply to be regretted that we may not
have Doctor Goddard’s own interpretation of Navajo literary style of
which he was unusually appreciative and with which he had closely
identified himself.

 Besides being the first accurately recorded texts, this body of myth
has also the distinction of not belonging to a definite chant. Sandoval,
who lived at Shiprock, New Mexico, laid no claim to being a chanter. His
power (for good) was however recognized by all in his own neighborhood
and elsewhere. “No, he knows no chants, but his story is the best for it
accounts for the Navajo much farther down<span
id="page_6_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_6_note_1.md) than any of the others.”
These were remarks frequently made of the origin tale (pp. 9-57,
127-147). Sandoval learned the stories from his maternal grandfather
*ba’iłinkojε*<span id="page_6_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_6_note_2.md).

 Besides, this version contains much that was heretofore not known of
the Navajo as, for example, the orderly account of the months, the
constellations which usher them in, the “soft feathers” belonging to
them, and the activities which go on in those months. There are, of
course, many incidents which are recorded by Matthews<span
id="page_6_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_6_note_3.md) and the Franciscan
Fathers,<span id="page_6_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_6_note_4.md) but the text
not only gives an entirely different impression of the thought and
style, but furnishes details, the omission of which by Matthews was very
annoying, especially since his references indicate that he knew details
of the girls’ puberty rite, for example, and other ceremonies which are
of great importance to the Navajo student, even though tedious to
record.

 All of these texts were recorded in summer, at a time when the
rattlesnakes were out. It is not “good” to tell them at this time and
the fact accounts for the omissions. In one case, Sandoval would not
tell a portion of the story which was highly significant, but the next
day he announced that he had “made medicine” to make himself immune from
any evil effects which might ensue, and proceeded to fill in the gaps in
the narrative. In other cases it was necessary to wait for the winter
months when the ground was frozen. Certain songs (p. 168 *e.g.*) were
too sacred and precious ever to be given up.

 There are a few pages (158-160) for which there were literal
translations, but for which I can find no free translation. I was
consequently forced to make it myself and I apologize for any
misinterpretations and <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> inadequacies,
assuming at the same time full responsibility for them. The two stories
included in pages 76-85, 158-160 are stories of witchcraft and, as such,
of extreme potency. The notebook records a remark of Sandoval’s, “If
people knew I knew this story they would call me a wizard.”

 Nothing could be more unfortunate for an individual.<span
id="page_7_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_7_note_1.md) He is suspected, avoided,
feared, but respected. The respect accorded him is not the same as that
enjoyed by the learned Navajo, but rather honor induced by coercion
based on fear and suspicion, respect of form for one’s own defense
rather than of admiration for intellect and personal success (*hojoni*).
Sandoval was always honored in the “good” way. He never practised
witchcraft, but he stated that even his knowledge of one who had
practised it would lay him open to suspicion were it known.

 The apparently innocent pages which record the stories of witchcraft
are an excellent example of things which to us are trivial, but which to
the native, are most highly significant.

 “The Creation of the Horse” is a tiny bit illustrative of Navajo
literary charm in a nutshell. It is comparable with a similar tale of
the Mescalero Apache,<span id="page_7_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_7_note_2.md)
but has a very different twist, particularly at the end.

 The last tale describes the origin and scattering of the people and
sheds additional light on the possession of pets by the Navajo. Such
possession has been interpreted as totemism by Matthews<span
id="page_7_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_7_note_3.md) and Kroeber.<span
id="page_7_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_7_note_4.md) The interpretation has been
refuted by the Franciscan Fathers<span
id="page_7_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_7_note_5.md) and by myself.<span
id="page_7_fr_6"></span>[6](#page_7_note_6.md) This tale seems to me to
corroborate our interpretation. The pets, bear, panther, and snake, were
protectors and saviors but were attached to indefinite groups before the
scattering of the clans and there is no evidence of a specific kinship
as of descent or of vision experience for them. They are more distinctly
Navajo protectors than clan totems.

 I hope some day to extract the enormous mass of ethnological material
contained in these texts as well as in mythological material already
published in English. Before that time I expect to have the opportunity
of becoming acquainted with that ethnology as it is still being lived.
Until that has been done (by myself or some one else) I must be content
to point out the vast possibilities for additional knowledge contained
in these texts of Doctor Goddard.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

 The alphabet employed in the text is that published in Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections, vol. 66, no. 6. It should be noted however
that b, d, and g are intermediates in sonancy while g is fully sonant
{sic}. The velar intermediate is represented by γ.

G<span class="small">LADYS</span> A. R<span
class="small">EICHARD</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](nt1.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_6">p. 6</span>

<span id="page_6_note_1"></span>[1](#page_6_fr_1.md) That is, in lower
worlds.

<span id="page_6_note_2"></span>[2](#page_6_fr_2.md) Reichard, Gladys A.,
Social Life of the Navajo Indians (*Columbia University Contributions to
Anthropology*, vol. 7, New York, 1928), Gen. I D, 557 who was highly
respected for his knowledge.

<span id="page_6_note_3"></span>[3](#page_6_fr_3.md) Navaho Legends
(*Memoirs, American Folk-Lore Society*, vol. 5, New York, 1897).

<span id="page_6_note_4"></span>[4](#page_6_fr_4.md) *An Ethnologic
Dictionary of the Navaho Language*. St. Michaels, Arizona, 1910.

<span id="footnotes_page_7">p. 7</span>

<span id="page_7_note_1"></span>[1](#page_7_fr_1.md) Cp. Reichard. *loc.
cit.*, 148.

<span id="page_7_note_2"></span>[2](#page_7_fr_2.md) Notes of P. E.
Goddard.

<span id="page_7_note_3"></span>[3](#page_7_fr_3.md) The Gentile System of
the Navajo Indians (*Journal of American Folk-Lore*. vol. 3, pp. 89-110.
1890), 106.

<span id="page_7_note_4"></span>[4](#page_7_fr_4.md) This series, vol. 18,
148.

<span id="page_7_note_5"></span>[5](#page_7_fr_5.md) *Ethnologic
Dictionary*, 424.

<span id="page_7_note_6"></span>[6](#page_7_fr_6.md) *Social Life*, 33.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
