[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Navajo](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](nt0) [Next](nt2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

## T<span class="small">HE</span> E<span class="small">MERGENCE</span>

 It was named “water everywhere,” “black world,” “one word,” and “trees
standing.” It was also called “white-shell waves moving,” “turquoise
waves moving,” “white shell stands vertical,” and “turoise stands
vertical.”

 Here was where the sun would rise in the future, blackness rose up and
whiteness rose up. There where blackness and whiteness rose together
First Man came into being. With him was a white ear of corn of white
abalone shell which was kerneled completely over its end.

 Here (in the west) blueness and yellowness rose up. Where they rose up
together First Woman came into being. A yellow ear of corn of abalone
shell, completely covered at the end with kernels, came into being with
her.

 The man started walking. When blackness rose up, he saw a fire in the
distance, but when whiteness came up he couldn’t find it. When this had
happened three times, he put up a stick so that it pointed to the fire.
When blackness went away and whiteness came again he sighted along the
stick and located smoke near a hill. He walked around the hill saying to
himself, “Whose house is this that I have come to in vain? Who lives
here? Why doesn’t the person come to me?” The fire was rock crystal. He
went back.

 When blackness came up she discovered a fire. When whiteness came up
again she started to travel. She came to a gap in a ridge and set up a
stick pointing toward the fire. When she sighted along this she found
the fire she had seen was by the side of a hill where there was smoke.
The fire was of turquoise. “Someone is living in a house I cannot see,”
she said to herself.

 “Are you walking about? Did you come here?” the man asked. “Why should
it be thus? Your fire is rock crystal; mine is turquoise. Why should we
be separated. Let us live here together” “All right, let it be my
house,” the woman said. Then they lived together.

 Someone came there. It was “Water Coyote” who runs on the water and
knows everything about the water. From this direction came Coyote
wearing a coyote skin blanket. He knows everything on the land. Others
came there, whose bodies were short and their legs so long. They were
yellow-jackets who have stings with which they witch people.

 Four others came there, who were short bodied and wore black shirts.
They were tarantulas. Four more came, black ones, black ants that had
stings with which they witched people. Three others came <span
id="page_128">p. 128</span> there, they were also black, but they had
nothing with which to sting. They were named *xolεdjinnε*. They wanted
to live there but they were not wanted. These began stinging and killing
each other by witchcraft. “There is no use trying to live with them,”
First Man said, and went up through the sky to the world above. The
others moved up after him.

 That was the blue world which was lying there and all those living on
it were blue. They were birds, blue birds, jays, small jays, chapparal
jays, and blue jays. The world was small and became crowded. They did
the same way again; they began to witch each other. Then First Man,
First Woman, Water Coyote, and Coyote, went up again to another world
which was yellow. They found it was like this. To the east stood a
mountain called *sisnadjinnε* (Pelado Peak), to the south was *tsodził*
(Mount Taylor), to the west was *dogosłit* (San Francisco Peaks) and to
the north was *debentsa* (La Plata Mountains). In the center was
*dzilna’odiłε* and on the east side of it *tc’olį*.

 There were living there yellow ant people, red and people, and black
ants with red heads. On the east side of Pelado Peak Turquoise-boy lived
with twelve male companions. They had large male reeds. Mirage people
lived with him. Toward the west where the sun will set in the future
lived White-shell Woman with twelve female companions. They had large
female reeds. Female shimmering heat people lived with her. Here, at a
place called brown mountain, turkey lived. He had brown corn.

 Now it was becoming crowded. First Man spoke. “Let them live as married
people,” he said. They made five chiefs; large snake, bear, wolf,
panther, and otter. These five held a council and established clans. “If
you marry one of your own clan you will go crazy and go into the fire.”
That is why they are afraid to marry into their own clans. “Now go home
and let those who like each other get married. There will be
hermaphrodites who will know women’s work and who will live like women.
They will know the ways of both men and women,” First Man said.

 First Man planted the white corn which was created with him, and First
Woman her yellow corn, and Turquoise-boy his blue corn. “Now you who
live at Brown Mountain, it is your turn,” First Man said. Then Turkey
danced four times back and forth saying “da da da da.” First he dropped
brown corn, then watermelon seeds, musk melon seeds, and last spotted
beans. Much got ripe and they harvested the corn.

 The wife of First Man was untrue to him. Mirage Man went to First Man
and talked to him until blackness arose. They continued <span
id="page_129">p. 129</span> while blackness arose four times. The people
didn’t hear any one. They listened in vain for the second chief. After
that blackness came up again. The next chief talked but they didn’t hear
him. The next talked and they didn’t hear him. Finally, Otter spoke.
“What is the matter that we do not hear? You who are the leader, tell us
why you do not talk.” “Very well,” said First Man, “tell yonder
hermaphrodite to come here.” When he arrived, First Man asked who made
the pot for him. “I made for myself,” he replied. “Who made the little
gourd cup?” “I planted it,” he said. “Who made the metate for you?” “I
did,” he replied. “Who made the hairbrush?” “I made it,” he said. “Who
made the stirring sticks?” “I made them,” he replied. “Who made the
water-basket?” “I made it,” he said.

 First Man had not eaten or drunk for four days. “Get some water for me.
I want to eat. Prepare some food. I am hungry. She scolded me badly. I
am like this because she was false to me,” he said.

 “Make a raft,” he said. “We will find out who is the stronger. All of
us men and boys will go across on the raft which they are making.” They
made a raft so large and all the men arrived on the other side of the
river on it. The women lived on one side and the men on the other, and a
large stream ran between them. The men made new farms. The women went
about singing, while they planted the old farms to their full exent.
They raised a crop of corn. The next year the men planted more land to
corn, but the women did not plant all of the farmland. The next year the
men planted still more and the women again fell short of the year
preceding. The fourth year, the men extended their fields still further,
but the woman’s fields had all reverted and were gone. The men had
plenty, but the women had no crops and famine was killing them. They
were especially hungry for meat.

 “Bring the raft across,” they called, but the men did not hear. One
woman called and ran into the water and drowned. Another did the same,
and a third and fourth. The second chief came across with the raft. When
he had returned to the men, he reported the women to be poor and
starving. “What is to happen?” he asked. “There can be no increase
living this way.” In the same manner the third and fourth chiefs spoke.
“They have learned their lesson by now. Are they not punished enough?”
asked the last chief. “All right,” replied First Man. “They are poor.
Tell them never as long as they live to do such things again. Bring them
across.”

 They brought them across. First Man told all the men to bathe and dry
themselves with white cornmeal and then to apply pollen to their <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> bodies from head to foot. The women were
also told to bathe and to dry themselves with the yellow cornmeal and to
apply the pollen in the same manner. They were requested to refrain from
intercourse for four days, after which they were allowed to come
together.

 To the leadership of First Man they attributed the misfortune of the
women, the deaths from famine and drowning.

 When there was blackness, Coyote came wearing his blanket. First Woman
instructed and provided him with a rainbow. The two children of
*tohołtsodi* were swimming where the water flows out in four directions.
Coyote caught them with the rainbow and drew them out. Whiteness arose
here and here. The weather became cold. From the east white ones flew,
from the south blue ones flew, from the west yellow ones flew, and from
the north black ones flew. First Man sent black hawk toward the east to
investigate. When he returned he reported that it was water. He sent
hummingbird toward the south. He returned, bringing the same report that
it was water. This way he sent the chief of the water, egret, who can
walk on it who confirmed the report. “What shall we do about it?” he
asked. “My children,” said First Man, “we will go to the top of Pelado
Peak.” They all moved there and everyone living on the earth joined
them. The First Man took up some of the soil in turn from Pelado Peak,
Mount Taylor, San Francisco Peaks, La Plata Mountain, *dziłna’odiłi* and
*tc’ol’į*. The people came after him, Turquoise Boy with black bow wood
and the large male reeds. After him came the twelve men who lived with
him and after them the male Mirage people. Here from the west of Pelado
Peak came White-shell girl and the female large reeds with mulberry
bows. After her came the twelve women and the Quivering Heat people.
“Why didn’t you tell me,” said Turkey who came from Brown Mountain.

 The water had reached the middle of Pelado Peak when First Man said,
“Where is my medicine? I shall have to die some time. I am going back
for it.” “No, I will go back after it for you,” said Blue Heron. He flew
up and then went down hard to the bottom of the water. He came out with
the medicine, but his legs were long. That is the way he got his name.

 The water came to the top of Pelado Peak. He erected a large reed and
blew against it so that it grew up until it reached the sky. Nodes were
formed inside the reed. All of them entered the reed and started to
climb up, but as Turkey was last his tail protruded into the water so
that the ends of the feathers were washed white. When they reached the
sky, Turkey said, “Let the water stop here.” They couldn’t break <span
id="page_131">p. 131</span> through the sky. “Well, sir, try it,” First
Man said. Then Woodpecker started pecking. The place became thin and
finally gave way. The people moved up until they came to the sky hole,
then *tohołtsodi* appeared with his horns, the ends of which are blue,
and asked for his children.

 Coyote had his blanket girded around him. “Look in that,” someone
suggested. Then they filled an abalone shell basket with hard jewels,
water mineral powder, blue pollen, and cat-tail pollen. They put the
filled basket between *tohołtsodi*’s horns.

 Then Coyote spoke. “No, I will give you only one of the children. With
the white fabric of the other I will cause male and female rains and
make the black clouds. I will cause flowers to grow on the mountain tops
and vegetation to spring up. With the moisture we will be able to live.”
To this *tohołtsodi* gave his assent. The girl was returned to him and
the water stopped rising.

 Cicada made himself a headband and fastened two feathered arrows
crossing each other in front and two arrows feathered with yellow tail
feathers behind. Where the hole had been drilled through to the upper
world water was lying they say. Cicada made a pile of mud on which to
stand.

 Then a grebe came to him from the east plowing out the water, so that
Cicada was splashed with it. The grebe had crossed feathered arrows in
his headband in front. He stared at Cicada and then took off a pair of
arrows and passed them through his alimentary canal from above and below
so that they passed each other and were drawn out in opposite directions
again. “Do this if you want to live here,” he said to the Cicada. “Oh,
that has already been done to me,” said Cicada, who then took off a pair
of his arrows and thrust them through his chest from side to side
drawing them out so that they passed each other. “Do this if you want to
live here,” he said to the grebe who, without speaking, went away again,
plowing up the water which flowed away after him toward the east.

 Then a blue grebe came from the south, stared at Cicada, and splashed
water on him. He too took yellow feathered arrows from his headband and
passed them through his alimentary canal. “Do this if you wish to live
here,” he said to Cicada. “It is already done, but you do this,” Cicada
replied and passed two arrows through his chest. The blue grebe without
a word turned and plowed through the water toward the south, taking the
water with him.

 Next came a yellow grebe from the west, throwing water on the Cicada,
and staring at him. “People do not live here,” he said and <span
id="page_132">p. 132</span> proceeded to pass the arrows through his
digestive tracts. “Do that,” he said, “if you would live here.” “Oh,
that has already been done, but you do this,” Cicada replied, and taking
a pair of arrows passed them through his chest. The yellow grebe,
without speaking, turned back toward the west, plowing out the water
which followed him.

 Last of all, came a black grebe from the north, plowing out the water
and staring at the Cicada. He, too, took a pair of arrows from his
forehead and passed them through his alimentary canal in opposite
directions. “Do that and you may live here,” he said. “Well, that has
already been done, but try this,” Cicada replied, and passed a pair of
arrows through his chest in opposite directions. The black grebe said
nothing, but went back, toward the north, plowing the water and taking
it with him.

 Now all the water which had been there was gone; it had flowed together
to form the ocean. Cicada returned and reported that there had been
water above, but that by a hard series of contests with four grebes he
had secured its removal and that now there was nothing but mud.

 Then they secured turquoise, white-shell, abalone, red shell, jet, and
powdered iron ore; also powdered blue flowers, pollen, and tree pollen.
These hard substances and pollen they sent by Small Wind as a fee for
those living above, that they should dry up the mud. Then the winds blew
for four days and four nights and the earth was dried up.

 Badger was sent up to investigate conditions. When he returned, his
legs so high up were black from the mud. “It is dried up a little,” he
reported. “Go up,” he told them. “Wait,” said First Man. Then they
decorated panther and wolf. They adorned wolf with eagle tails and
panther with variegated corn.

 The first to come up was “Water Coyote,” then First Man, and next First
Woman, and finally First Warrior. After them came the people generally.
They had now arrived on the white earth.

 They heard singing below and Panther with Wolf was climbing up. “Pull
Panther out!” First Man told them. One side (Navajo) trotted there, but
they missed him, pulling up Wolf instead of Panther. “This one will be
ours,” they said. The ancient Pueblo people who built the straight
walled houses pulled up Panther. The Pueblo people have houses and they
like corn the same as we. From the black earth, from the blue earth,
from the yellow earth, from the white earth; some of the people are from
the black earth, some from the blue earth, some from the yellow earth,
some from the white earth.

 “Now that all have moved up, there will be a hogan,” First Man said. On
the east side he put up a male reed, and on the west, opposite <span
id="page_133">p. 133</span> a female reed. On the south side he leaned
an oak timber, and opposite, on the north, a mulberry log. “I will put
cornmeal on these four timbers,” he said.

 Over there, the ancient Pueblo peoples had built straight-walled houses
with clay. “We have built a round house. We are tired from our travels,”
said First Man, “let us rest, my children.” “You make a sweathouse,” he
told Beaver. “Bring up some stones.” He brought them up and they found
Beaver had made a good round sweathouse which he had plastered with mud.
He had also made a fire and had put the four stones in it where they
became white hot. He made a good door and on the north side a place to
crawl out. He put the four stones inside. Then he hung a white coyote
blanket over the door and above that a white blanket, over that a black
fabric, and over that figured calico. When the four were hung he shouted
out, “Ooohwu, come into the sweathouse.” Many came in. “It is crowded,”
said First Man to Beaver. “Phu, phu, phu, phu,” he said as he blew and
the sweathouse became larger and the others came in. “Weh, old man,” he
said and Beaver began to sing.

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">“Those who came on top built it.<br />
Sticks women with he built it.<br />
Black stones with he built it.<br />
Earth with he built it.<br />
Living old age in safety with he built it.”<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 Those who had been tired had now sweated and were rested. The Pueblo
people who have houses do not have sweathouses. Those led by First Man,
who have the round hogans, are accustomed to go into sweathouses.

 First Man, First Woman, First Boy, and First Girl went into the hogan
which had been made. First Man lay this way and First Woman nearer the
door with First Man’s medicine between them. Lying thus (with their
heads pillowed on their arms) they began to talk, speaking softly. First
Boy and First Girl, lying on the other side of the fire, were unable to
hear and listened in vain until morning. Dawn came without their having
slept. During the following day it was the same; the talk went on so
softly the children could not distinguish the words. If they approached
nearer, so they might hear, they talking stopped entirely. The next
night was also spent by the elders in talking so softly that the
children could not hear what was said, although they stayed awake all
night listening. Day dawned but the talking continued. First Boy stood
listening until night. The parents lay huddled up that night also
talking until morning.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

 Four nights and four days had passed without their sleeping making
eight altogether. Then First Boy addressed them. “Why don’t you talk
before us? We cannot sleep and we are suffering from sleepiness.” When
he spoke thus language was originated.

 First Man replied that they were discussing what should be in the
world. They wanted to know how to live until old age. They had also
discussed the sun, the mountains, the months, the trees, and what should
be upon the earth.

 He stationed guards in a circle around the hogan before he began his
plans, but Coyote stepped in without being seen. “What are you doing?”
he inquired. First Man covered the diagram drawn on the floor and
replied that nothing was being discussed. Coyote went back.

 The next day, guards were stationed in two circles around the hogan and
the work resumed. When the plan was drawn Coyote again stepped in
without being seen by the guards. First Man spread something over his
drawing. “What are you talking about?” Coyote inquired. “We are not
discussing anything,” First Man replied. “So you are not planning
anything,” Coyote said, and returned. It was morning again and he placed
guards in three circles around the hogan before resuming his work. Just
as he was finishing his plan Coyote appeared, having again passed the
guards without being detected. First Man covered his work again.
“Cousin, what are you planning?” Coyote asked. “We are not talking about
anything,” First Man replied, and Coyote went away again.

 It was day for the fourth time. Guards were placed in four circles
around the hogan. “Go to *tsεdadin* and invite the venerable Black God
who resides there. We want his fire to make the sun hot.” They made the
sun glowing hot with it. The moon they made just a little warm with rock
crystal. That is why it does not give out heat. “It will give a little
light,” he said.

 Then with a diagram on the ground he named the months.

 This month will be called *nałac*, “spider.” The traveling of animals
will be its soft feather. In this month the mountain-sheep will run
together. The heart of the month was made of shimmering heat.

 This month will be called *niłtc’its’osi*, “slender wind.” *hastin
αk’ai*, “old man standing with his feet apart,” will be its soft
feather. In this month antelope will mate. Its heart is made of slender
heat.

 This will be named *niłtc’itso*, “large wind,” *tsε’εtso*, “first
large,” will be its soft feather. Its heart is made of cold. In this
month deer will run with each other.

 This will be called *zasniłt’εs*, “snow cooked.” Its heart will be
*tin*, “ice.” Its soft feather will be *ik’aisadai*, “morningstar.”

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

 This one will be called *atsabiyaj*, “young eagles.” The eagles will
warm their nests. Its soft feather will be *gaxat’ε*, “rabbit track.”
Its heart is made of round hail. During this month rabbits will mate.

 This will be called *xoztcint*, “horns lost.” Its soft feather will be
*dibεni*, “Say’s phoebe.” Its heart is made of small hail. At the end of
this month mountain-sheep will give birth to their lambs.

 Now winter has passed and summer begins.

 This will be called *hit’atcil*, “little vegetation.” Its soft feather
is *dεł*, “crane.” Cranes will migrate in that month. Its heart is made
of *tc’il*, “vegetation.”

 This one will be called *at’ątso*, “leaves large.” Its soft feathers
are made of *nalta‛*, “rain” and its heart of *niyol* “wind.” In this
month the antelope have their young.

 This month will be called *ya’icdjactcillε*. Its soft feathers will be
*djadεyac*, “Young antelope.” Vegetation will begin to ripen its fruit.
Its heart will be *xadots’osi*, “slim heat.”

 This one will be called *ya’icdjatso*, “seeds large.” Its soft feather
is made of *ndjijoc*, “little strings of rain” and its heart of *xado‛*
“heat.” In this month deer have their fawns. The Pleiades come up in
this month and they will lie on the backs of the fawns.

 This month will be called *nt’ą ts’osi*, “slender ripe.” Its soft
feather will be *niłtsą’ bikąi*, “male rain.” Its heart is made of
*nd’ats’osi*, “slender ripe.”

 This will be called *nt’atso*, “large ripe.” At the end of it all
vegetation will be mature. That will be its heart. Its soft feather will
be *niłts’a ba’at*, “rain female.”

 He had now placed all six (of the summer months).

 Then he asked Turquoise Boy who was to step inside (the sun) where he
was from. “I am from the east side of Pelado Peak,” replied Turquoise
Boy. “Step inside,” he told him. “Put the flute made of large reed with
twelve holes under your shirt. Let the Mirage People step in with you.
By means of them you will pass by unseen.” “All right,” he replied. “but
whenever I pass by I shall be paid by a person’s death. Not only your
people here, but wherever they move they must pay it. I have 102 roads
and that number of people will die.”

 Then he asked White-shell Boy where he was from. “I belong on the west
side of Pelado Peak. I am White-shell Boy,” he replied. “You step into
the moon,” he told him. “Hereafter if something happens you two will
trade places.”

 Although there were four lines of guards, Coyote came without being
seen. First Man covered up the drawing from Coyote. Small Wind <span
id="page_136">p. 136</span> warned him that Coyote was about to say
something unfortunate. He had gone to see Black God where he had fire.
“Why didn’t they tell us about it?” he said. Over there he had made a
picture of the sun, but what kind is not known. He handed it to Black
God who got angry, said “gaaa,” and tore it up. Coyote ran off because
Black God was the one person he feared.

 He had made a drawing on a background, white above and yellow below. He
had drawn lines across it with turquoise, abalone, jet, white shell, and
rock crystal, five lines in all. He had this under his blanket fold.

 “Why did you hide this matter from me? Tell what is on this. You
wouldn’t tell me because you said I would make everything crooked. It is
true I did that, but not on my own initiative. With you, First Woman, as
my leader, I did it. Your leadership was altogether unfortunate. You
told me you wanted to win. By your direction I took the young of
*tohołtsodi*. I did a little better than that however.” Saying this, he
put the stick with which he had made the drawing down in the center.

 Then Young Wind told First Man that he must guess what the drawing
meant or it would be established. He told him in detail what was
intended by each mark. First Man began to explain the design. “You drew
this with turquoise to represent the green vegetation. You mean that the
vegetation has fallen off by the line drawn with abalone. The line of
jet means that the leaves are all off and that there are black
horizontal stripes on the mountains. The line drawn with white shell is
for the mountain tops covered with snow. The rock crystal line is for
ice to which all the water has turned. You have put down six on the
other side. What will the names be? What more are you to do?”

 “We will get all mixed. You finish it,” Coyote said and went home.

 He put them in the sun. When they were making the sun, they sang this
way.

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">His face will be blue.<br />
His eye marks will be black.<br />
His mouth mark will be black.<br />
A horizontal yellow mark will be across his cheek.<br />
His horns will be blue.<br />
He placed it in the sky with a mirage.<br />
</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 Saying this, First Man chewed a medicine called *adzilł’ijtso* and
blowing it out of his mouth sprinkled the sun in four places. He then
put the sun in the sky and it began to move. “I will go to this place
called *dzaxadzis*, “low place,” or “reservoir” and there I will eat
lunch. The blue horse that I ride will eat there also. . . .”

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

 He traveled. By the time he went down, the people were nearly roasted,
“You nearly burned them,” he said. The next time he passed over higher
up. This made twice he had crossed over. It was very warm and the people
nearly boiled. He went over the third time and it was hot. Again he
raised it up and when the sun went over the fourth time the temperature
was just right.

 Then they made a model of the world, so large. Pelado Peak was adorned
with White-shell, Mount Taylor was decorated with turquoise, San
Francisco Peaks with abalone, La Plata Mountain with jet, *dziłnaxodiłε*
with mirage. They made the heart of the earth, named *tc’ol’i*, of
jewels. It was made round. “This will be called *yoditdzil* (Rule
Mountain) and this *niłtsadzil* (Rain Mountains). Then he made a
mountain ridge and placed it north and south. *noxoziłi* was its skull.
They covered it with *bεc*, “iron” or “obsidian” and stuck arrowheads up
around it. They became the black peaks that stand up. Way over on the
west side they made its breast. Water flows out of the ground there.
“Here it will be called prairie,” he said. Here where water will flow
are the pericardis and diaphragm. The stream at its base will be called
*ałnasdlį* “flowing across each other.”

 “Let those having seed plant them on Pelado Peak,” he said. Gray Pine
Squirrel planted pines and Black Squirrel, spruce, Blue-jays planted
Piñons, and Small Squirrel, cedar. After that, all the people each
planted the seed of the vegetation on which he lives. They still grow on
the earth.

 First Man then took the soil he brought from the third world and put
down Pelado Peak, Mount Taylor, San Francisco Peaks, La Plata Mountains,
four of them, He put ground-up mirage stone on *dziłnaodiłε* and
precious hard stones on *tc’ol’i*. “Who brought up the stone?” he asked,
“I did,” replied Cañon Wren. He took that stone, pounded it up, and
sowed the pieces back and forth. They became the rocks which stand in a
line.

 Then the four people who stand under the earth began to sing, and,
moving away from each other they stretched out the earth. The mountains
grew large.

 They say they have them in Mesa Verde. Now it was complete.

 He put the Pleiades in place, and then *atsεts’oz*, *hastin sαkk’ai*,
*atsεtso yikaisdat*, *gaxat’e*, *naxokǫs biką*, *naxokos bi’adε*, and
here put *bεkon*,<span id="page_137_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_137_note_1)
He placed Coyote’s star also. Then Coyote said, “These will <span
id="page_138">p. 138</span> be my stars,” as he pulled out hairs from
his head and blew them up.

 They appeared as red stars. Then Coyote gathered up all the other stars
and, blowing four times, sent them to the sky in unplanned clusters.
First Man was going to arrange them all, but Coyote did this. “They look
nice that way,” he said, and went back home.

 Over here they made a representation of the sun on a rock, and it is
there to this day. (By means of it they know the days \[?\])

 It was day again. A person died. When she had been dead four days they
talked about it. “Where has she gone?” they asked. Two persons went east
and returned without results. Two went south. Two went west. Then two
went north. “She isn’t in any of these places,” they reported. Then the
two who carry the corpse, one in front and one behind, put on masks and
went to the place where the people had come up from the lower world.
When they looked down, they saw the woman who had died sitting below
combing her hair. The two men became nervous and that is why those who
see a ghost become nervous. When they returned, they reported that the
dead person was sitting below. First Man said, “They will not die for
all time. Women will not have menstrual periods. They will not give
birth to babies.” He took up a stick over which skins are draped for
dressing. It was painted black. Throwing this into the water which stood
there he said, “If this floats up people will not finally die.” Coyote
picked up an ax and throwing it in the water said, “If this floats up
people will not die.” The ax sank, but the stick floated. Because it
floated, a person’s soul comes to life again. Because the ax sank people
die.

 A sapsucker came there. “Menses have become,” she said. “A person’s
hair will not turn gray. It will remain black,” he said. Soon a western
robin came there. “Children,” she said, “my head has become completely
gray.”

 “The men shall work hard. They shall plant and bring the wood. The
women too shall work. They shall prepare the food. The women may marry.
The men may marry,” he said. Coyote came there and said, “Cousin, I am
married.” That is why men marry.

 First Woman thought about it and resolved to be the leader in these
matters. She concluded that she would not be the only one to commit
adultery, but that women in general would do that. She planned that it
would be hard for men and women, once attached, to separate again. She
decided that both men and women should have medicine to attract each
other. Then she made a penis of turquoise. She rubbed loose cuticle from
the man’s breast. This she mixed with yucca fruit. She <span
id="page_139">p. 139</span> made a clitoris of red shell and put it
inside the vagina. She rubbed loose cuticle from a woman’s breast and
mixed it with yucca fruit. She put that inside the turquoise penis. She
combined herbs with waters of various kinds which should be for
producing pregnancy. She placed the vagina on the ground and beside it
the penis. Then she blew medicine from her mouth on them. That is why
when people marry nowadays the woman sits on the left side.

 “Now you think,” she said to the penis. It did so and its mind extended
across Mesa Verde. When the woman’s organ thought its mind went nearly
half way across and returned to her hips. That is why her longing does
not extend to a great distance.

 “Let them shout,” she said. The penis shouted very loud, but the vagina
had a weak voice. “Let them have intercourse and try shouting again,”
she said. When they tried again penis could not shout loud, but vagina
had a good voice. The penis had lost its voice. As the organs were being
put in place between the legs Coyote came. He pulled some of his beard
out, blew on it, and placed it between the legs of both the man and
woman. “It looks nice that way,” he said.

 While First Woman was doing this Great Snake, second chief, had been
biting the people and killing them. Bear, who was the next chief in
rank, had torn people. For these reasons both Great Snake and Bear were
discharged from being chiefs. Panther and Otter didn’t do anything and
because of that their skins have value. To this day, if a chief does
something bad he is discharged from office. “There will be chiefs,” they
said. “Now go wherever you like,” he said. “I am studying about
something else. There will be people.”

 It happened they were traveling in Mesa Verde with a gourd dipper. They
were traveling with a cat. They were bewitching the people who died as a
consequence. Many people died.

 There was a well behaved girl who had her hair covered with images of
coyote, bluebird, and other birds made of turquoise. She had, besides, a
disc of turquoise so large that a man standing could (just) put his
hands on top of it. There were twelve white tails (eagles) and twelve
red tails (hawk) fastened to its border.

 The tribe moved away with her, going to *dziłnadjinnε* (Ute Mountain)
and then to *kittsilbito˙*, “Kittsil its spring.” They were doing the
same thing at both places. The people were dying and they were
suspicious of each other. They moved away from the others and settled at
*xats’abitoγi* (Dolores). At that place there was witching again. The
people would not listen to advice and they moved to a place below
*dzilicdlai*. <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> Then the chief said they
would go to *xadjinai*. They all consented to this. Finally, they came
back and settled at kintεł (the Aztec Ruin). Then fighting began, for
the holy people wanted to kill the girl to get her treasures. Some of
the people remained at Aztec and others moved to *kindoł’ijε* (House
Blue). They came there to fight also and they moved again to Mesa Verde.
After that some of them went to explore Chaco Canon. They found a good
place for farms, much wild fruit, and plentiful game including deer,
antelope, and mountain sheep. They decided to move there.

 Then the sun had intercourse in a magical way with a woman named
*naxoditdai*, “She picks up little things.” This woman found herself
pregnant and in nine days gave birth to a boy. Because of that the
normal gestation period is nine months. Fifteen days after this boy was
born he was grown up. For that reason a man matures in fifteen years. He
ran a footrace around Mount Taylor. He had a bow and arrows and began
killing pack-rats.

 Large-fly came to him and said “Grandson, what are you doing? You
should go to your father. Sun is your father. If you wish to go to him
step on this,” indicating a rainbow. He stepped on the rainbow and was
carried to the summit of Mount Taylor and then to Pelado Peak and the
sand dunes and was finally landed in front of Sun’s door at a place
called *i’a’itsε’na’*, “Magpie’s tail.”

 “No one goes around here with us. What do you come for?” the sun asked.
Being instructed by small wind he replied, “I have a hard time and come
to you for help.”

 (Omission of tests.)

 “You are certainly my son,” the sun assured him. When four days had
passed, they two came to the middle of the sky. The sun put his hand in
his blanket fold and drew forth a golden plate. He put water in this and
mixed in some pollen and made mush. “Eat it with your five fingers,” he
bade his son. He tried, in vain, to eat all of the mush. When he
couldn’t do this he returned the plate with the remnants which the sun
disposed of with four motions, dried the plate, and returned it to his
blanket fold. The sun then gave his child a small wind which should ride
on his ear and tell him what he should know. He gave him also turquoise
earrings which would prevent him from losing when he gambled.

 When he had returned, the people began to talk about the very valuable
earrings which *naxodidai*’s son was wearing. They inquired in vain
where he could have gotten them, saying that there were none like them
in their pueblo. They tried to trade for them, but without success. They
<span id="page_141">p. 141</span> offered him paper bread and finally
the chief offered him a girl to be his wife. He refused to trade, but
agreed to stake them in play. The other side wagered paper bread which
filled a basket two feet high. The gambling was to be with seven wooden
staves thrown as dice. It was agreed that the bet should be decided by
one throw of the dice. The chief claimed the first throw, but the young
man insisted that since the dice were his he should throw first. They
came down white and he won the bread which he put away. Continuing to
bet the turquoise he won all their goods and then their houses. He then
offered to bet all his winnings against a woman. Then he won all the
people.

 When the gambling was done, he made slaves of the people and set them
to work, feeding them with the bread which he had won. He had them build
him a house, the round one that stands there, and then had them make a
race track around it. The people came from the east and the west. Some
of them (those from the west) lined up with him and the others were
opposed.

 He instituted the contest of pushing over a post set in the ground. He
also made a *najǫci* pole. On this he put eagle claws and panther claws,
the claws of all those which scratch. Those who knew how, put ten of
these on the border of the pole. Its name was lightning or measuring
worm. He made a ball, too, which should be thrown through a hole in the
walls of one of the houses. If the ball went through, the other side
would win the young man, but if they missed the hole they would lose.

 The people of *kintel* (Aztec Ruin), *kindołij*, and *tsεdεs’a* were
all talking about the gambler and what he was doing. They found he had
guards watching for him in four places. When they had come, they bet
their wives and the gambler won them. Then he bet the two women, all the
assembled people and himself. He won a second time. Next he bet himself
and his slaves against the land of the others. He won again. The
visitors had only the large turquoise left. The gambler offered to bet
all his winnings and himself against the turquoise. The contest was to
be a footrace on the track which had been made and the contestants were
required at the finish of the race to push over the posts which had been
set in the ground. He had put one of the posts deep into the ground, but
the one he was to push over was put down only a little way.

 When they started on the race around the house the gambler let his
opponent run in the lead. He then began bewitching him by shooting
magical objects into his body. He shot him first in the muscles of the
lower legs, then in the thighs, between the shoulders, and at the base
of his head. The bewitched man staggered as he ran and the gambler
passed <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> him. Wailing went up from the
partisans of the defeated man and shouts from the followers of the
gambler.

 The gambler pushed his post over with ease, but the other ran in slowly
and worked at his post in vain. The sun came there saying he was after
turquoise so large that one standing by it could just reach the top with
his hands. His son replied, “Gamble me for it,” and began to sing, “Come
down all white.” The sun, disappointed and angry, turned back, saying to
himself, “I thought it was mine.” *nohwiłbin*, the gambler, secured the
girl for his wife.

 The sun had intercourse in a magical way with *εstsąditcijε*. She
discovered she was pregnant and in nine days she gave birth to a boy.
Because of that, gestation now lasts nine months. In fifteen days the
child was grown up. “Where does the man live who is father of
*εstsąditcijε*’s son?” they were asking. Various men claimed him,
saying, “He is my son.”

 Large-fly came to the boy, calling him grandson, and telling him his
father wanted him. The boy did not know who was his father. “The sun is
your father,” the fly told him. White stripes appeared upon which the
boy was asked to step. They were sunbeams which transported him to
ts’εt’a. An old corrugated man lived there who was caterpiliar or
tobacco worm. “Your father is dangerous. He kills people with tobacco.”
The old man vomited and gave the boy what he had thrown up. He then was
transported to the door of Sun’s house.

 “It is hard for *nohwiłbin* has won everything from us. That is why I
have come to you. He picked out a turquoise pipe and filled it and
smoked it all. He cleaned the pipe and refilled it. The boy smoked it
all, but began to feel dizzy. The sun cleaned and refilled it. The boy
put in his mouth some of the vomited matter his grandfather had given
him. He then smoked the pipe. Again, it was cleaned and filled and he
smoked it again. Nothing happened to him.

 “You are truly my son, “the sun said and called to his daughter who
came and washed him first in a turquoise basket, then in a white-shell
one, in an abalone one, and finally in a jet one. Then the sun stretched
his hair until it was like *nohwiłbin*’s. He put a black medicine in the
water and stroked his hair with it and then his leg muscles. “The
turquoise which you win in the last bet will be mine,” he said.

 The son agreed to that. They two went to the center of the sky where
the sun prepared a smoke and blew smoke downwards four times. “Go to
*hactc’εoγan* and you will get the things you will use in betting with
*nohwiłbin*. He brushed around in a circle, saying he was looking <span
id="page_143">p. 143</span> for his pay which would be (?) abalone
shell. He gave his son a small wind which would sit on his ear and keep
him informed. He called him “son” and they two arrived on the earth at
the top of *tsεsgit*. *hactc’εoγan* already knew about it and small wind
went as a messenger and summoned an the holy ones to a council. They met
at the hogan called “yellow shining.” There they made wooden staves to
be used as dice. One side was left white and the other was blackened.
They gave bat a small yellow skin as his pay and told him to go up into
the roof of the house in which the gambling would take place. He was
told to take these dice with him and when the other dice were thrown up
in the play to make substitutions and throw them down so the young man
might win. They arranged with large snake that he should go into the
loop used in *najonci*. Red-shell which he was told to wear on his
forehead was given him for pay. Woodpecker was asked to go into a
mudball and white-shell was given him for pay. Rat was hired to go into
another ball and abalone shell was given him as his pay. Measuring Worm
was asked to go into the stick which when thrown would stand up as a
wicket in another game and hard substances were his pay. Whirlwind was
directed to screw one of the trees deep into the ground and hard
substances were his pay. Wood Worm was hired to gnaw off the roots of
the other tree and he was paid with jet.

 In the morning they dressed the young man up and were starting off when
*hactc’εoγan* inquired about his fee and was promised (?). “Do not go
today, my grandchildren,” he said. “Stay another day, there are many on
watch. What are you going to do to confuse *nohwiłbin*’s mind?” It was
morning. In the middle of the day they made his fee. He put hard
substances in an abalone basket, circling around with a brush (?).

 When it was dark the songs started and they continued until morning.
With these songs *nohwiłbin*’s mind was made forked so that it would be
divided. The young man then went where *nohwiłbin*’s wife was getting
water. He asked her for a drink and what was left in the cup he put on
his head. He then went over where she was and played with her. When he
had finished, he returned to his party and reported that he had played
with his opponent’s wife.

 The woman returned and was greeted by her husband with the remark, “Are
you back so soon? You played with someone who resembled me.” “Oh, I have
been false to my husband,” she said to herself; and to her husband she
replied that it was someone who, walking in the distance, looked like
him. “Well, we shall find out during the day,” he <span id="page_144">p.
144</span> replied. When it was fully light, white-shell, abalone shell,
jet, and hard substances, five altogether, were given whirlwind that he
should raise a sandstorm, making it dark and blowing dust in the eyes of
the guards. He asked the small wind on his ear to make *nohwiłbin*’s
mind dwell on the fact that his wife had been tampered with. When he
approached, the woman who sat with her face turned nearly away, laughed
and turned around. “That one was my husband,” she thought the wind told
him.

 “Well, my friend, I have come for something,” he said. “Gamble with
me,” he said and took up the dice and began to swing them back and
forth, singing a gambling song. “We will bet our wives. Just as many on
each side and wager them on one throw of the dice.” He consented to
this, but told his opponent if he hoped to win he must not look up and
must throw the dice against the roof beams. *nohwiłbin* began making
motions and singing, “White, white, white, white.” He threw the dice and
put the basket on the ground. Bat, sitting on the timbers, caught the
dice with his wings and threw down the others in place of them.
*nohwiłbin* jumped toward the basket saying, “You lost.” “No,” said the
young man, “you lost, it is my play.” *nohwiłbin* swore, for he was
still thinking about what had happened to his wife. “Now I will skin
you,” the young man said and threw the dice. Bat caught them and
substituted those of *nohwiłbin* which he had caught in the play before.
“I win from you,” the young man said to *nohwiłbin* who jumped toward
the dice and threw them to one side, swearing.

 “Well, outside this time. You bet all those you won and your own wife.
I will bet as many and my wife,” *nohwiłbin* proposed. They went outside
to play *najonc*. “I will roll my hoop,” *nohwiłbin* said. “No, I have
my own hoop, I won.” Large snake made himself into a hoop saying, “Throw
your pole and when it falls near me I will get up and lie on it. When he
throws his pole he will slam it down hard on me and bust my belly.” He
rolled his hoop and threw his pole with it. It had “claws” tied under
it. It fell close to the hoop which rolled to it and fell over on it.
*nohwiłbin* ran to it and pulled the “claws” to one side. “What are you
doing to my hoop? I win from you.”

 “Well, inside next. We will play measuring worm. If this arched stick
falls curved you win from me. You bet all you have won against an equal
number.” The young man consented to this. When *nohwiłbin* was picking
up an arched stick the young man objected, saying he had one of his own.
“Now I will beat you. You will cry. The young man threw it and it stood
up nicely arched. It was a real measuring worm. *nohwiłbin* tried to
throw it down, but the young man stopped him, saying he had won.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

 “Well,” he said, “You have won all you bet. We will play football
outside. If it drops this side I will win these from you, but if it
falls on the other side you win from me.” “All right,” he said. They
began kicking. He kicked it about so far (two feet) and Woodpecker flew
beside it so that it fell on the other side. “I win,” the young man
said. “Yes,” *nohwiłbin* said, “we will bet ? at one time.” The young
man consented. They were to guess what was in a row of water baskets.
Small wind assisted him. “What is that?” he was asked. “A water basket
with a black cloud inside.” “What is the one beside the white one?” was
the next question. “A water basket containing female rain,” was the
reply. “What is that which stands by the image of a boy?” he was asked
next. “It is an image of a girl and beside it a bird comes up singing.”
He had poison and was witching people. “I have won from you,” the young
man said. “All right,” *nohwiłbin* replied.

 “Now you bet all you have won and your wife too on one play.” He agreed
to this and they went outside where stood the house with a hole through
the wall. “You kick four times and if you miss putting the ball through
you lose, but if it goes through you win.” There was a rat inside the
ball. He pretended to hit it and the rat ran with the ball. They ran
after the ball which went through the hole. “I won from you,” the young
man said. “Well, I will bet you male rain, female rain, all the houses
and farms and myself, too. If you win you may kill me,” *nohwiłbin*
proposed. The young man consented. “We will run a footrace around this
track.” They started running side by side, but the young man, taunting
*nohwiłbin*, ran ahead of him. After they had passed each other several
times and the young man was in the lead, Wind told him that *nohwiłbin*
was about to shoot him with witchcraft in his leg muscle and that he
must dodge the shot by jumping up. When *nohwiłbin* shot him the young
man jumped up and caught up the missile. Next, he was warned the shot
would be at his hip and that he must throw himself to one side. He did
this and again caught the missile. The warning the next time was that he
would be shot between the shoulders and that he should dodge downward.
This he did and again caught the missile. The last time the shot was at
the base of his neck, which he escaped in the same way, again securing
the missile.

 Then *nohwiłbin* ran along beside him taunting him. “I will skin you.
Poor fellow take your time.” When *nohwiłbin* was ahead of him, the
young man, using the missiles he had picked up, shot him in the leg
muscles, in the thigh, between his shoulders, and at the base of his
head. Then he overtook him. “Let him run a long distance behind you,”
<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> Wind advised the young man. Then as
the young man ran by, he said, “Now I will run away from you,
*nohwiłbin*. Poor man. Take it easy.” The young man ran on *nohwiłbin*’s
side of the trail and the onlookers were deceived. *nohwiłbin*’s
partisans were shouting with joy and the young man’s friends were
crying. Then when he came over the hill the matter was reversed. The
friends of the young man began to shout and *nohwiłbin*’s friends cried.

 When the young man came to his tree he grabbed it and ran along with
it. *nohwiłbin* came in slowly and tried in vain to pull his tree out.
He trod the ground down as he fought with it. The young man came up to
him, said, “you take too long at it,” and pulled the tree up. Then
*nohwiłbin* said he was out of breath and, passing him an ax, asked to
be killed with it. Wind warned the young man, however, that with this
ax, the one who wielded it killed himself. “No,” the young man said,
“shut your eyes.” He was going to strike him with his own ax when the
sun came and said, “Wait, my son, he is not boss of anything. Let him be
boss of something. You shoot him up with your black bow.” They two went
there and the young man said, “Step on this,” indicating his bow. He
shot him up into the sky. He stopped halfway up. “For a long time my
thoughts have been at the earth’s heart,” he said. Again he stopped.
“Always my thoughts will come back to the center of the earth,” he said
again. He stopped the third time and said, “My thought will come back to
the center of the world, it may be for good, it may be for evil.” When
he stopped the fourth time he said, “Adios.”

 When this had happened those who had been with *nohwiłbin* began to
cry. “Why do you cry, slaves of *nohwiłbin*, I shall not treat you that
way. Go wherever you please and take back your houses and farms,” the
young man told them. “Thanks,” they all said and embraced each other.
That is the way it is told. The people went off in various directions.
“It will be so always, my son,” the sun said. He breathed out four
times. “The one who stays inside will be mine you are thinking,” he
said.

 The people scattered out, some staying there at Pueblo Bonito and
others investigated about Jemez where they found wide fields. “This will
be our country,” they said. “All right,” the others replied.

 Some of the people returned to *tsεdεs’a* and from there to Salt Cañon.
I do not know how many years they lived there. Then they moved to
*tsεdεgonεnεgε’* where they lived five years.

 Then First Man and First Woman went to the top of *dziłnaodiłε* where
the Navajo people were to be made. There they studied about it <span
id="page_147">p. 147</span> and decided that Navajo would be made where
the round heart of the earth is at *tc’oli’*. They made an image of a
man of the ear of white shell corn, rounded at the end, with which First
Man came into existence. Then they made an image of a woman of the
yellow ear of corn made of abalone shell, rounded at the end, with which
First Woman came into existence. Then there, Turquoise Boy, and on this
he made more so that they would have beads which covered them up and he
who lives in Pelado Peak stepped over them. He who was made in Mount
Taylor arrived and stepped over them. He who was made in San Francisco
Peaks arrived there and stepped over them. He who was made in La Plata
Mountains arrived there and stepped over them. Then he began to sing and
in the morning they began to move and breathe. The newly created pair
couldn’t get up, however. They invited the holy ones in vain. Finally,
they sent messengers to the sky with hard substances as a fee. Then
smoke came out and blowing through the new pair, passed each other and
came out. This made the body hairs and air came out (the pores of the
skin). Six women and six men, twelve all together stood up. Thus Navajo
were made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](nt2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_137">p. 137</span>

<span id="page_137_note_1"></span>[1](#page_137_fr_1) According to the
Franciscan Fathers, the following stars or constellations are meant:
*atsεts’oz*, belt and sword of Orion; *xastin sakk’ai*, a square in
Corvis; *atsεtso*, the fore part of Scorpion: *yik’aisdai* (perhaps
Milky Way); *gaxat’e*, cluster of stars under Canis Major: *naxokǫs
bikąi*, Ursa Major; *naxokǫs bi’adε*, Cassiopeia; *bεkon*, “its fire” in
this case is the North Star.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
