[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04052)  [Next](cc04054.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
25](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p2"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
25:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.iii.x-p4"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="iii.iii.x-p5"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
that they bring me an offering: of every man that giveth it willingly
with his heart ye shall take my offering.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p6"></span>**2.** Alloquere filios Israel ut tollant
mihi levationem: ab omni viro cujus cor voluntarie dederit illam,
sumetis levationem meam.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p7"></span>**3.** And this *is* the offering which
ye shall take of them; gold, and silver, and brass,

<span id="iii.iii.x-p8"></span>**3.** Ista autem est oblatio quam
capietis ab eis, aurum et argentum, et aes,

<span id="iii.iii.x-p9"></span>**4.** And blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine linen, and goats’ *hair,*

<span id="iii.iii.x-p10"></span>**4.** Et hyacinthum, et purpuram, et
vermiculum cocci, et byssum, et pilos caprarum,

<span id="iii.iii.x-p11"></span>**5.** And rams’ skins dyed red, and
badgers’ skins, and shittim-wood,

<span id="iii.iii.x-p12"></span>**5.** Et pelles arietum rubricatas, et
pelles taxorum, et ligna sittim.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p13"></span>**6.** Oil for the light, spices for
anointing oil, and for sweet incense,

<span id="iii.iii.x-p14"></span>**6.** Oleum pro luminari, aromata pro
oleo unctionis et pro thymiamate aromatum:

<span id="iii.iii.x-p15"></span>**7.** Onyx-stones, and stones to be set
in the ephod, and in the breastplate.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p16"></span>**7.** Lapides onychinos, et lapides
plenitudinum pro ephod et pro pectorali.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p17"></span>**8.** And let them make me a sanctuary;
that I may dwell among them.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p18"></span>**8.** Et facient mihi sanctuarium, ut
habitem in medio eorum.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p19"></span>**9.** According to all that I shew
thee, *after* the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the
instruments thereof, even so shall ye make *it.*

<span id="iii.iii.x-p20"></span>**9.** Omnino ut ego ostendam tibi
similitudinem habitaculi, et similitudinem omnium vasorum ejus, sic
facietis.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p21"></span>**10.** And they shall make an ark *of*
shittim wood: two cubits and a half *shall be* the length thereof, and a
cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height
thereof.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p22"></span>**10.** Facient etiam arcam e lignis
sittim: duorum cubitorum et semis erit longitudo ejus, cubitus vero et
semis latitudo ejus, cubiti item et semis altitudo ejus.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p23"></span>**11.** And thou shalt overlay it with
pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it; and shalt make upon
it a crown of gold round about.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p24"></span>**11.** Operiesque eam auro puro,
intrinsecus et extrinsecus, operies inquam, eam, faciesque super eam
coronam auream in circuitu.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p25"></span>**12.** And thou shalt cast four rings
of gold for it, and put *them* in the four corners thereof; and two
rings *shall be* in the one side of it, and two rings in the other side
of it.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p26"></span>**12.** Fundes quoque ei quatuor annulos
aureos, quos pones ad quatuor angulos ejus: duos videlicet annulos in
latere ejus uno, et duos annulos in latere ejus altero.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p27"></span>**13.** And thou shalt make staves *of*
shittim wood, and overlay them with gold.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p28"></span>**13.** Facies praeterea vectes ex
lignis sittim, quos cooperies auro.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p29"></span>**14.** And thou shalt put the staves
into the rings by the sides of the ark, that the ark may be borne with
them.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p30"></span>**14.** Inducesque vectes in annulos qui
erunt in lateribus illius arcrae, ut illis deferetur area.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p31"></span>**15.** The staves shall be in the rings
of the ark: they shall not be taken from it.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p32"></span>**15.** In annulis illius arcae erunt
vectes, non removebuntur ab ea.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p33"></span>**16.** And thou shalt put into the ark
the testimony which I shall give thee.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p34"></span>**16.** Ponesque in arca testimonium
quod dabo tibi.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p35"></span>**17.** And thou shalt make a mercy seat
*of* pure gold: two cubits and a half *shall be* the length thereof, and
a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p36"></span>**17.** Facies et operculum ex auro
mundo: duorum cubitorum et dimidii erit longitudo ejus, cubiti vero et
dimidii latitudo ejus.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p37"></span>**18.** And thou shalt make two
cherubims *of* gold, *of* beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two
ends of the mercy seat.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p38"></span>**18.** Facies etiam duos cherubim
aureos: ductiles facies eos in duabus extremitatibus propitiatorii.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p39"></span>**19.** And make one cherub on the one
end, and the other cherub on the other end: *even* of the mercy seat
shall ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p40"></span>**19.** Facies autem cherub unum in
extremo hinc, et cherub alterum in extremo inde: ex propitiatorio
facietis cherubim, duabus extremitatibus ejus.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p41"></span>**20.** And the cherubims shall stretch
forth *their* wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their wings,
and their faces *shall look* one to another; toward the mercy seat shall
the faces of the cherubims be.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p42"></span>**20.** Expandentque cherubim duas alas
superne tegentes alis suis propitiatorium, et se mutuo aspicient: ad
propitiatorium erunt facies cherubim.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p43"></span>**21.** And thou shalt put the mercy
seat above upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony
that I shall give thee.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p44"></span>**21.** Pones autem propitiatorium super
arcam superne, et in arca pones testimonium quod dabo tibi.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p45"></span>**22.** And there I will meet with thee,
and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the
two cherubims which *are* upon the ark of the testimony, of all *things*
which I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p46"></span>**22.** Conveniamque tecum illuc, et
loquar tecum e propitiatorio inter duos cherubim quod erit super arcama
testimonii, quaecunque praecipiam tibi ad filios Israel.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p47"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.x-p48"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p49"></span>**2.** *Speak unto the children of
Israel.* If any caviller should raise a question as to the time in which
I have thought fit to introduce this history,  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md) although I would not pertinaciously
contend with him, still I have not only a probable, but a sure reason
for my opinion. For it appears to me that I clearly gather from <span
id="iii.iii.x-p52.2"></span>[Exodus
33](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.iii.x-p52.2"></span>,
that the tabernacle was already built before Moses brought down the
first tables from the Mount; for it is there said, that in token of
their divorce, in order that the people might know that they were
repudiated by God, Moses took the tabernacle and pitched it separately
for himself without the camp; not for his own peculiar use, because it
is expressly said that he did not dwell there, but that he went out of
the camp as often as he desired to consult God; whilst Joshua was its
keeper and guardian, (*aedituus.*) But there is no doubt but that this
took place previous to his second ascent to bring down new tables from
the Lord; it is, therefore, clear that the tabernacle was already
erected. If any object that it was not set up till the end of the second
year, the reply is easy, that it was placed anew in its proper position,
so that being everywhere surrounded by the children of Israel, it might
have all its guards, according to the twelve tribes encamped in their
due order; and again, that the tables were then actually deposited in
the Ark of the Covenant, and by them God represented Himself, so that
without them the tabernacle was in a manner empty; finally, that the
solemn dedication is there treated of, for which the due season had not
arrived, until in testimony of God’s presence the covenant was deposited
in the Ark, by way of pledge. In order the better to remove all
ambiguity, we must briefly calculate the time. In the third month from
their exodus the people reached Mount Sinai. On what day the Law was
given is nowhere stated, unless we may probably conjecture that it was
promulgated about the end of that month. Thus there will be eight months
to be computed until the day on which the tabernacle was dedicated, and
the tables deposited in the Ark of the Covenant, as Moses expressly says
in the last chapter of Exodus; but, in the Book of Numbers, he relates
that in the second month of that year the people removed the camp from
that place, and departed to Kibroth-Hattaavah.  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) Now, since between the dedication of
the tabernacle and their departure only one month intervened, we must
admit that the two ascents into the mountain had preceded in order of
time.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p54"></span>Now, the question is, whether he was
called to receive the first tables in the beginning of the fourth month?
If this be allowed, he could scarcely have prescribed the building of
the sanctuary before the end of the eighth month; for it would have been
absurd to give  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) the tables of
God’s paternal favor between the two ascents, while the separation of
the tabernacle was testifying of their divorce from Him. Thus, then, I
establish the fact, that four whole months were employed in this long
and difficult work. And surely it was wonderful that so short a time
should suffice; had not incredible activity surpassed all men’s
expectation, whilst they all emulously devoted themselves with unwearied
labor to hasten the work. And it is probable, that after God had
established His covenant, He immediately delivered the ordinances
respecting the tabernacle and its adjuncts; lest the people should be
without the external exercises of religion, which we have seen to be so
very necessary. But after the completion of the work, Moses was again
commanded to come nigh to God with Nadab, Abihu, and the seventy elders;
and after the offering of sacrifices, he was taken up into the cloud to
hold familiar communion with God, where he passed about a month and a
half. Having returned, and being made aware of the rebellion of the
people, the slaughter of the three thousand took place, and he commanded
the people to mourn. How long he remained we know not, but it is
probable that at least a month passed before he was recalled We have now
more than nine months; and if we add the month and a half during which
he was kept in the mount, we shall not be far from the end of the year.
God then reconciled Himself to the people, and thus the legitimate
dedication of the tabernacle soon followed, which took place in the
second year at the beginning of the first month. The Passover having
been celebrated, the sign of removal was given in the second month.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p56"></span>If any disagree with me, I would now
have them answer me, how it is consistent that Moses, having detected
the people’s transgression, should then have begun to exhort them to the
building of the sanctuary, whereas in his whole address there is no
mention made of idolatry? Surely, all things well considered, we must be
ready to confess that the people were still loyal when they so heartily
consecrated their property to God. But the whole question is
sufficiently settled by what I have alleged on the testimony of Moses,
viz., that before he came down with the first tables the tabernacle was
already in being, unless, perhaps, it be objected that it was another
tabernacle, and different from that which was afterwards set up by God’s
command. But this is a very foolish cavil, for Moses had no authority to
make an earthly dwelling-place for God, and to impose on it the sacred
name whereby the sanctuary is always honored; and he expressly relates
that God’s glory appeared in it, in order that the people might more
surely know that they were separated from God for their uncleanness, of
which matter we shall again speak in its proper place. Again, the word
<span id="iii.iii.x-p56.1"></span>לקח*, lakach,*  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md) implies that Moses *took* the
tabernacle out of the camp, to transfer it to another place. If any one
should now object that the tabernacle was arranged according to the
pattern which Moses saw in the mount, the reply is easy, that Moses was
not then first in the mountain instructed in the true worship of God and
heavenly mysteries, when he was kept there forty days, but already
before the promulgation of the Law; nor is there any doubt but that the
same things were then shewn to him which he had learned before, in order
that the people might be more disposed to diligent meditation on the
Law. For, from the length of time, they might acknowledge that nothing
was omitted which it would be useful for them to know; since, although
God might have so instructed His servant in a moment that nothing should
have been wanting, still He chose gradually, and as if at His ease, to
form for Himself a perfect teacher; and this concession was made to the
infirmity of the people. For thus we read in <span
id="iii.iii.x-p57.4"></span>[Ex
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p57.4"></span>*,*

<span id="iii.iii.x-p58"></span>"Behold I come unto thee in a thick
cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee
for ever."

<span id="iii.iii.x-p59"></span>And again, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p59.1"></span>[Ex
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p59.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.iii.x-p60"></span>"And the people stood afar off, and
Moses drew near unto the thick darkness, where God was."

<span id="iii.iii.x-p61"></span>From whence it is plain that there is no
absurdity in saying that he had already seen the pattern of the
tabernacle wherein God would be worshipped.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p62"></span>But lest any should object that I rest
upon conjectures only, Moses himself plainly shews that, before he
received the tables, God gave him instructions respecting the making of
the tabernacle; for twice in chapter 25 it is said, “Thou shalt put in
the Ark the testimony which I shall give thee,” verses 16 and 21; from
whence it is clear that the tables were not yet given, when from God’s
command he described the whole structure; and thence we again infer
that, when the tabernacle was set up, he went up into the mount to bring
down the tables which were to be placed in the Ark. But, before he
begins to treat of the construction of the tabernacle, he imposes a
tribute upon the people, that each, according to his means, should
contribute materials both for the tabernacle itself and for all its
furniture. The heaving, or, <span id="iii.iii.x-p62.1"></span>תרומה,
*therumah,*  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) is here put simply
for an offering; and is not, as in other passages, distinguished from
another kind of sacrifice, which is called <span
id="iii.iii.x-p63.3"></span>תנופה, *thenuphah.* But the Israelites are
simply commanded to bestow from their abundance what may suffice for the
worship of God. It is indeed certain that all we have is God’s, and that
all He bountifully gives us is polluted unless we devote it to His
glory. Still in His indulgence He permits us the free use of all, if
only we testify that it remains under His power, and are ready to expend
it as He shall command. Thus we duly offer alms, as sacrifices of,
sweet-smelling savor; although the rich may not exhaust himself to
poverty, but, whilst he relieves the poor, enjoys the goods which he
possesses. In sum, whatever we offer to God is like the first-fruits,
whereby we testify that all we have is consecrated to His glory. Now,
although He required no assistance from the people for the building and
adorning of His tabernacle, since it was He who, for the maintenance of
them all, daily rained down manna from heaven; yet he would have every
one, from the very least to the greatest, bring together, in testimony
of their piety, whatever was necessary for the sacred work. But what He
then would have spent on the visible sanctuary, He now requires for the
building of His spiritual temple. Properly speaking, it is He alone that
builds His Church; yet He uses the work of men, and will have many
builders associated with Him, that the edifice of His Church may arise
in some measure by the labor of men; as also He ascribes the praise of
its prosperity and success to them. Meanwhile we offer nothing which He
Himself has not bestowed; just as the Israelites gave nothing but what
had been derived from his bounty alone. Therefore, He distributes the
gifts of His Spirit in certain measures, (<span
id="iii.iii.x-p63.4"></span>[1Co
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p63.4"></span>;) that, as each has received more or less,
he may employ it on the building of the Church. But this should be the
best incentive to activity, that none is so poor or humble but that his
offering is acceptable and pleasing, however small it may be, and almost
worthless in the eyes of men. Moreover, it must be observed, that the
tribute is not demanded authoritatively, but it is declared that each
should freely offer what he pleased; for, from the beginning, Paul’s
word was true, that “God loveth a cheerful giver,” (<span
id="iii.iii.x-p63.5"></span>[2Co
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p63.5"></span>;) and all Scripture teaches us that no
obedience is pleasing to God except what is voluntary; for, although the
word <span id="iii.iii.x-p63.6"></span>ידבנו*,* *yidbenu,*  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md) is variously rendered by the
translators, the sum comes to this, that the gift of each would be
pleasing to God according to the cheerful alacrity of his mind. The old
interpreter (*i.e.,* the *Vulgate*) has it “*qui* *offert ultroneus,*”
(he who offers voluntarily;) but this is rather paraphrastic than
literal.  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md) Others differ from
each other: some understand the relative as referring to the offering,
and translate it, “*whose* heart shall have voluntarily given it;”
others, “He who shall have shewn his heart liberal, or willing.” The
second rendering is the right one.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p66"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p67"></span>**3** *And this is the offering.* Hence,
what I have before said is more fully continued, viz., that what the
poor offer of their little will not be eclipsed by the abundance of the
rich, since God deigns to reckon goats’ hair among the sacred offerings
not less than gold, purple, and precious stones. Again, by the varied
and manifold contributions, He would shew, as in a glass, that a variety
of gifts are necessary to the building of the spiritual temple, as Paul
sets forth in <span id="iii.iii.x-p67.1"></span>[Ro
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.iii.x-p67.1"></span>
and <span id="iii.iii.x-p67.2"></span>[1Co
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.iii.x-p67.2"></span>
The liberality of the rich was indeed more splendid; but, as they did
not scruple to mix their gold and silver, blue, purple, and precious
stones, with brass, iron, and other common materials, so also,
now-a-days, those who aid the edification of the Church by their more
excellent gifts, admit, without contempt or dislike, into fellowship
poor brethren, to whom it is not given to equal them.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p68"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p69"></span>**8** *And let them make me a
sanctuary.* By first setting before them an inestimable recompense, God
stirs up the people to give largely; for, although liberality is praised
by all as a most excellent virtue, yet no one willingly deprives himself
of his own to bestow it upon others, since all think that it is so much
lost to themselves, unless they have some compensation in view.
Wherefore, that they may expend cheerfully, God promises that He will
dwell among them, than which nothing is more desirable. But we must
beware of imagining anything inconsistent with the nature of God, for He
who sits above the heavens, and whose footstool is the earth, could not
be enclosed in the tabernacle; but, because in His indulgence for the
infirmities of an ignorant people, He desired to testify the presence of
His grace and help by a visible symbol, the earthly sanctuary is called
His dwelling amongst men, inasmuch as there He was not worshipped in
vain. And we must bear in memory what we have lately seen, that it was
not the infinite essence of God, but His name, or the record of His
name, that dwelt there. This was the object of the expressions; that the
Israelites ought not to be slow or lazy in setting up the tabernacle,
because by these means they would obtain for themselves an inestimable
advantage. Another clause follows, that the artificers should copy the
pattern shewn to Moses, and not dare to invent anything, since it would
be a profanation to mix up anything human with the commands of God; on
which matter we shall treat more diffusely when we speak generally of
the types. Now is described the form of the Ark and its covering: for
the composition of the tabernacle, and its various parts, which Moses
now only slightly adverts to, will be presently repeated at greater
length in chapter 32. But, although the tabernacle was called God’s
house, yet there was a more express image of His glory in the Ark of the
Covenant; because the Law, whereby God bound the people to Himself, was
there deposited. The material was shittim-wood, covered or overlaid with
plates of gold. As to the species of the tree,  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md) not even the Hebrews are agreed among
themselves, although we may conjecture that it was beautiful and costly;
yet God would have gold over its whole surface, and even shining on its
staves, that the dignity of the Law might be enhanced But here a
question may arise, which introduces many others with it, how the
sumptuous splendor both of the Ark, as well as the tabernacle and all
its utensils, contributed to the worship of God? for it is certain that
God would never be worshipped except agreeably to His nature; whence it
follows, that His true worship was always spiritual, and therefore by no
means comprised in external pomp.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p71"></span>But the great number and intricacy of
the ceremonies were so far from awakening piety, that they were even the
occasion of superstition, or era foolish and perverse confidence. Again,
so many and such various rites seem to have had no other tendency than
to feed curiosity. It will be therefore worth while briefly to premise
something respecting this point. They are, in my judgment, at fault, who
think that the eyes of the people were captivated by these magnificent
sights, lest their religion, being stripped of all ornament, should
become dishonored, when amongst the Gentiles their false worship was
splendid even to a miracle; and thus a depraved rivalry might affect
their minds,  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md) if the beauty of
the tabernacle did not at least equal the pomp of others, as though the
God they worshipped were inferior to idols. On the same grounds they
imagine that the Jews were burdened with many observances; lest*,* if
God had only sparingly and slightly exercised them, they would in their
natural curiosity, have sought in all directions after profane trifles.
They tell part of the truth, but not the whole; for I admit that this
was given to the ancient people, in order that, when they saw the
tabernacle so brilliantly ornamented, they might be inspired with
greater reverence. I also admit that, by God’s command, they were
engrossed with many ceremonies, that they might not seek after strange
ones; but if this had been the only object proposed in them, the whole
legal service would have only availed for ostentation in its shadows and
histrionic pomps. But it is most absurd to think that God so trifled
with His people. We see, too, how honorably David and the Prophets speak
of these exercises.  <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md) It is,
therefore, impiety to suppose that the legal rites were like farces
composed in imitation of the Gentiles. In order, then, to preserve their
honor and dignity, we must remember the principle to which we have
lately alluded, viz., that all of them were arranged according to the
spiritual pattern which had been shewn to Moses in the mount. (<span
id="iii.iii.x-p73.2"></span>[Ex
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p73.2"></span>.) And this both Stephen, and the Apostle in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, wisely observed, when they would reprove the
gross follies of the people who continued to be wrapped up in the
external ceremonies, as if religion were comprised in them. (<span
id="iii.iii.x-p73.3"></span>[Ac
7:44](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p73.3"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.x-p73.4"></span>[Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p73.4"></span>.) Stephen and the Apostle, therefore, are
our best expositors, that the tabernacle, the altar, the table, the Ark
of the Covenant, were of no importance except in so far as they referred
to the heavenly pattern, of which they were the shadows and images.
Thence their entire utility, and even their legitimate use, depended on
the truth, (which they represented.)  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md) For the slaughter of an ox profits
nothing in itself, nay, it is but an unimportant thing; and so all the
sacrifices, except that they were types, would have been thought nothing
of. Whence we gather that there is the greatest difference between the
ceremonies of the Law and the profane rites of the Gentiles, for they
differ from each other not only inasmuch as God is the author of the
one, and that the temerity of men has foolishly invented the other, but
because among the Gentiles their religion was entirely comprised in
these bare and empty pomps; whilst God, by these rudiments, which He
gave to His people, elevated pious minds, as it were by steps, to higher
things. Thus the Gentiles seemed to themselves duly to propitiate (their
gods) when they offered victims; whilst the sacrifices of the Jews were
acceptable to God, because they were exercises of repentance and faith.
So the Law instructed the Jews in the spiritual worship of God, and in
nothing else, though it were clothed in ceremonies agreeably to the
requirements of the age. For, before the truth was fully made known, the
childhood of the Church was to be directed by earthly elements, and
thus, though there was great affinity and likeness between the Jews and
Gentiles as regarded the external form of their religious service, yet
its end was widely different. Moreover, when we would seek the body or
substance of the ancient shadows, and the truth of the figures, we may
learn them, not only from the Apostles, but also from the Prophets, who
everywhere draw the attention of believers to the kingdom of Christ; yet
their clearer explanation must be sought in the Gospel, where Christ,
the Sun of Righteousness, shining forth, shews that their fulfillment
exists in Himself alone. But, although by His coming He abolished these
typical ceremonies as regards their use, yet at the same time He
established the reverence justly due to them; since they have no claim
to be held in esteem on any other grounds, except that their completion
is found in Him; for, if they are separated from Him, it is plain that
they are mere farces,  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) since
neither the blood of animals, nor the sweetness of fat, nor aromatic
odors, nor candles, nor anything of that sort, have any power to
propitiate God. This indeed must be remembered, that the Jews did not
pay attention to the legal sacrifices in vain, since the promises were
annexed to them; as often, therefore, as these sentences occur, “your
iniquity shall be blotted out,” — “ye shall appear before my face*,*” —
“I will hear you from the sanctuary,” we are reminded that all the
ancient figures were sure testimonies of God’s grace and of eternal
salvation; and thus Christ was represented in them, since all the
promises are in Him, yea, and amen. (<span
id="iii.iii.x-p75.3"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p75.3"></span>.) Yet it by no means follows from hence
that there were mysteries hidden in all their details, since some, with
mistaken acuteness, pass over no point, however trifling, without an
allegorical exposition; as, in this passage, for instance, the
dimensions of the ark afford them matter of speculation.  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md) But it will be enough for the sound
and sober-minded to know that God would have His Law deposited in a
handsome vessel, in order that its majesty should be recognized. He
commanded that the ark itself should be carried with staves, that the
hands of the Levites might not touch it, and thus that its sanctity
might be the greater

<span id="iii.iii.x-p77"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p78"></span>**16.** *And thou shalt put into the ark
the testimony.* The title of “the testimony*,*” which is often given to
the law, indicates that something more is contained in it than the rule
of a just and holy life; viz., the compact whereby God bound Himself to
His people, and His people to Himself; therefore the words “the table of
the covenant,” are afterwards used instead of “the testimony.” Thus the
word <span id="iii.iii.x-p78.1"></span>עדת,  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md) *gneduth,* in this passage, and
similar ones, is equivalent to a contract, which is commonly called a
convention In this sense the Prophet in <span
id="iii.iii.x-p79.2"></span>[Ps
114](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.iii.x-p79.2"></span>
calls by the name of testimonies, not only the Commandments, but
whatever God hath delivered by the hand of Moses for the salvation of
His people. In <span id="iii.iii.x-p79.3"></span>[Ps
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p79.3"></span>, the word testimony is added as if in
explanation of the word law: “The law of the Lord is perfect; the
testimony of the Lord is sure;” as in <span
id="iii.iii.x-p79.4"></span>[Isa
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p79.4"></span>, where it is said, “To the law and to the
testimony,” it is not that two different things are referred to, but the
utility of the law is commended, because it contains all that God would
have testified to His people.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p80"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p81"></span>**17** *And thou shalt make a
mercy-seat.* The primary root of the verb <span
id="iii.iii.x-p81.1"></span>כפר, *caphar,* from whence this noun is
derived,  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md) is used for “to smear
with pitch,” but in the Hiphil conjugation, it signifies either to
expiate, or to purge, or to receive into favor; whence <span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.4"></span>כפר, *copher,* is expiation, as we have seen
elsewhere; and <span id="iii.iii.x-p82.5"></span>כפרת, *caphoreth,* a
covering or lid. Yet I doubt not but that Moses alludes in this word to
a metaphorical meaning, for the law requires a covering to conceal our
transgressions. And it is probable that, when Paul calls Christ <span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.6"></span>ἱλαστήριον*,* (<span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.7"></span>[Ro
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.7"></span>,) and John <span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.8"></span>ἱλασμὸν, (<span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.9"></span>[1Jo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.9"></span>,) they both refer to this figure, because
God was propitiated towards believers by the covering of the Law, so as
to shew Himself favorable to them by hearing their vows and prayers. For
as long as the law stands forth before God’s face it subjects us to His
wrath and curse; and hence it is necessary that the blotting out of our
guilt should be interposed, so that God may be reconciled with us. Nor
is it without reason that David exclaims, after he has proclaimed the
righteousness of the law, “Who can understand his errors?” (<span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.10"></span>[Ps
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.10"></span>.) Whence we gather that, without a
propitiation, the law does not bring us near to God, but accuses us
before Him. And assuredly, when I consider all things, it seems to me a
tame explanation, that Moses spoke literally of the cover, when he
 <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md) would have the Cherubim turn
their faces toward it, and God promises that He will give His answers
from it. By these honorable distinctions it is exalted above the Ark.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p84"></span><span id="iii.iii.x-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p85"></span>**18** *And thou shalt make two
cherubims.* I have stated in my commentary on Genesis and elsewhere,
 <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md) that there are various opinions
respecting the word cherub; but that those approach most nearly to the
truth who make the <span id="iii.iii.x-p86.3"></span>כ, *caph,* not a
servile, but a radical letter, and take it generally for any image; for
those who suppose the <span id="iii.iii.x-p86.4"></span> כto be a note
of similitude, render it “like a boy;” which in itself is forced, and
besides it is refuted by the words of Ezekiel, (<span
id="iii.iii.x-p86.5"></span>[Eze
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p86.5"></span>, and <span id="iii.iii.x-p86.6"></span>[Eze
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p86.6"></span>,) who calls the forms of a calf, a lion,
and an eagle by this name, as well as the human form. It is enough for
me that the images were winged, which represented angels. Therefore,
when Moses speaks of the angels, who were placed as guards to keep man
away from approaching paradise, he calls them cherubim; not so much in
reference to that time, as to keep the people in the doctrine of the Law
 <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) But God appointed angels, by
whom He exercises His dominion, and who are the ministers of His
blessings, to be a symbol of His presence; for as often as He manifested
Himself to believers by angels, He in a manner extended His hand to
them. On this ground, David, and other Prophets, in order to encourage
themselves to confidence in prayer, often speak of God as “dwelling
between the cherubims*,*” (<span id="iii.iii.x-p87.2"></span>[Ps.
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001.md), [Ps.
64:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p87.2"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.x-p87.3"></span>[Isa
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p87.3"></span>;) as much as to say, that He conversed
familiarly with His people, since His virtue exercises itself by His
angels. That they covered the lid of the ark with their extended wings,
I do not imagine to have been done to hide it, but to mark the readiness
of their obedience, for the extension of their wings is equivalent to
their being prepared for the performance of whatever God might command.
Thus they are said to turn their faces towards the mercy-seat, because
they are attentive to the will of God. Moreover, because the fullness of
the Godhead resides in Christ, He justly declares that, in His descent
upon earth, the heavens were opened that the angels might ascend and
descend. Their looking towards each other indicates that harmony in
which the angels are united for performing the commands of God. It is
indeed a plausible conceit,  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md)
that the two cherubim were the Old and New Testaments, which look from
one to the other, and surround the mercy-seat, inasmuch as Christ is
their common object; but this notion vanishes before the contradiction
of many passages of Scripture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc04053.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p50"></span> “*Calvine* here hath a singular opinion
by himself concerning the time of erecting the tabernacle, with the
parts and members thereof, which begin here to be described; for he
thinketh that the tabernacle was built and set up before Moses had
brought the first tables; and his reasons are these: — 1. There is
mention made of the tabernacle, 33-7*,* immediately after Moses was come
down with the tables in his hand, which he broke; and therefore the
tabernacle being presently after spoken of, must be made before.
*Answer.* This was not the great tabernacle which was afterwards made
for God’s service, for that tabernacle was not set without the Host, as
this was, but in the midst: *Lippoman.* But it was Moses’s tabernacle,
whither the people had access to consult with God. *Jun.* 2. In this
chapter it is said, verse 16, ‘Thou shalt put in the ark the testimony,
which I shall give thee;’ therefore he received the testament before he
made the ark, wherein he was to put it. *Answer.* This followeth not,
that the ark was therefore made first, but that the form thereof was
described first how it should be made, which was in the Mount; after
which form it was made after that Moses had received the tables of the
testimony. 3. When Moses cometh to exhort the people to build the
tabernacle, he maketh no mention at all of their apostasy and idolatry;
therefore it is evident, that they were yet sound, they had not yet
committed that sin, seeing they do so cheerfully consecrate their best
things to the Lord.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p51"></span>"*Answer.* — l. The people had already
received correction for their fault; and Moses, in sign of God’s
indignation against them, had removed his tent from among them, 33-7;
therefore it cannot be said that no mention is made of their falling
away. 2. The people, such especially as were touched with remorse for
their sin, did so much the more shew themselves cheerful in God’s
service, as a sign of true repentance. 3. And Moses having entreated the
Lord for His people, would not be still harping upon the same string, in
upbraiding them with their fault, lest he might altogether have
discouraged them.

<span id="iii.iii.x-p52"></span>*"Wherefore,* it is very clear that the
tabernacle was not erected and set up before the receiving of the
tables, but after; for these reasons: — 1. Because Moses is here bidden
to make the tabernacle according to all which the Lord should show him
in the Mount; but the form thereof was first showed him in the Mount,
when he continued there forty days and nights, in the end whereof he
received the tables, <span id="iii.iii.x-p52.1"></span>[Deut.
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p52.1"></span>; therefore the tabernacle could not be made
before the fashion thereof was shewed to Moses. *Calvine* here answereth
that divers times before this Moses was in the Mount with God, when the
fashion of the tabernacle might be shewed him. But it is evident, 24:18,
that this was done in the forty days and nights, when Moses was entered
into the cloud, and there so long continued. 2. It is expressly said
that the tabernacle was reared up in the second year, and the first
month, the first day, xl. 17. It was not then dedicated and set in order
only, as *Calvine* answereth, but then first set up. And in the second
year, in the second month, upon the twentieth day, they removed from
Sinai, which was about a month and a half after; but if the tabernacle
were built before Moses received the tables, he after the finishing
thereof was twice with the Lord, each time forty days; which could not
be, seeing about forty or fifty days after the tabernacle was erected,
the whole camp removed, as is said. 3. Besides, by this means a great
part of Exodus shall be transposed; all that followeth from chap. 35. to
the end, concerning the making and setting up of the tabernacle, should
be in order placed before the 32, 33, and 34, chapters; this being
admitted, that the tabernacle was first erected, before Moses had the
tables delivered to him. Therefore, rather the order of the story is
this: *first,* there is the description of the tabernacle to chap. 30;
*then* followeth the let and impediment to the building of it, the
people’s trans- gression, chap. 32-33; *thirdly,* the execution of God’s
commandment, and framing of the tabernacle, chap. 35:40; *fourthly,* the
erection and setting of it up, chap. xl *Lyranus.”* — Willet’s *Hexapla,
in loco.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc04053.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p53"></span> “<span
id="iii.iii.x-p53.1"></span>Sepulchra concupiscentiae.” — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc04053.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p55"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.x-p55.1"></span>Les
tables comme instrument de la faveur paternelle de Dieu.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc04053.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p57"></span> <span id="iii.iii.x-p57.1"></span>לקח,
the verb (to take,) whose future, <span id="iii.iii.x-p57.2"></span>יקח,
occurs <span id="iii.iii.x-p57.3"></span>[Ex
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p57.3"></span>. — *W*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc04053.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p63"></span> *A.V*., an offering; *margin,*
heave-offering. See note on <span
id="iii.iii.x-p63.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p63.2"></span>*, ante,* p. 132.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc04053.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p63.7"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p64"></span> The third person singular masculine
future of <span id="iii.iii.x-p64.1"></span>נדב, with the pronoun affix
<span id="iii.iii.x-p64.2"></span>נו, *it.* The verb signifies to do, or
give, anything with a cheerful readiness. - *W*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc04053.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p65"></span> The concluding sentence omitted in
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc04053.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p70"></span> “This was perhaps the <span
id="iii.iii.x-p70.1"></span>*acacia horrida,* a kind of mimosa, a native
of Arabia, since the Arabic word resembles the Hebrew. The thorns are
twinned, and nearly equal to the leaves in length. The leaves are
repeatedly winged. The spikes, of white flowers, proceed from the bosom
of the leaves. The wood is of an excellent quality, whence it deserves
the name given by the Greek translators, <span
id="iii.iii.x-p70.2"></span>ξύλα ἄσηπτα, wood that never decays.” —
Illustrated Comment., *in loco. “*The most important material, the wood
for the tent, is just that which is found here most plentifully, while
Palestine is deficient in acacia trees.” — Comp. Theophrast., Hist. P1.
4 3. Prosper Alpinus, de Plant. AEg., 100. 1., “<span
id="iii.iii.x-p70.3"></span>Acaciae arbores copiosissime in montibus
Sinai penes Rubrum Mare positis proveniunt.” Hieron. ad Joel, 4., “<span
id="iii.iii.x-p70.4"></span>Quae ligna in locis cultis, et in Romano
solo absque Arabiae solitudine non inveniuntur. Forskal. Flora AEg.
Arab., p. 56.” Havernick, Introd. Pent., p. 284.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc04053.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p72"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.x-p72.1"></span>Et
fussent induits a essayer de faire plus qu’eux;” and they might be
induced to try to do more than the*y.* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc04053.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p73"></span> Hengstenberg*,. Dissertations on the
Pentateuch,* vol. 2, pp. 504-505, briefly, but most satisfactorily,
enumerates the objects of the Ceremonial Law in reply to the deistical
writers, who, like De Wette, “can find out no rational basis for it*,*”
and can form no other notion of these pedantic regulations, this
gnat-straining, as he calls it, than as the production of a later
priestcraft. “The best apology Hengstenberg says of the Ceremonial Law
lies in pointing out its objects, and these, therefore, we present to
refute the charges brought against it: — *First,* It served to cherish
the religious sentiment. The Israelite was reminded by it in all his
relations, even the most insignificant and external, of God; the thought
of God was introduced into the very midst of the popular life.
*Secondly,* It required the recognition of sin, and thus called forth
the first thing essential for the reception of redemption, a sense of
the need of redemption. The people must be burdened and heavy-laden, in
order that the Lord might say to them, *Come unto me, all ye that are
weary and heavy, laden, and I will give you rest.* The Law was, and was
intended to be, a heavy yoke, and therefore would awaken a longing after
the Redeemer. Everywhere it proclaimed, *Touch not, taste not, handle
not!* and thus was a perpetual remembrancer of sin. *Thirdly,* It served
to separate Israel from the heathen; it erected between the two a wall
of separation, by which communication was prevented. Compare <span
id="iii.iii.x-p73.1"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p73.1"></span>. Not yet strong enough to conquer
heathenism, the people were, so to speak, shut up, to be withdrawn from
its influence, to preserve them for the time in which, armed with power
from on high, they might commence an offensive war against it. The
preliminary limitation effected by the Ceremonial Law served as the
means of the future illimitedness. *Fourthly,* Many things in the
Ceremonial Law served, by impressions on the senses, to awaken reverence
for holy things among a sensual people. The bad consequence of denying
this is, that it will then be necessary to impose a symbolic meaning on
institutions, in which evidently nothing of the kind is to be found.
*Fifthly,* One principal object of the Ceremonial Law lay in its
symbolic meaning. The people, enthralled in visible objects, were not
yet capable of vitally appropriating supersensual truth in words, the
form most suited to their nature. It was needful for the truth to
condescend, to come down to their power of apprehension, to prepare
itself a body from visible things, in order to free the people from the
bondage of the visible. This form was common to the Israelitish religion
with that of the heathen, and therein lies its best apology. Would we
rather not speak at all to the dumb than make use of signs? The
Ceremonial Law was not the opposite to the worship of God in spirit and
in truth, but only an imperfect form of the same, a necessary
preparation for it. The accommodation was only formal, one which did not
alter the essence, but only presented it in large capital letters to
children who could not yet read a small running-hand.” - *Ryland’s
Translation,* Edinburgh, 1847.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc04053.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p73.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p74"></span> Added from *Fr*

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc04053.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p75"></span> *Lat., “*<span
id="iii.iii.x-p75.1"></span>lusorias.” *Fr., “*<span
id="iii.iii.x-p75.2"></span>frivoles et comme badinages."

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc04053.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p75.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p76"></span> “*Rupertus* thus *collecteth,* that as
the Ark is described to be two cubits and a half in length, equal to the
stature of a man, so God hath appeared on earth, and shewed himself unto
the capacity of men ” — *Willet,* Hexapla, *in loco.*

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc04053.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p79"></span> “A testimony, or public evidence,” from
<span id="iii.iii.x-p79.1"></span>עוד, to affirm, or testify. — *W*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc04053.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p82"></span> <span id="iii.iii.x-p82.1"></span>כפרת
*C*. has not derived his explanation of the verb <span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.2"></span>כפר from his usual guide in Hebrew, viz.,
*S.M.;* but his remark, that it signifies to smear over with bitumen, or
pitch, agrees with its generally acknowledged meaning in <span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.3"></span>[Ge
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.3"></span>. It is in the Pihel conjugation, — the
effect of which is frequently the same as that proper to the Hiphil, —
that the verb means to expiate. The noun, as *C*. observes, properly
signifies a covering. — *W.*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc04053.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p82.11"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p83"></span> Addition in *Fr., “*<span
id="iii.iii.x-p83.1"></span>quand il le magnifie tant, et."

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc04053.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p85.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p86"></span> See Commentary on <span
id="iii.iii.x-p86.1"></span>[Genesis
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.iii.x-p86.1"></span>. Calvin Society Translation, vol. 1, p.
186. The fanciful derivation to which *C*. objects, he had found in *S.
M.,* who states it as popular with the Rabbis, But as untenable. — *W*.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc04053.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p86.7"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p87"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.x-p87.1"></span>Que
pour donner goust au peuple de la doctrine de la Loy, et l’accoustumer
aux ceremonies;” as to give the people a taste for the doctrine of the
Law, and to accustom them to its ceremonies — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc04053.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="iii.iii.x-p87.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.x-p88"></span> *Gregorius* in *Gloss. Ord. “*The two
cherubim are the two Testaments. One of them stands on one end of the
mercy-seat, and the other on the other; because what the Old Testament
begins to promise in prophecy respecting the Incarnation of Christ, the
New relates to be perfectly fulfilled. They are made of very pure gold,
because both Testaments are written with pure and simple truth.They
stretch out their wings and cover the oracles; because we (who are God’s
oracles) are protected from imminent errors by the study of sacred
Scripture; and whilst we earnestly look at it, we are covered by its
wings from the mistakes of ignorance. They look towards one another with
their faces turned to the mercy-seat, because the Testaments differ in
nothing, and look mutually to each other; for what the one promises the
other exhibits. And they see the mercy-seat, *i.e.,* the Mediator
between God and men, placed between them; for they would turn away their
faces from each other, if the one promised what the other denied.” — See
also *Bede* in *Gloss. Ord.,* and *Augustin Qoest. in Ex.* 105.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 35:4-19](cc04054.md)
