[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04070)  [Next](cc04072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv.v-p1.2"></span>[Numbers
3](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#000)<span id="iii.iv.v-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv.v-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
3:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p3"></span>**5.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.iv.v-p4"></span>**5.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="iii.iv.v-p5"></span>**6.** Bring the tribe of Levi near, and
present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p6"></span>**6.** Appropinquare fac tribum Levi, et
siste eam coram Aharone sacerdote, ut ministret ei.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p7"></span>**7.** And they shall keep his charge, and
the charge of the whole congregation before the tabernacle of the
congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p8"></span>**7.** Et custodiant custodiam ejus, et
custodiam universi coatus coram tabernaculo conventionis, ut exequantur
cultum tabernaculi.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p9"></span>**8.** And they shall keep all the
instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the
children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p10"></span>**8.** Custodiant quoque omnia utensilia
tabernaculi conventionis, custodiamque filiorum Israel, ut exequantur
culture tabernaculi.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p11"></span>**9.** And thou shalt give the Levites
unto Aaron and to his sons: they *are* wholly given unto him out of the
children of Israel.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p12"></span>**9.** Da inquam Levitas ipsi Aharon, et
filiis ejus: dati, dati namque sunt illi ex filiis Israel.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p13"></span>**10.** And thou shalt appoint Aaron and
his sons, and they shall wait on their priest’s office: and the stranger
that cometh nigh shall be put to death.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p14"></span>**10.** Aharon autem et filios ejus
praeficies, custodientque sacerdotium suum: externus sane qui accesserit
morietur.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p15"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.v-p16"></span><span id="iii.iv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p17"></span>**5.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
This passage contains two heads: *first,* That the Levites should be set
apart for the ministry of the sanctuary and altar; and, *secondly,* That
they should obey the chief priests of the family of Aaron, and do
nothing except by their authority and command. But it has been already
said, and we shall hereafter see again, that the tribe of Levi in
general was divinely chosen to perform the sacred offices; so that the
people might know that no one was worthy of so honorable a charge; but
that it depended on the gratuitous calling of God, whose attribute it is
to create all things out of nothing. In this way, not only was the
temerity of those repressed who might be foolishly ambitious of the
honor, but the whole Church was taught that, in order to worship God
aright, there was need of extraneous aid. For, if the Levites had not
stood between, the Law prohibited the rest of the people from having
access to God, since it brought in the whole human race guilty of
pollution. But, in order that they might be more certainly directed to
the One Mediator, the high priesthood was exalted, and one priest was
chosen to preside over all the rest: on this account God would have the
Levites subject to the successors of Aaron. At the same time, He had
regard to order, for a multitude, which is not governed by chiefs, will
always be disorderly. Yet, it is unquestionable that the supreme power
of Christ was represented in the person of Aaron; and hence the folly of
the Papists is refuted, who transfer, or rather wrest, this example to
the state of the Christian Church,  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) so as to set the bishops over the
presbyters, and thus to fabricate the primacy of the Roman See. But if
the true meaning of this figure be sought, it will be more appropriate
to reason that, whatever ministers and pastors of the Church are now
appointed, they are placed as it were under the hand of Christ, in order
that they may usurp no dominion, but behave themselves modestly, as
having to render an account to Him who is the Prince of pastors. (<span
id="iii.iv.v-p18.2"></span>[1Pe
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.v-p18.2"></span>.)
Hence we conclude that the Papacy is only founded in wicked sacrilege;
for Christ is unjustly deprived of His own, if any one else is feigned
to be Aaron’s successor. Meanwhile, the political distinction of ranks
is not to be repudiated, for natural reason itself dictates this in
order to take away confusion; but that which shall have this object in
view, will be so arranged that it may neither obscure Christ’s glory nor
minister to ambition or tyranny, nor prevent all ministers from
cultivating mutual fraternity with each other, with equal rights and
liberties. Hence, too, was taken that declaration of the Apostle, that
it is not lawful for any man to take this honor upon himself, but that
they are the legitimate ministers of the Church who are “called” to be
so. (<span id="iii.iv.v-p18.3"></span>[Heb
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span id="iii.iv.v-p18.3"></span>)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc04071.htm#fr_179) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p18"></span> “<span
id="iii.iv.v-p18.1"></span>Lesquels partissent tellement l’ordre de leur
Hierarchyie qu’en la fin ils parvienent a la primaute du Siege Romain;”
who so divide the order of their Hierarchy, that at length they arrive
at the primacy of the See of Rome — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 30:22-33](cc04072)
