[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04103)  [Next](cc04105.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.i"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
29](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p2"></span><span id="iii.ix.i-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
29:38-46](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038.md)<span
id="iii.ix.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p3"></span>**38.** Now this *is that* which thou
shalt offer upon the altar; two lambs of the first year day by day
continually.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p4"></span>**38.** Hoc est quod facies super altare,
agnos anniculos jugiter in singulos dies.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p5"></span>**39.** The one lamb thou shalt offer in
the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at even:

<span id="iii.ix.i-p6"></span>**39.** Agnum unum facies mane, et agnum
unum inter duas vesperas.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p7"></span>**40.** And with the one lamb a tenth-deal
of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the
fourth part of an hin of wine *for* a drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p8"></span>**40.** Et decimam partem similae mistae
oleo contuso, quartam partem hin et libamen, quartam partem hin vini in
agnam unum.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p9"></span>**41.** And the other lamb thou shalt
offer at even, and shalt do thereto according to the meat offering of
the morning, and according to the drink offering thereof, for a sweet
savour, an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p10"></span>**41.** Agnum alterum facies inter duas
vesperas sicut minha matutino, et sicut libamini ejus facies ei in
odorem quietis, oblationem ignitam Jehovae.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p11"></span>**42.** *This shall be* a continual burnt
offering throughout your generations, *at* the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation before the LORD: where I will meet you, to speak there
unto thee.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p12"></span>**42.** Holocaustum juge in generationes
vestras, ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis coram Jehova, quo conveniam
vobiscum nt tecum loquar.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p13"></span>**43.** And there I will meet with the
children of Israel, and *the tabernacle* shall be sanctified by my
glory.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p14"></span>**43.** Et conveniam illie cum filiis
Israel, et locus sanctificabitur in gloria mea.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p15"></span>**44.** And I will sanctify the
tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar: I will sanctify also both
Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priest’s office.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p16"></span>**44.** Sanctificabo tabernaculum
conventionis et altare, Aharonem quoque et filios ejus, et sacrificia,
ut sacerdotio fungantur mihi.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p17"></span>**45.** And I will dwell among the
children of Israel, and will be their God.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p18"></span>**45.** Habitaboqne in medio filiorum
Israel, et ero ipsis in Deum.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p19"></span>**46.** And they shall know that I *am*
the LORD their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt,
that I may dwell among them: I *am* the LORD their God.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p20"></span>**46.** Et scient quod sum Jehova Dens
eorum, qui eduxi eos e terra *A*Egypti: ut habitarem in medio eorum. Ego
Jehova Deus eorum

<span id="iii.ix.i-p21"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.i-p22"></span>The custom of sacrificing has always been
in use among all nations, and its origin is doubtless to be traced to
the ancient Fathers; but after the whole world had fallen away into
superstition, first of all, the rites themselves became degenerate, when
every one invented something new for himself, and made an absurd mimicry
of whatever remained having any similarity, since they no longer
retained their proper end and use. All heathendom was ignorant of the
reason why it was needful that God should be appeased by blood; and
therefore they shed the blood of their victims unreasonably, inasmuch as
they did not know themselves to be guilty before God, so as humbly to
seek for pardon; and much less did they apply their minds to embrace the
atonement, which was not only predestinated in God’s secret counsels,
but likewise promised to men. Hence we infer that all the religious
services of the Gentiles were rejected of God, (<span
id="iii.ix.i-p22.1"></span>*reprobatos,*) since they were not based upon
His word. Only let this be deemed sure, that, by the very custom of
sacrifice, adulterated as it was, they were convicted of their own
unworthiness, so that they should have acknowledged that God can only be
propitiated towards the human race through the medium of a
reconciliation. Foolish, then, was the philosophy of Pythagoras, which
held that God’s name was contaminated by sacrifices; for thus does the
Poet introduce him, inveighing against the eating of flesh, (<span
id="iii.ix.i-p22.2"></span>εἰς τὴν σαρκοφαγίαν)

<span id="iii.ix.i-p23"></span>"Nor will the sin itself their hearts
content:  
The very gods must share that guilty deed,  
And He, they think, who reigns omnipotent,  
Joys to behold the patient victim bleed.  
Spotless it stands, of perfect form confess’d,

<span id="iii.ix.i-p24"></span>(*Its beauty nerves the hand which else
might spare,*)*  
Before the shrine, with gold and fillets dress’d,  
And all unconscious, hears its murderer’s prayer.  
It sees the fruits itself has toiled to rear  
Placed on its horned brow; and as the blow  
Descends, perchance the blood-stained knives appear,  
Mirror’d before it in the streamlet’s flow.”*  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227.md)

<span id="iii.ix.i-p27"></span>He  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md) was pained that an innocent animal
should be slain for man’s sin; but he might have considered, what it was
gross ignorance not to feel, that men are but too impudently audacious
and foolhardy if they come into God’s presence to ask His pardon, seeing
that He is justly offended with them all. There is, therefore, nothing
absurd in submitting to the eyes of sinners that judgment of death which
they deserve, in order that, descending into themselves, they may begin
seriously to abominate the sin in which they fondly indulged themselves.
But this was the chief cause of the error of Pythagoras, that he knew
not that God could not be reconciled without an expiation. Since,
however, this is a thing which is beyond the reach of the human mind,
let us, who have ever truly sought after God, learn, under the guidance
and teaching of Scripture, that He has appointed the propitiation to be
by blood; so that, before the delivery of the Law, religion was always
sanctioned by sacrifices. Nor can it be doubted but that by the sacred
inspiration of the Spirit, the holy fathers were directed to the
Mediator, by whose death God was hereafter to be appeased; and surely if
Christ be put out of sight, all the sacrifices that may be offered
differ in no respect from mere profane butchery. But afterwards a
clearer revelation was added in the Law; and since many modes of
sacrificing were heaped together by the Gentiles, God left out no part
of them at all which might afford a profitable exercise for believers,
whether their piety was to be testified, or thanksgivings to be made, or
zeal to be added to their prayers, or purification to be sought, or sins
to be atoned for. Yet the twofold division of them is complete and clear
when we say that some of them were expiatory, and others testimonies of
gratitude. Thus, under the first head I include the rites of
consecration, by which God would have the priests initiated, since
purification was their main object. Moreover, since it is plain that God
can listen to no prayers without the intercession of Christ, the
constant morning and evening sacrifice was instituted to consecrate the
prayers of the Church; and, even when they only celebrated the bounties
of God, blood was shed, that they might know that not even their
gratitude was acceptable to Him, except through the sacrifice of the
Mediator; in a word, that nothing pure can proceed from men unless
purged by blood.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p29"></span><span id="iii.ix.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p30"></span>**38.** *Now this is that which thou
shalt offer.* I have thought it well to give the first place among the
sacrifices to that daily one which is called the continual sacrifice;
for God would have two lambs offered to Him every morning and evening,
that the people might perpetually exercise themselves in the
recollection of the future reconciliation. But, although the sacrifices
were constantly repeated under the Law, inasmuch as their offering had
no efficacy in expiating sin, yet it must be observed that, as the
priest entered once every year into the holy of holies with blood, so it
was profitable that another kind of victim should be daily set before
the people’s eyes, in order that they might reflect that they had
constant need of being reconciled to God. Propitiation was, therefore,
daily made with two lambs, that the Israelites, being reminded of their
guilt and condemnation, from the beginning to the end of the day, might
learn to fly to God’s mercy. The lamb chosen for this sacrifice was
spotless and entire, for the mention of its age (one year) implies its
perfection or entireness. It was offered with a cake made with oil, and
a libation of wine; and doubtless the ancients were reminded by these
symbols that it is not lawful to offer anything tasteless to God. True
that God was not gratified by their sweet savor, neither did He desire
to accustom the priests to delicacies that they might be epicures under
color of religion; for the scent of wine cannot in itself be pleasing to
God; but the object of these seasonings was that the people should not
rest in the bare and empty figures, but should acknowledge that
something better and more excellent underlay them. The savor of the wine
and oil, then, was nothing else than the spiritual truth; that the
people, for their part., might bring to the sacrifices faith and
repentance. And assuredly the external ceremony without the reality
would have been mere folly. Even heathen nations partially imitated this
rite; whence those words of Horace, —

<span id="iii.ix.i-p31"></span><span id="iii.ix.i-p31.1"></span>"<span
id="iii.ix.i-p31.2"></span><span id="iii.ix.i-p31.3"></span>Utque <span
id="iii.ix.i-p31.4"></span>sacerdotis fugitivus, liba recuso<span
id="iii.ix.i-p31.5"></span>:”  <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md)
<span id="iii.ix.i-p32.1"></span>  
"And like a runaway from priests, cakes I refuse:"

<span id="iii.ix.i-p33"></span>whereby he implies that cakes were
universally offered to idols. But this was a mere blind mimicry, for
they looked no higher, but thought that their gods took delight, like,
human beings, in sweet and delicate foods; whilst, as I have above
hinted, God’s intention was very different; for, by the, external savor,
He desired to arouse His people, so that, being affected by a serious
feeling of repentance, and by pure faith, they should seek for the
remission of their sins, not in these lambs which they saw slain, but in
the victim promised to them. They called it the “continual” sacrifice,
because God commanded it to be offered continually through all
generations; but it appears from Daniel that it was temporary, for it
ceased at the coming of Christ; for so speaks the angel: Christ

<span id="iii.ix.i-p34"></span>"shall confirm the covenant with many for
one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the continual
sacrifice, and the oblation (*minha*) to cease.”  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md) (<span id="iii.ix.i-p35.1"></span>[Da
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.ix.i-p35.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ix.i-p36"></span>It is clear that he speaks of this kind
of sacrifice. Hence we assuredly gather that by this sacrifice the minds
of the people were directed to Christ. But if this was its use and
object with the ancients, the profit of it now returns upon us, that we
may know that whatever was then shewn under the figure was fulfilled in
Christ. God promises that this sacrifice would be to Him “a savor of
rest.”  <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) We may not, therefore,
doubt but that He has been altogether propitiated to us by the
sacrifices of His only-begotten Son, and has remitted our sins. But
although Christ was once offered, that by that one offering He might
consecrate us for ever to God, yet by this daily sacrifice under the
Law, we learn that by the benefit of His death pardon is always ready
for us, as Paul says  <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) that God
continually reconciles Himself to the Church when He sets before it the
sacrifice of Christ in the Gospel As to the word *minha,*  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) although it is derived from, <span
id="iii.ix.i-p39.4"></span>נחה *nachah,* which means to offer, still we
must consider it to be peculiarly applied to this oblation, which was a
kind of appendix to the daily sacrifice. There are some, too, who
restrict it to the evening sacrifice alone, but, when it is used in
connection with victims, it is also extended generally to other
offerings.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p40"></span><span id="iii.ix.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p41"></span>**42.** *At the door of the tabernacle*
 <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) *of the congregation.* This
passage shews us in what sense the word <span
id="iii.ix.i-p42.3"></span>מועד *mogned,* is used, when it is employed
in connection with the tabernacle. Some translate it “testimony:”
others, “church:” others, “assembly,” (*conventum;*) others,
“appointment,” (*constitutum;*) but its etymology is sufficiently shewn
in this passage; for, when Moses gives the reason of its appellation, he
uses the word <span id="iii.ix.i-p42.4"></span>יגד *yagnad,* from whence
it is derived. What, then, is the tabernacle of the convention? God
Himself answers, that it is the place which He has chosen and appointed
unto His people, that they may there mutually come to agreement with
*each* other. Some conceive its root to be, <span
id="iii.ix.i-p42.5"></span>עדה *gnadah,* which is to make protestation
as by a solemn rite; but since this is opposed to grammar, I will take
what is certain. The word <span id="iii.ix.i-p42.6"></span>יעד *yagnad,*
in this construction, means to contract or agree with another, or at
least to meet for the transaction of mutual business; no word,
therefore, has appeared to me more nearly equivalent to it than
*convention;* for the fact that God invited them to familiar colloquy,
was of the greatest weight in preserving the modest reverence of the
faithful towards the priests. In the next verse He repeats to them,
addressing them in the third person, that whosoever shall desire to be
reckoned among the Israelites, should not turn away or wander elsewhere;
for a law is laid down for all the children of Israel, that they should
seek God there. Another confirmation is subjoined, *i.e.,* that this
place ought to be sanctified, because God will there magnificently
display His glory. In fine, from the whole passage, it appears that
God’s design was to keep the people bound to Him by the tie of the
Levitical priesthood; yet we must observe that it is God alone who
sanctifies both the place and the offerings, as well as the men
themselves. Wherefore frivolous is the boast of those who arrogate more
than God has conferred upon them. If we believe the Pope, in him is the
holiness of holiness; yet, since he does not produce God’s authority for
this, but vaunts himself of titles invented without foundation, we may
safely laugh at his stupid impudence. But from this and similar
passages, our doctrine is taken that Christ ought not to be estimated
humanly, but according to His heavenly and divine power. Hence, too, is
refuted the boast of the Popish priests that they offer Christ; for we
must always ask them, By what authority? since God claims for Himself
alone this right of sanctifying those who exercise the lawful
priesthood.

<span id="iii.ix.i-p43"></span><span id="iii.ix.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p44"></span>**46.** *And they shall know that I am
the Lord.* In these words God signifies that He has not only been the
deliverer of His people on one occasion, but with the object of
presiding over their welfare, and of demonstrating practically that He
dwells among them. He, moreover, appointed the sanctuary to be the
symbol of His presence, and, as it were, its pledge; from whence He
would have the rule of piety proceed, and be sought for by His
worshippers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc04104.htm#fr_227.md) <span
id="iii.ix.i-p24.7"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p25"></span> Ovid Metam. 15:127. The version here
attempted is at least literal. That in Garth’s Translation, though
sanctioned by a great name, is but a poor paraphrase. The *Fr.* omits
the whole quotation. The original stands thus, —

<span id="iii.ix.i-p26"></span>*"*<span id="iii.ix.i-p26.1"></span>*Nec
satis est quod tale nefas committitur: ipsos  
Inscripsêre deos sceleri, numenque supernum  
Ctede laboriferi credunt gaudere juvenci.  
Victima labe carens, et prtestantissima form’a,  
*(*Nam placuisse nocet*) *vittis prsesignis et auro  
Sistitur ante aras, auditque ignara precantem;  
Imponique sum videt inter cornua fronti  
Quas colttit fruges: percussaque sanguine cultros  
Inficit in liquid& prmvisos forsitan unda."*

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc04104.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="iii.ix.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p28"></span> “<span id="iii.ix.i-p28.1"></span>Ce
fantastique, etc.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc04104.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="iii.ix.i-p31.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p32"></span> Hor. Epis. 1 10:10.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc04104.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="iii.ix.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p35"></span> *A. V.,* “The sacrifice and the oblation
to cease."

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc04104.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="iii.ix.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p37"></span> See <span id="iii.ix.i-p37.1"></span>[Nu
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.ix.i-p37.1"></span>.
Margin, *A. V.* “a savor of my rest."

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc04104.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="iii.ix.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p38"></span> The reference here is to <span
id="iii.ix.i-p38.1"></span>[2Co
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.ix.i-p38.1"></span>,
a misprint, I presume, for <span id="iii.ix.i-p38.2"></span>[2Co
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.ix.i-p38.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc04104.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="iii.ix.i-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p39"></span> <span id="iii.ix.i-p39.1"></span>מנחה,
*A. V.,* “meat offering.” In deriving this word from, <span
id="iii.ix.i-p39.2"></span>נחה, *C.* follows *S. M.;* but later
lexicographers observe that this verb means to go or lead, and not to
*offer;* while they tell us that the root <span
id="iii.ix.i-p39.3"></span>מנח has been preserved in Arabic, and
signifies to *give freely.* — *W.*

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc04104.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="iii.ix.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.i-p42"></span> “<span
id="iii.ix.i-p42.1"></span>Conventionis:” of the convention. — *Lat*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 28:1-15](cc04105.md)
