[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04120)  [Next](cc04122.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
7](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.x.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
7:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.x.xiii-p2.1"></span>, 28-31, 37, 38

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p3"></span>**19.** And the flesh that toucheth any
unclean *thing* shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire: and as
for the flesh, all that be clean shall eat thereof.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p4"></span>**19.** Et caro quae contigerit ullum
immundum, non comedetur, sed igni comburetur: at cames illas omnis
mundus comedet.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p5"></span>**20.** But the soul that eateth *of*
the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, that *pertain* unto the
LORD, having his uncleanness upon him, even that soul shall be cut off
from his people.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p6"></span>**20.** Nam anima quae comederit carnes
de sacrificio prosperitatum quod est Jehovae, et immunditia ejus fuerit
super ipsum, tunc excidetur anima illa e populis suis.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p7"></span>**21.** Moreover the soul that shall
touch any unclean *thing, as* the uncleanness of man, or *any* unclean
beast, or any abominable unclean *thing,* and eat of the flesh of the
sacrifice of peace offerings which *pertain* unto the LORD, even that
soul shall be cut off from his people.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p8"></span>**21.** Anima item quum tetigerit
quicquam immundum, nempe de immunditia hominis, aut animal immundum, aut
onme reptile immundum, comederitque de carnibus sacrificii
prosperitatum, quod est Jehovae, tunc excidetur anima illa e populis
suis.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p9"></span>**22.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p10"></span>**22.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p11"></span>**23.** Speak unto the children of
Israel, saying, Ye shall eat no manner of fat, of ox, or of sheep, or of
goat.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p12"></span>**23.** Alloquere fllios Israel
dicendo: Omnem adipem boris, et agni, et caprae, non comedetis.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p13"></span>**24.** And the fat of the beast that
dieth of itself, and the fat of that which is torn with beasts, may be
used in any other use: but ye shall in no wise eat of it.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p14"></span>**24.** Adeps quidem cadaveris, et
adeps rapti parabitur in omne opus, sed comedendo non comedetis illum.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p15"></span>**25.** For whosoever eateth the fat of
the beast, of which men offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD,
even the soul that eateth *it* shall be cut off from his people.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p16"></span>**25.** Nam quicunque comederit adipem
animalis ex quo offeret oblationem ignitam Jehovae: tunc anima quae
comederit excidetur e populis suis.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p17"></span>**28.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p18"></span>**28.** Loquutus est insuper Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p19"></span>**29.** Speak unto the children of
Israel, saying, He that offereth the sacrifice of his peace offerings
unto the LORD shall bring his oblation unto the LORD of the sacrifice of
his peace offerings.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p20"></span>**29.** Loquere ad rilles Israel,
dicendo, Offerens sacrificium prosperitatum sunrum Jehovae, afferes
oblationem suam Jehovae de hostia prosperitatum suarum.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p21"></span>**30.** His own hands shall bring the
offerings of the LORD made by fire, the fat with the breast, it shall he
bring, that the breast may be waved *for* a wave offering before the
LORD.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p22"></span>**30.** Manus ejus afferent oblationes
ignitas Jehovae, adipem cum pectusculo afferet, pectusculum quidem ad
agitandum illud agitatione coram Jehova.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p23"></span>**31.** And the priest shall burn the
fat upon the altar: ...

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p24"></span>**31.** Adolebit vero sacerdos adipem
super altare.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p25"></span>**37.** This *is* the law of the burnt
offering, of the meat offering, and of the sin offering, and of the
trespass offering, and of the consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the
peace offerings;

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p26"></span>**37.** Haec est lex holocausti minhae,
et sacrificii pro peccato, et sacrificii pro delicto, et consecrationum,
et sacrificii prosperitatum:

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p27"></span>**38.** Which the LORD commanded Moses
in Mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded the children of Israel to
offer their oblations unto the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p28"></span>**38.** Quam praecepit Jehova Mosi in
monte Sinai, die quo praecepit filiis Israel ut offerrent oblationes
suas Jehovae in deserto Sinai.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p29"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p30"></span><span id="iii.x.xiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p31"></span>**19.** *And the flesh that toucheth.*
It was not indeed lawful to eat of any polluted flesh, but in the
sacrifices there was a special reason for this, *i.e.,* because the
uncleanness involved sacrilege. On this account he commands it to be
burnt, just like that which had not been consumed within the legitimate
time; and the punishment is,  <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md)
that if any unclean person shall have touched the consecrated meat, he
should be cut off from the people. The cruelty or immoderate severity of
this has induced some to think that to be “cut off” is nothing more than
to be cast out of the camp. But it is not wonderful that God should have
thus severely dealt with those who knowingly and wilfully contaminated
what was holy; for if any one had sinned in error, he was not to receive
this sentence, but only he who had betrayed his open contempt of God by
impious profanation of sacred things.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p33"></span><span id="iii.x.xiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p34"></span>**23.** *Speak unto the children of
Israel.* Since in all sacrifices the fat was consecrated to God, and was
burnt on the altar, God forbade His people to eat fat even in their
ordinary meals, in order that they might cultivate piety even in their
homes. For unquestionably this was an exercise of piety, that they who
were far away from the temple should still accustom themselves in their
daily meals to the service of God. Nor am I ignorant of the allegories
 <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288.md) in which some interpreters
indulge, but I willingly acquiesce in the reason which God reveals,
viz., that the people was prohibited from eating fat, because He had
assigned it to Himself. Nevertheless, the Law permits the fat of a
carcase,  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289.md) or of an animal torn
(by beasts) to be applied to any use, provided they abstain from the fat
of those animals which might be legally offered.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p37"></span><span id="iii.x.xiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p38"></span>**37.** *This is the law of the
burnt-offering.* In this conclusion Moses indicates that full provision
had been made lest any addition should insinuate itself from man’s
inventions to vitiate the sacrifices. In the day, he says, that God
appointed the sacrifices to be offered to Him on Mount Sinai, He omitted
nothing which was to be observed, lest men should dare to introduce
anything except what He prescribed. And surely, when He had thus
carefully embraced all the ceremonies, we may easily infer from hence
how earnestly we should avoid all temerity and audacity in invention.
The design, therefore, of Moses was in this brief admonition to exhort
the people to soberness, lest they should transgress the limits placed
by God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc04121.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p32"></span> “<span id="iii.x.xiii-p32.1"></span>La
punition est raise bien grieve;” the punishment awarded is very heavy. —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc04121.htm#fr_288.md) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p35"></span> *Vide* on <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p35.1"></span>[Leviticus
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.x.xiii-p35.1"></span>, *ante,* p. 334.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc04121.htm#fr_289.md) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p36"></span> See Margin, *A. V.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 15:1-16](cc04122.md)
