[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04104)  [Next](cc04106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
28](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#000)<span id="iii.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p2"></span><span id="iii.ix.ii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
28:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#001)<span
id="iii.ix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p4"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Command the children of Israel,
and say unto them, My offering, *and* my bread for my sacrifices made by
fire, *for* a sweet savour unto me, shall ye observe to offer unto me in
their due season.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p6"></span>**2.** Praecipe filiis Israel, et dic
eis, Oblationem meam, panem meum in oblationibus meis ignitis in odorem
quietis meae custodietis, ut offeraris mihi tempore suo.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p7"></span>**3.** And thou shalt say unto them, This
*is* the offering made by fire which ye shall offer unto the LORD; two
lambs of the first year without spot day by day, *for* a continual burnt
offering.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p8"></span>**3.** Dices praeterea illis, Haec est
oblatio ignita quam i Jehovah, agnos anniculos immaculatos duos quotidie
holocaustum juge.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p9"></span>**4.** The one lamb shalt thou offer in
the morning, and the other lamb shalt thou offer at even;

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p10"></span>**4.** Agnum unum facies mane, et agnum
alterum inter duas vesperas.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p11"></span>**5.** And a tenth *part* of an ephah of
flour for a meat offering, mingled with the fourth *part* of an hin of
beaten oil.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p12"></span>**5.** Et offeres decimam partem epha
similac et in minham permistae oleo contuso, cum quarta parte hin.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p13"></span>**6.** *It is* a continual burnt
offering, which was ordained in mount Sinai for a sweet savour, a
sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p14"></span>**6.** Istud est holocaustum juge quod
factum est in monte Sinai, in odorem quietis, oblationem ignitam
Jehovae.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p15"></span>**7.** And the drink offering thereof
*shall be* the fourth *part* of an hin for the one lamb: in the holy
*place* shalt thou cause the strong wine to be poured unto the LORD
*for* a drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p16"></span>**7.** Porro libamen ejus quartam partem
hin per singulos agnos in sanctuario liba libamen sechar Jehovae.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p17"></span>**8.** And the other lamb shalt thou
offer at even: as the meat offering of the morning, and as the drink
offering thereof, thou shalt offer *it, a* sacrifice made by fire, of a
sweet savour unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p18"></span>**8.** Agnum autem alterum facies inter
duas vesperas, secundum oblationem matutinam, et secundum libamen ejus
facies oblationem ignitam, in odorem quietis Jehovae.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p19"></span>**9.** And on the sabbath day two lambs
of the first year without spot, and two tenth deals of flour *for* a
meat offering, mingled with oil, and the drink-offering thereof:

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p20"></span>**9.** Die vero Sabbathi facies duos
agnos anniculos immaculatos, et duas decimas ephi similae in minham
permistae oleo, et libamen ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p21"></span>**10.** *This is* the burnt offering of
every sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering, and his drink
offering.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p22"></span>**10.** Istud est holocaustum Sabbathi,
in Sabbatho suo ultra holocaustum juge in libamen ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p23"></span>**11.** And in the beginnings of your
months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the LORD; two young
bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs of the first year without spot;

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p24"></span>**11.** Similiter in capitibus mensium
vestrorum offeretis holocaustum Jehovae: juvencos filios bovis duos, et
arietem unum, agnos anniculos immaculatos septem.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p25"></span>**12.** And three tenth deals of flour
*for* a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one bullock; and two tenth
deals of flour *for* a meat offering, mingled with oil, for one ram;

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p26"></span>**12.** Et tres declinus epbi similae in
minham permixtae oleo in juvencos singulos, et duas declinus ephi
similae in minham permixtae oleo in singulos arietes.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p27"></span>**13.** And a several tenth deal of
flour mingled with oil *for* a meat offering unto one lamb, for a burnt
offering of a sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p28"></span>**13.** Et singulas decimas oblationem
similae in minham permixtsa oleo, in singulos agnos, holocaustum odoris
quietis, oblatio ignita Jehovae.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p29"></span>**14.** And their drink offerings shall
be half an hin of wine unto a bullock, and the third *part* of an hin
unto a ram, and a fourth *part* of an hin unto a lamb: this *is* the
burnt offering of every month throughout the months of the year.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p30"></span>**14.** Haec autem libamina eorum e
vino: dimidium hin etiam in singulos juvencos, et tertia pars hin in
arietem, et quarta pars hin in singulos agnos. Hoc est holocaustum
singulorum mensium per singulos menses anni.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p31"></span>**15.** And one kid of the goats for a
sin offering unto the LORD shall be offered, beside the continual burnt
offering, and his drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p32"></span>**15.** Et hircus caprarum unus in
sacrificium pro peccato fiet Jehovae, procter holocaustum juge, et
libamen ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p33"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p34"></span><span id="iii.ix.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p35"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
Moses, being about to speak again of the “continual” sacrifice, premises
in general that the people should diligently follow in their offerings
whatever God has enjoined; for by the word “observe,” (*custodiendi,*)
not only diligence, but obedience is also expressed. But, in order that
they should more earnestly beware of every transgression, God calls
either that which was wont daily to be placed on the table, or that
which was annexed to the burnt-offerings, *His* bread, as if He ate of
it after the manner of men. It is indeed a hard expression, but the
rudeness of His ancient people obliged Him to speak thus grossly, that,
on the one hand, they might learn this rite to be acceptable to God,
just as food is acceptable to man; and, on the other, that they might
study to offer their sacrifices more purely and chastely.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p36"></span><span id="iii.ix.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p37"></span>**3.** *And thou shalt say unto them.*
He repeats what we have seen in Exodus, that they should kill two lambs
daily, one in the morning, and the other in the evening; but he speaks
more fully of the concomitants of flour and wine, and also refers to the
antiquity of this kind of sacrifice as its recommendation, because it
began to be offered to God on Mount Sinai, and was a “savor of rest.”
 <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) The libation of wine, of which
mention is made, was also in use among heathen nations; but, inasmuch as
it was without the command and promise of God, it could not but be
unmeaning (<span id="iii.ix.ii-p38.1"></span>*insipidum* )  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) And it is probable (as we have seen
elsewhere) that many of the heathen rites descended from the ancient
fathers but as a false and empty imitation; for when they had forgotten
the reason of them, all they did could only be a mere theatrical
pageantry. But we have said that thus men were reminded always to have
God before their eyes in their daily food; and therefore in every way to
accustom themselves to cultivate holiness.

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p40"></span><span id="iii.ix.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p41"></span>**9.** *And on the Sabbath-day.* What
was omitted in the former passage is here supplied, i.e., that on the
Sabbath the continual sacrifice was to be doubled, and two lambs offered
instead of one; for it was reasonable that, as the seventh day was
peculiarly dedicated to God, it should be exalted above other days by
some extraordinary and distinctive mark. He also commands greater
sacrifices to be offered at the beginning of the month or new moon,
viz., two bullocks and one ram, and a goat for a sin-offering; for we
know that the first day of every month was consecrated to God, that the
people might more frequently have the remembrance of their religious
duties renewed; and the goat for an atonement for sin was added, in
order that every month they should present themselves as guilty before
God to deprecate His wrath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc04105.htm#fr_235) <span
id="iii.ix.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p38"></span> *A.V.,* “a sweet savor.” *Margin,
“Heb.,* a savor of my rest."

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc04105.htm#fr_236) <span
id="iii.ix.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.ii-p39"></span> *Fr., “*<span
id="iii.ix.ii-p39.1"></span>c’a este moins que ripopper, comme on dit;”
*Ripope,* i.e.,bad wine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 28:16-31](cc04106)
