[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04117)  [Next](cc04119.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.x-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.x.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p2"></span><span id="iii.x.x-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
6:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.x.x-p2.1"></span>,
23-25, 30

<span id="iii.x.x-p3"></span>**8.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.x.x-p4"></span>**8.** Loquutus est etiam Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="iii.x.x-p5"></span>**9.** Command Aaron and his sons, saying,
This *is* the law of the burnt offering: It *is* the burnt offering,
because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the morning, and
the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.

<span id="iii.x.x-p6"></span>**9.** Praecipe Aharon et filiis ejus,
dicendo, Haec est lex holocausti, (holocaustum est, quod aduritur super
altare tota nocte usque mane, ubi ignis altari accensus fuerit in eo.)

<span id="iii.x.x-p7"></span>**10.** And the priest shall put on his
linen garment, and his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh, and
take up the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt offering
on the altar, and he shall put them beside the altar.

<span id="iii.x.x-p8"></span>**10.** Induet se sacerdos veste linen,
femoralibus item lineis induct se super carnem suam, tolletque cinerem
quum absumpserit ignis holocaustum ex altari, et ponet eum secus altare.

<span id="iii.x.x-p9"></span>**11.** And he shall put off his garments,
and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes without the camp
unto a clean place.

<span id="iii.x.x-p10"></span>**11.** Postea exuet se vestibus suis, et
induet se vestibus allis, efferetque cinerem extra castra ad locum
mundam.

<span id="iii.x.x-p11"></span>**12.** And the fire upon the altar shall
be burning in it; it shall not be put out: and the priest shall burn
wood on it every morning, and lay the burnt offering in order upon it;
and he shall burn thereon the fat of the peace offerings.

<span id="iii.x.x-p12"></span>**12.** Et ignis super altare ardebit in
eo, non extinguetur, et accendet in eo sacerdos ligna quotidie mane, et
disponet super illud victimam holocausti, adolebitque super illud adipes
prosperitatum.

<span id="iii.x.x-p13"></span>**13.** The fire shall ever be burning
upon the altar; it shall never go out.

<span id="iii.x.x-p14"></span>**13.** Ignis perpetuo ardebit in altari,
non extinguetur.

<span id="iii.x.x-p15"></span>**14.** And this *is* the law of the meat
offering: The sons of Aaron shall offer it before the LORD, before the
altar.

<span id="iii.x.x-p16"></span>**14.** Ista est lex minha quam offerent
filii Aharon coram Jehova ad altare.

<span id="iii.x.x-p17"></span>**15.** And he shall take of it his
handful, of the flour of the meat offering, and of the oil thereof, and
all the frankincense which *is* upon the meat offering, and shall burn
*it* upon the altar for a sweet savour, *even* the memorial of it, unto
the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.x-p18"></span>**15.** Tollet ex ea pugillo suo ex simila
minha, et oleo ejus, et totum thus quod erit super minha: adolebitque
super altare odorem quietis odorem ejus apud Jehovam.

<span id="iii.x.x-p19"></span>**23.** For every meat offering for the
priest shall be wholly burnt: it shall not be eaten.

<span id="iii.x.x-p20"></span>**23.** Omnis minha sacerdotis tota
eremabitur, non comedetur.

<span id="iii.x.x-p21"></span>**24.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.x.x-p22"></span>**24.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="iii.x.x-p23"></span>**25.** Speak unto Aaron and to his sons,
saying, This *is* the law of the sin offering: In the place where the
burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering be killed before the
LORD: it *is* most holy.

<span id="iii.x.x-p24"></span>**25.** Alloquere Aharon et filios ejus,
dicendo, Ista eat lex hostile pro peccato, In loco in quo mactabitur
hostia holocausti mactabitur hostia pro peccato coram Jehova, quia
sanctificatio sanctificationum est.

<span id="iii.x.x-p25"></span>**30.** And no sin offering, whereof *any*
of the blood is brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to
reconcile *withal* in the holy *place,* shall be eaten: it shall be
burnt in the fire.

<span id="iii.x.x-p26"></span>**30.** Omnis autem hostia pro peccato, de
cujus sanguine inferetur aliquid in tabernaculum conventionis, ad
expiandum in sanctuario non comedetur, igni comburetur.

<span id="iii.x.x-p27"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.x-p28"></span><span id="iii.x.x-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p29"></span>**9.** *Command Aaron and his sons.* He
more distinctly explains what might have appeared to be omitted; nor is
it without reason that he carefully enters into these full details, for
since God prefers obedience to all sacrifices, he was unwilling that
anything should remain doubtful as to the external rites, which were not
otherwise of great importance; that they might learn to observe
precisely, and with the most exact care, whatever the Law commanded, and
that they should not obtrude anything of themselves, inasmuch as the
purity of the holy things was corrupted by the very smallest invention.
He would, therefore, leave nothing to the people’s judgment, but
directed them by a fixed rule even in the most trifling matters. As to
the burnt-offerings, he commands that they should not be taken away from
the altar till they were consumed by the fire; but after they were put
on, he commands them to be burnt in a constant fire till the morrow.
With this intent, he expressly says, that the fire should be kept alight
on the altar all the night, since the sacrifices would not have been
reduced to ashes without the application of fuel. *Secondly,* he
commands the priest, clothed in the linen garment, and breeches, as he
was wont to be in the performance of his sacred duties, to go to the
altar, and to take away the ashes and put them by the side, or at some
part of the altar; but when he shall have gone away from the altar, he
bids him take off his holy garments, and carry the ashes out of the camp
to a clean place. But what he had before briefly adverted to as to the
supply of wood, he immediately declares more fully to be, lest the fire
should go out. Again, he assigns to the priest the office of setting the
wood in order every morning. But, because in the sacrifices  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274.md) of prosperities the Law commanded the
fat only to be burnt, Moses now adds, verse 12, that the fat was to be
burnt on the same fire. It is worthy of particular observation, that he
finally subjoins a precept as to so keeping up the fire that it may
never go out.

<span id="iii.x.x-p31"></span>The intent of this perpetuity was, that
the offerings should be burnt with heavenly fire; for on the day that
Aaron was consecrated, the sacrifice was reduced to ashes not by human
means but miraculously, in token of approbation. True that God did not
choose daily to exert this power; but He interposed the hand and labor
of men in such a manner that the origin of the sacred fire should still
be from heaven. The same thing afterwards happened at the dedication of
Solomon’s temple, because that alteration of the divine decree demanded
a sign (*tesseram,*) lest any should think that it was at the will of
man that the splendor of the temple should outvie the tabernacle.
Finally, the sacrifice of Elijah was graced by the same privilege when
he restored the abolished legal service; and then also God upheld what
He had ordained in His Law, in opposition to all corrupt and degenerate
rites. Meanwhile, in order to prevent any adulterations, He chose to
have the fire continually burning on the altar day and night, nor was it
allowable to take it from elsewhere. There was, indeed, amongst the
Persians  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275.md) a perpetual fire, and
at Rome also under the guardianship of the Vestal virgins;  <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276.md) and it may be, that in foolish mimicry
they transferred to themselves the custom which they had heard of being
observed by the Jews; for thus it is that, for the purpose of deceiving
unbelievers, the devil often falsely makes a pretense of something
divine, and imitates God just as an ape imitates man: but the purpose of
God in rejecting strange fire was to retain the people in His own
genuine ordinance prescribed by the Law, lest any inventions of men
should insinuate themselves; for the prohibition of strange fire was
tantamount to forbidding men to introduce anything of their own, or to
add to the pure doctrine of the Law, or to decline from its rule.
Meanwhile, since God had once testified, as if by stretching forth His
hand from heaven (to receive them,  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) .md) that the sacrifices were acceptable
to Him, believers were confirmed in their confidence of this by the
pledge of the perpetual fire.

<span id="iii.x.x-p35"></span><span id="iii.x.x-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p36"></span>**14.** *And this is the Law of the
meat-offering.* We have already seen that there were various kinds of
this offering; now, the cakes or wafers are omitted,  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278.md) and mention is only made of uncooked
flour, whereof God commands that the priest should burn on the altar as
much as his hand could hold. But this law was necessary in order that
believers might be fully assured that God was propitiated by the due
offering of this part, and that none might complain because the greater
portion remained with the priests. Lest, however, the dignity of the
sacrifice should be impaired, it was only permitted to the priests to
make unleavened bread of it, which they were to eat in the sanctuary, as
we have seen elsewhere. The meat-offering of the priests is excepted,
which I conceive to be for two reasons, — first, that the excellency and
dignity of their gift, honored as it was by special privilege, might
stimulate the priests to greater efforts of piety, so as not to exercise
themselves in God’s service in a common and perfunctory manner;
secondly, that they might be thus restrained from the affectation of
offering it too frequently. For if it only cost them a little flour, a
door was opened to vain ostentation; they would have never ceased
offering their  <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md) *minha,* the
profit of which returned to themselves; perhaps they might even have
made a trade of it, as we see the Popish sacrificers entice the simple
populace to profuse expenditure in offerings by the pomp of their
fictitious devotion. Lest, therefore, they should cause their immoderate
oblations to minister both to their vainglory and avarice, God willed
that their meat-offering should be entirely consumed.

<span id="iii.x.x-p39"></span><span id="iii.x.x-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p40"></span>**25.** *Speak unto Aaron.* We everywhere
see how carefully God provided that the people should have no doubts
about anything. And assuredly true religion is distinguished from false
imaginations by this peculiar mark, that God Himself prescribes what is
to be done. Nor can certainty, though religion ought to be based upon
it, be derived elsewhere than from His own mouth. Now, because there was
a difference between burnt-offerings and sin-offerings, it would have
been natural to kill them separately in different, places, unless the
error had been anticipated; but all doubt, is removed when God assigns
the same place to them both. Whence, too, we gather that one law
suffices for the proper worship of God, if men are not wise in their own
conceits, but depend on His mouth. For how came it to pass that, whilst
these two kinds of oblations differed from each other, the rule
respecting them was the same on this point, except because it so pleased
God? This passage, therefore, sufficiently reminds us with how great
sober-mindedness and modesty it becomes us to follow what is pointed out
to us in God’s word. A reason, however, is at the same time added, which
may invite reverence to be paid to the sin-offerings, when especial
sanctity is attributed to them, which, according to the idiom of the
Hebrew language, is called “holiness of holinesses.” Moreover, Moses
begins to distinguish between <span id="iii.x.x-p40.2"></span>חטאה,
*chateah,*  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) and <span
id="iii.x.x-p41.2"></span>אשם, *asham,* which the Latins translate
*peccatum,* and *delictum,* though he had before used them indifferently
to express the same thing. What the difference was, I confess, I know
not; I see the guesses of others, but nothing certain.

<span id="iii.x.x-p42"></span><span id="iii.x.x-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p43"></span>**30.** *And no sin-offering.* The
exception is repeated both with reference to the sacrifices mentioned in
the fourth chapter, and also to the solemn sacrifice, whereby the priest
and the people were reconciled every year: for private persons
individually atoned for their sins at less expense, and only the greater
altar, which stood in the court, was sprinkled with blood; but if the
priest reconciled God to the whole people, or to himself, in order that
the intercession might be more efficacious, he entered the sanctuary to
pour out blood on the opposite side of the veil. God now again commands
that such victims should be entirely burnt. This passage, then, is
nothing but a confirmation of the others in which a like command is
given. Hence the Apostle, in an apt allusion, infers that the
distinction of meats is abolished; for he says that the minor altar,
which under the Law was hidden, is now laid open to us, (<span
id="iii.x.x-p43.1"></span>[Heb
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.x.x-p43.1"></span>,) and therefore we no longer eat of the legal
sacrifices; yea, forasmuch as our One Priest has brought His blood into
the sanctuary, it only remains for us to go forth with Him without the
camp.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc04118.htm#fr_274.md) <span
id="iii.x.x-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p30"></span> Or peace-offerings, *vide supra,* p. 105.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc04118.htm#fr_275.md) <span
id="iii.x.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p32"></span> “The Persians regarded with reverence the
sun and every kind of fire. The fire continually kept alive in their
temples, was considered as sacred. It had been kindled from fire, which
Zoroaster pretended to have brought down from heaven. It was fed by a
particular kind of wood, and was supposed to be polluted even by the
breath of those who approached it.” — Hill’s Essays on Ancient Greece,
Essay 20. The sacred fire was kept alive even in their marches. — Curt,
3 3; Ammian Marcel., 23:6.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc04118.htm#fr_276.md) <span
id="iii.x.x-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p33"></span> “<span id="iii.x.x-p33.1"></span>Virgines
Vestales in urbe custodiunto ignem loci publici sempiternum.” — Cicero
de Legg. 2:8.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc04118.htm#fr_277.md) <span
id="iii.x.x-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p34"></span> Added from Fr.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc04118.htm#fr_278.md) <span
id="iii.x.x-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p37"></span> “<span id="iii.x.x-p37.1"></span>Omettant
les gasteux, et les tourtes, et bignets, tant cuits au four que frits;”
omitting the cakes, and the tarts, and fritters, both cooked in the oven
and fried. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc04118.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="iii.x.x-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p38"></span> “<span id="iii.x.x-p38.1"></span>Leurs
belles parades.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc04118.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="iii.x.x-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.x-p41"></span> *A. V*., “The sin-offering and the
trespass-offering.” Michaelis has affirmed that the former was a
sacrifice for sins of commission, and the latter for sins of omission:
but the Hebrew lexicographer, J. Simons, has observed that this
distinction is by no means compatible with the text in all instances.
Professor James Robertson, “Clavis Pentat.,” in a note on <span
id="iii.x.x-p41.1"></span>[Le 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.x.x-p41.1"></span>, gives other opinions about the distinction,
but expresses himself as most approving of that which supposes the first
to be an offering for offenses against the First Table of the Decalogue:
the second for those against the Second Table. — *W*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 7:1-5](cc04119.md)
