[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04159)  [Next](cc04161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.i"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#000)<span id="v.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p2"></span><span id="v.v.i-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
25:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008)<span id="v.v.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p3"></span>**8.** And thou shalt number seven sabbaths
of years unto thee, seven times seven years; and the space of the seven
sabbaths of years shall be unto thee forty and nine years.

<span id="v.v.i-p4"></span>**8.** Numerabis quoque tibi septem
hebdomadas armorum, id est septem annos septem vicibus; qui quidem dies
septem Sabbathorum annorum efficient tibi quadraginta novem annos.

<span id="v.v.i-p5"></span>**9.** Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of
the jubile to sound on the tenth *day* of the seventh month, in the day
of atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land.

<span id="v.v.i-p6"></span>**9.** Tunc transire facies tubam
jubilationis mense septimo die mensis, id est die expiationum: transire
inquam, facietis tubam per universam terrain vestram.

<span id="v.v.i-p7"></span>**10.** And ye shall hallow the fiftieth
year, and proclaim liberty throughout *all* the land unto all the
inhabitants thereof: it shall be a jubile unto you; and ye shall return
every man unto his possession, and ye shall return every man unto his
family.

<span id="v.v.i-p8"></span>**10.** Sanctificabitisque annum
quinquagesimum, et proclamabitis libertatem in terra cunctis
habitatoribus ejus: Jobel ipse erit vobis: et revertemini quisque ad
possessionem suam, et quisque ad familiam suam revertemini.

<span id="v.v.i-p9"></span>**11.** A jubile shall that fiftieth year be
unto you: ye shall not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in
it, nor gather *the grapes* in it of thy vine undressed.

<span id="v.v.i-p10"></span>**11.** Jobel ipse annus quinquaginta
annorum erit vobis: non seretis, neque metetis quae sponte produxerit
terra: neque vindemiabitis separationes ejus.

<span id="v.v.i-p11"></span>**12.** For it *is* the jubile; it shall be
holy unto you: ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field.

<span id="v.v.i-p12"></span>**12.** Quia Jobel est, sanctus erit vobis,
agri comedetis fructum.

<span id="v.v.i-p13"></span>**13.** In the year of this jubile ye shall
return every man unto his possession.

<span id="v.v.i-p14"></span>**13.** Anno Jobel isto revertemini singuli
ad possessionem suam.

<span id="v.v.i-p15"></span> 

<span id="v.v.i-p16"></span><span id="v.v.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.i-p17"></span>**8.** *And thou shalt number seven.* The
third kind of Sabbath follows, which was composed of forty-nine, or
seven times seven years. This was the most illustrious Sabbath, since
the state of the people, both as to their persons and their houses and
property, was renewed; and although in this way God had regard to the
public good, gave relief to the poor, so that their liberty should not
be destroyed, and preserved also the order laid down by Himself; still
there is no question but that He thus added an additional stimulus to
incite the Jews to honor the Sabbath. For it was a kind of imposing
memorial of the sacred rest, to see slaves emancipated and become
suddenly free; houses and lands returning to their former possessors who
had sold them; and in fine all things assuming a new face. They called
this year *Jobel,* from the sound of the ram’s horn, whereby liberty and
the restitution of property were proclaimed; but as I have said, its
main feature was the solemnity which shewed them to be separated from
other nations to be a peculiar and holy nation to God; nay, the renewal
of all things had reference to this, that being redeemed anew in the
great Sabbath, they might entirely devote themselves to God their
Deliverer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 23:1-44](cc04161)
