[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04026)  [Next](cc04028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#000)<span id="ii.x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.ii-p2"></span><span id="ii.x.ii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005)<span id="ii.x.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.ii-p3"></span>**5.** And that prophet, or that dreamer of
dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath spoken to turn *you* away
from the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and
redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way
which the LORD thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shalt thou put the
evil away from the midst of thee.

<span id="ii.x.ii-p4"></span>**5.** Propheta antem falsus aut somniator
interficietur, eo quod defectionem loquutus sit contra Jehovam Deum
vestrum, qui eduxit tee e terra AEgypti, et redemit tee domo servorum,
ut te depelleret a via quam princaepit tibi Jehova Deus tuus, ut ambules
in ea: et exterminabit malam e medio tui.

<span id="ii.x.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.x.ii-p6"></span><span id="ii.x.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.ii-p7"></span>**5.** *And that prophet.* Since the
ministers of Satan deceive men by their plausible exterior, when they
vaunt themselves to be the prophets of God, Moses had already admonished
them, that all. teachers were not to be listened to indifferently, but
that the true were to be distinguished from the false, and that, after
judgment had, those should obtain credit who deserved it. He now
subjoins the punishment of such as should creep in under the name of a
prophet to draw away the people into rebellion. For he does not condemn
to capital punishment those who may have spread false doctrine, only on
account of some particular or trifling error, but those who are the
authors of apostasy, and so who pluck up religion by the roots. Observe,
again, that the season of this severity would not be until a positive
religion should be established; and, therefore, the grossness of the
impiety is expressly named, “if they should have tried to turn the
people away from the worship of the true God.” Moreover, that all excuse
might be obviated, Moses says that it is sufficiently manifested who God
is, and how He is to be worshipped, both by the wonderful blessing of
their redemption, as well as by the doctrine of the Law. Therefore, in
order that God may shew that so heavy a punishment is justly inflicted
upon apostates, He declares the certainty of that religion which should
exist among the Israelites; as much as to say, that no pardon could be
granted to such impious contempt, since God had abundantly proved the
glory of His Godhead by the miracle of their redemption, and had
manifested His will in the Law.

<span id="ii.x.ii-p8"></span>It must then be remembered, that the crime
of impiety would not otherwise merit punishment, unless the religion had
not only been received by public consent and the suffrages of the
people, but, being supported also by sure and indisputable proofs,
should place its truth above the reach of doubt. Thus, whilst their
severity is preposterous who defend superstitions with the sword, so
also in a well constituted polity, profane men are by no means to be
tolerated, by whom religion is subverted.  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) Thus they are unable to endure, who
desire to be at liberty to make disturbances with impunity; and
therefore they call those sanguinary who teach that the errors by which
religion is undermined and thence destroyed, should be restrained by
public authority. But what will they gain by openly raving against God?
God commands the false prophets to be put to death, who pluck up the
foundations of religion, and are the authors and leaders of rebellion.
Some scoundrel or other gainsays this, and sets himself against the
author of life and death. What insolence is this!  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) As to their denial that the truth of God
stands in need of such support, it is very true; but what is the meaning
of this madness, in imposing a law upon God, that He should not make use
of the obedience of magistrates in this respect? And what avails it to
question about the necessity of this, since so it pleases God? God
*might,* indeed, do without the assistance of the sword in defending
religion; but such is not His will. And what wonder if God should
command magistrates to be the avengers of His glory, when He neither
wills nor suffers that thefts, fornications, and drunkenness should be
exempt from punishment. In minor offenses it shall not be lawful for the
judge to hesitate; and when the worship of God and the whole of religion
is violated, shall so great a crime be fostered by his dissimulation?
Capital punishment shall be decreed against adulterers; but shall the
despisers of God be permitted with impunity to adulterate the doctrines
of salvation, and to draw away wretched souls from the faith? Pardon
shall never be extended to poisoners, by whom the body alone is injured;
and shall it be sport to deliver souls to eternal destruction? Finally,
the magistracy, if its own authority be assailed, shall take severe
vengeance upon that contempt; and shall it suffer the profanation of
God’s holy name to be unavenged? What can be more monstrous! But it is
superfluous to contend by argument, when God has once pronounced what is
His will, for we must needs abide by His inviolable decree

<span id="ii.x.ii-p11"></span>But it is questioned whether the law
pertains to the kingdom of Christ, which is spiritual and distinct from
all earthly dominion; and there are some men, not otherwise
ill-disposed, to whom it appears that our condition under the Gospel is
different from that of the ancient people under the law; not only
because the kingdom of Christ is not of this world, but because Christ
was unwilling that the beginnings of His kingdom should be aided by the
sword. But, when human judges consecrate their work to the promotion of
Christ’s kingdom, I deny that on that account its nature is changed.
For, although it was Christ’s will that His Gospel should be proclaimed
by His disciples in opposition to the power of the whole world, and He
exposed them armed with the Word alone like sheep amongst wolves, He did
not impose on Himself an eternal law that He should never bring kings
under His subjection, nor tame their violence, nor change them from
being cruel persecutors into the patrons and guardians of His Church.
Magistrates at first exercised tyranny against the Church, because the
time had not yet come when they should “kiss the Son” of God, and,
laying aside their violence, should become the nursing fathers of the
Church, which they had assailed according to Isaiah’s prophecy, that
undoubtedly refers to the coming of Christ. (<span
id="ii.x.ii-p11.1"></span>[Isa
49:6-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)<span
id="ii.x.ii-p11.1"></span>.) Nor was it causelessly that Paul, when he
enjoins prayers to be made for kings and other worldly rulers, added the
reason that under them

<span id="ii.x.ii-p12"></span>"we may lead a quiet and peaceable life  
in all godliness and honesty.” (<span id="ii.x.ii-p12.2"></span>[1Ti
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002)<span id="ii.x.ii-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.x.ii-p13"></span>Christ, indeed as He is meek, would also,
I confess, have us to be imitators of His gentleness, but that does not
prevent pious magistrates from providing for the tranquillity and safety
of the Church by their defense of godliness; since to neglect this part
of their duty, would be the greatest perfidy and cruelty. And assuredly
nothing can be more base than, when we see wretched souls drawn away to
eternal destruction by reason of the impunity conceded to impious,
wicked, and perverse impostors, to count the salvation of those souls
for nothing. But, if under this pretext the superstitious have dared to
shed innocent blood, I reply that what God has once commanded must not
be brought to nought on account of any abuse or corruption of men. For,
if the cause alone abundantly distinguishes the martyrs of Christ from
malefactors, though their punishment may be identical, so the Papal
executioners will not bring it to pass by their unjust cruelty that the
zeal of pious magistrates in punishing false and noxious teachers should
be otherwise than pleasing to God. And this is admirably expressed in
the words of Moses, when he reminds them that judgment must be passed
according to the law of God. I have already said that. this severity
must not be extended to particular errors, but where impiety breaks
forth even into rebellion. When it is added, “to thrust thee out of the
way, which the Lord thy God commanded thee,” we gather from it that none
are to be given over to punishment, but those who shall have been
convicted by the plain word of God, lest men should judge them
arbitrarily. Whence it also appears that zeal will err in hastily
drawing the sword, unless a lawful examination shall have been
previously instituted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc04027.htm#fr_52) <span
id="ii.x.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.ii-p9"></span> It is impossible not to be here reminded
of Calvin’s acquiescence in the punishment of Servetus. In the principle
he lays down, we have, as it were, his final apology for the part he
took in that matter. Any discussion of the much-vexed question would
here be out of place, but it may not be altogether amiss to introduce
the few following calm reflections from the pen of a very able modern
historian, M. de Felice — “1. Servetus was not an ordinary heretic; he
was audaciously Pantheistic, and outraged the doctrine of all the great
Christian communions, by saying that God in three persons was a Cerberus
— a monster with three heads. 2. He had already been condemned to death
by the (Roman) Catholic Doctors at Vienna in Dauphine. 3. The matter was
adjudicated, not by Calvin, but by the magistrates of Geneva; and, if it
be objected that his opinion must have influenced their decision, it
must be remembered that the Councils of the other Reformed Cantons of
Switzerland unanimously approved of the sentence. 4. It was of supreme
importance that the Reformation should clearly separate its cause from
that of an Infidel like Servetus. The (Roman) Catholic Church, which
now-a-days accuses Calvin of having participated in his condemnation,
would, in the sixteenth century, have much more harshly accused him, if
he had sought for his acquittal.” — *Hist*, *des Protestants de France.*
Liv. 1., Section 5.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc04027.htm#fr_53) <span
id="ii.x.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.x.ii-p10.1"></span>Quant a
ce qui tels babouins alleguent,” etc. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 17:12,13](cc04028)
