[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04075)  [Next](cc04077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv.x-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
10](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#000)<span id="iii.iv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv.x-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
10:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p3"></span>**8.** And the LORD spake unto Aaron,
saying,

<span id="iii.iv.x-p4"></span>**8.** Loquutus est etiam Jehova ad
Aharon, dicendo:

<span id="iii.iv.x-p5"></span>**9.** Do not drink wine nor strong drink,
thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tabernacle of the
congregation, lest ye die: *it shall be* a statute for ever throughout
your generations:

<span id="iii.iv.x-p6"></span>**9.** Vinum et siceram non bibes tu et
filii tui tecum, quando intrabitis in tabernaculum conventionis, ne
moriamini: statutum perpetuum est in generationibus vestris:

<span id="iii.iv.x-p7"></span>**10.** And that ye may put difference
between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean;

<span id="iii.iv.x-p8"></span>**10.** Et ut discernatis inter sanctum et
profanum, et inter immundum et mundum.

<span id="iii.iv.x-p9"></span>**11.** And that ye may teach the children
of Israel all the statutes which the LORD hath spoken unto them by the
hand of Moses.

<span id="iii.iv.x-p10"></span>**11.** Et ut doceatis filios Israel
omnis statuta qum loquutus est Jehova ad eos per manum Mosis.

<span id="iii.iv.x-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.x-p12"></span><span id="iii.iv.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p13"></span>**9.** *Do not drink wine, nor strong
drink.* The second cleanness required in the priests is that they should
abstain from wine, and strong drink;  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) in which word Jerome says that
everything intoxicating is included; and this I admit to be true; but
the definition would be more correct, that all liquors espressed from
fruits are denoted by it, in whose sweetness there is nearly as much to
tempt men as in wine. Even in these days the Orientals compose of dates
as well as of other fruits, liquors, which are exceedingly sweet and
delicious. The same rule is, therefore, here prescribed for the priests,
whilst in the performance of their duties, as for the Nazarites. Both
were allowed freely to eat of all the richest foods; but God commanded
them to be content with water, because abstinence in drinks very greatly
conduces to frugality of living. For few are intemperate in eating, who
do not also love wine; besides, an abundance of food generally satisfies
the appetite, whilst there is no limit to drinking, where the love of
wine prevails. Therefore, abstinence from wines was enjoined upon the
priest, not only that they might beware of drunkenness, but that they
might be temperate in eating, and not luxuriate in their abundance. But,
inasmuch as sobriety is the main point in moderate living, God
especially limited His priests in this respect, lest the rigor of their
minds, and rectitude, and integrity of judgment, should be impaired by
drinking. Hence it appears how great is man’s proneness to all
defilements. Wine is very wholesome as one of our means of nutriment;
but by the too free use of it many enervate their strength, becloud
their understanding, and almost stupify all their senses so as to make
themselves inactive. Some, too, degrade themselves into foul and brutish
stupidity, or are driven by it to madness. Thus a pleasure, which ought
to have incited them to give God thanks, is taken away from them on
account of their vicious excess; and not without disgrace, because they
know not how to enjoy God’s good gifts in moderation. He afterwards
confirms the fact, that He interdicted wine to the priests when
exercising their office, that they may distinguish “between clean and
unclean,” and be sound and faithful interpreters of the Law. On this
score it became them to be abstemious throughout their whole life,
because they were always appointed to be masters to instruct the people;
but lest immoderate strictness should tend to disgust them, so that they
might be less disposed for the willing performance of the rest of their
duty, God deemed it sufficient to admonish them by this temporary
abstinence, that they should study to be sober at other times. Thus,
then, it must be concluded that none are fit to teach who are given to
gluttony, which corrupts the soundness of the mind, and destroys its
rigor. The comment of Jerome is indeed a childish one, that “A fat belly
does not engender a quick understanding:” for many corpulent men are of
vigorous and active intellect, and indeed leanness is often the
consequence of drinking too much. But those who stuff their bodies will
never have sufficient activity of mind to execute the office of
teaching. In conclusion, we gather from this passage, as Malachi says,
(<span id="iii.iv.x-p15.1"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="iii.iv.x-p15.1"></span>,)
that the priests were interpreters of the Law, and messengers of the
Lord of hosts, and not dumb masks For though the Law was written, yet
God would ever have the living voice to resound in His Church, just as
now-a-days preaching is inseparably united with Scripture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc04076.htm#fr_187) <span
id="iii.iv.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.x-p14"></span> *Lat., “*<span
id="iii.iv.x-p14.1"></span>sicera.” *Fr, “*<span
id="iii.iv.x-p14.2"></span>ce qui est nomme en Hebrieu *Sechar.”* Blunt,
“The veracity of the Books of Moses, etc.,” art. 13, argues on the
probability of Nadab and Abihu’s sin in the offering of strange fire
having been the effect of intoxication, from the fact of its relation
being immediately followed by this prohibition. — Edit., 1835. Pp. 113,
*et seq.*

<span id="iii.iv.x-p15"></span>Lorinus, however, *in loco,* refutes the
notion from Tostatus, and so also Willet. It appears to have been of
Jewish origin; and the principal arguments against it are, — 1. That it
is not mentioned in the Scripture; and 2. That the offenders had been
ministering from an early hour in the morning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the High Priest](cc04077)
