[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04012)  [Next](cc04014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.i"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
19:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.v.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses and
unto Aaron, saying,

<span id="ii.v.i-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est insuper Jehova as Mosen
et Aharon, dicendo:

<span id="ii.v.i-p5"></span>**2.** This *is* the ordinance of the law
which the LORD hath commanded, saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer without spot, wherein *is* no
blemish, *and* upon which never came yoke:

<span id="ii.v.i-p6"></span>**2.** Hoc est statutum Legis quod praecepit
Jehova, dicendo, Alloquere filios Israel, ut afferant ad te vaccam rufam
perfectam, in qua non sit macula, super quam non ascenderit jugum.

<span id="ii.v.i-p7"></span>**3.** And ye shall give her unto Eleazar
the priest, that he may bring her forth without the camp, and *one*
shall slay her before his face:

<span id="ii.v.i-p8"></span>**3.** Et dabitis eam Eleazar sacerdoti, qui
educet eam extra castra, et mactandam curabit ante se.

<span id="ii.v.i-p9"></span>**4.** And Eleazar the priest shall take of
her blood with his finger, and sprinkle of her blood directly before the
tabernacle of the congregation seven times:

<span id="ii.v.i-p10"></span>**4.** Capietque Eleazar sacerdos de
sanguine ejus digito suo, et sparget e regione faciei tabernaculi
conventionis de sanguine ejus septera vicibus.

<span id="ii.v.i-p11"></span>**5.** And *one* shall burn the heifer in
his sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall
he burn:

<span id="ii.v.i-p12"></span>**5.** Postea comburendam curabit vaccam in
oculis suis: pellem ejus, ct carnem ejus, et sanguinem ejus una cum fimo
ejus comburet.

<span id="ii.v.i-p13"></span>**6.** And the priest shall take cedar
wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast *it* into the midst of the
burning of the heifer.

<span id="ii.v.i-p14"></span>**6.** Tunc accipiet sacerdos lignum
cedrinum, et hyssopum, et coccum vermiculi, projicietque in medium
combustionis vaccae.

<span id="ii.v.i-p15"></span>**7.** Then the priest shall wash his
clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall
come into the camp, and the priest shall be unclean until the even.

<span id="ii.v.i-p16"></span>**7.** Et lavabit vestes suas sacerdos,
lavabit quoque carnem suam aqua, et postea ingredietur castra,
immundusque erit sacerdos usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.v.i-p17"></span>**8.** And he that burneth her shall wash
his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean
until the even.

<span id="ii.v.i-p18"></span>**8.** Ille quoque qui combusserit eam,
lavabit vestimenta sua aqua, lavabit et carnem suam aqua, immundusque
erit usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.v.i-p19"></span>**9.** And a man *that is* clean shall
gather up the ashes of’ the heifer, and lay *them* up without the camp
in a clean place, and it shall be kept for the congregation of the
children of Israel for a water of separation: it *is* a purification for
sin.

<span id="ii.v.i-p20"></span>**9.** Colliget autem vir mundus cinerem
illius vaccae, et ponet illum extra castra in loco mundo: eritque
congregationi filiorum Israel in custodiam in aquam separationis: nam
expiatio est.

<span id="ii.v.i-p21"></span>**10.** And he that gathereth the ashes of
the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it
shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that
sojourneth among them, for a statute for ever.

<span id="ii.v.i-p22"></span>**10.** Et lavabit qui collegerit cinerem
vaccae vestimenta sua, immundusque erit usqu,e ad vesperam: et erit
filiis Israel et peregrino qui pere-grinatur in medio eorum, in statutum
perpetuum.

<span id="ii.v.i-p23"></span>**11.** He that toucheth the dead body of
any man shall be unclean seven days.

<span id="ii.v.i-p24"></span>**11.** Qui tetigerit cadaver omnis animae
hominis, immundus erit septem diebus.

<span id="ii.v.i-p25"></span>**12.** He shall purify himself with it on
the third day, and on the seventh day he shall be clean: but if he
purify not himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not be
clean.

<span id="ii.v.i-p26"></span>**12.** Ipse purificabitur eo die tertia,
et die septima mundus erit: quod si non purificatus fuerit die tertia,
die septima non erit mundus.

<span id="ii.v.i-p27"></span>**13.** Whosoever toucheth the dead body of
any man that is dead, and purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacle
of the LORD; and that soul shall be cut off from Israel: because the
water of separation was not sprinkled upon him, he shall be unclean; his
uncleanness *is* yet upon him.

<span id="ii.v.i-p28"></span>**13.** Quicunque tetigerit mortuum, animam
hominis qui mortuus fuerit, et non fuerit purificatus, tabernaculum
Jehovae polluit: et excidetur anima illa ex Israel: quia aqua
separationis non fuit aspersa super eum, immundus erit, adhuc immunditia
ejus erit in ipso

<span id="ii.v.i-p29"></span>**14.** This *is* the law, when a man dieth
in a tent: All that come into the tent, and all that *is* in the tent,
shall be unclean seven days.

<span id="ii.v.i-p30"></span>**14.** Haec est lex, Quum quis mortuus
fuerit in tabernaculo, quicunque ingressus fuerit tabernaculum, et
quicquid fuerit tabernaculo, immundum erit septem diebus.

<span id="ii.v.i-p31"></span>**15.** And every open vessel, which hath
no covering bound upon it, *is* unclean.

<span id="ii.v.i-p32"></span>**15.** Omne item vas apertum super quo non
fuerit operculum adjectum, immundum est.

<span id="ii.v.i-p33"></span>**16.** And whosoever toucheth one that is
slain with a sword in the open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a
man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.

<span id="ii.v.i-p34"></span>**16.** Quicunque praeterea tetigerit in
superficie agri occisum gladio, aut mortuum, aut os hominis, aut
sepul-chrum, immundus erit septem diebus.

<span id="ii.v.i-p35"></span>**17.** And for an unclean *person* they
shall take of the ashes of the burnt heifer of purification for sin, and
running water shall be put thereto in a vessel:

<span id="ii.v.i-p36"></span>**17.** Tollentque pro immundo de pulvere
combustionis oblationis pro peccato, et ponent super eum aquam vlvam in
vase.

<span id="ii.v.i-p37"></span>**18.** And a clean person shall take
hyssop, and dip *it* in the water, and sprinkle *it* upon the tent, and
upon all the vessels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him
that touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave:

<span id="ii.v.i-p38"></span>**18.** Capiet item hyssopum, et intinget
in aquam vir mundus, et sparget super tabernaculum, et super omnem
supellectilem, et super animas quae fuerint ibi, ac super eum qui
tetigit os illud, vel occisum, vel mortuum, vel sepulchrum.

<span id="ii.v.i-p39"></span>**19.** And the clean *person* shall
sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day: and
on the seventh day he shall purify himself, and wash his clothes, and
bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at even.

<span id="ii.v.i-p40"></span>**19.** Asperget, inquam, mundus super
immundum die tertia, et die septima, et mundabit eum die septima: postea
lavabit vestimenta sua: lavabit quoque sese aqua, et mundus erit in
vespera.

<span id="ii.v.i-p41"></span>**20.** But the man that shall be unclean,
and shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from among the
congregation, because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the LORD: the
water of separation hath not been sprinkled upon him; he *is* unclean.

<span id="ii.v.i-p42"></span>**20.** Vir autem qui immundus fuerit, et
non purificaverit se, excidetur anima illa medio congregationis, quia
sanctuarium Jehovae polluit: aqua separationis non est aspersa super eum
immundus est.

<span id="ii.v.i-p43"></span>**21.** And it shall be a perpetual statute
unto them, that he that sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash
his clothes; and he that toucheth the water of separation shall be
unclean until even.

<span id="ii.v.i-p44"></span>**21.** Et erit els in statutum perpetuum:
et qui sparserit aquam separationis, lavabit vestimenta sua: quique
tetigerit aquam separationis, immundus erit usque ad vesperam.

<span id="ii.v.i-p45"></span>**22.** And whatsoever the unclean *person*
toucheth shall be unclean; and the soul that toucheth *it* shall be
unclean until even.

<span id="ii.v.i-p46"></span>**22.** Et quicquid tetigerit immundus,
immundum erit: et anima quae tetigerit ipsum, immunda erit usque ad
vesperam.

<span id="ii.v.i-p47"></span> 

<span id="ii.v.i-p48"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p49"></span>**2** *This is the ordinance of the law.*
Because it could not but occur that, whilst the faithful were engaged in
the world, they should often contract some pollution by their contact
with its many impurities, the composition of the water is here
described, by the sprinkling of which they might wash away, and expiate
their uncleanness: and then certain kinds of pollution are specified,
whereof the purification is required. God commands that a red heifer
should be slain, which had never been subjected to the yoke; and that it
should be burnt without the camp, together with its skin and dung; that
the ashes should be gathered by a man that was clean, and laid up
without the camp for the common use of the people. But, in order that
the water, which was mixed with these ashes, should have the power of
reconciliation, God at the same time commands that the blood should be
sprinkled seven times before the altar by the finger of the priest. The
object of this ceremony was twofold: for God would awaken the attention
of the people to reflect more closely upon their impurity; and, although
they might be pure within, still would have them carefully look around
them, lest they should be polluted from without; and also taught them
that, as often as they were infected by any pollution, expiation was to
be sought for from elsewhere, viz., from sacrifice and sprinkling; and
thus admonish them that men inquire in vain in themselves for the
remedies demanded for their purification, because purity can only
proceed from the sanctuary. Those, who speculate subtilty on the
details, advance some questionable matters. I leave them, therefore, to
the enjoyment of their conceits; let it suffice for us to consider
generally what God referred to in this ceremony, and what advantage
accrued from it to the people. By the red color, they suppose that sin
is signified. Meanwhile, lest they should run into a manifest
contradiction, they are obliged absurdly to interpret what follows, that
He required a heifer perfect and without blemish, as if it were said
that there should be no difference of color in her hair; whereas God
demands the same thing as in the other sacrifices, which were rejected
as faulty if any mark of deformity existed in them. And in this sense it
is added that she should never have borne a yoke. Therefore I make no
doubt but that God enjoined that a pure heifer, neither mutilated nor
lame, should be chosen; and, that her perfectness might be more
apparent, as yet unbroken to the yoke. What, then, is the meaning of the
red color? First of all, I prefer confessing my ignorance to advancing
anything doubtful; but it may be conjectured that a common and ordinary
color was rather chosen, lest it should be too conspicuous, as it would
have been, if either white or black. But this should be deemed sure,
that a perfect heifer, and one free from every blemish, was to be
offered, and one too, which had not been broken to bear the yoke by the
hands of men, that the purification might have nothing of humanity about
it.: But the command to offer her was given to the whole people;
because, in order that we may be partakers of ablution, it is necessary
that each of us should offer Christ to the Father. For, although He
only, and that but once, has offered Himself, still a daily offering of
Him, which is effected by faith and prayers, is enjoined to us, not such
as  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) the Papists have invented, by
whom in their impiety and perverseness, the Lord’s Supper has been
mistakenly turned into a sacrifice, because they imagined that Christ
must be daily slain, in order that His death might profit us. The
offering, however, of faith and prayers, of which I speak, is very
different, and by it alone we apply to ourselves the virtue and fruit of
Christ’s death.

<span id="ii.v.i-p52"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p53"></span>**3** *And ye shall give her unto Eleazar.*
A clear distinction is here made between two offerings; for the people
are not permitted to kill the heifer, but this is the peculiar office of
the priest. Thus the people offered vicariously by the hand of the
priest; and in this way also at present, although we set Christ before
God’s face in order to propitiate Him, still it is necessary that Christ
Himself should interpose, and exercise the office of a priest. Again,
the heifer was to be taken outside the camp, as a sign that it was
accursed, since it was an atonement. On which account, too, the atoning
victims, whose blood was carried into the Holy of Holies, were burnt
without the camp; the truth of which figure was accomplished in Christ,
who therefore suffered outside the gates of the city, as the Apostle
testifies. (<span id="ii.v.i-p53.1"></span>[Heb
13:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.v.i-p53.1"></span>.) But, because this was a species of
rejection, lest the heifer should be less accounted of, or lest the
Israelites should think her polluted by the curse, God shews that her
blood was sacred and of a sweet savor, by commanding that it should be
sprinkled seven times upon the altar, which might not be profaned by
anything unclean. The same thing is most clearly seen in Christ; for
although He was made a curse for us, and is called “sin*,*” because by
bearing our accursed sins upon the cross, He was our atoning victim, yet
nothing was thereby taken from His purity, so as to prevent His holiness
from being the sanctification of the whole world. For He offered Himself
through the Spirit, and by His own blood entered into the holy place,
and His death is elsewhere called by Paul, “a sacrifice for a
sweet-smelling savor.” (<span id="ii.v.i-p53.2"></span>[Heb
9:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.v.i-p53.2"></span>; <span id="ii.v.i-p53.3"></span>[Eph
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.v.i-p53.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.v.i-p53.4"></span>[Php
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)<span id="ii.v.i-p53.4"></span>.md).

<span id="ii.v.i-p54"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p55"></span>**6** *And the priest shall take
cedar-wood.* That the sprinkling of the blood might be conjoined with
that of the water, the cedar-wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, thread, with
which the sprinkling was wont to be made, were cast into the fire; for,
unless the Israelites had been admonished by this visible sign, they
would not have so clearly known that they were not only washed with the
water, but that by the offering of the sacrifice also their uncleanness
was removed. But it was not enough that the blood should be poured
forth, unless, as has been already seen, they were purified by its
aspersion. But, for as much as the scent of cedar-wood is precious, and
in hyssop there is a cleansing property, we gather from hence also that
the victim was pure, although it bore their sins together with the curse
and expiation. Peter teaches us how we are sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, viz., through the Spirit, (<span id="ii.v.i-p55.1"></span>[1Pe
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.i-p55.1"></span>;.md)
nay, John shews us in his Canonical Epistle, that we find all the parts
of this ceremony in Christ, where he writes that Christ “came by water
and blood,” and “it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the
Spirit is truth.” (<span id="ii.v.i-p55.2"></span>[1Jo
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.i-p55.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.v.i-p56"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p57"></span>**7** *Then the priest shall wash his
clothes.* At first sight there seems to be a discrepancy in the facts,
that the heifer was sacred to God, and pure, and still that the priest
was polluted by touching it; yet they accord very well with each other.
But that both the priest as well as the minister who made the burning,
were unclean until the evening, ought to have forcibly struck the
people, and taught them the more to abominate sin. And, since it was not
permitted to any but a man that was clean to gather the ashes, not that
they should be laid anywhere but in a clean place, it was manifested by
this sign that there was no impurity in the sacrifice itself, but that
from an extraneous and adventitious pollution; because it was destined
to purge away uncleanness, it was accounted in a certain sense unclean.
Whence too the water, into which the ashes were thrown, was called the
water of separation, as well as the expiation  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) For this translation which I have given
is the right one; and others improperly render it “for waters of
separation, and for expiation.” The old interpreter has not given the
sense amiss, as far as regards this word, “*because* the heifer is burnt
for sin.” But since in Hebrew the word,<span
id="ii.v.i-p58.2"></span>חטאה *chateah*  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) means not only wickedness or sin, but
also the sacrifice on which the curse is imposed; what Moses intended to
convey is better expressed by the word “*expiation.*” But the expression
“separation” has reference to the men, whose personal uncleanness
excluded them from the holy congregation. But the question arises, why
this ordinance is pronounced to be common to the strangers who sojourned
in the land of Israel, as well as to the natives; because it was by no
means reasonable that the uncircumcised should be purified. The reply is
easy, that such strangers are not adverted to as were altogether aliens
from the people, but those who, although born of heathen parentage, had
embraced the Law. These God equalizes with the children of Abraham in
the sacrifices and other religious services; for if their condition were
different, the-church, into the body of which they were ingrafted, would
be rent asunder.

<span id="ii.v.i-p60"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p61"></span>**11.** *He that toucheth the dead body.*
He now recites certain forms of pollution in which the washing was
necessary; all of them, however, come to the point, that men are defiled
by the touch of a corpse or, bones, or a grave. Nor is there here any
distinction between the body of a person who is slain, or of one who has
died in bed; whence it follows that death is here set forth as a mirror
of God’s curse: And assuredly, if we consider its origin and cause, the
corruption of nature, whereby the image of God is defaced, presents
itself in every, dead man; for, unless we were altogether corrupt, we
should not be born to perish But God also taught His people by another
mode of signifying it, that uncleanness is contracted by our
communication with the unfruitful works of darkness. For the Apostle
(<span id="ii.v.i-p61.2"></span>[Heb
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.i-p61.2"></span>.md)
calls them “dead works,” either from their consequences, or because, as
faith is the life of the soul, so unbelief keeps it in death. Since,
then, the corpse the bones, the grave, designate whatever we bring from
the womb, because, until we are born again, and God quickens us by His
Spirit and faith, we are dead while we live; there is no question but
that the children of Israel were reminded, that in order to keep
themselves pure before God, they must abstain from all corruption;
inasmuch as, if they were rendered unclean by their contact with a dead
man, they must immediately have recourse to ablution. In fine, the
ceremony had no other object than that they should serve God in pureness
from the sins of the flesh; and exercise themselves in constant thoughts
of repentance, whilst, if they fell from their purity, they should labor
to obtain reconciliation with God, by means of sacrifice and ablution.

<span id="ii.v.i-p62"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p63"></span>**13.** *Whosoever toucheth the dead body.*
The severity of. the capital punishment shews how very pleasing to God
is purity. If any one bad forgotten to sprinkle himself on the third or
the seventh day, he might redeem his negligence by a prolongation of the
term, because he only postponed his purification to another day; but it
was a capital crime to enter the sanctuary in his uncleanness, since
thus holy and profane things would be mixed together, nay, the altar
would have been polluted as well as the whole service of God. But indeed
the act of touching a dead body was of slight importance, nor was it to
be deemed an atrocious crime; but here the external defilement is not
regarded in itself, as if God were wroth on account of a stain
contracted by the performance of a pious duty.  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) Rather must the object of the *ceremony*
be considered, for God designed by these rudiments to teach the
Israelites, like children, that if any one should pollute sacred things
by his impurity, he would by no means be tolerated in this audacity. In
this then consisted the religious import of the transaction, that the
worship of God was too precious for the Israelites to be permitted to
contaminate it with impunity. Whence we gather that the punishment was
denounced as against sacrilege. In sum, it comes to this, that God is
not duly worshipped except with a sincere heart and pure hands; and that
if any pollution be contracted*,* there is need of expiation before a
free access is re-opened to holy things. But it must be remarked as to
the contact, that it was accounted the same thing, whether the corpse
lay in a field or a house; whilst, if any one died in a tent, men were
polluted by merely entering it, and likewise vessels without covers thus
became unclean.

<span id="ii.v.i-p65"></span><span id="ii.v.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p66"></span>**22.** *And whatsoever the unclean person
toucheth.* Others translate *it,* — “Whosoever toucheth an unclean thing
shall be unclean.” for, since the Hebrew is without a neuter gender,
 <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) the relative <span
id="ii.v.i-p67.4"></span>אשר, *asher,* and the noun <span
id="ii.v.i-p67.5"></span>הטמא*, hattame,* may be either masculine or
neuter; and either sense would not be unsuitable; except that we gather
from the second clause, that reference is rather made here to the
contagion with which unclean persons infect either men or garments, or
other articles. For those who had touched a dead body, or bones, or a
grave, were not only unclean until the evening, but for seven entire
days. But it appears that this was added in conclusion, lest the Jews
should murmur at the severity of the punishment, as if God would inflict
the penalty of death for a trifling sin. In this way, then, Moses shews
how great is the guilt incurred by those who, being unclean, intrude
into the sanctuary; because, as far as in them lies, they pollute the
holiness of God, and not without intolerable impertinence. Hence appears
to be taken the reproof of the Prophet, when he reproaches the Jews with
having done nothing but defile the worship of God with their sacrifices;
for he proposes this question to the priests, — “If one bear holy flesh
in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or
pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy?” After they
have replied in the negative, he asks again, “If one that is unclean by
a dead body touch any of these, shall it be unclean?” and they answer,
“It shall be unclean.” Whence the Prophet infers:

<span id="ii.v.i-p68"></span>"So is this people, and so is this nation
before me, saith the Lord, and so is the work of their hands; and that
which they offer there is unclean.” (<span id="ii.v.i-p68.1"></span>[Hag
2:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.v.i-p68.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.v.i-p69"></span>This passage shews us the legitimate use of
the ceremony, that corrupt and perverse worshippers  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) bring disgrace rather than honor on God,
whilst they mix up His holy name with their profanations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc04013.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="ii.v.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p50"></span> See the dogmatical statement of this
notion in the Creed of Pius iv.

<span id="ii.v.i-p51"></span>Art: V. — “I profess, likewise, that in the
Mass there is offered to God a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice
for the living and the dead; and that in the most holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist there are truly, really, and substantially the body and blood,
together with the soul and divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ,” etc.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc04013.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="ii.v.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p58"></span> “<span id="ii.v.i-p58.1"></span>Nam
expiatio est.” — *Lat*, v. 9. “It is a purification for sin.” — *A.V*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc04013.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="ii.v.i-p58.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p59"></span> <span id="ii.v.i-p59.1"></span>למי נדה
חטאת הוא <span id="ii.v.i-p59.2"></span>́̔Υδωρ ῥαντισμᾶ ἅγνισμά ἐστι· —
*LXX.* <span id="ii.v.i-p59.3"></span>In aqua aspersionis; quia pro
peccato vacca combusta est. — V. This last is what *C*. means by “the
old interpreter.” The translation which he condemns he had seen in
*S.M*. — W.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc04013.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="ii.v.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p64"></span> “<span id="ii.v.i-p64.1"></span>Pour
ensevelir son pere;” by burying his father — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc04013.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="ii.v.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p67"></span> *S.M*. had used the words cited by *C*.
“<span id="ii.v.i-p67.1"></span>Quicunque tetigerit immundum;” but *C*.
appears to have overlooked his note upon this clause, viz., “<span
id="ii.v.i-p67.2"></span>Hoc est, qui tetigerit hominem, qui super
mortuo est immundus;” or else he would have seen that <span
id="ii.v.i-p67.3"></span>*immundum* was not meant for a neuter. — *W*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc04013.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="ii.v.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p70"></span> “<span id="ii.v.i-p70.1"></span>*Ceux* qui
servent a Dieu sans droite affection, and par hypocrisie;” those who
serve God without right affections, and in hypocrisy. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Keeping Clean by the Concealment of Impurities](cc04014.md)
