[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04060)  [Next](cc04062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
27](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
27:9-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p3"></span>**9.** And thou shalt make the court
of the tabernacle: for the south side southward *there shall be*
hangings for the court *of* fine twined linen of an hundred cubits long
for one side:

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p4"></span>**9.** Facies insuper atrium
tabernaculi ad plugam meridianam australem: cortinae erunt atrio e bysso
retorta: centum cubitorum erit longitudo angulo uni.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p5"></span>**10.** And the twentypillars thereof
and their twenty sockets *shall be of* brass; the hooks of the pillars
and their fillets *shall be of* silver.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p6"></span>**10.** Columnae autem ejus erunt
viginti, et bases earum viginti aereae: capitella colunmarum et ilia
earum argentea.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p7"></span>**11.** And likewise for the north
side in length *there shall be* hangings of an hundred *cubits* long,
and his twenty pillars and their twenty sockets *of* brass; the hooks of
the pillars and their fillets of silver.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p8"></span>**11.** Et sic lateri aquilonari in
longitudine erunt cortinae centum, et columnm ejus viginti, basesque
earum viginti rerem: capitella columnarum, et fila earum argentea.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p9"></span>**12.** And *for* the breadth of the
court on the west side *shall be* hangings of fifty cubits: their
pillars ten, and their sockets ten.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p10"></span>**12.** Porro in latitudine atrii ad
latus occidentale, erunt cortinae quinquaginta cubitorum: et columnae
earum erunt decem, et bases earum decem.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p11"></span>**13.** And the breadth of the court
on the east side eastward *shall be* fifty cubits.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p12"></span>**13.** In latitudine vero atrii in
latere orientali ad orientem, quinquaginta cubiti erunt.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p13"></span>**14.** The hangings of one side of
*the gate shall be* fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their
sockets three.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p14"></span>**14.** Qindecim autem cubitorum
erunt tortinto lateri uni: columnae earum tres, basesque earum tres.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p15"></span>**15.** And on the other side *shall
be* hangings fifteen *cubits*: their pillars three, and their sockets
three.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p16"></span>**15.** Lateri vero secundo
quindecim cortinae: columnae earum tres, et bases earum tres.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p17"></span>**16.** And for the gate of the
court *shall be* an hanging of twenty cubits, *of* blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needlework: *and* their
pillars *shall be* four, and their sockets four.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p18"></span>**16.** Et portae atrii disponetur
aulaeum viginti cubitorum ex hyacintho, et purpura, et vermiculo cocci,
et bysso retorta, opere acupictoris: columnae ejus quatuor, basesque
earum quatuor.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p19"></span>**17.** All the pillars round about
the court *shall be* filleted with silver; their hooks *shall be of*
silver, and their sockets *of* brass.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p20"></span>**17.** Omnes columnae atrii in
circuitu cinctae erunt argento: capitella vero earum erunt argentea, et
bases earum aerea.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p21"></span>**18.** The length of the court
*shall* be an hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where, and the
height five cubits *of* fine twined linen, and their sockets *of* brass.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p22"></span>**18.** Longitudo atrii erit centum
cubitorum, et latitudo quinquaginta in quinquaginta: altitudo autem
quinque cubitorum: ex bysso retorta et bases earum aereae.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p23"></span>**19.** All the vessels of the
tabernacle, in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and
all the pins of the court, *shall be of* brass.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p24"></span>**19.** Omnia vasa tabernaculi in
omni ministerio ejus, et omnes paxilli ejus, et omnes paxilli atrii, ex
aeare.

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p25"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p26"></span><span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p27"></span>**9.** *And thou shalt make the
court.* There were two courts divided from the sanctuary, one for the
priests, the other common to the whole people. To the first chambers
were annexed, in which the Levites dwelt, who were the keepers of the
tabernacle; and thus sometimes the courts are spoken of in the plural
number, and especially in the Psalms, (<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p27.1"></span>[Ps.
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#004.md), [Ps.
84:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#002.md), [Ps.
92:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013.md), [Ps.
96:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p27.1"></span>.) It is the court of the people which
is here referred to, where they consecrated the victims, offered their
prayers, and were reconciled to God. In this manner the condition of
mankind was shewn to the Israelites, by their being forbidden to enter
the Temple, whilst at the same time they were reminded that men,
although unworthy outcasts, are received by God, if only they seek Him
simply, and with due humility, mindful of their own unworthiness. Hence
the consolation in which David gloried,  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) “I had rather dwell in the courts of
the Lord, than in the splendid tents of the ungodly.” The court was
formed by four curtains, two of which, on the north and south sides,
were 100 cubits long, and supported by 20 pillars, whose bases were of
brass, and their capitals  <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) and
fillets of silver; on the east and west, each curtain was 50 cubits
long, supported by 10 pillars. The length spoken of is not from the
ground upwards, but from their opposite corners: for the court was twice
as long as it was broad, as is said in <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p29.1"></span>[Ex
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p29.1"></span>. There would be an appearance of
contradiction in the fact that Moses afterwards speaks of two sides, and
assigns fifteen cubits to each, if he did not immediately go on to
mention the hanging or curtain, which covered the gate of the court, and
which he sets at twenty cubits. Thus the measure will be correct, and
the passage will be quite accordant; for, after he has said in <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p29.2"></span>[Ex
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p29.2"></span> that the curtain on the east side
should consist of fifty cubits, he adds in explanation that there were
two curtains at the sides of the door, and a third between them to cover
the door, making up in all the fifty cubits. But the door was covered by
the hanging, that the Israelites might reflect in themselves, whenever
they went into the sanctuary, that it was no profane or common
(*promiscuum*) place; but if they came thither in purity and chastity,
they might be assuredly persuaded that they were safe under the
protection of God. Finally also the majesty of holy things was shewn
them in this type, in order that they might reverently approach the
worship of God; and they were reminded of their own unworthiness, that
they might humble themselves the more before God, and that fear might
beget penitence, whilst moderation in the desire of knowledge was
recommended to them, that they might not be unduly inquisitive. The
religion of the Gentiles also had its secret shrines with the same
object, but for very different causes; for it was a brutal religion, for
which veneration was sought by darkness, and the disguise of ignorance;
whereas God, whilst He retained His people in modesty and simplicity, at
the same time set before them the Law, from which they might learn
whatever it was right and useful for them to know.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc04061.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p28"></span> It will be seen that he quotes
<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p28.1"></span>[Ps
84:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p28.1"></span>, somewhat parathrastically.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc04061.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iii.iii.xviii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.xviii-p29"></span> *A. V*., hooks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 29:36,37](cc04062.md)
