[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04125)  [Next](cc04127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#000)<span id="iii.x.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.x.xviii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019)<span
id="iii.x.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p3"></span>**19.** ... Thou shalt not seethe a kid
in his mother’s milk.

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p4"></span>**19.** Non coques hoedum in lacte
matris suae.

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p6"></span><span id="iii.x.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xviii-p7"></span>**19.** *Thou shalt not seethe a kid.*
The threefold repetition of the command reminds us that a serious matter
is spoken of, whereas it would be a light and almost frivolous one, if,
as some suppose, it is merely the prohibition of a somewhat unwholesome
food. But the Jews, not considering its intent, and affecting sanctity,
as they do, in trifling puerilities, dare not taste of cheese together
with kid, or lamb’s flesh, until they have well cleaned their teeth. I
have no doubt, however, but that this prohibition relates to the
sacrifices, for in the first passage quoted, it is added in connection
with the offering of the first-fruits; and in the second, we read as
follows: “The first of the first-fruits of thy land thou shalt bring
unto the house of the Lord thy God. Nor shalt thou seethe a kid in his
mother’s milk;” and so also in the third passage: “Ye shall not eat of
any thing that dieth of itself, etc., for thou art an holy people unto
the Lord thy God; nor shalt thou seethe a kid in his mother’s milk.” I
allow indeed that Moses sometimes mixes together precepts respecting
different things; but this running context shews that this precept is
delivered among the ceremonies, and must therefore be reckoned to be a
part of the legal service. Whence I conclude, that the people are not
only interdicted from eating this sort of food, as if they were to
partake of flesh steeped in blood; but that they should not pollute the
sacrifices by the carnal mixture. It is however probable, that meat
seasoned with milk was accounted a delicacy; but inasmuch as they might
grow cruel, if they ate of a lamb or kid in its mother’s milk, God
forbade to be offered to Himself, what was not allowable even in their
common meals. The exposition of some, that kids were excluded from their
tables until they were weaned, is not agreeable to reason; because they
then begin to have a goatish flavor. But the reason is a very
appropriate one, *i.e.,* that God would not admit a monstrous thing in
His sacrifices, that the flesh of the young should be cooked in its
mother’s milk, and thus, as it were, in its own blood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Civil Supplements to the Second Commandment](cc04127)
