[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04032)  [Next](cc04034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.viii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.x.viii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
20](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#000)<span id="ii.x.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.viii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.x.viii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#001)<span
id="ii.x.viii-p2.1"></span>, 27

<span id="ii.x.viii-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="ii.x.viii-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="ii.x.viii-p5"></span>**2.** Again, thou shalt say to the
children of Israel, Whosoever *he be* of the children of Israel, or of
the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that giveth *any* of his seed unto
Molech; he shall surely be put to death: the people of the land shall
stone him with stones.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p6"></span>**2.** Filiis Israel dices, Quicunque e
filiis Israel, et e peregrinis qui peregrinantur in Israel, dederit e
semine suo Moloch, moriendo morietur: populus terrae lapidibus lapidabit
eum.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p7"></span>**3.** And I will set my face against
that man, and will cut him off from among his people; because he hath
given of his seed unto Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my
holy name.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p8"></span>**3.** Ego etiam ponam faciem meam contra
virum illum, et exterminabo eum e medio populi sui, eo quod de-derit e
semine suo Moloch, ut contaminaret sanctuarium meum, et profanaret nomen
sanctitatis meae.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p9"></span>**4.** And if the people of the land do
any ways hide their eyes from the man, when he giveth of his seed unto
Molech, and kill him not:

<span id="ii.x.viii-p10"></span>**4.** Quod si abscondendo absconderit
populus terrae oculos suos a viro illo quando dabit ex semine suo
Moloch, non interficiendo illum;

<span id="ii.x.viii-p11"></span>**5.** Then I will set my face against
that man, and against his family, and will cut him off, and all that go
a whoring after him, to commit whoredom with Molech, from among their
people.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p12"></span>**5.** Tunc ponam ego faciem meam in
virum illum, et in familiam ejus, et succidam eum et omnes qui
scor-tantur post ipsum, ut scortentur post Moloch, e medio populi sui.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p13"></span>**6.** And the soul that turneth after
such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards, to go a whoring after
them, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off
from among his people.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p14"></span>**6.** Anima quae respexerit ad Pythones
et ariolos, ad fornicandum post eos, ponam faciem meam contra animam
illam, et exterminabo e medio populi sui.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p15"></span>**27.** A man also or woman that hath a
familar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death: they
shall stone them with stones: their blood *shall be* upon them.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p16"></span>**27.** Vir sive muleir in quibus fuerit
Python, vel aruspicum spiritus, moriendo morietur: lapidando lapidabunt
eos: sanguis eorum super eos.

<span id="ii.x.viii-p17"></span> 

<span id="ii.x.viii-p18"></span><span id="ii.x.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.viii-p19"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake.* The
prohibition of this superstition was previously expounded in its proper
place. God here commands the punishment to be inflicted, if any one
should have polluted himself with it. And surely it was a detestable
sacrilege to enslave to idols that offspring, which was begotten to God,
and which He had adopted in the loins of Abraham, since in this way they
not only despoiled God of His right, but, so far as they could, blotted
out the grace of adoption. What He had then generally pronounced, He now
specially applies, viz., that they should be stoned who offered their
seed to Molech; for otherwise they would have tried to escape on the
pretense that they had no intention of revolting to other gods. Just as
now-a-days, under the Papacy, whatever is alleged from Scripture against
their impious and corrupt worship, is coldly and contemptuously
received; because they varnish over their idolatries, and so indulge
themselves in them in security. But after God has commanded His judges
to punish this crime severely, He at the same time declares that, if
perchance they should connive at it, and encourage it by their lenity,
He Himself will avenge it, so as to punish much more heavily those who
may have escaped from the hands of men; and not only so, but that He
would implicate all those who might have been aware of it in the same
con-detonation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 12:15,19](cc04034)
