[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04143)  [Next](cc04145.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
30](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p2"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
30:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p3"></span>**1.** And Moses spake unto the heads of
the tribes concerning the children of Israel, saying, This *is* the
thing which the LORD hath commanded.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p4"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Moses ad capita
tribuum in Israel, dicendo: Hic est sermo quem praecepit Jehova.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p5"></span>**2.** If a man vow a vow unto the LORD, or
swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shall not break his word,
he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p6"></span>**2.** Vir qui voverit votum Jehovae, aut
juravefit jusjurandum, quo constringendo constrinxerit animam suam, ne
violet verbum suum: sed secundum omne quod egressum fuerit ex ore ejus,
faciat.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p7"></span>**3.** If a woman also vow a vow unto the
LORD, and bind herself by a bond, *being* in her father’s house in her
youth;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p8"></span>**3.** Mulier autem si vovetit votum
Jehovae, et constringendo constrinxerit in domo patris sui in pueritia
sua:

<span id="iv.ii.v-p9"></span>**4.** And her father hear her vow, and her
bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father shall hold his
peace at her: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith
she hath bound her soul shall stand.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p10"></span>**4.** Et audierit pater ejus votum
ipsius, et oblationem qua adstrinxit animam suam, et tacuerit ei (vel ad
eam) pater ejus, stabilia erunt omnia vota ejus, omnisque obligatio qua
constrinxit animam suam stabilietur.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p11"></span>**5.** But if her father disallow her in
the day that he heareth; not any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith
she hath bound her soul, shall stand: and the LORD shall forgive her,
because her father disallowed her.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p12"></span>**5.** Si autem irritum fetetit pater ejus
illo die quo audierit omne votum ab ea factum, et obligationem ejus
quibus constrinxerit animam suam, non stabilietur: et Jehova parcet el,
quia pater ejus irritum fecerit.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p13"></span>**6.** And if she had at all an husband,
when she vowed, or uttered ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound
her soul;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p14"></span>**6.** Quod si fuerit sub viro, et fuerint
vota ejus super eam, aut prolatio labiorum qua constrinxerit animam
suam:

<span id="iv.ii.v-p15"></span>**7.** And her husband heard *it,* and
held his peace at her in the day that he heard *it*: then her vows shall
stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p16"></span>**7.** Et audierit maritus eius, et die
quo audivit tacuerit el: tunc stabilietur vota ejus, et obligationes
quibus constrinxerit animam suam stabilientur.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p17"></span>**8.** But if her husband disallowed her
on the day that he heard *it;* then he shall make her vow which she
vowed, and that which she uttered with her lips, wherewith she bound her
soul, of none effect: and the LORD shall forgive her.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p18"></span>**8.** Quod si quo die audivit marl tus
ejus irritum id fecerit, et dissolverit vota ejus quae erant super eam,
et prolationem labiorum ejus relaxaverit, qua constrinxerat animam suam,
tunc Jehova propitius illi erit.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p19"></span>**9.** But every vow of a widow, and of
her that is divorced, wherewith they have bound their souls, shall stand
against her.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p20"></span>**9.** Votum autem omne viduae et
repudiatae quo constrinxerit animam suam, stabilietur super eam.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p21"></span>**10.** And if she vowed in her husband’s
house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath;

<span id="iv.ii.v-p22"></span>**10.** Porro si in domo mariti sui votum
fecerit, aut constringendo constrinxerit animam per jusjurandum:

<span id="iv.ii.v-p23"></span>**11** And her husband heard *it,* and
held his peace at her, *and* disallowed her not: then all her vows shall
stand, and every bond wherewith she bound her soul shall stand.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p24"></span>**11.** Et maritus ejus audierit et
tacuerit ei, nec irritum fecerit illud: tune stabilientur omnia ejus
vota, et omnis obligatio qua eonstrinxerit animam suam stabilietur.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p25"></span>**12.** But if her husband hath utterly
made them void on the day he heard *them; then* whatsoever proceeded out
of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul,
shall not stand: her husband hath made them void; and the LORD shall
forgive her.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p26"></span>**12.** Quod si dissolvendo dissolverit
illa maritus ejus, quo die audivit omnem prolationem labiorum ejus, ad
vota ejus, et obligationem animae ejus, non stabilietur; maritus ejus
dissolvit ea, et Jehova propitius erit el.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p27"></span>**13.** Every vow, and every binding oath
to afflict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her husband may
make it void.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p28"></span>**13.** Omne votum, et omnejusjurandum
obligationis ad affligendam animam maritus ejus stabiliet, et maritus
ejus dissolvet.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p29"></span>**14.** But if her husband altogether hold
his peace at her from day to day; then he establisheth all her vows, or
all her bonds, which *are* upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held
his peace at her in the day that he heard *them.*

<span id="iv.ii.v-p30"></span>**14.** Sin tacendo tacuerit maritus ejus
a die in diem, tune stabiliet omnia vota ejus, et omnes obligationes
ejus: quae sunt super eam, stabiliet, quia tacuit ei quo die audivit.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p31"></span>**15.** But if he shall any ways make them
void after that he hath heard *them;* then he shall bear her iniquity.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p32"></span>**15.** Quod si dissolvendo dissolverit,
ea postquam audierit, portabit iniquitatem illius.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p33"></span>**16.** These *are* the statutes which the
LORD commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, between the father and
his daughter, *being yet* in her youth in her father’s house.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p34"></span>**16.** Haec sunt statuta quae praecepit
Jehova Most inter virum et uxorem ejus, inter patrem et filiam ejus quae
est in pueritia in domo patris sui.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p35"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.v-p36"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p37"></span>**1** *And Moses spake.* Moses teaches in
this chapter that the vows which were made by persons who were not free,
were not held good before God; and although no mention is made of male
children, still, as their condition was the same, it seems that by
*synecdoche* they must be included with the daughters and wives, unless
perhaps God chose to pay regard to the weaker sex. But since He permits
females, who were not under their father’s power, to make vows in spite
of their sex, nor does He make it to be an excuse for levity or
thoughtlessness, it seems that the object proposed was, that the right
of the father over his children as well as of the husband over the wife,
should be maintained inviolate.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p38"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p39"></span>**2.** *If a man vow a vow.* Wishing to
modify the general law, lest any one should think that there was any
contradiction in this exception, he begins by repeating the law itself,
that every one should faithfully pay whatever he had vowed; as much as
to say, that this stands good, but that he only refers to such as are
their own masters; and that women or girls who are under the power of
another, were not free to make vows without the concurrence of their
fathers’ or husbands’ consent. This preface, however, must be
understood, as I have already pointed out, of lawful vows, whereby
neither is religion corrupted nor the holiness of God’s name profaned.
And assuredly, unless what we offer is acceptable to God, there can be
no obligation on the conscience. Moreover, since there is here a
distinction made between males and females, it may be probably
conjectured that boys of ten years old, although still united with their
family, are bound by their promises; and therefore I will not
pertinaciously contend about this, because it is better to leave
undecided whatever is doubtful, and *disputable,* as it is commonly
called, on either side.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p40"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p41"></span>**3.** *If a woman also vow.* He now
proceeds to the point of which he proposed to treat, *i.e.,* that vows
made by persons who are not their own masters do not hold good; and he
mentions two cases. For, in the *first* place, he teaches that if a
daughter, whilst living with her father, has vowed anything without his
knowledge, it is of no force. He lays down the same rule, if the father,
hearing the vow, has disallowed it; but if he has held his peace, it is
declared that his silence is equivalent to consent. Hence we gather that
all those who are possessed of power do not do their duty unless they
frankly and discreetly express their opposition whenever anything
displeases them; since their connivance is a kind of tacit approbation.
In the *second* place, he treats of married women, whose vows, made in
the absence or with the disapproval of their husbands, he commands to be
of none effect; but if the husbands have known of them, and been silent,
he obliges their performance. For many deceptions might have thus
arisen; since it is usual with many when they wish to gratify their
wives, to conceal their opinion for the time, but, when the period of
actual performance arrives, to elude what may have been promised. But
unless they use their privilege in proper time, God would have them bear
the punishment of their servile indulgence and dissimulation; but
because women are often urged to deceive by their levity and
inconstancy, this danger is also anticipated. It may also happen  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325.md) that a woman, when subject to her
husband, may make a vow in the precipitate fervor of her zeal, and when
he is dead, may retract it under the specious pretext that she was not
then free and her own mistress; the same thing may occur when a divorced
woman shall bind herself, and then when she has married, shall appear to
herself to be released. Since instances of this wicked change of mind
are too frequent, no wonder that this special precaution should be
added, to prevent frauds. Wherefore God declares that the period when
the vow was made is to be considered, so that they are no less liable
than as if their condition had remained the same. He therefore condemns
to the performance of their vow those women who have been emancipated
from their fathers’ authority by marriage, and also who have been set
free by death or divorce; yet it appears from the last verse of the
chapter, that two exceptions, modifying the general law, are here
peculiarly treated of.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p43"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p44"></span>**5.** *But if her father disallow her.*
The expression is remarkable, “And the Lord shall forgive her,” whereby
Moses gently reproves the foolish thoughtlessness of the girl; and soon
afterwards the same thing is spoken of married women. And surely their
rashness is worthy of reprehension, if unmindful of their condition,
they, as it were, shake off the yoke and hastily commit themselves. God
therefore hints that they are not without blame; but lest they should be
tormented by secret remorse, He removes every scruple, declaring that He
will forgive, if the performance of the vow shall have been prevented in
any other quarter. When the dissent of the father or the husband is
required on the same day, it is tantamount to saying that what they have
once approved of cannot be disallowed. Further, to “hold his peace” to a
wife or daughter, signifies that he does not oppose, but give by silence
a token of consent.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p45"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p46"></span>**9.** *But every vow of a widow.* I have
stated why widows are expressly named, viz., lest a woman should think
that by a second marriage she would escape, as being no longer free, and
again under the yoke; since by such subtle excuses people often
extricate themselves. No other subject is referred to down to the end of
the last verse but one; for they have made a very gross mistake, who
interpret it as applying to a family and its master.  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326.md) The subject itself certainly does not
admit of such an explanation; and the words of Moses forbid it: so that
it is the more surprising that persons skilled in the Hebrew language
have not seen the matter clearly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc04144.htm#fr_325.md) <span
id="iv.ii.v-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p42"></span> The *Lat.* is, “<span
id="iv.ii.v-p42.1"></span>Accidet ut mulier *in vidaitate viro non
subjecta,* praecipiti zeli fervore voveat, *eo mortuo* retractet
specioso praetextu, quia tunc libera non erat, nec sui juris.” The *Fr.,
“*<span id="iv.ii.v-p42.2"></span>Il adviendra qu’une femme estante en
sujection de mari, vouera par une ardeur hastive de zele, le marl
trespasse, elle prendra honneste couverture de se retracter, d’autant
qu’elle n’estoit pas libre pour lors.” I have translated the latter, not
being able to understand the original, nor to reconcile them.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc04144.htm#fr_326.md) <span
id="iv.ii.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p47"></span> <span id="iv.ii.v-p47.1"></span>[Nu
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ii.v-p47.1"></span>,
<span id="iv.ii.v-p47.2"></span>ואם-בית אישה. Literally, “And if the
house of her husband.” *C*. and *A.V.* follow *LXX.* in assuming that
the preposition *in* should be supplied before *the house. S.M.,* on the
other hand, translates the word <span id="iv.ii.v-p47.3"></span>בית*,
family,* which is undeniably allowable; but says in a note, “By family,
is to be understood the wife here, as the chief personage in it after
its master.” To this treatment of the text *C*. here adverts, as strange
on the part of one so skillful in the Hebrew tongue. — *W*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Political Supplements to the Third Commandment](cc04145.md)
