[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04027)  [Next](cc04029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#000)<span id="ii.x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p2"></span><span id="ii.x.iii-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#013)<span id="ii.x.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p3"></span>**12.** And the man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest that standeth to
minister there before the LORD thy God, or unto the judge, even that man
shall die: and thou shalt put away the evil from Israel.

<span id="ii.x.iii-p4"></span>**12.** Vir autem qui egerit in superbia
ut non audiat sacerdotem qui stat ut illic ministret Jehovae Deo, tuo,
aut judicem, morietur vir ille, et exterminabis malum ex Israele

<span id="ii.x.iii-p5"></span>**13.** And all the people shall hear, and
fear, and do no more presumptuously.

<span id="ii.x.iii-p6"></span>**13.** Atque omnes e populo audi ant, ut
timeant, neque in posterurn superbiant.

<span id="ii.x.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.x.iii-p8"></span><span id="ii.x.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p9"></span>He pronounces a similar punishment on
those who shall have contumaciously rejected the judgment of the
priests. We have already seen that the prophetical office was united
with the priesthood; since, according to <span
id="ii.x.iii-p9.1"></span>[Mal
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004)<span id="ii.x.iii-p9.1"></span>,
the covenant of God was with Levi, that his descendants might be the
guardians of His knowledge, and the interpreters of His law: yet God
often punished the laxity of the priests, by setting other teachers over
his people. At any rate, both were ambassadors for Him. Since,
therefore, the authority of the prophets had been sanctioned above, the
same rights are now conferred upon the priests; nor is this surprising,
for it was no trifling crime to despise God, the appointer of this
order. Yet we must remember what I have elsewhere stated, that the
priests were not armed with tyrannical authority, so that it was sinful
to reject whatever they might have decreed according to their own fancy.
For neither did God dethrone Himself when He appointed them, nor did He
bind men’s consciences to obey their ordinances without distinction, but
only would put reins on the audacity of those who have no scruple in
undervaluing the government of the Church. For this must be considered,
that foul and horrible would be the disorder, if men were promiscuously
permitted to reject whatever the rulers of the Church may have
appointed; and it would be ridiculous that persons should be called to
govern, to whom no dignity should be accorded; and, therefore, natural
reason itself shews and dictates, that the reverence, which is here
demanded, is due to all lawful commands. God was the author of the
priesthood: He, too, ordained judges. What could be more absurd than
that they should be despised and laughed at with impunity, who presided
in the name and by the command of God? But He has never exalted a mortal
man so high as to abdicate His own rights; nay, it was often necessary
boldly to reject what the priests had commanded. Urijah the priest built
a profane altar in the fashion of that at Damascus, which Ahaz had sent,
and offered a sacrifice thereon,  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54)
(<span id="ii.x.iii-p10.2"></span>[2Ki
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#012)<span
id="ii.x.iii-p10.2"></span>,) was it necessary that Isaiah should
acquiesce in this? Nay, detestable was the adulation of all who assented
to the decree of a wicked and perfidious priest. Moreover, we see that
the prophets were very often so far from agreeing with the priests, that
they waged open war with them. But the whole of this matter is decided
by the words of Moses, for he does not unreservedly condemn all who
should not obey, but restricts his law by the addition of a special
mark, viz., if the contempt should arise from presumption or arrogance.
Therefore it was not else a capital crime to disobey the priest or the
judge, unless any one should insolently and proudly oppose himself to
the ordinance established by God. Otherwise this exception would have
been interposed without reason. In fine, the priests of old were to be
obeyed, as far as it concerned the public peace that the pastors
ordained by God should be reverently honored; yet so as that there
should be no departure from God Himself, the one Head and Prince of all
pastors. We have elsewhere seen how foolishly the Papists take this to
themselves  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55)

<span id="ii.x.iii-p12"></span><span id="ii.x.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p13"></span>**13.** *And all the people.* He shews
from the object of the enactment why the proud despisers (of the
priests) were not to be spared; for punishments have reference to common
example, whilst, on the other hand, impunity is a bait to sin, and the
nurse of unbridled licentiousness. And, assuredly, when He commands that
the whole people should be inspired with terror, it is a hint that,
unless presumption should be corrected*,* and the bold and wicked should
be restrained by severe discipline, the door would be opened to them to
destroy the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc04028.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.x.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.x.iii-p10.1"></span>Ce
vilein traistre Urie y offroit;” that vile traitor Urijah offered on it.
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc04028.htm#fr_55) <span
id="ii.x.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p11"></span> “<span
id="ii.x.iii-p11.1"></span>*Combien* les Papistes sont sots et badins,
voulant faire leur profit de ce passage;” how silly and trifling the
Papists are, in seeking to make their profit of this passage. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 13:6-11](cc04029)
