[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04113)  [Next](cc04115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.vi-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
15](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#000)<span id="iii.x.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p2"></span><span id="iii.x.vi-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
15:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#022)<span
id="iii.x.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p3"></span>**22.** And if ye have erred, and not
observed all these commandments, which the LORD hath spoken unto Moses,

<span id="iii.x.vi-p4"></span>**22.** Quum erraveritis, et non feceritis
onmia praecepta haec quae protulit Jehova ad Mosen.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p5"></span>**23.** *Even* all that the LORD hath
commanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the LORD commanded
*Moses,* and henceforward among your generations;

<span id="iii.x.vi-p6"></span>**23.** Omnia quae praecepit Jehova vobis
per manum Mosis a die qua praecepit Jehova et postea per generationes
vestras.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p7"></span>**24.** Then it shall be, if *ought* be
committed by ignorance without the knowledge of the congregation, that
all the congregation shall offer one young bullock for a burnt offering,
for a sweet savour unto the LORD, with his meat offering, and his drink
offering, according to the manner, and one kid of the goats for a sin
offering.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p8"></span>**24.** Si inquam a congregatione procter
scientiam allquid factum fluerit per errorera, immolabit universa
congregatio juvencum unum filium bovis, in holocaustum in odorera
quietis Jehovae, minha quoque ejus, et libamen ejus, secundum regulam,
et hircum caprarum unum, in sacrificium pro peccato.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p9"></span>**25.** And the priest shall make an
atonement for all the congregation of the children of Israel, and it
shall forgiven them; for it *is* ignorance: and they shall bring their
offering, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD, and their sin offering
before the LORD, for their ignorance:

<span id="iii.x.vi-p10"></span>**25.** Expiabitque sacerdos universam
congregationem filiorum Israel, et ignoscetur els, quia error est, et
illic offerent oblationem suam, oblationem ignitam Jehovae, et
oblationem pro peccato suo, coram Jehova, propter errorera ipsorum.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p11"></span>**26.** And it shall be forgiven all the
congregation of the children of Israel, and the stranger that sojurneth
among them; seeing all the people *were* in ignorance.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p12"></span>**26.** Et condonabitur universae
congregationi filiorum Israel, et peregrino qui peregrinabitur in medio
illorum: quia universi populi error est.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p13"></span>**27.** And if any soul sin through
ignorance, then he shall bring a she-goat of the first year for a sin
offering.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p14"></span>**27.** Quod si anima una peccaverit per
errorem, offeret capram anniculam sacrificium pro peccato.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p15"></span>**28.** And the priest shall make an
atonement for the soul that sinneth ignorantly, when he sinneth by
ignorance before the LORD, to make an atonement for him; and it shall be
forgiven him.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p16"></span>**28.** Expiabitque sacerdos animam quae
peccaverit per errorem, quum peccaverit per errorera coram Jehova:
expiabit eam, et remittetur ei.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p17"></span>**29.** Ye shall have one law for him
that sinneth through ignorance, *both for* him that is born among the
children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p18"></span>**29.** Indigence inter filios Israel, et
peregrino qui peregrinatur inter illos, lex una erit vobis quoad eum qui
fecerit per errorem.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p19"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.vi-p20"></span><span id="iii.x.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p21"></span>**22.** *And if ye have erred.* He
teaches by what kind of sacrifice the sins of the whole people or of
each individual are to be expiated, although he enumerates only two of
the four classes which are mentioned in Leviticus; for a special
atonement is there enjoined both on the priest and the ruler. But
neither is the ceremony of sacrificing here described, since Moses only
wished to refresh their memories by the way as to the manner in which,
either publicly or privately, they were to be reconciled to God. This
word “error,”  <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) as we have said,
extends to incogitancy, which partakes of contempt of God, and arises
from too great security, when men inconsiderately fall into the sins to
which their lusts invite them; for deliberate impiety is afterwards
brought into contrast with error, when men designedly rush into
violations of the law. But since nothing is more easy than for men to
err, this remedy was most necessary, lest they who had sinned should
fall into despair. Lest, then, the people or private individuals, when
they saw their guilt, should despair of pardon and throw away the
pursuit of holiness, God anticipates them, and shews them by what means
He is to be propitiated, so that the sins which had occurred should not
interrupt His service. Since, however, Moses here only repeats what has
already been explained, there is no need of dwelling largely upon it,
except that in one point he seems to deliver a law different from the
former one; for he there commands two bullocks to be slain for the
reconciliation of the people,  <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264)
the one as a burnt-offering, the other as a sin-offering; yet, if the
second were not easily obtained, the permission was given to substitute
a goat. In Leviticus, therefore, the regular and perfect rite was
delivered; the permissive alteration is only added here; nor does Moses
contradict himself, though, for the sake of brevity, he only refers to
one of the two modes. At the end a clearer explanation is subjoined,
viz., that the same law should be common to all, since it was by no
means expedient to introduce any diversity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc04114.htm#fr_263) <span
id="iii.x.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p22"></span> “<span id="iii.x.vi-p22.1"></span>Ce mot
d’inadvertence.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc04114.htm#fr_264) <span
id="iii.x.vi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p23"></span> “This law differs from <span
id="iii.x.vi-p23.1"></span>[Lev. 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#014)<span id="iii.x.vi-p23.1"></span>.
Outram thinks the bullock was to be offered under that law when the
whole congregation of Israel, though in other respects retaining their
own rites and following the worship of the true God, yet, led away by
one common error, transgressed, without knowing it, some prohibitory
precept. The kid for a sin-offering, accompanied with a bullock for a
burnt-offering, (see <span id="iii.x.vi-p23.2"></span>[Nu
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024)<span
id="iii.x.vi-p23.2"></span>,) Outram says he apprehends to have been
required when the people, neglecting their ancient rites and unmindful
of the divine laws, (which often happened under wicked kings,) were
seduced into strange worship. What is recorded in <span
id="iii.x.vi-p23.3"></span>[2 Chr.
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#024), [2 Chr.
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#021),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#024)<span id="iii.x.vi-p23.3"></span>,
Outram thinks adds much probability to his opinion. See Outram, D. 1,
ch. 14, Section 2.” — Brightwell *in loco.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 5:1-13](cc04115)
