[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04129)  [Next](cc04131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#000)<span id="iii.xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p2"></span><span id="iii.xi.iii-p2.1"></span>[Exod.
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#012),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016)<span id="iii.xi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Observe thou that which I
command thee this day: behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and
the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and
the Jebusite.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p4"></span>**11.** Custodi quod ego praecipio tibi
hodie. Ecce ego ejiciam a facie tua Amorrhaeum, Chananaeum, Hittaeum,
Pheresaeum, Hivaeum, et Jebusaeum.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Take heed to thyself, lest thou
make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whether thou goest,
lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee:

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p6"></span>**12.** Cave tibi ne forte percutias
foedus cum habitatoribus ejus terrae ad quam ingressurus es, ne forte
sint in laqueum vel offendiculum in medio tui.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p7"></span>**15.** Lest thou make a covenant with
the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and
do sacrifice unto their gods, and *one* call thee, and thou eat of his
sacrifice;

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p8"></span>**15.** Ne forte percutias foedus cum
habitatoribus ejus terrae, ut scortentur post deos suos, et sacrificent
diis suis: vocet autem to quispiam, et comedas e sacrificio ejus.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p9"></span>**16.** And thou take of their daughters
unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and
make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p10"></span>**16.** Et forte accipias e filiabus
ejus filiis tuis, et scortentur filiae ejus post deos ipsarum, et
scortari faciant filios tuos post deos earum.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p12"></span><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p12.1"></span>[Exodus
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#000)<span id="iii.xi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p13"></span><span
id="iii.xi.iii-p13.1"></span>[Exodus
23:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#031)<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p14"></span>**31.** ... for I will deliver the
inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out
before thee.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p15"></span>**31.** Dabo in manum vestram
habitatores terrae, et expelles cos a facie tua.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p16"></span>**32.** Thou shalt make no covenant
with them, nor with their gods.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p17"></span>**32.** Non percuties cum ipsis foedus,
nec cum diis eorum.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p18"></span>**33.** They shall not dwell in thy
land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve their gods,
it will surely be a snare unto thee.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p19"></span>**33.** Non habitabunt in terra tua: ne
forte peccare faciant te contra me quando colueris deos eorum, quod erit
tibi in offendiculum.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p20"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p21"></span><span id="iii.xi.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p22"></span>**<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p22.2"></span>[Exodus
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#011)<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p22.2"></span>.** *Observe that which I command thee.*
Although these supplements belong alike to the First and Second
Commandment, still it was fit to postpone them to this place; because in
them God applied a remedy to all external and manifest superstitions,
which might easily have insinuated themselves had they not been
anticipated in good time. All will run eagerly into idolatry, even
though there be none to impel us from without; but where the ungodly act
upon us also like fans, and this must needs be the case, when the people
of God entangle themselves in their society, this disease is
increasingly inflamed. And truly the closer our familiarity is with
them, it is like a yoke, whereby they draw others with them. In order
then that the people, when they entered the land, might preserve
themselves pure and thoroughly devoted to God, care must be taken lest
they should contract pollution from other nations; and therefore God
would have all the inhabitants of Canaan utterly destroyed, lest they
should entice His elect people to their errors and the worship of false
gods. He here interdicts two kinds of covenant with them, lest there
should be any public or private alliance between them; and then commands
that all should be slain without mercy. As regards the public covenant,
it was forbidden for a special cause, that the sons of Abraham should
mix themselves with the reprobate; because they would have thus deprived
themselves of the lawful inheritance which God had destined for them;
nor would the face of the land have been renewed by the removal of all
defilements. Since then in His just judgment God had long ago determined
to destroy these nations, it was not lawful for the children of Abraham
to rescind the divine decree, or to make any alteration in it.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p23"></span>If therefore any one should insist too
literally on this passage to prove the unlawfulness of making any
contract with the ungodly, because God forbade it of old, he will not
reason soundly, since God does not now command us to execute vengeance
by putting all the wicked to death; nor is a certain country assigned to
the Church in which it may dwell apart and have dominion. Still I do not
deny that what was enjoined upon the ancient people, in some degree has
reference to us; nay, we must carefully remark what I lately adverted
to, that those, who voluntarily unite themselves with the ungodly,
impose as it were a yoke on themselves to draw them to destruction. And
in fact Paul embraced in this comparison all the grounds upon which
unbelievers insinuate themselves into familiarity with us, to ensnare us
by their corrupting influence. (<span id="iii.xi.iii-p23.1"></span>[2Co
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p23.1"></span>) As much as possible, therefore, must all
ties of connection be rather broken, than that by union with God’s
enemies  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) we should allow
ourselves to be drawn away from Him by their allurements; for they will
always be attempting, by all the artifices they can, to make a divorce
between us and God. Besides, if we desire faithfully to serve God, there
ought to be a perpetual quarrel between us and them. God then would have
us not only separate ourselves from open communion with them, but since
we are too much given to depravity, He also commands us to fly from all
the snares which might gradually induce us to participate in their sins.
But inasmuch as Paul justly reminds us, that if we are not permitted to
have any dealings with unbelievers, we must “needs go out of the world,”
(<span id="iii.xi.iii-p24.3"></span>[1Co
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p24.3"></span>,) it is proper for us to distinguish
between the contracts which associate us with them and those which do
not at all diminish our liberty.

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p25"></span>As long as we live among unbelievers,
we cannot escape those dealings with them which relate to the ordinary
affairs of life; but if we approach nearer, so that a greater intimacy
should arise, we open the door as it were to Satan. Such are alliances
between kings and nations, and marriages amongst private persons; and
therefore Moses laid down rules respecting them both for the ancient
people. And although our condition now-a-days is more free, still we are
warned that all temptations are to be avoided which might give occasion
to this evil. It is notorious that men are too apt to be led away by the
blandishments of their wives; and also, that men in their power compel
their wives to obedience. Those, therefore, who mix with idolaters,
knowingly and wilfully devote themselves to idols. The same thing
happens as to alliances; for men are ashamed in them to betray any marks
of disrespect. Thus, to please the king of Syria, Ahaz raised an altar
in the temple like that at Damascus. (<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p25.1"></span>[2Ki
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010)<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p25.1"></span>.) Thus while the Jews desired to gratify
the Assyrians, they imitated their superstitions. In a word, it, is a
most uncommon case that the religion of those should remain unaffected
who seek to curry favor with the ungodly. But that they may cleave more
earnestly to their duty, the danger I have spoken of is declared;
otherwise such rejoinders as these would have been straightway in their
mouths: “Although my wife is altogether averse from true piety, still I
will stand firm; although my husband is not subject to God, yet I will
never decline from the true course; although religion is not dear to our
allies, still it shall not cease to be sacredly held in honor amongst
ourselves.” God  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) therefore
interferes betimes, and declares that they will not be so magnanimous in
resistance, when once they have opened the window to the evil. He adds,
too, another evil, *i.e.,* that the sacred land would be thus profaned;
for, although the Israelites should be separated from the impieties of
the Gentiles, still it was not excusable to allow them to have altars in
that land in which God had chosen a sanctuary for Himself. Yet at the
same time Moses warns them that it could scarcely be but that this
association would involve the Israelites also. When he says, then, “lest
they go a whoring after their gods, and one call thee,” he means that
the Israelites would be like panders, if under cover of their covenant,
and for the sake of preserving their good-will, they gave the Gentiles
permission to exercise their superstitions; and also that this would be
a snare to grosser sin; since whilst they feared to give offense, they
would not refuse to go to their feasts, and thus would be partakers of
their guilt. Literally, it is, “Lest perhaps thou strike a covenant, and
they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods,
and call thee,” which words may be thus paraphrased, so as to depend on
the foregoing prohibition: “Lest it should happen, after you shall have
made a covenant, that they should go a whoring,” etc.; or thus, “By no
means make a covenant, because they will go a whoring after their idols,
and when they shall offer sacrifices will call thee.” The meaning,
however, will amount to the same; for he mentions the two worst results
of their unlawful covenant, *i.e.,* that these unbelieving nations will
pollute the land, and under pretext of kindness will corrupt God’s
people. But in order that they may be more earnest and courageous in
their duty, the promise is added, that they shall be victorious over
these nations. This was almost incredible, that wanderers and exiles as
they were, they should easily and quickly be enabled to gain possession
of so many lands; therefore God takes away all doubt, and thus commands
the Israelites to obey His dominion at the end of this war, which they
shall feel that they have waged successfully under His auspices.
Wherefore he convicts them of ingratitude if they shall dare to relax
any of that severity which He requires; as if He had said, Since these
nations far excel you in numbers, and strength, and warlike equipments,
it will plainly appear that you have not conquered them by your own
power; it will therefore be more than iniquitous that the war, which
shall be concluded under my guidance alone, and by my hand, should be
finished in opposition to my will, and that you should be the disposers
of that victory which I have gratuitously conferred upon you. The
discrepancy is easily reconciled, that Moses should only enumerate six
nations in Exodus, and add a seventh in Deuteronomy; for often he only
names the Canaanites or Amorites, yet comprising by *synecdoche* all the
rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc04130.htm#fr_300) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p24"></span> The *Fr.* here has “<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p24.1"></span>ceremonies de Dieu,” which seems to be a
misprint for “<span id="iii.xi.iii-p24.2"></span>ennemis de Dieu."

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc04130.htm#fr_301) <span
id="iii.xi.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iii-p26"></span> Addition in *Fr., “*<span
id="iii.xi.iii-p26.1"></span>Qui est plus sage."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 7:1-4](cc04131)
