[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04085)  [Next](cc04087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.ix-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
17](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#000)<span id="iii.v.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ix-p2"></span><span id="iii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
17:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)<span id="iii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ix-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.v.ix-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="iii.v.ix-p5"></span>**2.** Speak unto Aaron, and unto his
sons, and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them; This *is*
the thing which the LORD hath commanded, saying,

<span id="iii.v.ix-p6"></span>**2.** Loquere ad Aharon, et ad filios
ejus, et ad omnes filios Israel, et dic illis, Hoc est verbum quod
praecepit Jehova, dicendo:

<span id="iii.v.ix-p7"></span>**3.** What man soever *there be* of the
house of Israel, that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or
that killeth *it* out of the camp,

<span id="iii.v.ix-p8"></span>**3.** Quicunque de domo Israel mactaverit
bovem, ant agnum, aut capram in castris, aut qui mactaverit extra
castra.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p9"></span>**4.** And bringeth it not unto the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer an offering unto the
LORD before the tabernacle of the LORD; blood shall be imputed unto that
man; he hath shed blood; and that man shall be cut off from among his
people:

<span id="iii.v.ix-p10"></span>**4.** Et ad ostium tabernaculi
conventionis non adduxerit eum, ut offerat oblationem Jehovae coram
tabernaculo Jehovae: sanguis imputabitur viro illi: ipse sanguinem
fudit, excideturque vir ille e medio populi sui.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p11"></span>**5.** To the end that the children of
Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they offer in the open field,
even that they may bring them unto the LORD, unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest, and offer them *for*
peace offerings unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p12"></span>**5.** Ut afferant filii Israel
sacrificia sua quae mactaturi sunt in superficie agri: ut afterant
inquam illa Jehovae ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis ad sacerdotem, et
sacrificent ilia sacrificia prosperitatum Jehovae.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p13"></span>**6.** And the priest shall sprinkle the
blood upon the altar of the LORD *at* the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and burn the fat for a sweet savour unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p14"></span>**6.** Spargetque sacerdos sanguinem ad
altare Jehovae, ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis, et adolebit adipem
in odorem quietis Jehovae.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p15"></span>**7.** And they shall no more offer their
sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shall
be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p16"></span>**7.** Et non sacrificabunt ultra
sacrificia sua daemonibus cum quibus fornicantur: statutum perpetuum
erit hoc illis ill generationibus eorum.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p17"></span>**8.** And thou shalt say unto them,
Whatsoever man *there be* of the house of Israel, or of the strangers
which sojourn among you, that offereth a burnt offering or sacrifice,

<span id="iii.v.ix-p18"></span>**8.** Dices praeterea illis, Quicunque e
domo Israel, aut de peregrinis qui peregrinantur in medio vestri,
obtulerit holocaustum, aut sacrificium:

<span id="iii.v.ix-p19"></span>**9.** And bringeth it not unto the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation, to offer it unto the LORD; even
that man shall be cut off from among his people.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p20"></span>**9.** Et ad ostium tabernaculi
conventionis non adduxerit illud Jehovae: tunc excidetur vir ille e
populis suis.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p21"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.ix-p22"></span><span id="iii.v.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ix-p23"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
In this, and similar passages, God appoints the priests to offer the
sacrifices; for although they were common to all the people,
nevertheless He would have them offered to Him by the hand of one
person, and in a particular place: first, because, if they had been
allowed to build altars everywhere, His pure and genuine worship would
have been corrupted by this variety; and secondly, that He might direct
the people to the Mediator, because this principle was ever to be held
fast by believers, that no offerings could be legitimate except by His
grace. The same doctrine will often occur hereafter, where the
sacrifices are treated of; but, since we are here discussing the
priests’ office, let it be sufficient to have said once for all that it
was not lawful for private persons to offer anything to God, except by
the hands of the priest, to whom this duty was enjoined. But, since in
this point vain glory is marvelously apt to affect men’s minds, He
threatens His severe vengeance against whosoever shall have attempted
it. It has already been explained why God chose a single sanctuary. He
now declares that, unless the victims are brought thither, this
profanation will be equivalent to the murder of a man. He therefore
commands that all the victims should be brought before the altar, even
although those who offer them may be far away; for “the surface of the
field”  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) means a distant place,
lest any one should excuse himself by the inconvenience of the journey.
He expressly names the peace-offerings, because that was the kind of
sacrifice whereby private individuals were accustomed to testify their
piety. God declares, then, that their service would be acceptable to
Him, if the priest should intervene to make the oblation in right of the
charge committed to him. Finally, this law is ratified unto all
generations, that its abrogation may never be attempted. The reason for
this is stated, which has been elsewhere more fully explained, *i.e.,*
that a single place had been ordained at which they were to assemble;
and again, that a priest was appointed who might observe the ceremonies
enjoined by the Law, in order that they might worship God in purity; and
pollute not nor adulterate His sacrifices by strange superstitions. For
we have stated that the ancient people were tied to the sanctuary, lest
religion should be twisted and altered according to men’s fancies, and
lest any inventions should creep in whereby they might easily decline
into idolatry. The commandment which He gave, then, that the priest only
should offer the victims, is recommended on the score of its great
usefulness; viz., because it would restrain the people from prostituting
themselves to devils. Hence a profitable doctrine is gathered, that men
cannot be restrained from turning away to idolatry, except by seeking
from God’s mouth the one simple rule of piety.

<span id="iii.v.ix-p25"></span><span id="iii.v.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ix-p26"></span>**8.** *And thou shalt say unto them.*
The law is now extended to strangers, not those who were heathens, but
those who, springing originally from other nations, had devoted
themselves to pure religion. For, if more had been allowed to them than
to the genuine children of Abraham, the corruption would, according to
their wont, have soon spread more widely. God, then, would not have His
sanctuary defiled by foreigners, lest their liberty might make its way
amongst the whole people. From this latter portion we may gather that
the word “kill”  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) which is
elsewhere taken in a sense, is here confined to the sacrifices; since
permission is elsewhere given to the people to eat (meat) in all their
cities and villages, provided they abstain from blood. We must remember,
therefore, that the question is not here as to their ordinary food, but
only as to the victims, which were never to be offered except at the
tabernacle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc04086.htm#fr_203) <span
id="iii.v.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ix-p24"></span> “The open field,” *A. V.*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc04086.htm#fr_204) <span
id="iii.v.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ix-p27"></span> In these verses (<span
id="iii.v.ix-p27.1"></span>[Lev. 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#009)<span id="iii.v.ix-p27.1"></span>)
the offering of a burnt-offering, or sacrifices, is only spoken of, from
whence *C.* appears justly to conclude that the word “kill” in <span
id="iii.v.ix-p27.2"></span>[Le
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#003)<span id="iii.v.ix-p27.2"></span>,
referred merely to animals killed in sacrifice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 17:8-11](cc04087)
