[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04130)  [Next](cc04132.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p2"></span><span
id="iii.xi.iv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
7:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p3"></span>**1.** When the LORD thy God shall bring
thee into the land whither thou goest to possess it, and hath cast out
many nations before thee, the Hittites, and the Girgashites, and the
Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and
the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou;

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p4"></span>**1.** Quum introduxerit te Jehova Deus
tuus in terram in quam ingrederis possidendam, et avellerit gentes
multas a facie tua, Hittaeum, Gergasaeum, Amorrhaum, Chananaeum,
Perisaeum, Hivaeum, et Jebusaeum, septem gentes nmltas et robustiores
te:

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p5"></span>**2.** And when the LORD thy God shall
deliver them before thee; thou shalt smite them, *and* utterly destroy
them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p6"></span>**2.** Et tradiderit eas Jehova Deus tuus
coram to, et percusseris eas: perdendo perdes eas: non inibis cum illis
pactum, neque misereberis earum.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p7"></span>**3.** Neither shalt thou make marriages
with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his
daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p8"></span>**3.** Non junges te affinitate cum eis,
filiam tuam non dabis filio ejus et filiam ejus non accipies filio tuo.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p9"></span>**4.** For they will turn away thy son
from following me, that they may serve other gods; so will the anger of
the LORD be kindled against you, and destroy thee suddenly.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p10"></span>**4.** Avocabit enim filium tuum a me,
et colent Deos alienos: unde irascetur furor Jehovae in vos, ut
disperdat te cito.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p12"></span><span id="iii.xi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p13"></span>**2.** *Thou shalt smite them and
utterly destroy them.* Those who think that there was cruelty in this
command, usurp too great authority in respect to Him who is the judge of
all. The objection is specious that the people of God were unreasonably
imbued with inhumanity, so that, advancing with murderous atrocity, they
should spare neither sex nor age. But we must first remember what we
shall see hereafter, *i.e.,* that when God had destined the land for His
people, He was at liberty utterly to destroy the former inhabitants, so
that its possession might be free for them. We must then go further, and
say that He desired the just demonstration of His vengeance to appear
upon these nations. Four hundred years before He had justly punished
their many sins, yet had He suspended His sentence and patiently borne
with them, if haply they might repent. That sentence  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md) is well known, “The iniquity of the
Amorites is not yet full.” (<span id="iii.xi.iv-p14.2"></span>[Ge
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.xi.iv-p14.2"></span>.) After God had shewn His mercy for four
centuries, and this clemency had increased both their audacity and
madness, so that they had not ceased to provoke His wrath, surely it was
no act of cruelty to compensate for the delay by the grievousness of the
punishment. And hence appears the foul and detestable perversity of the
human intellect. We are indignant if He does not smile at once; if He
delays punishment our zeal accuses Him of slackness and want of energy;
yet, when He comes forth as the avenger of guilt, we either call Him
cruel, or at least complain of His severity. Yet His justice will always
absolve Him; and our calumnies and detractions will recoil upon our own
heads. He commanded seven nations to be utterly destroyed; that is to
say, after they had added sin to sin for 400 years, so that their
accumulation was immense, and experience had taught that they were
obstinate and incurable. It will therefore be said elsewhere, that the
land “spewed them out,” (<span id="iii.xi.iv-p14.3"></span>[Le
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#028.md)<span
id="iii.xi.iv-p14.3"></span>,) as if it had eased itself, when burdened
by their filthiness. If impiety is intolerable to the lifeless element,
why should we wonder that God in His character of Judge exercised
extreme severity? But if God’s wrath was just, He might surely choose
whatever ministers and executioners of it He pleased; and when He had
given this commission to His people, it was not unreasonable that He
should forbid them to pity those whom He had appointed for destruction.
For what can be more preposterous than for men to vie with God in
clemency? and when it pleases the Master to be severe, for the servants
to assume to themselves the right of shewing mercy? Therefore God often
reproves the Israelites for being improperly merciful. And hence it came
to pass that the people, whom they ought to have destroyed, became as
thorns and briars to prick them. (<span id="iii.xi.iv-p14.4"></span>[Jos
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xi.iv-p14.4"></span>, and throughout the book of Judges.) Away,
then, with all temerity, whereby we would presumptuously restrict God’s
power to the puny measure of our reason; and rather let us learn
reverently to regard those works of His, whose cause is concealed from
us, than wantonly criticise them. Especially when He declares to us the
just grounds of His vengeance, let us learn to subscribe to His decrees
with the humility and modesty that becomes us, rather than to oppose
them in vain, and indeed to our own confusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc04131.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="iii.xi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.xi.iv-p14.1"></span>On
sait ce qui fur dit a Abraham,” etc. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 7:16-26](cc04132.md)
