[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04115)  [Next](cc04117.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.viii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.x.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.x.viii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
5:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.x.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p3"></span>**14.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.x.viii-p4"></span>**14.** Loquutus est insuper Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="iii.x.viii-p5"></span>**15.** If a soul commit a trespass, and
sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the LORD; then he shall
bring for his trespass unto the LORD a ram without blemish out of the
flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of
the sanctuary, for a trespass offering:

<span id="iii.x.viii-p6"></span>**15.** Anima quum praevaricata fuerit
praevaricationem, et peccaverit per errorem in una re ex
sanctificationibus Jehovae, adducat oblationem pro delicto suo Jehovae,
arietem perfectum de pecudibus, secundum aestimationem tuam argenti
siculorum, secundum siculum sanctitatis pro delicto.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p7"></span>**16.** And he shall make amends for the
harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and shall add the fifth part
thereto, and give it unto the priest: and the priest shall make an
atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and it shall be
forgiven him.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p8"></span>**16.** Et quod peccaverit in
sanctificatione reddet, et quintam partem ipsius addet ei, tradetque
illud sacerdoti, sacerdos vero expiabit eum in ariete oblationis pro
delicto: et remittetur ei.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p9"></span>**17.** And if a soul sin, and commit
any of these things which are forbidden to be done by the commandments
of the LORD; though he wist *it* not, yet is he guilty, and shall bear
his iniquity.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p10"></span>**17.** Itaque si anima peccaverit, et
fecerit unum ab omnibus praeceptis Jehovae, quae non sunt facienda, et
non cognoverit, et deliquerit, et portaverit iniquitatem suam:

<span id="iii.x.viii-p11"></span>**18.** And he shall bring a ram
without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespass
offering, unto the priest: and the priest shall make an atonement for
him concerning his ignorance wherein he erred and wist *it* not, and it
shall be forgiven him.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p12"></span>**18.** Tunc adducet arietem
immaculatum de pecudibus, secundum aestimationem tuam in oblationem pro
delicto ad sacerdotem, et expiabit eum sacerdos ab errore suo quem per
errorem commisit, neque intellexit, et remittetur el.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p13"></span>**19.** It *is* a trespass offering: he
hath certainly trespassed against the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p14"></span>**19.** Delictum est, delinquendo
deliquit Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p15"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.viii-p16"></span><span id="iii.x.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p17"></span>**14.** *And the Lord spake unto
Moses.* The difference of the victim clearly shews, that another kind of
offense is here referred to; for God now requires a male instead of a
female. Before, He had been contented with an ewe lamb or a female kid;
but inasmuch as a ram is more valuable, it follows that punishment is
now awarded to a heavier offense. The heinousness of the fault depends
upon the quality of the act; *i.e.,* when a person shall have wronged
not a mortal man merely, but God Himself, nor shall have transgressed
only one of the Commandments of the first Table, but shall not have paid
a vow, or shall have offered a defective victim, or shall have defrauded
God of His right in any oblation; since this is what is meant by the
clause “in the holy things of the Lord.” In this expression Moses
includes both vows voluntarily made, as well as the legitimate
oblations, such as tithes, first-fruits, the offering of the first-born;
since in all these things the Israelites were strictly charged to deal
most faithfully with God. If by chance avarice had blinded any one, so
that in pursuit of personal gain he paid God less than he ought, his
recklessness justly received a heavier punishment. Yet it must be
understood, that the offense here referred to is one in which no fraud
or evil deceit had place; for if any one had designedly and craftily
appropriated what was sacred, the impiety of this sacrilege was not so
easily expiated. But inasmuch as it often happens that the covetous and
grasping are too ready to spare themselves, God enjoins a sacrifice in
such a case, where private advantage has through thoughtlessness
prevailed over religious feeling. The words, “with thy estimation,” some
refer to Moses, others to the priest; but I prefer taking it passively
for the estimation prescribed by God; which is called the estimation of
the people, because they were bound to acquiesce in the Law appointed by
Him, and not arbitrarily to alter the value. Moses estimates the ram at
two shekels of the sanctuary, equivalent to four common shekels,  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268.md) amounting in French money to about
twenty-eight sols, (*asses*.)

<span id="iii.x.viii-p19"></span><span id="iii.x.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p20"></span>**16.** *And he shall make amends for
the harm.* Hence it more plainly appears, as I have recently stated,
that they, who withheld anything of God’s full right, are said to have
sinned “in the holy thing;” since they are commanded to make restitution
with the addition of a fifth part. Yet let my readers remember, that
those who are compelled to make restitution, are not such as have
fraudulently embezzled the sacred things, but those who under some vain
pretext have flattered themselves for a time, so as to be unaffected by
any conviction of their fault. The object therefore of this sacrifice,
was to arouse the people to attention, so that postponing their private
advantage, they should freely pay what was due to God.  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269.md) Theirs is but foolish trifling who
think that Moses, having before spoken of sins (<span
id="iii.x.viii-p21.1"></span>*peccata*), now prescribes the mode of
making expiation for delinquencies (<span
id="iii.x.viii-p21.2"></span>*delicta*), since he uses the same words
indifferently on all occasions, and also designates all the victims by
the same name. But to make out a delinquency to be greater than a sin is
a piece of gross ignorance; nor does it need a long refutation, since it
manifestly appears that in this passage a special rule is delivered as
to the means of obtaining pardon when a person through thoughtlessness
has not reflected that he has omitted to discharge in full either his
vows or oblations.

<span id="iii.x.viii-p22"></span><span id="iii.x.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p23"></span>**17.** *And if soul sin.* Although the
expressions seem to be general, as if he briefly confirmed what he had
said before, yet it is necessary to connect them with the last sentence,
or at least to restrict them to certain cases. The former exposition
appears to me to be the right one; nor is there any absurdity in the
repetition, to cut off all occasion for subterfuge from the disobedient.
Still I do not deny that the reason which is added at the end, applies
to all the modes of expiation of which he has been treating; viz., that
although he may pretend ignorance who has fallen into sin
inconsiderately, or who has not intentionally sinned, or who through
forgetfulness has contracted any defilement, still he is guilty before
God until he makes reconciliation. When therefore he *again commands*
that a ram without blemish, and of full value should be offered, he once
more shews how they must purge themselves who have been too stingy in
their oblations. Immediately after he adds a reason common to all the
other errors; as if he had said, that they are not absolved before God
who offer the excuse of ignorance as a cover for their fault.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc04116.htm#fr_268.md) <span
id="iii.x.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p18"></span> “<span
id="iii.x.viii-p18.1"></span>Ainsi revienent a vingt huit sols de roy,
ou environ;” thus they amount to twenty-eight sols of the king, or
thereabouts. — *Fr.Vide* note, vol. 1 p. 483.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc04116.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="iii.x.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.viii-p21"></span> This is the gloss of Bonfrerius in
Poole’s Synopsis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 6:1-7](cc04117.md)
