[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04066)  [Next](cc04068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
28](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
28:1-43](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** And take thou unto thee Aaron thy
brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that
he may minister unto me in the priest’s office, *even.* Aaron, Nadab and
Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p4"></span>**1.** Tu vero accerse ad to Aharonem
fratrem tuum et filios ejus eum co, e medio filiorum Israel: ut
sacerdotio fungatur mihi Aharon, Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, et Ithamar filii
Aharon.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** And thou shalt make holy garments
for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p6"></span>**2.** Et facies vestes sacras Aharoni
fratri tuo, in gloriam, et decorem.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** And thou shalt speak unto all *that
are* wise hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that
they may make Aaron’s garments to consecrate him, that he may minister
unto me in the priest’s office.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p8"></span>**3.** Tu itaque alloqueris omnes
sapientes corde quos replevi spiritu sapientiae, ut fadant vestes Aharon
ad sanctificandum eum, ut sacerdotio fungatur mihi.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** And these *are* the garments which
they shall make; a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a
broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shall make holy garments
for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the
priest’s office.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p10"></span>**4.** Hae sunt omnes vestes quas
facient, pectorale et ephod, et pallium et tunicam ocellatam, mitram et
baltheum: facient inquam vestes has sacras Aharoni fratri tuo et filiis
ejus, ut sacerdotio fungantur mihi.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p11"></span>**5.** And they shall take gold, and
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p12"></span>**5.** Qui accipient aurum et hyacinthum,
et purpuram, et vermiculum cocci, et byssum.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p13"></span>**6.** And they shall make the ephod *of*
gold, *of* blue, and *of* purple, *of* scarlet, and fine twined linen,
with cunning work.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p14"></span>**6.** Facient autem ephod ex auro,
hyacintho, et purpura, vermiculo cocci, et bysso retorta, opere
phrygionico.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p15"></span>**7.** It shall have the two
shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and *so* it
shall be joined together.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p16"></span>**7.** Duae orae junctae erunt in duabus
extremitatibus ejus, et ita conjungetur.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p17"></span>**8.** And the curious girdle of the
ephod, which *is* upon it, shall be of the same, according to the work
thereof; *even of* gold, *of* blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
twined linen.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p18"></span>**8.** Cingulum autem ipsius ephod ejus
quod in eo erit, simile erit texturae ipsius, in ipso erit, nempe ex
auto, hyacintho, et purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et bysso retorta.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p19"></span>**9.** And thou shalt take two onyx
stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel:

<span id="iii.iv.i-p20"></span>**9.** Accipies quoque duos lapides
onychinos, et sculpes in eis nomina filiorum Israel.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Six of their names on one stone,
and *the other* six names of the rest on the other stone, according to
their birth.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p22"></span>**10.** Sex e nominibus eorum in lapide
uno, et nomina sex reliqua in lapide altero, secundum generationes
eorum.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p23"></span>**11.** With the work of an engraver in
stone, *like* the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two
stones with the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt make them to
be set in ouches of gold.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p24"></span>**11.** Opere artificis lapidum et
sculpturis annuli sculpes duos illos lapides nominibus filiorum Israel,
circundatos palis aureis facies eos.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p25"></span>**12.** And thou shalt put the two stones
upon the shoulders of the ephod *for* stones of memorial unto the
children of Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names before the LORD
upon his two shoulders for a memorial.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p26"></span>**12.** Ponesque duos illos lapides in
lateribus ephod, lapides memoriae pro filiis Israel: et feret Aharon
nomina eorum coram Jehova in duobus humeris suis ad memoriam.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p27"></span>**13.** And thou shalt make ouches *of*
gold;

<span id="iii.iv.i-p28"></span>**13.** Facies itaque palas aureas:

<span id="iii.iv.i-p29"></span>**14.** And two chains *of* pure gold at
the ends; *of* wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten the
wreathen chains to the ouches.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p30"></span>**14.** Et duas catenas ex auro puro
terminatas, facies opere plectili, inseresque catenas plectiles palis
illis.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p31"></span>**15.** And thou shalt make the
breastplate of judgment with cunning work; after the work of the ephod
thou shalt make it; *of* gold, *of* blue, and *of* purple, and *of*
scarlet, and *of* fine twined linen, shalt thou make it.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p32"></span>**15.** Facies deinde pectorale judicii,
opere phrygionico: sicut opus ephod facies illud, ex auro, et hyacintho,
et purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et bysso retorta.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p33"></span>**16.** Foursquare it shall be *beinq*
doubled; a span *shall be* the length thereof, and a span *shall be* the
breadth thereof.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p34"></span>**16.** Quadratum erit et duplicatum:
palmus erit longitudo ejus: et palmus latitudo ejus.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p35"></span>**17.** And thou shalt set in it settings
of stones, *even* four rows of stones: *the first* row *shall be* a
sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: *this shall be* the first row.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p36"></span>**17.** Et implebis in eo impletione
lapidum quatuor ordines lapidum: ordo erit talis: sardius, topazius, et
carbunculus, ordo primus.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p37"></span>**18.** And the second row *shall be* an
emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p38"></span>**18.** Ordo vero secundus: smaragdus,
sapphirus, et jaspis.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p39"></span>**19.** And the third row a ligure, an
agate, and an amethyst.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p40"></span>**19.** Ordo praeterea tertius:
lyncurius, achates, et amethystus.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p41"></span>**20.** And the fourth row a beryl, and
an onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their inclosings.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p42"></span>**20.** Postremo ordo quartus:
chrysolithus, onychinus, et berillys: constricti auro erunt in
plenitudinibus suis.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p43"></span>**21.** And the stones shall be with the
names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names,
*like* the engravings of a signet; every one with his name shall they be
according to the twelve tribes.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p44"></span>**21.** Porro lapides illi erunt juxta
nomina filiorum Israel, duodecim, secundum nomina ipsorum, sculpturis
annuli singuli juxta nomen suum, erunt duodecim tribubus.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p45"></span>**22.** And thou shalt make upon the
breastplate chains at the ends *of* wreathen work *of* pure gold.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p46"></span>**22.** Facies et in pectorali catenas
termini opere plectili ex auro puro.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p47"></span>**23.** And thou shalt make upon the
breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two
ends of the breastplate.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p48"></span>**23.** Facies etiam in pectorali duos
arnnulos aureos, et illos duos annulos pones in duabus extremitatibus
pectoralis.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p49"></span>**24.** And thou shalt put the two
wreathen *chains* of gold in the two rings *which are* on the ends of
the breastplate.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p50"></span>**24.** Pones item duas catenas aureas in
duobus annulis in extremitatibus pectoralis.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p51"></span>**25.** And *the other* two ends of the
two wreathen *chains* thou shalt fasten in the two ouches, and put
*them* on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod before it.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p52"></span>**25.** Et duas extremitates duarum
catenarum inseres duabus palis, et pones in lateribus ephod a fronte
ipsius.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p53"></span>**26.** And thou shalt make two rings of
gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate in
the border thereof, which *is* in the side of the ephod inward.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p54"></span>**26.** Facies et duos annulos aureos,
quos pones in duabus extremitatibus ipsius pectoralis in ora ejus, quse
est in latere ipsius ephod intrinsecus.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p55"></span>**27.** And two *other* rings of gold
thou shalt make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod
underneath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the *other*
coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p56"></span>**27.** Facies item duos altos annulos
aureos, quos pones in duobus lateribus ipsius ephod inferne a fronte
ejus, e regione conjunctionis ejus, supra baltheum ephod.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p57"></span>**28.** And they shall bind the
breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace
of blue, that *it* may be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and
that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p58"></span>**28.** Ita jungent pectorale annulis
suis ad annulos ipsius ephod filo hyacinthino, supra baltheum ipsius
ephod, neque separetur pectorale ab ephod.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p59"></span>**29.** And Aaron shall bear the names of
the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart,
when he goeth in unto the holy *place,* for a memorial before the LORD
continually.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p60"></span>**29.** Itaque feret Aharon nomina
filiorum Israel in pectorali judieii supra cor suum, quando ingredietur
in sanctuarium in memoriam coram Jehova jugiter.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p61"></span>**30.** And thou shalt put in the
breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon
Aaron’s heart, when he goeth in before the LORD: and Aaron shall bear
the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the LORD
continually.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p62"></span>**30.** Pones autem in pectorali judicii
Urim et Thummim, ut sint super cor Aharon quando ingredietur coram
Jehova: gestabitque Aharon judicium filiorum Israel super cot suum coram
Jehova semper.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p63"></span>**31.** And thou shalt make the robe of
the ephod all *of* blue.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p64"></span>**31.** Facies et pallium ipsius ephod
totum ex hyacintho.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p65"></span>**32.** And there shall be an hole in the
top of it, in the midst thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work
round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it
be not rent.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p66"></span>**32.** Et erit foramen sumrose parris
ejus in medio ejus: labrum erit foramini illius in circuitu opere
textoris, sicut foramen loricae erit el, ne rumpatur.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p67"></span>**33.** And *beneath* upon the hem of it
thou shalt make pomegranates *of* blue, and *of* purple, and *of*
scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and bells of gold between them
round about:

<span id="iii.iv.i-p68"></span>**33.** Facies et in fimbriis ejus
malogranata ex hyacintho, et purpura, et vermiculo cocci: in fimbriis,
inquam, ejus per circuitum, *et tintinnabula aurea in medio per
circuitum.*

<span id="iii.iv.i-p69"></span>**34.** A golden bell and a pomegranate,
a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe round about.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p70"></span>**34.** Tintinnabulum aureum unum et
malogranatum, tintinnabulum aureum alterum et malogranatum in fimbriis
pallii per circuitum.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p71"></span>**35.** And it shall be upon Aaron to
minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in unto the holy
*place* before the LORD, and when he cometh out, that he die not.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p72"></span>**35.** Erit autem Aharon ad
ministrandum, et audietur sonus ejus quando ingredietur sanctuarium
coram Jehova, et quando egredietur: et non morietur.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p73"></span>**36.** And thou shalt make a plate *of*
pure gold, and grave upon it, *like* the engravings of a signet,
Holiness To The Lord.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p74"></span>**36.** Facies insuper laminam ex auto
puro, et sculpes in ea sculpturis annuli. Sanctitas ipsi Jehovae.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p75"></span>**37.** And thou shalt put it on a blue
lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it
shall be.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p76"></span>**37.** Quam pones in filo hyacinthino,
eritque super cidarim, ex adverso faciei cidaris erit.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p77"></span>**38.** And it shall be upon Aaron’s
forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the
children of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be
always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p78"></span>**38.** Et erit supra frontem Aharon,
feretque Aharon iniquitatem sanctificationum quas sanctificabunt filii
Israel in omnibus muneribus sanctificationum suarum: erit inquam supra
frontem ejus jugiter in beneplacitum els coram Jehova.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p79"></span>**39.** And thou shalt embroider the coat
of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre *of* fine linen, and thou
shalt make the girdle *of* needlework.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p80"></span>**39.** Et facies opere ocellato tunicam
byssinam, facies item cidarim byssinam, cingulum quoque facies opere
phrygionico.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p81"></span>**40.** And for Aaron’s sons thou shalt
make coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou
make for them, for glory and for beauty.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p82"></span>**40.** Filiis autem Aharon facies
tunicas, facies quoque illis cingula et pileos ad gloriam et decorum.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p83"></span>**41.** And thou shalt put them upon
Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him; and shalt anoint them, and
consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in
the priest’s office.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p84"></span>**41.** Et vesties illis Aharon fratrem
tuum, et filios ejus cure illo, atque unges illos: implebisque manum
eorum, et sanctificabis cos, ut sacerdotio fungantur mihi.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p85"></span>**42.** And thou shalt make them linen
breeches to cover their nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs
they shall reach:

<span id="iii.iv.i-p86"></span>**42.** Fac eis et feminalia linea ad
tegendam carnem turpitudinis: a lumbis usque ad femora erunt,

<span id="iii.iv.i-p87"></span>**43.** And they shall be upon Aaron, and
upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of the
congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the
holy *place;* that they bear not iniquity, and die: *it shall be* a
statute for ever unto him and his seed after him.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p88"></span>**43.** Eruntque super Aharon et super
filios ejus quando ingredientur tabernaculum conventionis, aut quum
accedent ad altare ut ministrent in sanctuario: et non ferent
iniquitatem, neque morientur. Statutum perpetuum illi et semini ejus
post eum.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p89"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.i-p90"></span>We now arrive at the second part of the
Legal Worship, *i.e.,* the Priesthood; for we must bear in mind what I
have said, that there are three things to be considered, —

<span id="iii.iv.i-p91"></span>**1.** The Tabernacle;

<span id="iii.iv.i-p92"></span>**2.** The Priestly Office; and

<span id="iii.iv.i-p93"></span>**3.** The Sacrifices.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p94"></span>And indeed all the splendor of the
tabernacle, of which we have been speaking, would have been an empty
parade without the priest, who so mediated as an intercessor, that he
reconciled men to God, and in a manner united heaven to earth. Now it is
unquestionable, that the Levitical priests were the representatives of
Christ; since, with respect to their office, they were even better than
the very angels; which would be by no means reasonable, unless they had
been the type of Him, who is Himself the head of the angels. The heathen
nations, it is true, had their priests, who presided over their
religious services, but they were but empty phantoms; for there was no
mention with them of the Mediator, so that the people might know that
God cannot be duly appeased, and that our prayers cannot be heard by
Him, unless a peace-maker interfere between us. But the nature of the
Levitical priesthood was widely different; for the Israelites were
instructed that all of them were unworthy to stand before God, and so
that there was need of an Intercessor to propitiate Him. Now, since the
general rule had been laid down, that all things should be rigidly
referred to the pattern which had been shewn to Moses in the mount,
their minds were necessarily drawn upwards; and this too they might
easily have arrived at, for various reasons. The whole body of the
people saw a man like themselves, who could not enter the sanctuary
trusting in his own innocence, and whose dignity was conferred upon him
by adventitious rites; *i.e.,* by anointing, and by investiture. The
full truth, therefore, did not shine forth in this, but only a figure to
direct them to the truth; and of this they were doubtless admonished,
lest they should rest in earthly things. Besides, its interpretation was
added (by the prophets  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) .md);
because, as the Apostle wisely teaches us in the Epistle to <span
id="iii.iv.i-p95.1"></span>[Heb
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.iv.i-p95.1"></span>,
the promise to appoint hereafter a priest after the order of Melchisedec
would not hold good, unless it were applied to Christ; for it is plain
that the Levitical priesthood is there brought into comparison by
contrast with one of a different nature; and since the latter is
eternal, it follows that the former is temporary; and, whilst the one is
sanctioned by an oath, it clearly is superior to the other. There is no
doubt, then, but that David, as a faithful interpreter of the Law, more
manifestly shewed forth what there was obscurely shadowed.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p96"></span>Thus far my wish has been to teach that
the Levitical priest was ordained, that he might be a type of the true
Mediator. It will now be worth our while briefly to advert to the marks
by which our perpetual and only Priest, the Son of God, is to be
distinguished from those of old; for a fuller exposition will follow
hereafter in its proper place. The *first* distinction I have already
pointed out, viz., that the type was temporary; since perpetuity is only
to be sought in the reality itself: whence we learn that the priestly
office was not so instituted by Moses to last for ever, but to direct
the people to a better hope. But what I have said as to the office, must
be transferred also to the persons. There was only one high priest under
the Law, who was afterwards succeeded by one of his race, since they
were all mortal. None, then, was ever such a priest as became us, except
Christ; because none other could be perpetual; and hence we arrive at
the *second* distinction. The *third* arises from Christ’s divinity,
which is proved by the fact, that the priest after the order of
Melchisedec has no beginning; for we find nowhere the origin of
Melchisedec; but he is only brought forward once and unexpectedly, as if
be had come down from heaven. The *fourth* is the combination of the
kingdom and the priesthood. Under the Law God would have some to be
kings, and others to be priests; nor was it allowable to mix up the one
office with the other; but He, of whom it is said that He should be a
priest like Melchisedec, is honored with the title of king. The *fifth*
is, that the legal priest only appeared before God in the visible and
sanctuary, but Christ entered into heaven, to present us to His Father,
not in the external symbols of (precious) stones,  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md) but in the reality itself; for in Him
as our Head we are all gathered together unto God. The *sixth* lies in
the perfect righteousness of Christ; for the legal priest, since he was
one of us sinners, had need to seek pardon for himself; but Christ,
being free from all guilt, awakens favor towards us by His own purity.
The *seventh* is, that the priest borrowed from external figures what
was truly and really shewn forth in Christ. The sacred garments, as we
have lately said, denoted something more than human; the anointing, too,
was a symbol of the Spirit which dwells in Christ; and He therefore was
not consecrated with visible and corruptible oil, but with the fullness
of all gifts. The priest of old abstained from intercourse with his wife
when he went into the sanctuary; he was only allowed to marry a virgin;
the perfect and spiritual purity of Christ was contented with its own
perfection. The *last* distinction consisted in the *sacrifices*
themselves, respecting which I abstain at present from speaking more
fully, because they will have their proper place hereafter. This only we
must now recollect, that Christ expiated the sins of the world, not with
the blood of beasts, but with His own blood. Now we turn to the words of
Moses.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p98"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p99"></span>**1.** *And take thou unto thee Aaron.*
The calling of God is here alleged to prove the importance and dignity
of the priesthood, and this too the Apostle has well weighed in the
words:

<span id="iii.iv.i-p100"></span>"And no man taketh the honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p100.1"></span>[Heb
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p100.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iv.i-p101"></span>Among heathen nations the priests were
appointed by popular election, so that ambition alone governed their
appointment; but God would only have those accounted lawful priests whom
He had selected at His own sole will; and surely the whole human race
together had no power to obtrude any one on God, who should interpose
himself to obtain pardon and peace; nay, not even Christ Himself would
have been sufficient to propitiate God, unless He had undertaken the
office by the decree and appointment of His Father. To which refers the
famous oath, whereby His heavenly Father appointed Him to be priest; and
so much the more vile and detestable was the sacrilege which afterwards
prevailed in the Jewish nation, viz., that the successors of Aaron
bought the priesthood! This unworthy traffic of the office, which
Josephus relates, ought to awaken horror in us now, when we see that
sacred honor profaned by the family which had been chosen by God to
represent Christ. Nevertheless, however they may have violated all law
and justice, still the counsel of God remained inviolable, that
believers might know that the priesthood depended on His authority, just
as reconciliation flows from His mere mercy. For in order that it should
be lawful for men to establish a priest, it would be necessary that they
should anticipate God by their own deservings; and from this they are
very far distant. The case is different as to the election of the
pastors of the Church; since, after Christ had instituted the order
itself, He commanded that there should be chosen out of the Church those
who by their doctrine and integrity of life were fitted to exercise the
office. Still He does not thus resign His own right and power to men,
for He does not cease through them to call those (by whom He would be
served.  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) .md) Wherefore, to shew
that He is the sole author of the priesthood, God commands Aaron and his
sons to be separated from among the others; and the performance of this
He entrusts to Moses, whom, however, He does not elevate to the like
honor. Moses consecrates Aaron, although he was never himself dedicated
by anointing and investiture to the service of God;  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160.md) whence we perceive that the sacraments
have their power and effect not from the virtue of the minister, but
only from the commandment of God; for Moses would not have given to
others what he had not himself, if it had not so pleased God.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p104"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p105"></span>**2.** *And thou shalt make holy
garments.* These external ornaments denoted the want of those which are
true and spiritual; for if the priest had been absolutely and entirely
perfect, these typical accessories would have been superfluous. But God
would shew by this symbol the more than angelical brightness of all
virtues which was to be exhibited in Christ. Aaron was defiled by his
own corruption, and therefore unworthy to appear in the presence of God;
in order, then, that he might be a fit peacemaker between God and man,
he put off his ordinary garments, and stood forth as a new man. Hence
the holy garments were, first of all, supposed to conceal his faults;
and, secondly, to represent the incomparable adornment of all virtues.
The latter may indeed be in some measure applied to the pastors of the
Church; nor will the comparison be absurd, if we say that no others are
worthy of so excellent an honor, except those in whom surpassing and
extraordinary virtue brightly manifests itself. But we must chiefly
recollect what I have said, viz., that in these garments the supreme
purity and wondrous glory of Christ were represented; as if God should
promise that the Mediator would be far more august than the condition of
man could produce. He therefore declares that they shall be “for glory
and for beauty.” We shall speak more fully hereafter, what I will touch
upon now, as to the wisdom of the artificers, viz., that all who from
the foundation of the world have invented arts useful to the human race,
have been imbued with the Spirit of God; so that even heathen authors
have been compelled to call them the inventions of the gods. But
inasmuch as in this Divine work there was need of rare and unwonted
skill, it is expressly spoken of as a peculiar gift of the Spirit.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p106"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p107"></span>**4.** *And these are the garments.*
Here again I must remind my readers, that they should abandon all subtle
speculations, and be contented with simplicity. I might repeat many
plausible allegories, which perhaps would find more favor with some than
a sound knowledge of facts. If any should delight in this kind of
child’s play, let him only read what *Jerome* wrote to *Fabiola;* in
which he collected almost everything that he possibly could from the
writings of others; but nothing will be found except dull trifling, the
folly of which it is painful even to report, much more to refute. Those
who are conversant with my writings, are aware that I do not willingly
find fault with the opinions of others; but when I reflect how dangerous
are those itching ears, with which many are troubled, I am obliged to
prescribe this remedy. Six principal parts of the dress are enumerated.
What the Greeks call the <span id="iii.iv.i-p107.2"></span>λογεῖον, and
the Latins the *pectorale,* was like a square breastplate attached by
small chains, so as to be connected with the ephod. Inclosed in it were
twelve stones to represent the tribes of Israel; and the Urim and
Thummim were also annexed to it. But what its form might be, cannot be
certainly declared from the words of Moses; and since even the Jews also
differ among themselves, let us be satisfied with its comparison to a
breastplate. I have no objection to the opinion, that its name  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md) was derived from *strength,* or a
*treasure.* But this is worthy of the utmost attention, that the priest
bore the sons of Abraham as it were upon his heart, not only that he
might present them to God, but that he might be mindful of them, and
anxious for their welfare. The twelve precious stones were by no means
given to be symbols of the twelve tribes as a cause for awakening their
pride, as if they were so highly esteemed on the score of their own
dignity or excellence; but they were thus reminded that the whole value,
in which believers are held by God, is derived from the sanctity of the
priesthood. Therefore, let us learn from this figure, that:, however
vile and abject we may be in ourselves, and so altogether worthless
refuse, yet inasmuch as Christ deigned to ingraft us into this body, in
Him we are precious stones. And to this Isaiah seems to allude in the
passage before cited, where, speaking of the restoration of the Church,
which was to take place under the reign of Christ, he says, “Behold, I
will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with
sapphires; and I will make thy windows with carbuncles, and all thy
borders with pleasant stones;” for immediately after the exposition
follows, “And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord.” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p108.2"></span>[Isa
54:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p108.2"></span>.) Therefore what was to be fulfilled in
Christ, was typified by the external sign under the Law; viz., that
though we sojourn in the world, yet are we united with Christ by faith,
as if we were one with Him; and, besides, that He takes care for our
welfare, as if He bore us enclosed in His heart; and, finally, that when
our heavenly Father regards us in Him, He esteems us above all the
wealth and splendor of the world.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p109"></span>As to the Urim and Thummim, it appears
probable to me that they were two conspicuous marks on the breastplate,
corresponding to these names; for the supposition of some of the Jews,
 <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162.md) that the ineffable name of God
was placed beneath its texture, is not free from foolish and dangerous
superstition. I pass over other fancies, which are equally frivolous;
nor am I anxious to know what was the form of either of them; the fact
itself is sufficient for me. By the *Urim,* therefore, or *splendors,* I
doubt not but that the light of doctrine, wherewith the true Priest
illuminates all believers, was represented; first, because He is the one
“light of the world,” without which all things are full of darkness; and
because in Him “are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.”
(<span id="iii.iv.i-p110.2"></span>[John
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md), [John
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.iv.i-p110.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.iv.i-p110.3"></span>[Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p110.3"></span>.) Hence did Paul justly glory that he knew
nothing but Jesus Christ, (<span id="iii.iv.i-p110.4"></span>[1Co
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p110.4"></span>,) since His priesthood sufficiently and
more than sufficiently enlightens us. As then the people were admonished
that their eyes should be directed to the splendor of the priest, so now
we must diligently remember what Christ Himself teaches, that “he that
followeth him shall not walk in darkness.” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p110.5"></span>[Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p110.5"></span>.) On the other hand, the *Thummim,* which
signifies *perfections,* was a symbol of the perfect and entire purity
which is only to be sought in Christ; for He would not have been a meet
high priest unless He had been perfect, free from every spot, and
deficient in nothing which is required unto complete holiness. It is
not, then, an improper distinction, that the *Urim* refers to the light
of doctrine, and the *Thummim* to the life; and this is indeed in some
measure applicable to the pastors of the Church, who ought to shine both
in sound doctrine and in integrity of life. But it was God’s design to
shew that neither of these things is to be sought anywhere except in
Christ; since from Him we obtain both light and purity, when He deigns
to make us partakers of them according to the measure of His free
bounty. Whence it follows, that they who seek for the least spark of
light or drop of purity out of Christ, plunge themselves into a
labyrinth, where they wander in mortal darkness, and inhale the deadly
fumes of false virtues unto their own destruction.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p111"></span>What the Scripture sometimes relates, as
to the inquiries made by *Urim* and *Thummim,* it was a concession made
by God to the rudeness of His ancient people. The true Priest had not
yet appeared, the Angel of His Almighty counsel, by whose Spirit all the
Prophets spoke, who, finally, is the fountain of all revelations, and
the express image of the Father; in order then that the typical priest
might be the messenger from God to man, it behooved him to be invested
with the ornaments of Christ. Thus even then believers were taught in a
figure, that Christ is the way by which we come to the Father, and that
He also brings from the secret bosom of His Father whatever it is
profitable for us to know unto salvation, hence that fiction of the Jews
is contradicted, that the responses were given in this way: if a
question was asked respecting a particular tribe, that the stone which
represented it was lighted up; and that the colors of the stones were
changed according as God refused or assented. For even if we allow that
the Urim and Thummim were the rows of precious stones themselves, still
this imagination is altogether unmeaning. But, as I have said, by the
very form of the breastplate God would testify that the fulness of
wisdom and integrity was contained in it; for which reason it is called
“the breastplate of judgment,” *i.e.,* of the most perfect rectitude,
which left nothing to be desired; for the word <span
id="iii.iv.i-p111.1"></span>משפט *mishphot,* often signifies in
Scripture whatsoever is well and duly ordered. The interpretation which
some give, that “judgment” means “inquiry,” because the priest only
asked for responses when he had the breastplate on, is too restricted,
and is even proved to be erroneous by sundry passages. Let this then be
deemed settled, that this honorable appellation is meant to express a
correct and infallible rule (*ordinem.*) Because the breastplate was, as
it were, a part of the ephod, it is therefore sometimes comprehended in
that word; in which it may be well also to observe, that this peculiar
ephod of the high priest’s was different from the others, of which
mention is made elsewhere; for all of the sacerdotal lineage wore an
ephod in the performance of religious duties. (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p111.2"></span>[1 Sam.
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#003.md), [1 Sam.
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p111.2"></span>.) Even David, when he danced before the
Ark, wore his ephod, (<span id="iii.iv.i-p111.3"></span>[2Sa
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p111.3"></span>;) and this custom is still retained by the
*Jews* at their chief festivals. The rest I will introduce presently in
their proper places.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p112"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p113"></span>**9.** *And thou shalt take two
onyx-stones.* That the connection between the priest and the people
might be made more plain, God not only placed on his breast the
memorials of the twelve tribes, but also engraved their names on his
shoulders. Thus all occasion of envy was removed, since the people would
understand that this one man was not separated from the others for the
sake of private advantage, but that in his one person they were all a
kingdom of priests, which Peter teaches to have been at length really
fulfilled in Christ, (<span id="iii.iv.i-p113.1"></span>[1Pe
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p113.1"></span>;) as Isaiah had foretold that there should
be priests of God, and Levites brought from the Gentiles, (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p113.2"></span>[Isa
66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p113.2"></span>;) to which John makes allusion in the
Apocalypse, where he says that we are all priests in Christ, (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p113.3"></span>[Re
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p113.3"></span>.) But we must remember the reason why our
High Priest is said to bear us on His shoulders, for we not only crawl
on earth, but we are plunged in the lowest depths of death; how then
should we be able to ascend to heaven, unless the Son of God should
raise us up with Him; Now, since there is no ability in us unto eternal
life, but all our powers of mind and body lie prostrate, we must be
borne up by His strength alone. Hence then arises our confidence of
ascending to heaven, because Christ raises us up with Him; as Paul says,
we “sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p113.4"></span>[Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p113.4"></span>;) however weak then we may be in ourselves,
herein is all our strength, that we are His burden. Therefore in this
old type was prefigured what Paul teaches, that the Church is “his
body,” and “the fullness of him,” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p113.5"></span>[Eph
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p113.5"></span>.) It remains that each of us, conscious of
our own weakness, should rest on Christ; for when in foolish arrogance
we exalt ourselves, we do not suffer ourselves to be lifted up by Him,
to be borne and sustained by His power. Let the proud then, by lifting
themselves on high, fall down in ruin, whilst Christ supports us upon
His shoulders. These stones are called “stones of memorial;” and again,
“for a memorial” to the children of Israel; as is also afterwards
repeated of the twelve stones; which some expound, that “God may be
mindful of the children of Israel;” others, that “the priest himself may
remember them;” others, that “the children of Israel may remember that
God is reconciled to them for the sake of the one Mediator;” but I
simply interpret it, that they were a monument of the mutual agreement
between God and them; as if God would shew by a visible sign that He
embraced them and received them into His sanctuary, as often as they
were offered in this manner.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p114"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p115"></span>**30.** *And thou shalt put in the
breastplate.* From these words some infer that the *Urim* and *Thummim*
were distinct from the whole work, which is before described; others
think that they were the twelve stones, because no mention will be made
of them when Moses relates that the whole was completed. But nothing is
more probable, as I have already said, than that on the breastplate
itself some representation was given of light in doctrine, and of entire
uprightness of life; and therefore after Moses has called it “the
breastplate of judgment,” he also speaks of it as “the judgment of the
children of Israel;” by which expression he means a certain and defined
system, or an absolutely perfect rule, to which the children of Israel
ought to direct and conform themselves.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p116"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p117"></span>**31.** *And thou shalt make the robe.*
This robe was above the oblong coat between that and the ephod; and from
its lower edge hung the bells and pomegranates alternately. Although
there was no smell in the pomegranates,  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md) yet the type suggested this to the
eyes; as if God required in that garment a sweet smell as well as a
sound; and surely we who stink through the foulness of our sins, are
only a sweet smell unto God as being covered with the garment of Christ.
But God would have the bells give a sound; because the garment of Christ
does not procure favor for us, except by the sound of the Gospel, which
diffuses the sweet savor of the Head amongst all the members. In this
allegory there is nothing too subtle or far-fetched; for the similitude
of the smell and the sound naturally leads us to the honoring of grace,
 <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md) and to the preaching of the
Gospel. By the pomegranates, therefore, which were attached to the hem
of the garment, God testified that whatever was in the priest smelt
sweetly, and was acceptable to Him, provided the sound accompanied it;
the necessity of which is declared, when God denounces death against the
priest if He should enter the sanctuary without the sound. And assuredly
it was a general invitation which awakened the peoples’ minds to
attention, whilst the sacred offices were performed. There is no
absurdity in the fact, that the punishment which God threatens does not
properly apply to Christ; because it was necessary to issue severe
injunctions to the Levitical priests, lest they should omit these
external exercises of piety, until the truth was manifested. The
ancients do not unwisely make a spiritual application of this to the
ministers of the Church; for the priest is worthy of death, says
Gregory,  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md) from whom the voice of
preaching is not heard; just as Isaiah reproves “the dumb dogs.” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p120.3"></span>[Isa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p120.3"></span>.) But this we must especially remember,
that the garment of Christ is sonorous, since only faith, which cometh
by hearing, clothes us with His righteousness.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p121"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p122"></span>**36.** *And thou shalt make a plate.*
It is not without reason that this inscription is placed upon the
priest’s forehead, that it may be conspicuous; for not only did God thus
testify that the legal priesthood was approved of, and acceptable to
Him, since He had consecrated it by His word, but also that holiness was
not to be sought elsewhere. These two things, then, are to be observed,
— *first,* that the priesthood of His own appointment is pleasing to
God, and so, that all others, however magnificently they may be spoken
of, are abominable to Him, and rejected by Him; and *secondly,* that out
of Christ we are all corrupt, and all our worship faulty; and however
excellent our actions may seem, that they are still unclean and
polluted. Thus, therefore, let all our senses remain fixed on the
forehead of our sole and perpetual Priest, that we may know that from
Him alone purity flows throughout the whole Church. To this His words
refer,

<span id="iii.iv.i-p123"></span>"For their sakes I sanctify myself, that
they also might be sanctified through the truth.” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p123.1"></span>[Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p123.1"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iv.i-p124"></span>and the same thing is expressed in this
passage of Moses, “that Aaron may hear the iniquity of the holy things,”
etc. It is undoubtedly a remarkable passage, whereby, we are taught that
nothing proceeds from us pleasing to God except through the intervention
of the grace of the Mediator; for here there is no reference to manifest
and gross sins,  <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) the pardon of
which it is clear that we can only obtain through Christ; but the
iniquity of the holy oblations was to be taken away and cleansed by the
priest. That is but a poor exposition of it, that if any error were
committed in the ceremonies, it was remitted in answer to the prayers of
the priest; for we must look further, and understand that on this
account the iniquity of the offerings must be purged by the priest,
because no offering, in so far as it is of man, is altogether free from
guilt. This is a harsh saying, and almost a paradox, that our very
holinesses are so impure as to need pardon; but it must be borne in mind
that nothing is so pure as not to contract some stain from us; just as
water, which, although it may be drawn in purity from a limpid fountain,
yet, if it passes over muddy ground, is tinged by it, and becomes
somewhat turbid: thus nothing is so pure in itself as not to be polluted
by the contagion of our flesh. Nothing is more excellent than the
service of God; and yet the people could offer nothing, even although
prescribed by the Law, except with the intervention of pardon, which
none but the priest could obtain for them. There is now no sacrifice,
nor was there ever, more pleasing to God than the invocation of His
name, as He himself declares,

<span id="iii.iv.i-p126"></span>"Call upon me in the day of trouble: I
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me,” (<span
id="iii.iv.i-p126.1"></span>[Ps
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p126.1"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iv.i-p127"></span>yet the Apostle teaches us that “the
sacrifice of praise” only pleases God when it is offered in Christ.
(<span id="iii.iv.i-p127.1"></span>[Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p127.1"></span>.) Let us learn, then, that our acts of
obedience, when they come into God’s sight, are mingled with iniquity,
which exposes us to His judgment, unless Christ should sanctify them. In
sum, this passage teaches us that whatsoever good works we strive to
present to God are so far from deserving reward, that they rather
convict us of guilt, unless the holiness of Christ, whereby God is
propitiated, obtains pardon for them. And this is again asserted
immediately afterwards, where Moses says that by favor of the priest the
sins of the sacred oblations are taken away  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md) “for favorable acceptation,” *i.e.,*
that the Israelites may be sure that God is reconciled and favorable to
them. I have nothing to say of the tiara itself, which some call a
mitre, (*cidarim,*) and others a cap; neither do I choose to
philosophize too subtilely about the belt or girdle.  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md)

<span id="iii.iv.i-p130"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p131"></span>**40.** *And for Aaron’s sons.* The sons
of Aaron also are separated not only from the body of the people, but
likewise from the Levites; for a peculiar dignity was attached to that
family, from whom his successor was afterwards to be taken.  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md) And since no single individual was
able to perform all their offices, they were distributed amongst them.
Hence it was that they were adorned with the coat, the girdle, and the
bonnet, “for glory and for beauty.” We shall see as to their anointing
in the next chapter. Their hands are said be filled,  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) when they are made fit for offering
sacrifices, for as long as their hands are unconsecrated (*profanae*)
they are accounted empty, even though they may be very full, since no
gift is acceptable to God except in right of the priesthood;
consequently their fullness arose from consecration, whereby it came
that the oblations duly made had access to God. But we must observe that
it is not their father Aaron, but Moses, who sanctifies them, that the
power itself, or effect of their sanctification, may rest in God, and
may not be transferred to His ministers. Perhaps, too, God would
anticipate the calumnies of the ungodly, lest any should afterwards
object that Aaron had fraudulently and unjustly extended the honor
conferred upon himself alone to his sons also, and thus had unlawfully
made it hereditary. He was protected against this reproach by the fact,
that the sacerdotal dignity came to them from elsewhere. Besides, by
these means the posterity of Moses was more certainly deprived of the
hope they may have conceived in consideration of what their father was.
Therefore Moses, by inaugurating the children of Aaron, reduced his own
to their proper place, lest ally ambition should hereafter tempt them,
or lest envy should possess them when they saw themselves put below
others.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p134"></span><span id="iii.iv.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p135"></span>**42.** *And thou shalt make them linen
breeches.* Since men, in their natural levity and frowardness, lay hold
of the very slightest causes of offense to the disparagement of holy
things, and so religion easily sinks into contempt, God here, as a
precaution against such a danger, delivers a precept respecting an
apparently trivial matter, viz., that the priests should cover their
nakedness with breeches. The sum is, that they should conduct themselves
chastely and modestly, lest, if anything improper or indecorous should
appear in them, the majesty of holy things should be impaired. Some,
therefore, thus explain the clause, “that they may minister *in
holiness,”*  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) as if it were said,
“that they may be pure from every stain, and may not desecrate God’s
service.” In my opinion, however, the word <span
id="iii.iv.i-p136.1"></span>קודש *kodesh,* should be taken for the
sanctuary; and this is the more natural sense. A threat is added, that
if they neglected this observance it would not be with impunity, since
they would bring guilt upon themselves. Nor can we wonder at this, since
all carelessness and negligence in the performance of sacred duties is
closely connected with impiety and contempt of God. What immediately
follows as to its being a perpetual law or statute, some, in my judgment
improperly, restrict to the precept respecting the breeches, for it has
a natural reference to the other ordinances of the priesthood. God
therefore declares generally, that the Law which He gives is not for a
little time, but that it may always remain in force as regards His elect
people; whence we infer that the word <span
id="iii.iv.i-p136.2"></span>עולם *gnolam*  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md) whenever the legal types are in
question, attains its end in the advent of Christ; and assuredly this is
the true perpetuity of the ceremonies, that they should rest in Christ,
who is their full truth and substance. For, since in Christ was at
length manifested what was then delineated in shadows, these figures are
established, because their use has ceased after the manifestation of
their reality. And this we have already seen was long ago foretold by
David, when he substitutes for the Levitical priesthood another “after
the order of Melchisedec,” (<span id="iii.iv.i-p137.1"></span>[Ps
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p137.1"></span>;) but the dignity being transferred, as the
Apostle well reminds us, the Law and all the statutes must be of
necessity transferred also. (<span id="iii.iv.i-p137.2"></span>[Heb
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iv.i-p137.2"></span>.) The ancient rites, therefore, are now at
an end, because they do not accord with the spiritual priesthood of
Christ; and herein the twofold sacrilege of the Papacy betrays itself,
in that mortal men have dared to substitute another third priesthood for
that of Christ, as if His were transitory; and also, in their foolish
imitation of the Jews, have heaped together ceremonies which are
directly opposed to the nature of Christ’s priesthood. They reply,
indeed, that His priesthood remains entire, although they have
innumerable sacrifices; but they vainly endeavor to escape by this
subterfuge, for if it was unlawful to change, or to innovate anything in
the legal priesthood, how much less is it lawful to corrupt the
priesthood of Christ by strange inventions, when its integrity has been
ratified by the inviolable oath of God? The Father says to the Son,
“Thou art a priest for ever;” how, then, does it avail to make the silly
assertion that nothing is taken away from Christ, when an innumerable
multitude (of priests) are appointed? How do these things accord, that
He was anointed to offer Himself by the Spirit, and yet that He is
offered by others? that by one offering He completed His work unto our
full justification, and yet that He is offered daily? Now, if there be
now-a-days no lawful priest except such an one as possesses in himself
what was foreshewn in the ancient types, let them bring forth priests
adorned with angelic purity, and as it were separate from the ranks of
men, otherwise we shall be at liberty to repudiate all who are defiled
by the very slightest stain. Hence, too, has arisen their second
sacrilege, viz., that they have dared to obscure the brightness of the
gospel with a new Judaism. They were altogether without the means of
proving their priesthood, and so their easiest plan was to envelop their
vanity in an immense mass of ceremonies, and, as it were, to shut out
the light by clouds. So much the more diligently, then, must believers
beware of departing from the pure institution of Christ, if they desire
to have Him for their one and eternal Mediator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc04067.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p95"></span> Supplied from *Fr.*

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc04067.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p97"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.i-p97.1"></span>Non
pas en effigies exterieures de diamans et rubies.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc04067.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p102"></span> Added from *Fr.*

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc04067.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p103"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.i-p103.1"></span>Ad
Dei cultum.” — *Lat. “*<span id="iii.iv.i-p103.2"></span>A sacrifier.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc04067.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p107.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p108"></span> The Hebrew name of the breastplate,
viz., <span id="iii.iv.i-p108.1"></span>חשן, is a word whose root has
not been preserved in the *Heb.* But in the Arabic its root signifies
*elegant,* or *adorned with beauty,* according to Simon’s Lexicon. There
is no discoverable reason for its signifying *strength, or a treasure.*
— *W.*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc04067.htm#fr_162.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p110"></span> “R. *Salomon* thinketh, that the Urim
and Thummim was nothing else but the name of Jehovah, which was written
in letters and put within the breastplate; which name some ancient
Hebrews, even before Christ, did take to signifie the Trinitie. In this
word, <span id="iii.iv.i-p110.1"></span>יהוה Jehovah, they would have
the first letter *yod,* taken for the Father; *he,* for the Son, which
letter is doubled to signifie his two natures, the humane and divine;
and *vau,* which is a conjunctive copulative, signifieth the Holy Ghost.
— *Vatab*. But between these words, Urim and Thummim, and the name
Jehovah, there seemeth to be small affinitie.” — Willet *in loco.*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc04067.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p118"></span> *Lat., “*<span
id="iii.iv.i-p118.1"></span>in malogranatis, vel malts punicis;” the
latter being the translation of the *V*.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc04067.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p118.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p119"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.i-p119.1"></span>Que
la justice de Jesus Christ nous rend odoriferans par la predication de
l’Evangile;” (leads us to this) that the righteousness of Jesus Christ
makes us sweet through the preaching of the Gospel. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc04067.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p119.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p120"></span> Quoted in the <span
id="iii.iv.i-p120.1"></span>Glossa Ordinaria *in loco: “*<span
id="iii.iv.i-p120.2"></span>Quia tram contra se occulti Judicis
provocat, si sine praedicationis sonitu incedit."

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc04067.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p125"></span> Addition in *Fr., “*<span
id="iii.iv.i-p125.1"></span>Et qu’on puisse condamner par le sens
commun;” and which even common sense must condemn.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc04067.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p127.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p128"></span> *Lat., “*<span
id="iii.iv.i-p128.1"></span>In beneplacitum.” *A. V*., “That they may be
accepted.” The translation I have given is that of Ainsworth.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc04067.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p128.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p129"></span> This sentence is omitted in the *Fr*.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc04067.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p132"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.i-p132.1"></span>Les
successeurs de la souveraine sacrificature;” the successors in the
sovereign priesthood.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc04067.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p132.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p133"></span> *A.V.,* “consecrate,” v. 41. *Margin,
“*fill their hand;” *i.e.,* says Rosenmuller, *in loco, “*thou shalt
deliver them the power of their office. Le Clerc suggests that the
phrase is perhaps borrowed from some ancient oriental rite, in which the
ensigns of office were put into the hands of those to whom it was
entrusted. It appears also, from the following chapter, ver. 24, that
all the sacred offerings were placed by Moses in the hands of the
priests at their inauguration."

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc04067.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p136"></span> “To minister in the holy *place.”* —
*A. V.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc04067.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p136.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p137"></span> The primary signification of this word
is *hidden;* hence a period of time, of which either the end or the
beginning is hidden; and therefore frequently it is used for *eternity,*
or as in the *A. V., for ever.* — *W.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 29:1-35](cc04068.md)
