[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04122)  [Next](cc04124.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.xv-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.x.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p2"></span><span id="iii.x.xv-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
22:17-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.x.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p3"></span>**17.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.x.xv-p4"></span>**17.** Loquutus est praeterea Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="iii.x.xv-p5"></span>**18.** Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons,
and unto all the children of Israel, and say unto them, Whatsoever *he
be* of the house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel, that will
offer his oblation for all his vows, and for all his freewill offerings,
which they will offer unto the LORD for a burnt offering;

<span id="iii.x.xv-p6"></span>**18.** Alloquere Aharon et filios ejus,
et omnes filios Israel et dicas illis, Quit. unque e domo Israelis, et e
peregrinis Israel obtulerit oblationem suam pro omnibus votis suis, et
pro omnibus oblationibus spontaneis suis, quae obtulerit Jehovae in
holocaustum;

<span id="iii.x.xv-p7"></span>**19.** *Ye shall offer* at your own will
a male without blemish, of the beeves, of the sheep, or of the goats.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p8"></span>**19.** In acceptationem vestri offeretis
immaculatum masculum ex bobus, ex agnis, et ex capris.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p9"></span>**20.** *But* whatsoever hath a blemish,
*that* shall ye not offer: for it shall not be acceptable for you.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p10"></span>**20.** Omne in quo fuerit macula non
offeretis: quia non erit in acceptationem pro vobis.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p11"></span>**21.** And whosoever offereth a
sacrifice of peace offerings unto the LORD to accomplish *his* vow, or a
freewill offering in beeves or sheep, it shall be perfect to be
accepted; there shall be no blemish therein.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p12"></span>**21.** Vir autem quum obtulerit
sacrificium prosperitatum Jehovae, ad solvendum votum, vel ad voluntarie
offerendum, ex bobus, vel ex ovibus immaculatum erit in aeceptationem,
nullum vitium erit in eo.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p13"></span>**22.** Blind, or broken, or maimed, or
having a wen, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer these unto the
LORD, nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p14"></span>**22.** Caecum aut fractum, aut concisum
labiis, aut verrucatum, vel scabiosum, vel impetiginosum, non offeretis
ista Jehovae: neque oblationem ignitam dabitis ex his super altare
Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p15"></span>**23.** Either a bullock or a lamb that
hath anything superfluous or lacking in his parts, that mayest thou
offer *for* a freewill offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p16"></span>**23.** Bovem quidem et pecus superfluum
aut diminutum, pro oblatione voluntaria facies: at pro voto non
placebit.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p17"></span>**24.** Ye shall not offer unto the LORD
that which is bruised,or crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shall ye
make *any offering thereof* in your land.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p18"></span>**24.** Concussum et contusum, ruptum et
excisum non offeretis Jehovae: in terra vestra non facietis.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p19"></span>**25.** Neither from a stranger’s hand
shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of these; because their
corruption *is* in them, *and* blemishes *be* in them: they shall not be
accepted for you.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p20"></span>**25.** De mann autem alienigenae non
offeretis panem Dei vestri, ex omnibus istis: quia corruptio eorum est
in ipsis: macula est in els: non acccpta erunt pro vobis.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p21"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xv-p22"></span><span
id="iii.x.xv-p22.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.x.xv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p23"></span><span
id="iii.x.xv-p23.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.x.xv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p24"></span>**1.** Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the
LORD thy God *any* bullock or sheep, wherein is blemish, *or* any
evilfavouredness: for that *is* an abomination unto the LORD thy God.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p25"></span>**1.** Non sacrificabis Jehovae Deo tuo
bovem, aut agnum, in quo fuerit macula, aut quidpiam vitii, quia
abominatio Jehovae Dei tui est.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p26"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xv-p27"></span><span id="iii.x.xv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p28"></span>**<span
id="iii.x.xv-p28.2"></span>[Leviticus
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.x.xv-p28.2"></span>.** *And the Lord spake.* He now more clearly
teaches and more copiously inculcates what he has frequently adverted to
heretofore, that it is sinful to offer to God a *maimed,* or *weak,* or
otherwise *imperfect animal.* Now this external soundness admonished the
ancient people that God is served amiss when He is served by halves,
since He abominates a double heart.  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291.md) (<span id="iii.x.xv-p29.2"></span>[Pr
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.x.xv-p29.2"></span>.) At the same time, in this symbol was shewn
forth the perfect purity of that victim by which God was at length to be
reconciled. We know in how great liberties the world indulges itself in
the service of God; for whilst it lightly and contemptuously obtrudes
mere trifling upon Him as if He were a child, it still fancies that its
duty is properly discharged. Hence it is that it claims reward for any
rubbish (*sordibus,*) and exults in mere mockeries of God, as if it were
laying Him under obligation. A notable example of this stupid security
is seen now-a-days in the Papacy, when they mock God with no less
audacity than as if they were dealing with a block of wood. To omit
innumerable other cases, what can be more monstrous than this arrogance
of theirs, when, as they mutter their prayers, their minds wander not
only into frivolous but even into unholy imaginations, and yet they
pretend that the final intention, as they call it, is meritorious and
approved by God?  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292.md) Suppose a
priest (<span id="iii.x.xv-p31.3"></span>*sacrificus*) shall have
proposed to recite the godly prayers of his breviary, and, when scarcely
three words have been said, his mind shall be occupied with dishes,
shall run away now to his cups, now to dicing, or other pastimes, still,
as if his task were performed, he will boast that he has offered worship
to God. In order, therefore, to obviate this fault, God commands that
sacrifices free from all blemish should be presented to Him. Hence that
sharp expostulation of His in <span id="iii.x.xv-p31.4"></span>[Mal.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.x.xv-p31.4"></span>,
because the Jews polluted His altar and thought His table contemptible,
when they said that their blind, and lame, and sick victims were not
evil. “Offer it now (he says) to thy governor, will he — accept thy
person?” not because God cared for the fatness or the juiciness of the
animals, but because it thus was made plain that true piety was
neglected, nay, altogether despised. We perceive, then, that all
defective sacrifices were rejected, that the Israelites might learn
sincerely and seriously to consecrate themselves entirely to God, and
not to play childishly with Him, as is often the case. Elsewhere we have
seen indeed that all uncleanness is repudiated by God; but we must
remember that two things are required for legitimate worship; *first,*
that he who approaches God should be purged from every stain, and
*secondly,* that he should offer nothing except what is pure and free
from all imperfection. What Solomon says, that “the sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination to the Lord,” (<span
id="iii.x.xv-p31.5"></span>[Pr
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.x.xv-p31.5"></span>,) is true, although it be fat and splendid.
But in order that the things which are offered by the good should be
pleasing to God, another point must also be attended to, viz., that the
offering should not be poor, and stingy, and deficient; and again, by
this symbol, as I have already said, they were directed to Christ,
besides whom no integrity will anywhere be found which will satisfy God.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p32"></span><span id="iii.x.xv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p33"></span>**19.** *“Unto your acceptance.”*  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293.md) Some indeed translate this “at your
own will,” but the context forbids it; for Moses sometimes uses the word
<span id="iii.x.xv-p34.1"></span>רצה, *ratseh,* which means “accepted,”
in the same sense, and sometimes <span id="iii.x.xv-p34.2"></span>רצון,
*ratson,* which can only be referred to God’s favor, which is commonly
called His “good pleasure.” Again, as he here uses the compound word
<span id="iii.x.xv-p34.3"></span>לרצנכם; *leretsoncem,* so he soon
afterwards adds <span id="iii.x.xv-p34.4"></span>לרצון לכם, *leretson
lecem,* where he declares that a blemished sacrifice would not be “unto
their acceptance,” because it would be rejected by God. The sum
therefore is, that if they desire their oblations to be approved by God,
they must beware that there be no defect in them. Still, if any one
chooses to think that God’s gratuitous favor is expressed by the word
“good pleasure,” I willingly admit it, since our services only please
God in so far as in His paternal indulgence He deigns to award to them
the value of which they are by no means worthy. Nevertheless let us
learn meanwhile that we must not play with God, but that He must be so
worshipped in integrity and sincerity of heart as that our sacrifices
may correspond with His good pleasure. For hence arises the careless
profanation of His worship, because we do not sufficiently consider what
is due to His perfection. It is indeed certain that nothing can proceed
from us which is pure in every respect; but let us at least aspire at
what befits us, and let us mourn that our desires fall so far short of
their aim, in order that Christ may by His grace supply what is wanting
in US; for it is unquestionable that, provided our sacrifices are the
fruits of true regeneration, He washes out their blemishes with His own
blood.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p35"></span><span id="iii.x.xv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p36"></span>**22.** *Either a bullock, or a lamb,
that hath anything superfluous.* An exception is here stated as to
free-will-offerings; for in them God does not refuse a diminutive
animal, or one which has a member either contracted, or of excessive
size. And doubtless a greater license ought to be given, when a person
is not under the obligation either of a vow or any other necessity.
Still we must remember that no victim is acceptable to God, which labors
under any notable defect.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p37"></span><span id="iii.x.xv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p38"></span>**25.** *Neither from a stranger’s hand.*
God here forbids that victims of this sort should be offered to Him,
although they might be purchased from foreigners. The Hebrews, however,
has invented a different meaning, viz., that not even from foreigners
were such sacrifices to be received, as it was unlawful for the children
of the Church themselves to offer. But inasmuch as the Law altogether
prohibited the unclean nations from making sacred oblations, another
solution of this difficulty was still to be discovered.  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md) They suppose, therefore, that those
are called “strangers,” who observe the precepts of the children of
Noah, *i.e.,* who honor God, and do not pollute themselves by incest,
abstain from the effusion of human blood, and from theft, and who do not
worship idols. But the context does not accord with this, for Moses adds
at the end that this kind of sacrifice would not be accepted by God from
the Jews themselves, which will not agree with their being offered by
the Gentiles. This, then, seems to me to be a confirmation of the
previous injunction, introduced by way of precaution; for it might have
seemed that the offering would have been permissible, if they had
purchased the animal, even though it were defective; whereas God
declares that what they were not allowed to present from their own
stalls, was no more approved of by Him, if it had been purchased,
because defectiveness is always displeasing to Him. Nor do I restrict
this, as they do, to the foregoing clause, as if it only referred to
castrated animals, and such as were wounded in the testicles, but I
include with it also warts and eruptions, and other blemishes. In order
that the prohibition may have more weight, he again calls the sacrifices
*“*the bread of God,” not because God, who is the fountain of life, has
need of food, or eats of corruptible meat, since He is the eternal
Spirit; but that men may more diligently take care duly to perform their
sacred rites, wherein they familiarly draw nigh to God. Now, if no one
would dare to present stale or corrupted food to an earthly prince, much
less tolerable is it to contaminate God’s table with anything blemished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc04123.htm#fr_291.md) <span
id="iii.x.xv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p29"></span> *A. V.,* “They that are of a *froward*
heart are abomination to the Lord.” The word <span
id="iii.x.xv-p29.1"></span>עקש, however, says Cocceius, quoted in
Taylor’s Concordance, “expresseth the character of a man who walketh in
a *double* way,” etc.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc04123.htm#fr_292.md) <span
id="iii.x.xv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p30"></span> “Wherefore the schoolmen grossly err
when they lay it down that *actual* attention, as they call it, is not
required in our prayers, but that it is sufficient for us to give
*virtual* attention, as they say, since our hearts, they affirm, are not
in our own power; and hence it is enough if, at the commencement, we
resolve to wish to pray to God.” — Petr. Mart. Loci Com. C1. 3 chap.
13:11.

<span id="iii.x.xv-p31"></span>Luther ridicules this mode of praying in
his “<span id="iii.x.xv-p31.1"></span>Simplex Orandi Modus,” (Witteb.
1558,) vol. 7:132: “<span id="iii.x.xv-p31.2"></span>Quemadmodum
sacrificulus ille rurestris ipsis periculis (precibus?) subinde aliena
miscebat, ad hunc modum, Deus in adjutorium meum intende; (Heus, serve,
deme helcia equis.) Domine ad adjuvandum me festina; (Vade, famula,
mulge vaccas.) Gloria Patri, etc.; (Etiam cessas, puer? Dii te perdant,
etc.) Tales preculas audivi sub Papatu quamplurimas, atque omnes adeo
eorum orationes fere ejusmodi fuere."

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc04123.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="iii.x.xv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p34"></span> *A.V.* “At your own will,” *vide supra,*
p. 370.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc04123.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="iii.x.xv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xv-p39"></span> This is *S.M.’s* solution; and after him
Fonseca. *Willet. “*Some understand this (says Bonar) as forbidding them
to let a stranger supply them with animals for sacrifices, *q. d.,* take
it not out of a stranger’s flock or herd: But this is contrary to
practice approved of in after days; as when Cyrus gave, and Darius
ordered others to supply. But the true meaning is evidently that the
same rule shall hold in regard to a strangers offering as in regard to
their own. ‘The stranger’ may be a proselyte, as <span
id="iii.x.xv-p39.1"></span>[Le
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.x.xv-p39.1"></span>; or he may be such an one as Cyrus."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 23:18](cc04124.md)
