[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04108)  [Next](cc04110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.i"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p2"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
16:1-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.x.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses after
the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they offered before the LORD,
and died;

<span id="iii.x.i-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad Mosen
postquam mortui sunt duo ex filiis Aharon: qui dum accederent coram
Jehova mortui sunt.

<span id="iii.x.i-p5"></span>**2.** And the LORD said unto Moses, Speak
unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the holy
*place* within the vail before the mercy seat, which *is* upon the ark;
that he die not: for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat.

<span id="iii.x.i-p6"></span>**2.** Dixitque Jellova ad Mosen, Loquere
ad Aharon fratrem tuum, ut ne ingrediatnr omni tempore sanctuarium intra
velum coram propitiatorio quod est supra arcata, ne moriatur: in nube
enim apparebo supra propitiatorium.

<span id="iii.x.i-p7"></span>**3.** Thus shall Aaron come into the holy
*place*: with a young bullock for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt
offering.

<span id="iii.x.i-p8"></span>**3.** Cum hoc ingredietur Aharon
sanctuarium, eum juvenco filio bovis in hostiam pro peccato, et ariete
in holocaustum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p9"></span>**4.** He shall put on the holy linen coat,
and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded
with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shall he be attired: these
*are* holy garments; therefore shall he wash his flesh in water, and
*so* put them on.

<span id="iii.x.i-p10"></span>**4.** Tunica linca saneta induet se, et
femoralia linea erunt super carnem ejus, balteoque lineo accinget se, et
mitra linea velabit sese: vestes sanctitatis sunt: lavabitque aqua
carnem suam, et induct se illis.

<span id="iii.x.i-p11"></span>**5.** And he shall take of the
congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the goats for a sin
offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.

<span id="iii.x.i-p12"></span>**5.** A coetu autem filiorum Israel
accipiet duos hircos caprarum in hostiam pro peccato, et arietem unum in
holocaustum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p13"></span>**6.** And Aaron shall offer his bullock
of the sin offering which *is* for himself, and make an atonement for
himself, and for his house.

<span id="iii.x.i-p14"></span>**6.** Offeretque Aharon juvencum
sacrificii pro peccato suum, et expiationem faciet pro se et pro domo
sua.

<span id="iii.x.i-p15"></span>**7.** And he shall take the two goats,
and present them before the LORD *at* the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation.

<span id="iii.x.i-p16"></span>**7.** Postea caplet duos hircum, quos
statuet coram Jehova ad ostium tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="iii.x.i-p17"></span>**8.** And Aaron shall cast lots upon the
two goats; one lot for the LORD, and the other lot for the scapegoat.

<span id="iii.x.i-p18"></span>**8.** Mittetque Aharon super duos illos
hircum sortes, sortem unam Jehovae, et sortem alteram pro azazel.

<span id="iii.x.i-p19"></span>**9.** And Aaron shall bring the goat upon
which the LORD’S lot fell, and offer him *for* a sin offering.

<span id="iii.x.i-p20"></span>**9.** Offeret autem Aharon hircum super
quem ceciderit sots pro Jehovae, et faciet eum pro peccato.

<span id="iii.x.i-p21"></span>**10.** But the goat, on which the lot
fell to be the scapegoat, shall be presented alive before the LORD, to
make an atonement with him, *and* to let him go for a scapegoat into the
wilderness.

<span id="iii.x.i-p22"></span>**10.** Hircum vero super quem ceciderit
sors pro azazel, statuet vivum coram Jehova ad emundandum per illum, ad
emittendum illum in azazel in desertum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p23"></span>**11.** And Aaron shall bring the bullock
of the sin offering, which *is* for himself, and shall make an atonement
for himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin
offering which *is* for himself:

<span id="iii.x.i-p24"></span>**11.** Offeret autem Aharon juvencum pro
hostia peccati suum, et expiationem faciet pro se et pro domo sua,
mactabitque juvencum pro hostia peccati suum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p25"></span>**12.** And he shall take a censer full of
burning coals of fire from off the altar before the LORD, and his hands
full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring *it* within the vail:

<span id="iii.x.i-p26"></span>**12.** Assumet quoque plenum thuribulum
prunis ignitis de altari a conspectu Jehovae, et plenas volas suas de
incenso aromatico comminuto, et inferet intra velum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p27"></span>**13.** And he shall put the incense upon
the fire before the LORD, that the cloud of the incense may cover the
mercy seat that *is* upon the testimony, that he die not:

<span id="iii.x.i-p28"></span>**13.** Ponetque incensum super ignero
coram Jehova: operietque nubes incensi propitiatorium quod est super
testimonium, et non morietur.

<span id="iii.x.i-p29"></span>**14.** And he shall take of the blood of
the bullock, and sprinkle *it* with his finger upon the mercy seat
eastward; and before the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with
his finger seven times.

<span id="iii.x.i-p30"></span>**14.** Deinde accipiet de sanguine
juvenei, et asperget digito suo contra faciem propitiatorii ad orientem:
coram propitiatorio inquam asperget septem vicibus de sanguine illo,
digito suo.

<span id="iii.x.i-p31"></span>**15.** Then shall he kill the goat of the
sin offering, that *is* for the people, and bring his blood within the
vail, and do with that blood as he did with the blood of the bullock,
and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat:

<span id="iii.x.i-p32"></span>**15.** Mactabit praeterea hircum hostiam
pro petcato, qui fuerit populi, et inferet sanguinem ejus intra velum:
facietque de sanguine ejus quemadmodum fecit de sanguine juvenci,
aspergens scilicet illum supra propitiatorium, et coram propitiatorio.

<span id="iii.x.i-p33"></span>**16.** And he shall make an atonement for
the holy *place,* because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel,
and because of their transgressions in all their sins: and so shall he
do for the tabernacle of the congregation, that remaineth among them in
the midst of their uncleanness.

<span id="iii.x.i-p34"></span>**16.** Et emundabit sanctuarium ab
immunditiis filiorum Israel, eta praevaricationibus eorum, cunctisque
pectaris eorum: sic quoque faciet tabernaculo conventionis quod moratur
cum eis in medio immunditiarum corum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p35"></span>**17.** And there shall be no man in the
tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in
the holy *place,* until he come out, and have made an atonement for
himself, and for his household, and for all the congregation of Israel.

<span id="iii.x.i-p36"></span>**17.** Nullus autem homo erit in
tabernaculo conventionis dum egredietur ipse ad emundandum in
sanctuario, donec egrediatur ipse: et expiationem fecerit pro se et pro
domo sua, et pro universo coetu Israel.

<span id="iii.x.i-p37"></span>**18.** And he shall go out unto the altar
that *is* before the LORD, and make an atonement for it; and shall take
of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and put *it*
upon the horns of the altar round about.

<span id="iii.x.i-p38"></span>**18.** Exibit autem ad altare quod est
coram Jehova: et expiabit illud: tolletque de sanguine juvenci, ac de
sanguine hirci, et ponet super cornua altaris per circuitum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p39"></span>**19.** And he shall sprinkle of the blood
upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from
the uncleanness of the children of Israel.

<span id="iii.x.i-p40"></span>**19.** Aspergetque super illud de
sanguine illo, digito suo, septem vicibus, ac mundabit illud,
sanctificabitque ab immunditiis filiorum Israel.

<span id="iii.x.i-p41"></span>**20.** And when he hath made an end of
reconciling the holy *place,* and the tabernacle of the congregation,
and the altar, he shall bring the live goat:

<span id="iii.x.i-p42"></span>**20.** Qunm autem finierit expiare
sanctuarium tabernaculumque conventionis et altare, tune offeret hircum
vivum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p43"></span>**21.** And Aaron shall lay both his hands
upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities
of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their
sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, and shall send *him* away
by the hand of a fit man into the wilderness:

<span id="iii.x.i-p44"></span>**21.** Imponetque Aharon ambas manus suas
super caput hirei vivi, et confitebitur super illud onmes iniquitates
filiorum Israel, et omnes praevaricationes eorum cum omnibus peccatis
eorum: et ponet illa super caput hirci, ac emitter ilium per manum viri
praeparati in desertum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p45"></span>**22.** And the goat shall bear upon him
all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shall let go the
goat in the wilderness.

<span id="iii.x.i-p46"></span>**22.** Et portabit hircus ille super se
omnes iniquitates eorum in terram inhabitabilem: et abire sinet hircum
ilium in deserto.

<span id="iii.x.i-p47"></span>**23.** And Aaron shall come into the
tabernacle of the congregation, and shall put off the linen garments,
which he put on when he went into the holy *place,* and shall leave them
there:

<span id="iii.x.i-p48"></span>**23.** Veniet post haec Aharon in
tabernaculmunconventionis, et exuet se vestibus lineis, quibus induerat
se dum ingrederetur sanctuarium, et ponet eas ibi.

<span id="iii.x.i-p49"></span>**24.** And he shall wash his flesh with
water in the holy place, and put on his garments, and come forth, and
offer his burnt offering, and the burnt offering of the people, and make
an atonement for himself, and for the people.

<span id="iii.x.i-p50"></span>**24.** Lavabitque carnem suam aqua in
loco sancto: et induct se vestibus suis: egredietur autem et faciet
holocaustum populi, et expiationem faciet pro se et pro populo.

<span id="iii.x.i-p51"></span>**25.** And the fat of the sin offering
shall he burn upon the altar.

<span id="iii.x.i-p52"></span>**25.** Adipem vero hostira pro peccato
adolebit super altare.

<span id="iii.x.i-p53"></span>**26.** And he that let go the goat for
the scapegoat shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and
afterward come into the camp.

<span id="iii.x.i-p54"></span>**26.** Qui veto deduxerit hircum in
azazel, lavabit vestimenta sua, postea quam laverit carnem suam aqua, et
postea ingredietur castra ipsa.

<span id="iii.x.i-p55"></span>**27.** And the bullock *for* the sin
offering, and the goat *for* the sin offering, whose blood was brought
in to make atonement in the holy *place,* shall *one* carry forth
without the camp; and they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their
flesh, and their dung.

<span id="iii.x.i-p56"></span>**27.** Juvencum autem pro peccato, et
hircum pro delicto quorum illatus fuerit sanguis ad emundandum in
sanctuario, educet extra castra, et comburent igni pellem eorum, et
carnes eorum, et fimum eorum.

<span id="iii.x.i-p57"></span>**28.** And he that burneth them shall
wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall
come into the camp.

<span id="iii.x.i-p58"></span>**28.** Et qui combusserit ea, lavabit,
vestimenta sua, postquam laverit carnem suam aqua, et postea ingredietur
castra.

<span id="iii.x.i-p59"></span>**29.** And *this* shall be a statute for
ever unto you: *that* in the seventh month, on the tenth *day* of the
month, ye shall afflict your souls, and do no work at all, *whether it
be* one of your own country, or a stranger that sojourneth among you:

<span id="iii.x.i-p60"></span>**29.** Eritque vobis in statutum
perpetuum: mense septimo decima die mensis affligetis animas vestras:
neque opus ullum facietis, indigena et peregrinus qui peregrinatur in
medio vestri.

<span id="iii.x.i-p61"></span>**30.** For on that day shall *the priest*
make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, *that* ye may be clean from
all your sins before the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.i-p62"></span>**30.** In hac enim die expiabit vos ut
emundet vos ab omnibus peccatis vestris, coram Jehova mundabimini.

<span id="iii.x.i-p63"></span>**31.** It *shall be* a sabbath of rest
unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls, by a statute for ever.

<span id="iii.x.i-p64"></span>**31.** Sabbathum quietis est vobis, et
affligetis animas vestras statuto perpetuo.

<span id="iii.x.i-p65"></span>**32.** And the priest, whom he shall
anoint, and whom he shall consecrate to minister in the priest’s office
in his father’s stead, shall make the atonement, and shall put on the
linen clothes, *even* the holy garments:

<span id="iii.x.i-p66"></span>**32.** Expiabit enim sacerdos quem
unxerit ungens, et cujus consecraverit manum ad fungendum sacrificio pro
patre suo, inductque se vestibus lineis, vestibus sanctis.

<span id="iii.x.i-p67"></span>**33.** And he shall make an atonement for
the holy sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of
the congregation, and for the altar; and he shall make an atonement for
the priests, and for all the people of the congregation.

<span id="iii.x.i-p68"></span>**33.** Et expiabit sanctuarium
sanctitatis et tabernaculum conventionis, altare quoqne expiabit et
sacerdotes, et cunctum populum congregationis expiabit.

<span id="iii.x.i-p69"></span>**34.** And this shall be an everlasting
statute unto you, to make an atonement for the children of Israel for
all their sins once a year. And he did as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="iii.x.i-p70"></span>**34.** Eritque hoe vobis in statutum
perpetuum, ad emundandum filios Israel ab omnibus peccatis suis, semel
quotannis. Et fecit Moses secundum quod praeceperat ei Jehova.

<span id="iii.x.i-p71"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.i-p72"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p73"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.* A
copious description is here given of what we have recently adverted to
cursorily, as it were, *i.e.,* the solemn atonement which was yearly
made in the seventh month; for when Moses was instructing them as to
what sacrifices were to be offered on each of the festivals, he
expressly excepted, though only in a single word, this sacrifice, where
he spoke of the day of atonement itself, on which they afflicted their
souls. Now, therefore, a clear and distinct exposition of it is
separately given. For although at other seasons of the year also both
their public and private sins were expiated, and for this purpose
availed the daily sacrifices, still this more solemn rite was meant to
arouse the people’s minds, that they might more earnestly apply
themselves all the year through to the diligent seeking for pardon and
remission. In order, then, that they might be more anxious to propitiate
God, one atonement was performed at the end of the year which might
ratify all the others. But, that they might more diligently observe what
is commanded, Moses makes mention of the time in which the Law was
given, viz., when Nadab and Abihu were put to death by God, after they
had rashly defiled the altar by their negligence.

<span id="iii.x.i-p74"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p75"></span>**2.** *Speak unto Aaron.* The sum of the
law is, that the priest should not frequently enter the inner sanctuary,
but only once a year, *i.e.,* on the feast of the atonement, in the
month of September. The cause of this was, lest a more frequent entrance
of it should produce indifference; for if he had entered it
promiscuously at every sacrifice, no small part of the reverence due to
it would have been lost. The ordinary sprinkling of the altar was
sufficient to testify the reconciliation; but this annual ceremony more
greatly influenced the people’s minds. Again, by this sacrifice, which
they saw only once at the end of the year, the one and perpetual
sacrifice offered by God’s Son was more clearly represented. Therefore
the Apostle elegantly alludes to this ceremony in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, where it is said that by the annual entrance of the high priest
the Holy Ghost signified,

<span id="iii.x.i-p76"></span>"that the way into the holiest of all was
not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet
standing,”  
(<span id="iii.x.i-p76.2"></span>[Heb
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#008)<span id="iii.x.i-p76.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="iii.x.i-p77"></span>and a little further on he adds, that
after Christ the true Priest had come,

<span id="iii.x.i-p78"></span>"he entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us.” (<span
id="iii.x.i-p78.1"></span>[Heb. 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012)<span id="iii.x.i-p78.1"></span>..md)

<span id="iii.x.i-p79"></span>Thus the year, in the ancient type, was a
symbol of the one offering, so that believers might understand that the
sacrifice, whereby God was to be propitiated, was not to be often
repeated. That God may inspire greater fear, and preserve the priests
from carelessness, He proclaims that His glory should appear in the
cloud in that part of the sanctuary where was the mercy seat; for we
know that the sign was given from hence to the Israelites, when the camp
was to be moved, or when they were to remain stationary. But this
testimony of God’s presence should have justly moved the priests to
greater care and attention; and hence we may now learn, that the closer
God’s majesty manifests itself, the more anxiously should we beware,
lest through our thoughtlessness we should give any mark of contempt,
but that we should testify our submission with becoming humility and
modesty.

<span id="iii.x.i-p80"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p81"></span>**3.** *Thus shall Aaron come into the
holy place.* The rites and formality are now described; first, that
Aaron should put on the holy garments, and wash his person; secondly,
that he should offer a bullock and ram for a burnt-offering; thirdly,
that he should take two goats from the people, one of which should be
sent away alive, and the other slain in sacrifice. We have stated
elsewhere why the priests were to be dressed in garments different from
others, since he who is the mediator between God and men should be free
from all impurity and stain; and since no mortal could truly supply
this, a type was substituted in place of the reality, from whence
believers might learn that another Mediator was to be expected; because
the dignity of the sons of Aaron was only typical, and not true and
substantial. For whenever the priest stripped himself of his own
garments, and assumed those which were holy and separated from common
use, it was equivalent to declaring openly that he represented another
person. But if this symbol were not sufficient, the ablution again
taught that none of the sons of Aaron was the genuine propitiator; for
how could he purify others, who himself required purification, and made
open confession of his uncleanness? A third symbol also was added; for
he who by a sacrifice of his own atoned for himself and his house, how
was he capable of meriting God’s favor for others? Thus then the holy
fathers were reminded, that under the image of a mortal man, another
Mediator was promised, who, for the reconciliation of the human race,
should present Himself before God with perfect and more than angelical
purity. Besides, in the person of the priest there was exhibited to the
people a spectacle of the corruption whereby the whole human race is
defiled, so as to be abominable to God; for if the priest, both chosen
by God, and graced with the sacred unction, was still unworthy on the
score of his uncleanness to come near the altar, what dignity could be
discoverable in the people? And hence to us now-a-days also very useful
instruction is derived; viz., that when the question arises how God is
to be propitiated, we are not to look this way and that way; since out
of Christ there is no purity and innocence which can satisfy the justice
of God.

<span id="iii.x.i-p82"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p83"></span>**7.** *And he shall take the two goats.*
A twofold mode of expiation is here presented to us; for one of the two
goats was offered in sacrifice according to the provisions of the Law,
the other was sent away to be an outcast, or offscouring (<span
id="iii.x.i-p83.1"></span>κάθαρμα *vel* <span
id="iii.x.i-p83.2"></span>περίψημα  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) .md) The fulfillment of both figures,
however, was manifested in Christ, since He was both the Lamb of God,
whose offering blotted out the sins of the world, and, that He might be
as an offscouring, (<span id="iii.x.i-p84.8"></span>κάθαρμα*,*) His
comeliness was destroyed, and He was rejected of men. A more subtle
speculation might indeed be advanced, viz., that after the goat was
presented, its sending away was a type of the resurrection of Christ; as
if the slaying of the one goat testified that the satisfaction for sins
was to be sought in the death of Christ; whilst the preservation and
dismissal of the other shewed, that after Christ had been offered for
sin, and had borne the curse of men, He still remained alive. I embrace,
however, what is more simple and certain, and am satisfied with that;
*i.e.,* that the goat which departed alive and free, was an atonement,
 <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242.md) that by its departure and
flight the people might be assured that their sins were put away and
vanished. This was the only expiatory sacrifice in the Law without
blood; nor does this contradict the statement of the Apostle, for since
two goats were offered together, it was enough that the death of one
should take place, and that its blood should be shed for expiation; for
the lot was not cast until both goats had been brought to the door of
the tabernacle; and thus although the priest presented one of them alive
“to make an atonement with him,” as Moses expressly says, yet God was
not propitiated without blood, since the efficacy of the expiation
depended on the sacrifice of the other goat. As to the word Azazel,
 <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243.md) although commentators differ, I
doubt not but that it designates the place to which the scape-goat was
driven. It is certainly a compound word, equivalent to “the departure of
the goat,” which the Greeks have translated, whether properly or not I
cannot say, <span id="iii.x.i-p86.3"></span>ἀποπομπαῖον I am afraid that
the expiation is decidedly too subtle which some interpreters give, that
the goat was so called as “the repeller of evils,” just as the Gentiles
 <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md) invented certain gods, called
<span id="iii.x.i-p89.2"></span>ἀλεξικάκους. What I have said agrees
best with the departure of the goat; although I differ from the Jews,
who conceive that this place was contiguous to Mount Sinai; as if the
lot for Azazel were not cast every year, when the people were very far
away from Mount Sinai. Let it suffice, then, that some solitary and most
uninhabitable spot was chosen whither the goat should be driven, lest
the curse of God should rest upon the people.

<span id="iii.x.i-p90"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p91"></span>**12.** *And he shall take a censer full.*
Before he takes the blood into the sanctuary, (the priest) is commanded
to offer incense. There was, as we have seen, an altar of incense, on
which the priest burnt it, but without the veil; but now he is ordered
to go within the veil, to make  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245.md)
an incense-offering in the very holy of holies. But it is worth
noticing, that is said that the cloud of the incense should cover the
mercy-seat — that the priest die not; for by this sign it was shewn how
formidable is God’s majesty, the sight of which is fatal even to the
priest; that all might learn to tremble at it, and to prostrate
themselves as suppliants before Him; and again, that all audacity and
temerity might be repressed. But it is uncertain whether he killed
together the bullock for himself and the goat for the people, or
whether, after he had sprinkled the sanctuary with his own offering, he
killed the goat separately. Moses indeed seems to mark this distinct
order in the words he uses; for after having spoken of the first
sprinkling, he immediately adds, “Then shall he kill the goat of the
sin-offering:” but since the narrative of Moses is not always
consecutive, and it is a matter of little importance, let the reader
choose which he pleases.

<span id="iii.x.i-p93"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p94"></span>**16.** *And he shall make an atonement
for the holy place.* The cleansing of the sanctuary might seem absurd,
as if it were in man’s power to pollute what God Himself had
consecrated; for we know that God remains true, although all’ the world
be unholy, and consequently that whatever God has appointed changes not
its nature through the sins of men. Yet, if no contagion from men’s sins
had infected the tabernacle, this cleansing would have been superfluous.
But although the sanctuary in itself may have contracted no defilement
from the guilt of the people, still, in regard to the sin and guilt of
the people themselves, it is justly accounted unclean. And thus sin is
made more exceeding sinful, inasmuch as men, even though their intention
be to serve God, profane His sacred name, if they do so carelessly or
irreverently. It was at that time a detestable sacrilege in all to
defile the altar and sanctuary of God; and Moses convicts the Israelites
of this sacrilege when He commands the sanctuary to be cleansed.
Moreover, let us learn that men may so contaminate the sacred things of
God as that their nature should still remain unaltered and their dignity
inviolate. Wherefore Moses expressly states that the sanctuary is
cleansed not from its own uncleanness, but from that of the children of
Israel. We must now apply the substance of this type to our own use. By
Baptism and the Lord’s Supper, God appears to us in his only-begotten
Son: these are the pledges of our holiness; yet such is our corruption
that we never cease from profaning, as far as in us lies, these
instruments of the Spirit whereby God sanctifies us. Since, however, we
have now no victims to kill, we must mourn and humbly pray that Christ,
by the sprinkling of His blood, may blot out and cleanse these
defilements of ours, by which Baptism and the Lord’s Supper are
polluted. The reason of the purification is also to be observed, viz.,
because the tabernacle “dwelleth among them in the midst of their
uncleanness;”  <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246.md) by which words
Moses signifies that men are so polluted and full of corruptions that
they contaminate all that is holy without the intervention of a means of
purification; for he takes it for granted that men cannot but bring some
impurity with them. What he had said of the inner sanctuary he extends
to the altar and the whole of the tabernacle.

<span id="iii.x.i-p96"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p97"></span>**17.** *And there shall be no man.* The
driving away of all men from approaching the tabernacle during the act
of atonement is a sort of punishment by temporary banishment, that they
may perceive themselves to be driven from God’s face, whilst the place
is purified which had been defiled by their sins. This was a melancholy
sight, when all these for whose sake it was erected were obliged to
desert it; but in this way they were reminded that every part and
particle of our salvation depends on God’s mercy only, when they saw
themselves excluded from the remedy designed for obtaining pardon,
unless a new pardon should come to their aid, since they had fallen away
from the hope of reconciliation.

<span id="iii.x.i-p98"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p99"></span>**20.** *And when he hath made an end of
reconciling.* The mode of expiation with the other goat is now more
clearly explained, viz., that it should be placed before God, and that
the priest should lay his hands on its head, and confess the sins of the
people, so that he may throw the curse on the goat itself. This, as I
have said, was the only bloodless (<span
id="iii.x.i-p99.1"></span>ἀναίματον) sacrifice; yet it is expressly
called an “offering,”  <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247.md) with
reference, however, to the slaying of the former goat, and was,
therefore, as to its efficacy for propitiation, by no means to be
separated from it. It was by no means reasonable that an innocent animal
should be substituted in the place of men, to be exposed to the curse of
God, except that believers might learn that they were in no wise
competent to bear His judgment, nor could be delivered from it otherwise
than by the transfer of their guilt and crime. For, since men feel that
they are altogether overwhelmed by the wrath of God, which impends over
them all, they vainly endeavor to lighten or shake off in various ways
this intolerable burden; for no absolution is to be hoped for save by
the interposition of a satisfaction; and it is not lawful to obtrude
this according to man’s fancy, or, in their foolish arrogance, to seek
in themselves for the price whereby their sins may be compensated for.
Another means, therefore, of making atonement to God was revealed when
Christ, “being made a curse for us,” transferred to Himself the sins
which alienated men from God. (<span id="iii.x.i-p100.5"></span>[2Co
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.x.i-p100.5"></span>;
<span id="iii.x.i-p100.6"></span>[Ga
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.x.i-p100.6"></span>.) The confession tended to humiliate the
people, and thus acted as a stimulus to sincere repentance; since “the
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit,” (<span
id="iii.x.i-p100.7"></span>[Ps
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.x.i-p100.7"></span>;) nor is it fit that any but the prostrate
should be lifted up by God’s mercy, nor that any but those who
voluntarily condemn themselves should be absolved. The accumulation of
words tends to this, “all the iniquities, all their transgressions, all
their sins,” that believers may not lightly only and as, a mere act of
duty acknowledge themselves guilty before God, but rather that they
should groan under the weight, of their guilt. Since now in Christ no
special day in the year is prescribed in which the Church should confess
its sins in a solemn ceremony, let believers learn, whenever they meet
together in God’s name, humbly to submit themselves to voluntary
self-condemnation, and to pray for pardon, as if the Spirit of God
dictated a formulary for them; and so let each in private: conform
himself to this rule.

<span id="iii.x.i-p101"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p102"></span>**26.** *And he that let the goat go.*
Since this goat was the outcast (<span
id="iii.x.i-p102.1"></span>κάθαπμα) of God’s wrath, and devoted to His
curse, he who led it away is commanded to wash his person and his
clothes, as if he were a partaker in its defilement. By this symbol the
faithful were reminded how very detestable is their iniquity, so that
they might, be affected with increasing dread, whenever they considered
what they deserved. For when they saw a man forbidden to enter the camp
because he was polluted by simply touching the goat, they must needs
reflect how much wider was the alienation between God and themselves,
when they bore upon them an uncleanness not contracted elsewhere, but
procured by their own sin. The same may be said of him who burned the
skin, the flesh, and the dung of the bullock and the goat. We have
elsewhere seen that these remnants were carried out of the camp in token
of abomination. And on this head Christ’s inestimable love towards us
shines more brightly, who did not disdain to go out of the city that He
might be made an outcast (*rejectamentum*) for us, and might undergo the
curse due to us.

<span id="iii.x.i-p103"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p104"></span>**29.** *And this shall be a statute for
ever.* This day of public atonement is now finally mentioned in express
terms, and the affliction of souls, of which fuller notice is taken in
chap. 23, is touched upon, that they may more diligently exercise
themselves in more serious penitential meditations, nor doubt that they
are truly purged before God; and yet in a sacramental manner, viz., that
the external ceremony might be a most unmistakable sign of that
atonement, whereby, in the fullness of time, they were to be reconciled
to God. Wherefore Moses states at some length that this was to be the
peculiar office of the priest; and by this eulogy exalts the grace of
the coming Mediator, so that He may direct the minds of believers to Him
alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc04109.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p83.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p84"></span> The two Greek words here used are the
same as those employed in <span id="iii.x.i-p84.1"></span>[1Co
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.x.i-p84.1"></span>
<span id="iii.x.i-p84.2"></span>ως περικαθάρματα (or, with others, <span
id="iii.x.i-p84.3"></span>ὡσπερεὶ καθάρματα) <span
id="iii.x.i-p84.4"></span>τῦ κόσμυ ἐγενήθημεν, πάντων περίψημα ἕως ἄρτι·
which our *A. V.* translates, “we are made as *the filth* of the world,
and are the *offscouring* of all things unto this day.” Commentators
seem to be agreed that they are citative by St. Paul of the Hebrew words
in <span id="iii.x.i-p84.5"></span>[La
3:45](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#045.md)<span id="iii.x.i-p84.5"></span>,
which *A.V.* translates “offscouring and refuse.” *C.* (*Comment.* on
Cor., vol. 1, p. 1650 says that <span id="iii.x.i-p84.7"></span>κάθαρμα
“denotes a man who, by public *execrations* is devoted, with the view to
the cleansing of a city, etc."

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc04109.htm#fr_242.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p84.9"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p85"></span> “<span
id="iii.x.i-p85.1"></span>Piaculum.” — *Lat.* “<span
id="iii.x.i-p85.2"></span>Une beste maudite.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc04109.htm#fr_243.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p85.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p86"></span> *C*. adopts the opinion of *S. M.* in
regarding Azazel as the name of a place. Most lexicographers agree that,
<span id="iii.x.i-p86.1"></span>עזאזל cannot well mean anything else
than what is its necessary translation, if divided thus <span
id="iii.x.i-p86.2"></span>עז אזל, viz., the goat departing. — *W*

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc04109.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p86.4"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p87"></span> Thus Jupiter is addressed: —

<span id="iii.x.i-p88"></span><span id="iii.x.i-p88.1"></span>Δῶρον
ἀλεξικάκοιο Διὸς — Orph. <span id="iii.x.i-p88.2"></span>Λίθικα, i.

<span id="iii.x.i-p89"></span>and Lactantius says, that an image of
Apollonius was worshipped at Ephesus, “<span
id="iii.x.i-p89.1"></span>sub Herculis Alexieaci nomine constitutum.” —
De Just. v. 3.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc04109.htm#fr_245.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p92"></span> “<span id="iii.x.i-p92.1"></span>Pour
faire ce perfum exquis et solennel:” to make the exquisite and solemn
incense-offering. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc04109.htm#fr_246.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p95"></span> Margin, *A.V.*

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc04109.htm#fr_247.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p99.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p100"></span> *C.* refers to his own translation,
“<span id="iii.x.i-p100.1"></span>tunc *offeret* hircum vivum.”
Lorinus*in loco* says, “The Greek <span
id="iii.x.i-p100.2"></span>προσάξει signifies he shall bring or lead
near, (<span id="iii.x.i-p100.3"></span>*offeret* vel *adducet* )
Although <span id="iii.x.i-p100.4"></span>הקריב *hikriub,* is not
infrequently rendered to *offer.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 1:1-17](cc04110.md)
