[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04084)  [Next](cc04086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.v.viii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#000)<span id="iii.v.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.v.viii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
4:4-20](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#004)<span
id="iii.v.viii-p2.1"></span>, 24-28, 31-33

<span id="iii.v.viii-p3"></span>**4.** This *shall be* the service of
the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation, *about* the
most holy things:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p4"></span>**4.** Istud erit opus filiorum Cehath
in tabernaculo conventionis Sancti sanctorum.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p5"></span>**5.** And when the camp setteth
forward, Aaron shall come, and his sons, and they shall take down the
covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p6"></span>**5.** Veniet autem Aharon et filii ejus
quando transferenda erunt castra, et deponent velum tentorii, et
operient illo arcata testimonii.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p7"></span>**6.** And shall put thereon the
covering of badgers’ skins, and shall spread over *it* a cloth wholly of
blue, and shall put in the staves thereof.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p8"></span>**6.** Potentque super illam operimentum
pellis taxram, et expandent pannum totum hyacinthinum desuper, et
imponent vectes ejus.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p9"></span>**7.** And upon the table of shewbread
they shall spread a cloth of blue, and put thereon the dishes, and the
spoons, and the bowls, and covers to cover withal: and the continual
bread shall be thereon:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p10"></span>**7.** Et super mensam panum
hyacinthinum expandent pannum hyacinthinum, ponentque super eum
scutellas, et cochlearia, et crateras, et opercula operimenti: et pants
ille jugis super eam erit.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p11"></span>**8.** And they shall spread upon them
a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering of badgers’
skins, and shall put in the staves thereof.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p12"></span>**8.** Et expandent super ilia pannum
vermiculi coccini, operientque ilia opertorio pellis taxaeoe, postea
imponent vectes ejus.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p13"></span>**9.** And they shall take a cloth of
blue, and cover the candlestick of the light, and his lamps, and his
tongs, and his snuffdishes, and all the oil vessels thereof, wherewith
they minister unto it:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p14"></span>**9.** Tollent praeterea pannum
hyacinthinum, et operient candelabrum luminaris, et lucernas ejus, et
forcipes ejus, et receptacula ejus, et omma vasa olei ejus quibus
ministrabunt ei.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p15"></span>**10.** And they shall put it, and all
the vessels thereof within a covering of badgers’ skins, and shall put
*it* upon a bar.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p16"></span>**10.** Ponentque illud cum omnibus
vasis ejus in opertorio pellis taxaeae, et portent super vectes ejus.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p17"></span>**11.** And upon the golden altar they
shall spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering of badgers’
skins, and shall put to the staves thereof:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p18"></span>**11.** Super altare autem aureum
expandent pannum hyacinthinum, et operient illum operimento pellis
taxaeae, ponentque vectes ejus.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p19"></span>**12.** And they shall take all the
instruments of ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and
put *them* in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of
badgers’ skins, and shall put *them* on a bar:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p20"></span>**12.** Tollent quoque omnia vasa
ministerii quibus ministrabunt: in sanctuario, et ponent in panno
hyacinthino, operientque illa operimento pellis taxaeae, et ponent super
vectes.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p21"></span>**13.** And they shall take away the
ashes from the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p22"></span>**13.** Auferent et cinerem ab altari,
et expandent super illud pannum purpureum.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p23"></span>**14.** And they shall put upon it all
the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it, *even* the
censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basons, all the
vessels of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of
badgers’ skins, and put to the staves of it.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p24"></span>**14.** Ponentque super illud omnia
vasa ejus quibus ministrant, receptecula, fuscinculas et scopas, et
crateras, cuncta vasa altaris: et expandent super illud operimentum
pellis taxaeae, et imponent vectes ejus.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p25"></span>**15.** And when Aaron and his sons
have made an end of covering the sanctuary, and all the vessels of the
sanctuary, as the camp is to set forward; after that, the sons of Kohath
shall come to bear *it:* but they shall not touch *any* holy thing, lest
they die. These *things are* the burden of the sons of Kohath in the
tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p26"></span>**15.** Quum autem finen fecerit Aharon
et filii ejus operiendi santuarium, et omnia vasa sanctuarii quando
transferenda erunt castra, tum postea venient filii Cehath ut portent:
ne contingant sanctuarium et moriantur: istae sunt onera filiorum Cehath
in tabernaculo conventionis.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p27"></span>**16.** And to the office of Eleazar
the son of Aaron the priest *pertaineth* the oil for the light, and the
sweet incense, and the daily meat offering, and the anointing oil, *and*
the oversight of all the tabernacle, and of all that therein *is,* in
the sanctuary, and in the vessels thereof.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p28"></span>**16.** Praefeetura autem Eleazar filii
Aharon sacerdotis est oleum luminaris, et suffimentum aromaticun, et
minha jugis, oleumque unctionis, atque praefectura totius tabernaculi,
et omniran quae sunt in eo, in sanctuario et vasis ejus.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p29"></span>**17.** And the LORD spake unto Moses
and unto Aaron, saying,

<span id="iii.v.viii-p30"></span>**17.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad
Mosen et Aharon, dicendo:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p31"></span>**18.** Cut ye not off the tribe of the
families of the Kohathites from among the Levites:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p32"></span>**18.** Ne excidatis tribum familiarum
Cehath e medio Levitarum.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p33"></span>**19.** But thus do unto them, that
they may live, and not die, when they approach unto the most holy
things: Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint them every one to
his service and to his burden:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p34"></span>**19.** Sed hoe facite illis, tum
vivent et non morientur: quando accesserint ad sanctitatem sanctitatum,
Aharon et filii ejus venient, et constituent illos, quemque super opus
suum, et super onus suum.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p35"></span>**20.** But they shall not go in to see
when the holy things are covered, lest they die.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p36"></span>**20.** Ne ingrediantur ut videant
quando operient sanctitatem, et moriantur.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p37"></span>**24.** This is the service of the
families of the Gershonites, to serve, and for burdens:

<span id="iii.v.viii-p38"></span>**24.** Istud erit opus familiarum
Gersonitarum ad ministrandum et ad portandum

<span id="iii.v.viii-p39"></span>**25.** And they shall bear the
curtains of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his
covering, and the covering of the badgers’ skins that *is* above upon
it, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,

<span id="iii.v.viii-p40"></span>**25.** Portabunt cortinas tabernaculi,
et tabernaculum conventionis, operimentum ejus, et operimentum pellis
taxmaeae, quod super illud est superne, et aulaeum ostii tabernaculi
conventionis.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p41"></span>**26.** And the hangings of the court,
and the hanging for the door of the gate of the court, which *is* by the
tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all the
instruments of their service, and all that is made for them: so shall
they serve.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p42"></span>**26.** Cortinas item atrii, et aulaeum
ostii portse atrii, quod est juxta tabernaculum, et juxta altare per
circuitum, et funes eorum, et omnia vasa operis eorum, et quaecunque
facta sunt pro illis: et ita ministrabunt.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p43"></span>**27.** At the appointment of Aaron and
his sons shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all
their burdens, and in all their service: and ye shall appoint unto them
in charge all their burdens.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p44"></span>**27.** Secundum sermonem Abaton et
filiorum ejus erit universum ministerium filiorum Gersonitarum, juxta
omnia onera eorum, et juxta omnem culture eorum: et deponetis apud eos
in custodiam universa onem ipsorum.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p45"></span>**28.** This *is* the service of the
families of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation:
and their charge *shall be* under the hand of Ithamar, the son of Aaron
the priest.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p46"></span>**28.** Istud erit ministerium
familiarum filiorum Gersonitarum in tabernaculo conventionis: et
custodia eorum erit per manum Ithamar filii Aharon sacerdotis.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p47"></span>**31.** And this *is* the charge of
their burden, according to all their service in the tabernacle of the
congregation; the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and
the pillars thereof, and sockets thereof,

<span id="iii.v.viii-p48"></span>**31.** Haec autem erit custodia oneris
filiorum Merari, pro ministerio eorum in tabernaculo conventionis,
tabulae tabernaculi, et vectes ejus, et columnae ejus, et bases ejus.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p49"></span>**32.** And the pillars of the court
round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with
all their instruments, and with all their service: and by name ye shall
reckon the instruments of the charge of their burden.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p50"></span>**32.** Columnae item atrii per
circuitum, et bases earum, et clavi earum, et funes earum, cum omnibus
instrumentis earum, et omne ministerium earum, et per nomina numerabis
vasa custodiae oneris eorum.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p51"></span>**33.** This *is* the service of the
families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the
tabernacle of the congregation, under the hand of Ithamar the son of
Aaron the priest.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p52"></span>**33.** Hoc erit ministerium familiarum
filiorum Merari, juxta omne ministerium eorum in tabernaculo
conventionis per manum Ithamar filii Aharon sacerdotis.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p53"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.viii-p54"></span><span id="iii.v.viii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii-p55"></span>**4.** *This shall be the service of
the sons of Kohath.* He assigns their various offices to the Levites:
firstly, lest their promiscuous sedulity should beget confusion;
secondly, lest ambition should stimulate certain of them,  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) from whence disputes and contentions
might arise. We know how confusedly men work unless a certain rule is
prescribed to them, lest they should run about in an aimless hurry; and
whilst each individual desires to anticipate others, an unworthy
emulation ensues, which afterwards vents itself in quarrels. If,
therefore, this had not been prevented, the Levites would soon have made
disturbances in their duty, and contentions would have taken place
between them. God, then, comes forward, and by His own authority
confines them all within their proper bounds, and restrains their
foolish passions. That a more honorable office is assigned to the sons
of Kohath than to the others, proceeds from God’s gratuitous favor; and
thus all pride was suppressed, lest any should boast of his dexterity,
or industry, or other gifts. The charge of the Holy of holies is,
therefore, entrusted to the sons of Kohath; not that they should handle
any part of it, but only that they should carry on the march its
vessels, when packed by the priests; for God commands the sons of Aaron
to come and take down the sanctuary, and carefully cover the veil, the
altar, and other sacred vessels with their proper covers, before the
sons of Kohath laid a finger upon them, that thus the reverence of the
people for holy things might be increased; and besides, that when the
other tribes should see even the Levites forbidden from touching the
sanctuary, they might be reminded of their unworthiness and humbled the
more. Moreover, all cause of envy was removed when the other Levites
heard that a perilous duty was entrusted to the sons of Kohath, for God
threatens them with death if they touch any forbidden thing: and lastly,
admonishes the priests, the sons of Aaron, lest by their carelessness
they should destroy their brethren; for, if they should leave anything
uncovered, they would be the cause of their destruction.

<span id="iii.v.viii-p57"></span><span id="iii.v.viii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii-p58"></span>**24.** *This is the service of the
families of the Gershonites.* The tasks which He enjoins upon the sons
of Gershon, as well as the sons of Merari, are apparently mean and
laborious, for it was a hard and also a servile work to carry the
curtains and the tabernacle, together with its coverings, the boards,
too, and the bars, and the pillars. But hence we learn that in God’s
service nothing is to be despised, but that each and every part of our
duty should be cheerfully performed, inasmuch as it ought abundantly to
satisfy us, that God should have deigned to choose us as ministers of
His sanctuary, so that neither weariness nor pride should ever hinder us
in our duty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc04085.htm#fr_202) <span
id="iii.v.viii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii-p56"></span> “<span id="iii.v.viii-p56.1"></span>D’
s’avancer, ou ingerer:” to put themselves forward, or to interfere. —
*Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 17:1-9](cc04086)
