[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04082)  [Next](cc04084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
35](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#000)<span id="iii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p2"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
35:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)<span id="iii.v.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses in
the plains of Moab by Jordan *near* Jericho, saying,

<span id="iii.v.vi-p4"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova in
campestribus Moab juxta Jordanem. Jericho, dicendo:

<span id="iii.v.vi-p5"></span>**2.** Command the children of Israel,
that they give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their possession
cities to dwell in; and ye shall give *also* unto the Levites suburbs
for the cities round about them.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p6"></span>**2.** Praecipe filiis Israel ut dent
Levitis de haereditate possessionis suae urbes ad habitandum, et
suburbana urbium ipsarum, per circuitus earum dabitis ipsis Levitis.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p7"></span>**3.** And the cities shall they have to
dwell in; and the suburbs of them shall be for their cattle, and for
their goods, and for all their beasts.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p8"></span>**3.** Eruntque urbes illis ad habitandum:
suburbana vero earum erunt animalibus eorum, et substantia eorum, et
omnibus bestiis eorum.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p9"></span>**4.** And the suburbs of the cities,
which ye shall give unto the Levites, *shall reach* from the wall of the
city and outward a thousand cubits round about.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p10"></span>**4.** Et suburbana urbium earum quas
dabitis Levitis, a pariete urbis, et forinsecus, mille cubitorum erunt
per circuitum.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p11"></span>**5.** And ye shall measure from without
the city on the east side two thousand cubits, and on the south side two
thousand cubits, and on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the
north side two thousand cubits; and the city *shall be* in the midst:
this shall be to them the suburbs of the cities.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p12"></span>**5.** Praeterea metiemini extra urbem a
plaga orientali duo millia cubitorum, eta plaga meridiana duo millia
cubitorum, eta plaga occidentali duo millia cubitorum, eta plaga
aquilionari duo millia cubitorum: et urbs ipsa erit in medio: ista
mensura erit eis suburbanorum urbium.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p13"></span>**6.** And among the cities which ye
shall give unto the Levites *there shall be* six cities for refuge,
which ye shall appoint for the manslayer, that he may flee thither: and
to them ye shall add forty and two cities.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p14"></span>**6.** De urbibus autem quas dabitis
Levitis, erunt sex urbes refugii, quas dabitis ut fugiat illuc homicida:
et praeter illas dabitis quadraginta duas urbes.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p15"></span>**7.** *So* all the cities which ye shall
give to the Levites *shall be* forty and eight cities: them *shall ye
give* with their suburbs.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p16"></span>**7.** Omnes urbes quas dabitis Levitis,
erunt quadraginta octo urbes, ipsas et suburbana earum dabitis:

<span id="iii.v.vi-p17"></span>**8.** And the cities which ye shall give
*shall be* of the possession of the children of Israel: from *them that
have* many *ye* shall give many; but from *them that have* few ve shall
give few: every one shall give of his cities unto the Levites according
to his inheritance which he inheriteth.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p18"></span>**8.** Et urbes quas dabiris de
possessione filiorum Israel, ab eo qui plures habuerit, plures
accipietis: et ab eo qui pauciores, pauciores capietis: singuli pro
quantitate possessionis suae quam possederint, dabunt ex urbibus suis
Levitis.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p19"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.vi-p20"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p21"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
Although there was no inheritance assigned to the tribe of Levi, yet it
was necessary that they should be supplied with dwelling-places. No
lands were given then where they might sow and reap; but by way of
compensation the tithes were a sufficient means of subsistence, even
after deducting the tithes which were paid to the poor. God now,
however, makes provision for their residences; and here we must
carefully remark, that they were so distributed over the whole land, as
to be, as it were, guards regularly posted for the preservation of the
worship of God, lest any superstition should creep in, or the people
should fall into gross contempt of God. For we know that they were
chosen by Him, not only to attend to the ceremonies, but to be the
interpreters of the law, and to cherish sincere piety among the people.
Now if all had been placed in one station, it was dangerous lest the
doctrine of the Law should immediately fall into oblivion through the
whole land; and thus the other tribes should grow irreligious. Wherefore
the incomparable goodness of God here shone forth, since their
punishment was turned as it were into a reward of virtue, and their
disgrace into honor; for this dispersion of the tribe of Levi had been
foretold by the holy patriarch Jacob, (<span
id="iii.v.vi-p21.1"></span>[Ge
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#007)<span
id="iii.v.vi-p21.1"></span>,) that their posterity should be scattered
in that land, which Levi the father of their race had polluted by a
detestable murder and wicked perfidy. God proved eventually that this
prophecy, which proceeded from Him, did not fall to the ground
unfulfilled; nevertheless, although the Levites were to be banished here
and there in token of their disgrace, yet were they set in various parts
of the land, that they might retain the other tribes under the yoke of
the Law. It was then in God’s wonderful providence that they were rather
placed in peculiar and fixed residences, than allowed to mingle
themselves promiscuously with the rest of the people; for the cities
which God assigned to them were so many schools, where they might better
and more freely engage themselves in teaching the Law, and prepare
themselves for performing the office of teaching. For if they had lived
indiscriminately among the multitude, they were liable to contract many
vices, as well as to neglect the study of the Law; but when they were
thus collected into separate classes, such an union reminded them that
they were divided from the people that they might devote themselves
altogether to God. Besides, their cities were like lamps shining into
the very furthest corners of the land. They were therefore fortified, as
it were, by walls, lest the corruptions of the people should penetrate
to them. Their association together also should have stimulated them
mutually to exhort each other to confinehey, decent and modest manners,
temperance, and other virtues worthy of God’s servants; whilst, if they
fell into dissolute habits, they were the less excusable. Thus their
cities were like watch towers in which they might keep guard, so as to
drive impiety away from the borders of the holy land. Hence was the
light of heavenly doctrine diffused; hence was the seed of life
scattered; hence were the examples to be sought of holiness and
universal integrity.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p22"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p23"></span>**4.** *And the suburbs of the cities.* A
discrepancy here appears, from whence a question arises; for Moses first
limits the suburbs to a thousand cubits from the city in every
direction; and then seems to extend them to two thousand. Some thus
explain the difficulty, viz., that the parts nearest to the city were
destined for cottages and gardens; and that then there was another space
of a thousand cubits left free for their flocks and herds; but this
seems only to be invented, in order to elude by the subterfuge the
contradiction objected to. My own opinion rather is, that after Moses
had given them a boundary of a thousand cubits on every side, he
proceeds to shew the way in which they were to be measured, that thus he
may obviate all the quarrels which might aria: from their neighbors. It
is plain that, when he repeats the same thing twice, the latter verse is
only an explanation of the former; and thus it would be absurd, that
after having fixed a thousand cubits, he should immediately double that
number. But it will be all very consistent, if this measurement be taken
in a circuit; for if you draw a circle, and then a line from the center
to the circumference, that line will be about a tenth part of the whole
circumference; compare then the fourth part of the circle with the
straight line which goes to the center, and it will be greater by one
part and a half. But, if you leave a thousand cubits for the city, the
two thousand cubits  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) in the four
parts of the circumference will correspond with one thousand cubits from
the city towards each of the boundaries.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p25"></span>It is afterwards prescribed, in
accordance with equity, that a greater or less number of cities should
be taken according to the size of the possessions belonging to each
tribe; for, just as in paying tax or tribute, regard is had to each
man’s means, so it was just that every tribe should contribute equitably
in proportion to its abundance. As to the cities of refuge, I now omit
to explain what their condition was, because this matter relates to the
Sixth Commandment; only let us observe that the wretched exiles were
entrusted to the care of the Levites, that they might be more safely
guarded. Besides, it was probable that those who presided over holy
things would be upright and honest judges, so as not to admit men
indiscriminately out of hope of advantage, or from carelessness, but
only to protect the innocent, after duly examining their case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc04083.htm#fr_198) <span
id="iii.v.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="iii.v.vi-p24.1"></span>Les
huit mille coudees prinses aux quatre quatriers conviendront avec les
mille coudees d’espace entre la ville, et les bornes des fanbourgs.” —
*Fr*. The more common solution of this difficulty appears to be that
suggested by Maimonides, viz., that besides the 1000 cubits allotted to
the suburbs, 2000 more were added for fields and vineyards. Rosenmuller,
however, demurs to this interpretation, which he does not consider the
text will bear. I have translated *C*. word for word, but I believe his
figures are wrong. It is probable that his theory is the same as that of
Corn. a Lapide, which he thus more clearly propounds, “God seems here to
comprise the city and its suburbs in a circle, so that the center should
be the city, and the circumference should end at the distance of 1000
cubits on every side of the city walls. This circle He divides into four
triangles, each of which is *isosceles, i e.,* it, has its two sides
equal, which are drawn from the center to the circumference. God,
therefore, here commands, that the suburbs on every side should be
extended a thousand cubits, and that the east side should be contained
in two lines (each, of course, of 1000 cubits) drawn from the city to
the circumference of the suburbs, which two lines comprehend that east
side in the shape of a triangle;” and so also with the other sides, “so
that the two lines drawn to the circumference of each side, which are
the two equal sides of the triangle, should together contain 2000
cubits."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 18:1-7,22,23](cc04084)
