[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04069)  [Next](cc04071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p2"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
8:5-19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>, 23-26

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p3"></span>**5.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p4"></span>**5.** Loquutusque est praeterea Jehova
ipsi Mosi, dicendo:

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p5"></span>**6.** Take the Levites from among the
children of Israel, and cleanse them.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p6"></span>**6.** Cape Levitas e medio filiorum
Israel, et purifices illos.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p7"></span>**7.** And thus shalt thou do unto them,
to cleanse them: Sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and let them
shave all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and *so* make
themselves clean.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p8"></span>**7.** Sic autem facies illis ut
purifices illos: sparge super eos aquam purificationis, et transire
faciant novaculam super totam carnem suam, laventque vestimenta sua, et
purificentur.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p9"></span>**8.** Then let them take a young bullock
with his meat offering, *even.* fine flour mingled with oil, and another
young bullock shalt thou take for a sin offering.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p10"></span>**8.** Postea capient juvencum filium
bovis, et minham ejus similam conspersam oleo: et juvencum alterura
filium bovis capies in sacrificium pro peccato.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p11"></span>**9.** And thou shalt bring the Levites
before the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt gather the
whole assembly of the children of Israel together.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p12"></span>**9.** Tunc offeres Levitas coram
tabernaculo conventionis: et congregabis omnem coetum filiorum Israel.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p13"></span>**10.** And thou shalt bring the Levites
before the LORD: and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon
the Levites:

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p14"></span>**10.** Offeres inquam Levitas eoram
Jehova, et conjungent filii Israel marius suas super Levitas.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p15"></span>**11.** And Aaron shall offer the
Levites before the LORD *for* an offering of the children of Israel,
that they may execute the service of the LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p16"></span>**11.** Offeretque Aharon Levitas in
oblationem coram Jehova a filiis Israel, et ministrabunt in ministerio
Jehovae.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p17"></span>**12.** And the Levites shall lay their
hands upon the heads of the bullocks: and thou shalt offer the one *for*
a sin offering, and the other *for* a burnt offering, unto the LORD, to
make an atonement for the Levites.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p18"></span>**12.** Levitae autem conjungent manus
suas super caput juvencorum: postea facies unum pro peccato, et alterum
in holocaustum Jehovae ad expiandum Levitas.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p19"></span>**13.** And thou shalt set the Levites
before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them *for* an offering unto
the LORD.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p20"></span>**13.** Statuesque Levitas coram Aharon
et coram fillis ejus, et offeres illos oblationem Jehovae.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p21"></span>**14.** Thus shalt thou separate the
Levites from among the children of Israel: and the Levites shall be
mine.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p22"></span>**14.** Ac segregabis Levitas e medio
filiorum Israel: erunt mei Levitae.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p23"></span>**15.** And after that shall the Levites
go in to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou
shalt cleanse them, and offer them *for* an offering.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p24"></span>**15.** Posted autem venient Levitae ad
ministrandum in tabernaculo conventionis, et expiabis illos, offeresque
cos oblationem.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p25"></span>**16.** For they *are* wholly given unto
me from among the children of Israel; instead of such as open every
womb, *even instead of* the firstborn of all the children of Israel,
have I taken them unto me.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p26"></span>**16.** Quid dati, dati inquam sunt mihi
e medio filiorum Israel pro aperiente omnem vulvam, pro primogenito
filiorum Israel accepi cos mihi.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p27"></span>**17.** For all the firstborn of the
children of Israel *are* mine, *both* man and beast: on the day that I
smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p28"></span>**17.** Meus est enim omnis primogenitus
in filiis Israel tam hominum quam jumentorum: a die quo percussi omne
primogenitum in terra *A*Egypti, sanctificavi illa mihi.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p29"></span>**18.** And I have taken the Levites for
all the firstborn of the children of Israel.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p30"></span>**18.** Cepi autem Levitas pro onmi
primogenito in filiis Israel.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p31"></span>**19.** And I have given the Levites
*as* a gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the children of Israel,
to do the service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the
congregation, and to make an atonement for the children of Israel: that
there be no plague among the children of Israel, when the children of
Israel come nigh unto the sanctuary.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p32"></span>**19.** Et dedi Levitas dono datos
Aharoni et filiis eius e medio filiorum Israeli, ut fungantur officio
filiorum Israel in tabernaculo conventionis, et expient filios Israel:
neque sit in filiis Israel plaga, quum ipsi appropinquaverint
sanctuario.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p33"></span>**23.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p34"></span>**23.** Loquutns est autem Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p35"></span>**24.** This *is it* that *belongeth*
unto the Levites: from twenty and five years old and upward they shall
go in to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the congregation:

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p36"></span>**24.** Hoc quoque est quod ad Levitas
pertinet, vicesimo quinto anno et supra ingredientur militare militiara
in cultu tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p37"></span>**25.** And from the age of fifty years
they shall cease waiting upon the service *thereof,* and shall serve no
more:

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p38"></span>**25.** A quinquagesimo autem anno
revertetur a militia cultus, nec ministrabit ultra:

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p39"></span>**26.** But shall minister with their
brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation, to keep the charge, and
shall do no service. Thus shalt thou do unto the Levites touching their
charge.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p40"></span>**26.** Sed ministrabit cum fratribus
suis in tabernaculo conventionis, ut munere suo illi fungantur et
ministerium non administrabit: sic facies de Levitis in custodiis eorum.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p41"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p42"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p43"></span>**5.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
Although the Levites were not allowed to go into the sanctuary, but were
only the priests’ ministers, and chiefly employed in servile duties,
yet, inasmuch as they carried the tabernacle and the sacred vessels,
prepared the sacrifices, took away the ashes and other offscourings from
the altar, God would have them consecrated to Himself by a solemn rite.
For as all Israel, with respect to the Gentiles, was God’s peculiar
people, so the house of Levi was chosen out of the people itself to be
His own property, as it is here said. But, lest they should arrogate to
themselves more than was right, God anticipates their presumption:
*first,* by putting off their consecration for some time; *secondly,* by
desiring that they should not be initiated by Moses, but by Aaron; and
*thirdly,* by appointing a different ceremony for it. For, if they had
been initiated at the same time as the priests, under this pretext they
might have contended to be on an equality with them; therefore, although
the priests were already separated from the common people, yet the
Levites still remain unconsecrated, (*privati,*) in order that they may
learn to reverence the priestly office. And again, since, if they had
been dedicated likewise by Moses, there was a danger of their being
puffed up with pride against all others, Aaron is appointed to preside
over their consecration, that they may modestly submit themselves to his
authority. Since, too, they were only purified by water, and sacrifice,
and without the addition of anointing, the difference in the external
rite reminded them that their degree of honor was not similar or the
same.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p44"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p45"></span>**6.** *Take the Levites from among.* To
take them from among the children of Israel, is equivalent to
subtracting them from the number of the people, that they might not be
included in the general *census,* and accounted to be one of the tribes.
This separation, then, as he will more clearly express a little further
on, devoted the Levites to God for the service of the sanctuary. That
under this pretext the Papal clergy should claim immunity for
themselves, so that they may live as they like in exemption from the
laws, is not only an unsound deduction, but one full of impious mockery;
for, since the ancient priesthood attained its end in Christ, the
succession, which they allege, robs Christ of His right, as if the full
truth had not been manifested in Him. Besides, inasmuch as all their
privileges only depend on the primacy of the Pope, if they would have
them ratified they must needs prove, first of all, that the Pope is
appointed by God’s command to be the head of the whole Church, and
therefore that he is the successor of Christ. As to Aaron, since he was
the minister of their installation, in this way he was set over the
Levites to rule them at his discretion. Meanwhile this ministry is thus
entrusted to a man, in such a manner as not to stand in the way of God’s
gratuitous good pleasure.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p46"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p47"></span>**7.** *And thus shalt thou do unto
them.* Aaron is commanded first to sprinkle the water of purifying upon
them, to cleanse them from their uncleanness; and not only so, but they
are commanded to wash their clothes, that they may diligently beware of
any impurity being anywhere about them, whereby their persons may be
infected. Thirdly, they are commanded to shave their skin with a razor,
that, putting off their flesh, they may begin to be new men. A sacrifice
is afterwards added, and that twofold, to make an atonement for them.
These things being completed, Aaron, in right and to the honor of the
priesthood, is commanded to offer them just like the holy bread or
incense. But the end of this was, that they might acknowledge that they
were no longer their own masters, but devoted to God, that they might
engage themselves in the service of the sanctuary. It was in testimony
of alienation that some of the people were ordered at the same time to
lay their hands upon them; as if by this ceremony all the tribes bore
witness that with their consent the Levites passed over to be God’s
peculiar property, that they might be a part or appendage of the
sanctuary. For private individuals (as we shall see hereafter) were
accustomed to lay their hands on their sacrifices, yet not with the same
object as the priests.  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176.md)

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p49"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p50"></span>**16.** *For they are wholly given.*
Lest the other tribes should complain that the number of the people was
diminished, God declares that the Levites were alienated from the race
of Abraham, since He had acquired them to Himself when He smote all the
first-born of Egypt; for it is certain that the first-born of the
people, as well as those of their animals, were miraculously rescued
from the common destruction. Since, then, God delivered them by special
privilege, He thus bound them to Himself by the blessing of their
redemption. But this reason would seem no longer to hold good, when God,
in demanding the *price* of redemption, set the first-born free,  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md) as was elsewhere stated; else He would
require the same thing twice over, which would be unjust. The solution,
however, of this is easy; when, in the first *census,* the first-born of
the twelve tribes were counted, they were found to exceed the Levites in
number. An exchange was then made, viz., that all the first-born of the
twelve tribes, being 22,000 in number, should be free from the tribute,
and that God should take the Levites in their place as His ministers.
Only 273 were redeemed, because this was the excess of their number
above that of the Levites. Thus was it brought to pass, that God was
content with these just and equal terms, so as not to oppress the people
by a heavy burden. But this compensation, which was only made on that
one particular day, did not prevent the Israelites from owing their
children, who were not then born, to God. Since, then, this obligation
still lay upon them as regarded their posterity, the law was passed that
they should redeem their first-born. If any should object that it was
not fair for those who should be born of the Levites to be consecrated
to God, — I reply, that on this point there was no unfairness, for of
whatever tribe they might be descended, they were already His property,
together with all their offspring; the condition of the people was not
therefore made worse by the exchange; and hence, in all equity, God
appointed for the future at what price the Israelites should redeem
their first-born. In saying that they were “given” to Him, He means to
assert that they were His by compact;  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md) and in this sense He declares that
from the day in which He smote the first-born of Egypt, the first-born
of Israel had become His; and then adds, that He then took the Levites;
as much as to say, that He only dealt with his people with respect to
the time past.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p53"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p54"></span>**19.** *And I have given the Levites.*
He declares on what terms He desires to have them as His own, viz., that
they may be directed by Aaron, and obey his commands; for by “a gift” is
not to be understood such an act as that whereby a person resigns and
cedes his own right to another; but, when He devotes them to the
ministry of the sanctuary, He desires that they should have a leader and
master. At the end of the verse, Moses teaches that this is done for the
advantage and profit of the whole people: whence it follows, that there
was no room for ill-will towards them, unless the people should perhaps
be annoyed that God had taken measures for their welfare. A two-fold
advantage is pointed out; first, because they were to be the
intercessors or ministers of reconciliation, (for either sense would be
appropriate;) secondly, because, whilst they would be the guardians of
the sanctuary, they would prevent the Israelites from bringing
destruction upon themselves, by their rash approach to it.

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p55"></span><span id="iii.iv.iv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p56"></span>**24.** *This is it, that belongeth to
the Levites.* The age is here prescribed when the Levites should begin
and end the execution of their office. God commands them to commence in
their 25th year and grants them their dismissal in their 50th; and for
both these provisions there is very good reason. For, if they had been
admitted in early youth, their levity might have greatly detracted from
the reverence due to sacred things: not only because those, whose
manhood is not yet mature, are generally given to pleasure and
intemperance, but because either by negligence, or levity, or want of
thought, or ignorance and error, they might have made many grievous
mistakes in the service of God; and, whilst they were by no means fitted
to exercise their charge until they should have attained prudence and
gravity, so also, lest they should fail from old age, it was right that
they should be seasonably dismissed; for as we have before said, their
duties were laborious, and such as demanded bodily strength. If,
however, any should choose to make an application of this to the
pastoral office, it should be generally remembered, that none should be
chosen to it except such as have already given proofs of their
moderation, and float those who diligently devote themselves to it
should not be unreasonably pressed upon, nor should more be required of
them than their ability can bear; for some foolishly count their years,
as if it were a sin to choose a pastor before his 24th year, although he
might be otherwise fully provided with the necessary qualifications.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc04070.htm#fr_176.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p48"></span> This last sentence omitted in *Fr.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc04070.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p51"></span> *Vide* <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p51.1"></span>[Nu
3:43-51](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#043.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc04070.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv-p52"></span> “<span id="iii.iv.iv-p52.1"></span>En
disant *qu’ils luy ont este donnez,* il n’entend pas que ce soit de don
gratuit, mais qu’ils luy appartienent comme de paction faite;” in saying
*that they were given to* Him, He does not mean as a gratuitous gift,
but that they belonged to Him as by agreement made. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 3:5-10](cc04071.md)
