[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04090)  [Next](cc04092.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
6:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#016.md)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>, 26-29

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p3"></span>**16.** And the remainder thereof shall
Aaron and his sons eat: with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the
holy place; in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation they
shall eat it.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p4"></span>**16.** Quod superfuerit ex minha,
comedent Aharon et filii ejus: azymum comedetur in loco sancto, in atrio
tabernaculi conventionis, comedent illud.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p5"></span>**17.** It shall not be baken with
leaven. I have given it *unto them for* their portion of my offerings
made by fire; it *is* most holy, as *is* the sin offering, and as the
trespass offering.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p6"></span>**17.** Non coquetur fermentatum:
portionem eorum dedi illud ex oblationibus meis ignitis: sanctitas
sanctitatum est, sicut oblatio pro peccato, et sicut oblatio pro
delicto.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p7"></span>**18.** All the males among the children
of Aaron shall eat of it. It *shall be* a statute for ever in your
generations concerning the offerings of the LORD made by fire: every one
that toucheth them shall be holy.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p8"></span>**18.** Omnis masculus in filiis Aharon
comedet illud, statutum perpetuum est satatibus vestris de oblationibus
ignitis jehovae: qui tetigerit eas sanctificabitur.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p9"></span>**26.** The priest that offereth it for
sin shall eat it: in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p10"></span>**26.** Sacerdos oblationem pro peccato
comedet, in loco sancto comedetur, in atrio tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p11"></span>**27.** Whatsoever shall touch the
flesh thereof shall be holy: and when there is sprinkled of the blood
thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled
in the holy place.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p12"></span>**27.** Qui tetigerit carnem ejus
sanetificabitur, et si defluxerit de sanguine ejus super vestera, illud
super quod defiuxerit lavabis in loco sancto.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p13"></span>**28.** But the earthen vessel wherein
it is sodden shall be broken: and if it be sodden in a brazen pot, it
shall be both scoured, and rinsed in water.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p14"></span>**28.** Et vas testaceum in quo
coquetur, confringetur: quod si in vase aeneo cotta fuerit, defricabitur
et lavabitur aqua.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p15"></span>**29.** All the males among the priests
shall eat thereof: it *is* most holy.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p16"></span>**29.** Omnis masculus in sacerdotibus
comedet illam: sanctitas sanctitatum est.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p17"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p18"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p19"></span>**16.** *And the remainder thereof.* He
repeats what we have seen just before, that the residue of those
oblations, in which there was peculiar holiness, should belong to the
priests; but upon condition that they should be eaten nowhere except in
the sanctuary. A special precept is also given as to the *minha,*
(meat-offering,) that it should not be made into leavened bread; for
thus the meal, which had been already dedicated to God, would be changed
into common food, which could not be done without profanation. Since,
then, God admits the priests, as it were, to His own table, the dignity
of their office is not a little heightened by this privilege; yet in
such a manner as that by their liberty the reverence due to God’s
service may not be impaired. Afterwards Moses confirms in general terms
that right, which had been before assigned to them, that they should
take what remained of the burnt-offerings, on condition that it should
be eaten by males only, and in the sacred place; in order that God’s
presence may not only act as a restraint on their luxury and
intemperance, but, also instruct them in the sobriety due from His
servants, and, in a word, accustom them to exceeding purity, whilst they
reflect that they are separated from all others. At the end of <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>[Le
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>, some translate it in the neuter gender,
“every *thing* that shall have touched them shall be holy:” but in this
passage Moses seems to me to prescribe that none but the priests should
touch the *minha.* It was said elsewhere of the altar and its vessels,
that by virtue of their anointing they sanctified whatever was placed
upon them; but we now see that ordinary men are prohibited from touching
sacred things, that their sanctity may be inviolate. For we know that
the sons of Aaron were anointed with this object, that they alone might
be allowed to touch whatever was consecrated to God. Therefore the verb
in the future tense is put for the imperative. So also it is soon
afterwards said of the victims, <span id="iii.vi.iii-p19.2"></span>[Le
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p19.2"></span>, “Whosoever shall touch the flesh thereof
shall be holy:”  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md) because Moses
enacts this special law for the priests, that they alone should handle
the sacrifices. Nor does what immediately follows contradict this, “when
there is sprinkled of the blood thereof on any garment,” etc.; for he
does not mean to say that the garments or any vessels would be
consecrated by the mere touch; but it is an argument from the less to
the greater; if it were not lawful to take a garment sprinkled with the
blood, or the pots in which the flesh was dressed, out of the
tabernacle, unless the garment were washed, or the pots broken or
rinsed, much more were they to beware lest any of the ordinary people
should meddle with it. For how shall a mortal man dare to lay a hand
upon that holy thing (*sanctitati*) which could not even cleave to the
garment; of a priest without atonement? The sum is that a thing so holy
should not be mixed with unhallowed things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc04091.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p20"></span> *A. V., “Whatsoever,”* following the
*V*. and not *LXX.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 5:8](cc04092.md)
