[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04048)  [Next](cc04050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
12](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p2"></span><span
id="iii.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
12:4-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>, 17, 18, 26, 27

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Ye shall not do so unto the LORD
your God.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p4"></span>**4.** Non facietis sic Jehovae Deo
vestro.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p5"></span>**5.** But unto the place which the LORD
your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there,
*even* unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shalt come:

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p6"></span>**5.** Sed locum quem elegerit Jehova
Deus vester e cunctis tribubus vestris, ut ponat illic nomen suum ad
habitandum, quaretis, veniesque illuc.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p7"></span>**6.** And thither ye shall bring your
burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave
offerings of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and
the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks:

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p8"></span>**6.** Et afferetis illuc holocausta
vestra, sacrificia vestra, decimas vestras, levationem manus vestrae,
vota vestra, spontaneas oblationes vestras, primogenita armentorum
vestrorum, et pecudum vestrarum.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p9"></span>**7.** And there ye shall eat before the
LORD your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand unto,
ye and your households, wherein the LORD thy God hath blessed thee.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p10"></span>**7.** Comedetisque in conspectu
Jehovae Dei vestri, et laetabimini in omni applicatione manus vestrae,
vos et domus vestrae quibus benedixerit Jehova Deus tuus.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p11"></span>**8.** Ye shall not do after all *the
things* that we do here this day, every man whatsoever *is* right in his
own eyes.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p12"></span>**8.** Non facietis secundum omnia quae
nos hodie hic facimus, unusquisque quod rectum est in oculis suis.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p13"></span>**9.** For ye are not as yet come to
the rest and to the inheritance which the LORD your God giveth you.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p14"></span>**9.** Quia non venistis adhuc ad
requiem et haereditatem quam Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p15"></span>**10.** But *when* ye go over Jordan,
and dwell in the land which the LORD your God giveth you to inherit, and
*when* he giveth you rest from all your enemies round about, so that ye
dwell in safety;

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p16"></span>**10.** Quum vero transieritis
Jordanem, et habitabitis in terra quam Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi
possiden-dam, et requiem dederit vobis ab omnibus inimicis vestris in
cireuitu, et habitabitis secure.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p17"></span>**11.** Then there shall be a place
which the LORD your God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there;
thither shall ye bring all that I command you; your burnt offerings, and
your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave offering of your hand, and
all your choice vows which ye vow unto the LORD:

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p18"></span>**11.** Tune ad locum quem elegerit
Jehova Deus vester, ut in eo habitare faciat nomen suum, adducetis omnia
quae ego praecipio vobis, holo-causta vestra, sacrificia vestra, decimas
vestras, elevationem manus vestrae, et omnem delectum votorum vestrorum
quae vovebitis.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p19"></span>**12.** And ye shall rejoice before the
LORD your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your
menservants, and your maidservants, and the Levite that *is* within your
gates; forasmuch as he hath no part nor inheritance with you.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p20"></span>**12.** Et laetabimini coram Jehova Deo
vestro, vos et filii vestri, et filiae vestrae, servi vestri et ancillae
vestrae: Levita quoque qui erit intra portas vestras: quia non habebit
partem et haereditatem vobis-cum.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p21"></span>**13.** Take heed to thyself that thou
offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou seest:

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p22"></span>**13.** Cave tibi ne forte offeras
holocausta tua in quovis loco quem conspexeris:

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p23"></span>**14.** But in the place which the LORD
shall choose in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt offer thy burnt
offerings, and there thou shalt do all that I command thee.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p24"></span>**14.** Sed in loco quem elegerit
Jehova in una tribuum tuarum, illic offeres holocausta tua, et illic
facies quae ego praecipio tibi.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p25"></span>**17.** Thou mayest not eat within thy
gates the tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the
firstlings of thy herds or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou
vowest, nor thy freewill offerings, or heave offering of thine hand:

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p26"></span>**17.** Non poteris comedere in portis
tuis decimam frumenti tui, vini tui, et olei tui, neque primogenita
armentorum tuorum et pecudum tuarum, et onmia vota tua quae voveris, et
spontanea tua, et elevationem manus tuae.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p27"></span>**18.** But thou must eat them before
the LORD thy God in the place which the LORD thy God shall choose, thou,
and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant,
and the Levite that *is* within thy gates: and thou shalt rejoice before
the LORD thy God in all that thou puttest thine hands unto.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p28"></span>**18.** Sed coram Jehova Deo tuo
comedes illa in loco quem elegerit Jehova Deus tuus, tu et filius tuus,
et filia tua, servus tuus, et ancilla tua, et Levita qui erit intra
portas tuas: laetaberisque coram Jehova Deo tuo in omni applicatione
manuum tuarum.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p29"></span>**26.** Only thy holy things which thou
hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go unto the place which the
LORD shall choose.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p30"></span>**26.** Sanctificata tua quae fuerint
tibi et vota tua tolles, ut venias ad locum quem elegerit Jehova:

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p31"></span>**27.** And thou shalt offer thy burnt
offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of the LORD thy God:
and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar of
the LORD thy God, and thou shalt eat the flesh.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p32"></span>**27.** Et facies holocausta tua ex
carne et sanguine super altare Jehovae Dei tui, sanguis autem
sacrificiorum tuorum fundetur super altare Dei tui, carnes vero comedes.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p33"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p34"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p35"></span>**4** *Ye shall not do so unto the Lord
your God.* The principal distinction, as far as regards the external
exercises of devotion, is here laid down between the legitimate worship
of God, and all the fictitious rites which the Gentiles have invented;
viz., that God would have but one sanctuary and one altar, which might
be a symbol of the difference between Himself and all idols; and thus
that true religion should have no affinity to superstitions. To this
refers the prohibition, that the Israelites should not conduct
themselves towards God as the Gentiles did towards their idols; but that
a barrier should be raised, which would separate  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) them from the whole world. The whole
external profession of God’s worship is fitly annexed to the Second
Commandment, because upon that it depends, and has no other object than
its due observation. But when I begin to speak of the tabernacle, the
priesthood, and the sacrifices, I am entering on a deep and vast ocean,
in which many interpreters, whilst indulging their curiosity, have
pursued a wild and wandering course. Admonished, therefore, by their
example, I will take in my sails, and only touch upon a few points which
tend to edification in the faith. But my readers must now be requested,
not only to pardon me for abstaining from subtle speculations, but also
themselves willingly to keep within the bounds of simplicity. Many have
itching ears; and in our natural vanity, most men are more delighted by
foolish allegories, than by solid erudition. But let those who shall
desire to profit in God’s school, learn to restrain this perverse desire
of knowing more than is good for them, although it may tickle their
minds. Now let us consider the words of Moses.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p37"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p38"></span>**5** *But unto the place which the
Lord your God shall choose.* It is asked why God would have sacrifices
offered to Him only on one altar? Besides the reason which I have lately
advanced, it is not to be doubted but that He in this way had regard to
believers, that He might cherish in them an agreement in the unity of
the faith. This place, then, was like a standard to gather together the
people, lest their religion should be torn by divisions, and lest any
diversities should insinuate themselves. Moreover, God, by claiming His
right and authority to choose the place, commends obedience, on which
also the purity of worship depends. But, again, another question arises;
because, before the time of David, the Ark had nowhere a fixed
resting-place, but traveled about, as it were, to various lodgings,
therefore, if the chosen place is understood to be Mount Zion, the
people were free in the intermediate time to perform the sacrifices
wherever they pleased. I reply, that the place was not, chosen until the
Ark was placed in Zion; for not till then was fulfilled what is said in
the Psalm,

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p39"></span>"I was glad when they said unto me, Let
us go into the house of the Lord;  
our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem,”  
(<span id="iii.iii.vi-p39.3"></span>[Ps
122:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p39.3"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p40"></span>in which words the Prophet intimates
that there was before no resting-place, because God had not yet pointed
out the place in which He would be worshipped. Therefore it is expressly
said, “out of all your tribes,” or “in one of your tribes,” whereby a
special privilege is referred to, which was to be conferred on one of
their tribes, to the exclusion of the others. And to this relates what
is said in another Psalm,

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p41"></span>"Moreover he refused the tabernacle of
Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim, but chose the tribe of
Judah, the Mount Zion which he loved: and he built his sanctuary like
high *palaces,* like the earth, which he hath established for ever.”  
(<span id="iii.iii.vi-p41.2"></span>[Ps
78:67-69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p41.2"></span> )

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p42"></span>To the same effect the faithful
elsewhere congratulate themselves, after the Ark was deposited with
David, “We will go into his tabernacles, we will worship at his
footstool;” and, on the other hand, the Spirit declares,

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p43"></span>"The Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath
desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever: here will I
dwell; for I have desired it ” (<span id="iii.iii.vi-p43.1"></span>[Ps
132:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p43.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p44"></span>Similar statements everywhere occur,
confirming the opinion that the Ark never rested in its true home until
it was deposited on Zion; and God, in my judgment, in order that He
might keep the hope of His people in suspense, promised, although the
Ark changed its place from time to time, that He had still determined on
a perpetual abode in which it should rest. Yet it does not therefore
follow that, up to that period, a free permission was given to the
people to sacrifice wherever they would. For, wherever the sanctuary
was, there was also a temporary choice of the place, until the
legitimate resting-place was shewn them. Therefore God, chastising by
Jeremiah the foolish confidence by which the Jews were puffed up, said,

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p45"></span>"Go ye now unto my place, which was in
Shiloh,  
and see what I did to it,” etc., (<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p45.2"></span>[Jer
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p45.2"></span>;)

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p46"></span>in which words he implies that Shiloh
had been highly honored for a season, but had now been deprived of its
honor, because the sacrifices had there been unworthily polluted.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p47"></span>Although, then, there is a special
promise here concerning Zion, still there is no doubt but that God in
the meantime confines the Jews to His sanctuary, lest any one should
erect a private altar for himself, or build for himself other cities and
other temples. The phrase is worthy of observation, “to put his name
there;” and again, “his habitation.” The gross imaginations of men are
thus obviated, lest the people should enclose God within walls, as they
are wont to circumscribe His infinite essence, or to draw Him down from
heaven, and to place Him beneath the elements of the world. But God’s
name is said to inhabit a place, not in His own nature, but with
reference to man; whilst, in deference to their ignorance, He sets
before their eyes a visible symbol of His presence. Thus He is often
said to “come down,” not as if He, who fills heaven and earth, actually
moved, but because the familiar knowledge of Him brings Him near to men.
But although He allows Himself to be invoked on earth, yet He would not
have the minds of men rest there, but rather lifts them up on high as if
by steps. Therefore, by Isaiah, He harshly chides them, because,
although enwrapped in their sins, they still thought that He was under
obligation to them because His temple was in their sight, (<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p47.1"></span>[Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p47.1"></span>,) whereas it is our business to approach
Him by faith and with serious feelings when He extends His hand to us.
The Ark of the Covenant indeed is often called “His face;” but, lest men
should form any gross or earthly conceptions of Him, the sanctuary is
also called “His footstool."

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p48"></span>The various kinds of oblations which
are here enumerated will be hereafter more clearly explained. I will
only briefly remind you that the burnt-offerings are included in the
sacrifices, as a part is taken for the whole. The Hebrew word, which we
have translated “the elevating of the hand,” is, <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p48.2"></span>תרומה, *therumah,*  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) to which another word, <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p49.6"></span>תנופה, *thenuphah,* is often added; but,
although both are derived from the act of elevating, still they seem to
differ, and those skilled in the language thus distinguish them, viz.,
that <span id="iii.iii.vi-p49.7"></span>תרומה, *therumah,* is to be
lifted up, and then brought down; and, <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p49.8"></span>תנופה, *thanuphah,* to be turned at the
same time to the right and left, although others think it means to be
turned round to the four quarters of the globe. There is a difference
between vows and freewill-offerings; for although a vow is at first
freely made, yet we may offer things which we have not vowed. I have
already spoken of the firstlings.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p50"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p51"></span>**7** *And there shall ye eat.* We see
that the sanctuary in which God manifested Himself is called His face;
 <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) for, although believers are
taught that always, wherever they dwell, they walk before God; yet they
placed themselves nearer, and in some special manner in His sight, when
they approached His sanctuary. By this mode of speaking God also
stimulates the laziness or tardiness of the people, lest it should be
irksome to them to come to the Ark of the Covenant for the purpose of
sacrificing, inasmuch as this inestimable benefit would compensate for
the labor and expense of the journey. I have elsewhere shewn that, when
men are said to feast before the Lord, sacred feasts are thus
distinguished from our daily meals. For this was as it were an accessory
to the sacrifices, to eat what remained of the victims; and in this way
the guests were made partakers of the offering, which custom even
heathen nations imitated, though improperly. Again, God kindly invites
them when He says, “ye shall rejoice in all that thou puttest thine
hands unto,” for which some translate it, “in everything to which you
shall have sent your hand;” literally it is, “in the sending forth of
the land.” There is no ambiguity in the sense, for it refers to those
works which require the motion and application of the hands. A little
below, where I have translated it, “which he hath blessed,” (*quibus
benedixerit,*) some insert the proposition *in,* and supply the pronoun
*you,* (*i.e., in* which he hath blessed *you;*) but it is quite
appropriate to say, that God blesses their works, although it may be
understood of their families also. As to the command that the tithes
should be eaten in the holy place, I do not extend it to tithes in
general,  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) for it was hardly
probable that the food of those who were dispersed through various
cities should be transferred to another place, so that they would perish
(at home)  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) from hunger; but I
understand it of the second tithes, which the Levites separated to be a
special and peculiar oblation; for we shall see elsewhere that what
remained over passed into the nature of ordinary produce, as if the
Levites ate of the fruits of their own possessions.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p55"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p56"></span>**8** *Ye shall not do after all.* Even
then they observed the rite of sacrifice handed down to them from the
fathers; but since as yet they were wandering in the desert, it was
lawful for them to build altars anywhere, until an end should be put to
their journeyings. And this Moses expressly declares, adding the reason,
viz., that they had not yet entered into the rest which the Lord had
promised them. He shews them, then, that when they shall have attained
the tranquil possession of the land, there would be no further room for
excuse if they should sacrifice wheresoever it pleased them. When,
therefore, it is said that they then did “ever*y* man whatsoever was
right in his own eyes,” it does not extend to any of the inventions
which men devise for themselves in the worship of God, but only points
out a freer system and form in the exercise of devotion, before the
place was shewn them in which they must stay their foot.  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107)

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p58"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p59"></span>**10.** *But when ye go over Jordan.*
This verse confirms what I have before said, that the Jews were
constrained to a certain rule as soon as they should have reached the
promised land; and yet that the place in which the Ark was perpetually
to rest, would not be immediately manifested to them; for what is
declared at the end of the verse, that God would give them rest round
about, so that they should dwell in safety, was not in fact perfectly
exhibited before the time of David. Still God would have them, as soon
as they were in enjoyment of the land, come together even from their
remotest boundaries to the sanctuary. He omits certain kinds of
offerings of which he had lately spoken, and puts, instead of “vows*,*”
 <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) “the choice vows,” which some
translate “very choice vows,” or “the chief things in your vows.” I do
not reject this; but the other sense is more simple, that all the vows
were comprised which every one had made of his own free judgment and
choice. Soon afterwards he more fully expresses his meaning, when he
prohibits them from offering sacrifices of their own accord in any
places that might please them; for, “to see a place*,*” here, is
equivalent to being carried away by the sight, so as to connect religion
and holiness with elegance and beauty.

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p61"></span><span id="iii.iii.vi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p62"></span>**26** *Only thy holy things.* This
passage more clearly explains what was meant by the foregoing precepts,
viz., that but one place was set apart for the performance of their
sacred rites, lest, if each should offer wherever it pleased him,
religion should be corrupted, and by degrees the various altars should
beget as many gods. He therefore commands that all the victims should be
sacrificed on one altar, with a provision that the blood should be
poured out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc04049.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p36"></span> *Fr. “*<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p36.1"></span>l’Eglise."

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc04049.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p49"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p49.2"></span>תרומה, the heaving or elevating; <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p49.3"></span>תנופה, the heaving or vibrating. *C.’s*
translation of the first word is that of *S.M*.; and his note on both is
extracted from a note of *S.M.* on <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p49.4"></span>[Ex
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#002)<span
id="iii.iii.vi-p49.4"></span>, where <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p49.5"></span>תרומה occurs, and is rendered *offering* in
the text of *A.V*., but *heave-offering* in its margin. — *W*

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc04049.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p52"></span> <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p52.1"></span>לפני*,* *Heb.*; <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p52.2"></span>in conspectu, *Lat;* before, *A.V*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc04049.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p52.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p53"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.vi-p53.1"></span>Ne
s’estend pas en general a la nourriture des Levites;” does not extend
generally to the maintenance of the Levites. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc04049.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p54"></span> Added from *Fr.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc04049.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p57"></span> “<span id="iii.iii.vi-p57.1"></span>Ou
seroit le sanctuaire;” where the sanctuary should be. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc04049.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iii.iii.vi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.vi-p60"></span> *A.V*., Your choice vows; *margin,*
the choice of your vows. Ainsworth *in loco, “i.e.,* the best, *or
fairest,* as the Chaldee translateth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 14:23-26](cc04050)
