[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04089)  [Next](cc04091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
18](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#000)<span id="iii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p2"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
18:8-19](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#008)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p3"></span>**8.** And the LORD spake unto Aaron,
Behold, I also have given thee the charge of mine heave offerings of all
the hallowed things of the children of Israel; unto thee have I given
them by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for
ever.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p4"></span>**8.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Aharon,
Ecce, ego dedi tibi custodiam oblationum incarum, omnes sanctificationes
filiorum Israel dedi tibi propter unctionem, et filiis tuis in statutum
perpetuum.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p5"></span>**9.** This shall be thine of the most
holy things, *reserved* from the fire: every oblation of theirs, every
meat offering of theirs, and every sin offering of theirs, and every
trespass offering of theirs, which they shall render unto me, *shall be*
most holy for thee and for thy sons.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p6"></span>**9.** Hoc erit tuum ex sanctitate
sanctitatum, residua ab igni: onmis oblatio eorum, sire minha eorum sit,
sire oblatio pro peccato eorum, sive oblatio pro delieto eorum quam
reddent mihi, sanctitas sanetitatum tibi erit et filiis tuis.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p7"></span>**10.** In the most holy *place* shalt
thou eat it; every male shall eat it: it shall be holy unto thee.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p8"></span>**10.** In sanctitate sanctitatum comedes
eam, omnis masculus comedet eam: sanetitas erit tibi.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p9"></span>**11.** And this *is* thine; the heave
offering of their gift, with all the wave offerings of the children of
Israel: I have given them unto thee, and to thy sons and to thy
daughters with thee, by a statute for ever: every one that is clean in
thy house shall eat of it.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p10"></span>**11.** Hoc etiam tuum erit, levationem
muneris eorum, omnes oblationes filiorum tibi dedi, et fillis tuis, et
filiabus tuis tecum in statutum perpetuum: omnis mundus in domo tua
comedet eam.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p11"></span>**12.** All the best of the oil, and all
the best of the wine, and of the wheat, the firstfruits of them which
they shall offer unto the LORD, them have I given thee.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p12"></span>**12.** Omnem pinguedinem olei, et omnem
pinguedinem vini et frumenti, primitias eorum quas dabunt Jehovae, tibi
dem.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p13"></span>**13.** *And* whatsoever is first ripe
in the land, which they shall bring unto the LORD, shall be thine; every
one that is clean in thine house shall eat *of* it.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p14"></span>**13.** Primitiae omnium qum in terra
eorum, quas afferent Jehovae, tute erunt: omnis mundus in domo tua
comedet eas.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p15"></span>**14.** Every thing devoted in Israel
shall be thine.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p16"></span>**14.** Omne anathema in Israel tuum
erit.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p17"></span>**15.** Every thing that openeth the
matrix in all flesh, which they bring unto the LORD, *whether it be* of
men or beasts, shall be thine: nevertheless the firstborn of man shalt
thou surely redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou
redeem.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p18"></span>**15.** Quicquid aperit vulvam in omni
carne quod afferent Jehovae, tam de hominibus quam de animalibus, tuum
erit: sed redimendum dabis primogenitum hominis, primogenitum quoque
animalis immundi redimendum dabis.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p19"></span>**16.** And those that are to be
redeemed from a month old shalt thou redeem, according to thine
estimation, for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the
sanctuary, which *is* twenty gerahs.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p20"></span>**16.** Redemptiones autem ejus a filio
mensis redimendas dabis secundum aestimationem tuam, pecunia quinque
siclorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii, qui viginti obolorum est.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p21"></span>**17.** But the firstling of a cow, or
the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not
redeem; they *are* holy: thou shalt sprinkle their blood upon the altar,
and shalt burn their fat *for* an offering made by fire, for a sweet
savour unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p22"></span>**17.** Veruntamen primogenitum bovis,
et primogenitum ovis, aut primogenitum caprae non dabis redimendum: sunt
enim sanctificata: sanguinem eorum sparges ad altare, et adipem eorum
adolebis: oblatio ignita in odorem quietis Jehovae.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p23"></span>**18.** And the flesh of them shall be
thine, as the wave breast and as the right shoulder are thine.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p24"></span>**18.** Et caro eorum tua erit, ut
pectus elevationis, et armus dexter, tua erit.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p25"></span>**19.** All the heave offerings of the
holy things, which the children of Israel offer unto the LORD, have I
given thee, and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, by a statute for
ever: it *is* a covenant of salt for ever before the LORD unto thee and
to thy seed with thee.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p26"></span>**19.** Omnes oblationes
sanctificationum quas obtulerint filii Israel Jehovae, dedi tibi, et
filiis tuis et filiabus tuis tecum in statutum perpetuum: pactum salis
perpetuum est coram Jehova tibi et semini tuo tecum.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p27"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p28"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p29"></span>**8.** *And the Lord spake unto Aaron.*
He now proceeds to state more fully what he had been lately adverting
to, as to the rights of the priests with respect to the sacred
oblations. We must, however, remember the contrast, which I spoke of,
between the priests of the higher order and the Levites; for, whilst the
family of Aaron is invested with peculiar honors, the other families of
the tribe of Levi are abased. God, then, assigns to the priests alone
all the offerings, in which was the greater consecration, called “the
holy of holinesses.”  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) An
exception will afterwards appear; viz., that the whole was to be
deposited, by way of honor, with the priests, out of which they were to
pay a part to the Levites, who were performing their office in the
service of the sanctuary. He tells them that this privilege is given
them “by reason of the anointing,” lest the priests should pride
themselves or magnify themselves on this score; for God’s gratuitous
liberality ought to instruct us in modesty and humility. It is by this
argument that Paul corrects and represses all vain boasting: “Why dost
thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?” (<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p30.1"></span>[1Co
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p30.1"></span>.) Now, the sons of Aaron had obtained their
anointing by no other right, than that God had been pleased to elect
them to it. This is also indicated by their privilege being spoken of as
“a gift:” but God thus more expressly commends His grace, for He makes
mention of His gift for another reason, *i.e.,* that none should enter
into any dispute or controversy with the priests on this point.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p31"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p32"></span>**9.** *This shall be thine.* He
enumerates certain kinds of sacrifices which He desired to come to the
share of the priests; viz., all the residue of the burnt-offerings;
*secondly,* the *minha,* or meat-offering; *thirdly,* what was
consecrated of the sin and trespass-offerings; although the following
clause, “which they shall restore unto me,” seems to be added by way of
restriction, as if it only designated those sacrifices of which mention
will be elsewhere made,  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) and by
which they purged themselves from the guilt of theft, unless it may
perhaps be preferred to read it as if to the sin and trespass-offerings
this third were added, wherein people restored what did not belong to
them, that they might be freed from the guilt of theft. After this He
adds the free gifts, which the children of Israel vowed, and the
first-fruits of oil, as well as of wine and corn. But this distinction
was laid down, that God might more surely prevent jealousy and ill-will;
for if there had been any ambiguity, many disputes would have
straightway arisen, and thus the reverence due to sacred things would
have been impaired. At the same time, however, God prescribes to the
priests, that none but males should eat of the burnt-offerings, and
nowhere else but in the sanctuary; for there would have been danger (as
we said before) that the dignity of these holy offerings would have been
lessened, if they had been carried away to private houses and mixed with
ordinary meats; besides, God was unwilling to indulge the priests in
sumptuous living, but by the very sight of the sanctuary induced them to
be frugal and sober in their repasts. For this was a kind of military
discipline to encourage abstinence, that they should go away from their
wife and family to take their meal. But whatever was offered as a vow,
and the first-fruits, He allows to be eaten of by the women, and in
their houses, provided only that no unclean person should touch what had
once been sacred.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p34"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p35"></span>**15.** *Every thing that openeth the
matrix.* The same thing is now ordained as to the first-born, viz., that
the priests should have them also for themselves; though at the same
time a distinction is inserted, that the first-born of man should be
redeemed. With regard to unclean beasts, the owners were free either to
redeem or to kill them. But, since this matter is not professedly
treated of here, God only briefly declares that He gives to the priests
whatever profit may be made of the first-born. The command that the
first-born should be redeemed according to the estimation of the
priests, does not mean that the priests should themselves prescribe the
value, as if they had the authority to do so; but that estimation is
referred to by which they were bound according to God’s command, as we
saw elsewhere; and this may be readily gathered from the context,
because the price is presently added, which God Himself had fixed. As to
the first-born of clean animals, another law is given, viz., that they
should be killed at the altar, and their fat burned, whilst the flesh
was to belong to the priests, like the breast and the right shoulder of
the burnt-offerings. But, lest any of the Levites or of the people —
since men are always eager for innovation — should ever attempt to
violate this decree, all controversy is removed in future ages, when God
declares that what He gave to the priests He would never have taken away
from them. First, He uses the word edict or decree,  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) which others translate “*statute:”*
and then adds the title “covenant,”  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) in order that its observation may be
more sacred, and less exposed to contentions and quarrels; for nothing
could be more indecent than that the priests should dispute regarding
their rights and privileges. God, then, signifies that He shall be
Himself outraged, if any one should trouble the priests. By the word
“salt,” perpetuity is metaphorically expressed; in which, however, God
appears to allude to the sacrifices, which it was not lawful to offer
unless seasoned with salt; that the Israelites might learn that, by
earthly and corruptible things, something greater was designated; for we
know that salted meats do not so easily become corrupt. In a word, this
metaphor implies inviolable stability.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc04090.htm#fr_207) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p30"></span> *A. V.* “The most holy things:” “the
holy of holies:” Ainsworth, whose note is, “*Heb*. ‘of the holiness of
holinesses,’ *i.e.,* of the most holy things; which the Greek
translateth ‘of the hallowed (or sanctified) holy things.’ Some
oblations in the sanctuary are called *holy,* and, by the Hebrew
doctors, *light holy things,* some *holy of holies, i.e.,* most holy
things,” etc.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc04090.htm#fr_208) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p33"></span> See <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p33.1"></span>[Numbers
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#008)<span id="iii.vi.ii-p33.1"></span>,
*infra,* p. 273.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc04090.htm#fr_209) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p36"></span> <span id="iii.vi.ii-p36.1"></span>חק
from <span id="iii.vi.ii-p36.2"></span>חקק <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p36.3"></span>describere, decernere, statuere. — Taylor’s
Concordance.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc04090.htm#fr_210) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p36.4"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p37"></span> Addition *Fr. “*<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p37.1"></span>voire, *Paction de sel."*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 6:16-18,26-29](cc04091)
