[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04029)  [Next](cc04031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.v"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p1"></span><span id="ii.x.v-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#000)<span id="ii.x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p2"></span><span id="ii.x.v-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
13:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012)<span id="ii.x.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p3"></span>**12.** If thou shalt hear *say* in one of
thy cities, which the Lord thy God hath given thee to dwell there,
saying,

<span id="ii.x.v-p4"></span>**12.** Si audieris de una urbium tuarum
quas Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi ut habites ibi, aliquem dicen-tem:

<span id="ii.x.v-p5"></span>**13.** *Certain* men, the children of
Belial, are gone out from among you*,* and have withdrawn the
inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which
ye have not known;

<span id="ii.x.v-p6"></span>**13.** Egressi sunt quidam homines filii
impietatis e medio tui, qui impulerunt habitatores urbis suae, dicendo,
Eamus et colamus deos alienos quos non nostis.

<span id="ii.x.v-p7"></span>**14.** Then shalt thou enquire, and make
search, and ask diligently; and, behold, *if it be* truth, *and* the
thing certain, *that* such abomination is wrought among you;

<span id="ii.x.v-p8"></span>**14.** Tunc inquires, et investigabis
diligenter: et siquidem veritas sit et rumor verus, quod facta sit
abominatio ista in medio tui:

<span id="ii.x.v-p9"></span>**15.** Thou shalt surely smite the
inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it
utterly, and all that *is* therein, and the cattle thereof, with the
edge of the sword.

<span id="ii.x.v-p10"></span>**15.** Percutiendo percuties habitatores
urbis illius acie gladii, perdendo eam, et quicquid in ea fuerit, et
jumenta ejus acie gladii.

<span id="ii.x.v-p11"></span>**16.** And thou shalt gather all the spoil
of it into the midst of the street thereof, and shalt burn with fire the
city, and all the spoil thereof every whit, for the LORD thy God: and it
shall be an heap for ever; it shall not be built again.

<span id="ii.x.v-p12"></span>**16.** Atque omnia spolia ejus congregabis
in medio plateae ejus, et combures igni urbem ipsam et omnia spolia ejus
prorsus Jehovae Deo tuo, eritque tumulus perpetuus, non aedificabitur.

<span id="ii.x.v-p13"></span>**17.** And there shall cleave nought of
the cursed thing to thine hand: that the LORD may turn from the
fierceness of his anger, and shew thee mercy, and have compassion upon
thee, and multiply thee, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers;

<span id="ii.x.v-p14"></span>**17.** Neque adhaerebit manui tuae
quicquam de anathemate, ut avertatur Jehova ab ira furoris sui, et det
tibi misericordias, misereaturque tui, ac te multiplicet quemadmodum
juravit patribus tuis.

<span id="ii.x.v-p15"></span> 

<span id="ii.x.v-p16"></span><span id="ii.x.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p17"></span>**12.** *If thou shalt hear say.* If
impiety and rebellion should more widely prevail, Moses declares that
whole cities, together with their inhabitants, should rather be
destroyed, than that so great a crime should remain unpunished. Hence we
may better infer how unholy is the tenderness of those who would have no
punishment inflicted for the violation of the religion of God. If any
sedition may have arisen in an army or nation, and the contagion may
have spread through the whole multitude, the severity of a just and
moderate ruler does not usually proceed further than to punish the
ringleaders; when, therefore, God commands all without exception to be
destroyed, the great atrocity of the crime is made apparent. Hence, too,
we are admonished, that zeal for God’s glory is but cold among us,
unless true religion is held to be of more value than the preservation
of a single city or people. But if so many together are to be dragged to
death in crowds, their impudence is more than detestable, and their pity
cruelty itself, who would take no account of God’s injured majesty, so
that one man may be spared. And since we are created to no other end,
and live for no other cause than that God may be glorified in us, it is
better that the whole world should perish, than that men should enjoy
the fruits of the earth in order that they may contaminate it with their
blasphemies. If those who first professed Christ’s name had been
inspired with such zeal as this, true religion would never have been
overwhelmed, and almost extinguished by so many corruptions. But we must
always bear in mind what I have already said, that this severity must
not be resorted to except when the religion is suffering, which is not
only received by public authority and general opinion, but which is
proved on solid grounds to be true; so that it may clearly appear that
we are the avengers of God against the wicked.

<span id="ii.x.v-p18"></span><span id="ii.x.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p19"></span>**13.** *Certain men, the children of
Belial.* Moses puts a case, which very often is wont to occur. For all
do not break forth into impiety together at the same moment, but Satan
stirs up some who are like fans to excite others; and by their
instigations the multitude is led to imitate them. Moses calls such as
these “children of Belial;”  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) by
which word some think that rebellious (<span
id="ii.x.v-p20.6"></span>*proefractos*) men are pointed out, and expound
it “without yoke.” Their opinion, however, seems to be more correct, who
interpret it “men of nothing,” men in whom nothing good or praiseworthy
is found; and literally translate it “those who are worthless.”  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) This expression is invariably applied to
the wicked (<span id="ii.x.v-p21.3"></span>*sceleratis, improbis, et
nequam;*) and therefore Paul, contrasting Christ with Belial, designates
by it Satan the chief of all the wicked. (<span
id="ii.x.v-p21.4"></span>[2Co
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)<span id="ii.x.v-p21.4"></span>.)
He uses the words “gone out,” as if they had dared to come forward, and
openly to parade their impiety. But, though the evil may have originated
with a few authors, he does not mean that punishment should stop with
them; as if the instigation of others availed as an excuse for the
multitude. And he enjoins diligent inquiry to be made, for two reasons:
viz., lest they should connive at the iniquity, and be lax, and careless
about it, or lest they should be too hasty and precipitate in their
judgment; because, on the one hand, whilst we are never equitable, nor
decide rightly in precipitation and anger, so on the other it betrays
base indifference, and something like disloyalty, to overlook so great a
crime. Thus both activity and moderation are commended, so that the
judge may neither be lax, nor make any decision until the matter shall
be carefully inquired into.

<span id="ii.x.v-p22"></span><span id="ii.x.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p23"></span>**15** *Thou shalt surely smite.* Lest the
severity of the punishment should occasion surprise, let us first
observe that the error was unpardonable, because its authors, being
educated in the doctrines of the Law, could not be deceived
involuntarily, nor unless they had grown weary of religion, and set
their hearts on the impostures of the devil. On this account God, in the
Book of Jeremiah, in order to inveigh more heavily against the
inconstancy of the Jews, refers them to distant isles and nations:
“Passover (He says) and consider,” etc., “Hath a nation changed their
gods, which are yet no gods? but my people have changed their glory for
that which doth not profit. Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this*,*”
etc. (<span id="ii.x.v-p23.1"></span>[Jer
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010)<span
id="ii.x.v-p23.1"></span>.) For justly must their instability be
accounted monstrous, that they should have voluntarily forsaken the
fountain of life, and have been carried away to vanity by their
preposterous love of novelty. If any should object that the little
children at least were innocent, I reply that, since all are condemned
by the judgment of God from the least to the greatest, we contend
against Him in vain, even though He should destroy the very infants as
yet in their mothers’ womb. When Sodom and the neighboring cities were
swallowed up, we doubt not but that in the mighty multitude many infants
and pregnant women also perished; and whilst our reason struggles
against this, it is better rather to look up reverently to the Divine
tribunal, than to subject it to our own laws. The same may be said of
the destruction of Babylon; for when the Prophet exclaims: “Happy shall
he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones,” he
assuredly eulogizes the just vengeance of God. (<span
id="ii.x.v-p23.2"></span>[Ps
137:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#009)<span id="ii.x.v-p23.2"></span>.)
So also in this passage, if it does not appear to us agreeable to reason
that the whole race of evil-doers should be exterminated, let us
understand that God is defrauded of His rights, whensoever we measure
His infinite greatness, which the angels themselves admiringly adore, by
our own feelings. Although we must recollect that God would never have
suffered any infants to be destroyed, except those which He had already
reprobated and condemned to eternal death. But if we admit God’s right
to deprive of the hope of salvation whomsoever He sees fit, why should
the temporal punishment, which is much lighter, be found fault with?
Rather let us learn from the severity of this Law, how detestable is the
crime of setting up false and spurious modes of worship, since it
contaminates not only the infants, whose age prevents them from being
conscious of it,  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) but even the
cattle and flocks, and the very houses and walls. For he proceeds
immediately afterwards to say,

<span id="ii.x.v-p25"></span><span id="ii.x.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p26"></span>**16.** *And thou shalt gather all the
spoil of it.* They are commanded to burn all the furniture, and whatever
is found in the city; and the reason is subjoined, because it is
accursed (*anathema*) If any city was taken in war, all that God here
commands to be burnt was to be counted as spoil, for the Jews would
pollute themselves by its very touch. It might be indeed that God’s
intention was to obviate covetousness, lest the Jews should mix up their
zeal with rapine; but the principal reason was that which Moses
expresses, that the people might be more accustomed to detest the crime,
which they saw to be so cruelly punished by God. The word <span
id="ii.x.v-p26.1"></span>חרם, *cherem,* which the Greeks have translated
*anathema,*  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) properly means
destruction, or abolition; but that which God would have annihilated,
because He cannot bear the sight of it, is called <span
id="ii.x.v-p27.2"></span>חרם, before Him. Therefore it is said, “Thou
shalt burn it to the Lord thy God;” for the translation which some give,
“for (<span id="ii.x.v-p27.3"></span>*propter*) the Lord,” is not quite
literal. The sum is to this effect, that if they fear God’s vengeance
for themselves, and desire to propitiate His favor, they must hold in
execration the houses and property of those who have rebelled against
the Law. Moreover, it is implied by the words “mercy” and “compassion,”
that if God should deal with absolute justice, the wickedness of one
city would suffice to destroy a whole country. Whence we gather, that a
kind of expiation is demanded to propitiate God, when they are commanded
utterly to destroy the city, and to cast every remnant of it into the
fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc04030.htm#fr_60) <span
id="ii.x.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p20"></span> <span id="ii.x.v-p20.1"></span>בליעל,
*Belial.* If the authority of the points be conceded, this word must be
considered as composed of <span id="ii.x.v-p20.2"></span>בלי, *without,*
and <span id="ii.x.v-p20.3"></span>יעל, *use,* or *profit,* so as to
correspond with our expression *good-for-nothing;* but, if the points be
disregarded, it might be considered as made up of <span
id="ii.x.v-p20.4"></span>בלי, and <span id="ii.x.v-p20.5"></span>על*,
without yoke;* insubmissive, rebellious. *S.M.’s* note says, “Without
the yoke of the Divine Law.” — W.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc04030.htm#fr_61) <span
id="ii.x.v-p20.7"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.x.v-p21.1"></span>Ausquels
il ne se trouve pas une seule goutte de bien.” — *Fr*. The *Lat.,
“*<span id="ii.x.v-p21.2"></span>Eos, qui non ascendunt,” appears to be
a misprint; possibly for qui non *assis sunt?*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc04030.htm#fr_62) <span
id="ii.x.v-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.x.v-p24.1"></span>Lesquels
n’en sont point coulpables.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc04030.htm#fr_63) <span
id="ii.x.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p27"></span> “<span
id="ii.x.v-p27.1"></span>Execration.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 22:18](cc04031)
