[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04156)  [Next](cc04158.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p1"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#000.md)<span id="v.iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p2"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p2.1"></span>[Exod.
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011.md)<span id="v.iv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p3"></span>**10.** And six years thou shalt sow thy
land, and shalt gather in the fruits thereof:

<span id="v.iv.i-p4"></span>**10.** Sex annis seres terram tuam et
congregabis fructus ejus:

<span id="v.iv.i-p5"></span>**11.** But the seventh *year* thou shalt
let it rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what
they leave the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt
deal with thy vineyard, *and* with thy oliveyard.

<span id="v.iv.i-p6"></span>**11.** Anno autem septimo omittes eam, et
quiescere sines, ut comedant pauperes populi tui, et residuum comedant
bestiae agri. Ita facies vineae et oliveto tuo.

<span id="v.iv.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="v.iv.i-p8"></span><span id="v.iv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p9"></span>**10.** *And six years shalt thou sow.*
Another Sabbatical institution (*Sabbathismus*) follows, viz., that of
years, in reference to the cultivation of the land; for as men and
cattle rested on every seventh day, so God prescribed that the earth
should rest on the seventh year. According to the fertility or
barrenness of the soil, fields are fallowed every third or fourth year,
lest they should become altogether unproductive through exhaustion.
Indeed a soil can hardly be found of such fecundity as to be fitted for
continual productiveness. Some relaxation is therefore given, until the
land recovers its vigor; but this only pertains to wheat, barley, pease,
beans, and other pulse, and seeds. As to meadows and vineyards the state
of things is different, since, when meadows are mown every year, the
fertility of the soil is not weakened; whilst vines degenerate unless
they are cultivated. It was a sign of extraordinary and exceeding
fertility that the land of Canaan could bear six years’ sowing
following, without being worn out. God honored it with this privilege in
favor of His people; nor did He indeed ordain the rest from necessity,
since on the sixth year He doubled the power of His blessing; but in
order that the sanctity of the Sabbath might be everywhere conspicuous,
and that thus the children of Israel, as they looked upon the land,
might be the more encouraged to its observance. The nature of the rest
was that they should not sow anything, nor prune their vineyards in the
sacred year; and if anything should spring up from the scattered seeds
of last harvest, it was the common property of the inhabitants of the
land and strangers, although He peculiarly bestowed whatever grew of
itself, whether corn or grapes, upon the poor, as a kind of gratuitous
present for the relief of their wants. And this kindness and liberality
was a kind of incidental adjunct to the performance of the religious
duty. It was not indeed mainly or chiefly God’s purpose to give relief
to the poor, but, as we said before, there was nothing strange in it
that the offices of charity should be consequent upon God’s service.

<span id="v.iv.i-p10"></span>If ungodly men should foolishly object that
there is no connection between the senseless soil and a spiritual
mystery, we have already answered, that although the Sabbath was
deposited with believers only as a pledge of an inestimable blessing,
still tokens of it appeared both in the flocks and herds, as well as in
dead creatures, in order to renew the recollection of it, lest the
people should grow cold, and their devotion should become languid. But
if they mockingly persist that the Jews were finely dealt with,  <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md) when in their highest privilege they
had asses and oxen, as well as the fields themselves, for companions; I
answer, why do they not apply the same scoff to a commoner matter? For
since the doctrine of salvation is committed to paper or parchment
before it comes to us, why do they not laugh with all their might at the
obedience of our faith? since in our silly credulity we embrace the
promises transmitted to us by a stinking skin or some other filthy
material? God would have the observation of the Sabbath engraved on all
creatures, that wherever the Jews turned their eyes they might be kept
up to it. Why, then, should not the earth be a conspicuous and
impressive sign (*character*) for the rude inculcation of this doctrine?
When it is said, “What they leave the beasts of the field shall eat,”
the injunction does not extend to wild and noxious animals which they
might drive away from their property; but God merely commands that
whatever the earth produced should be exposed promiscuously for the food
both of man and beast. And this affords an indirect answer to a question
that might occur for God shews that the grass would not be lost,
although there should be no hay-making; for the grass would be instead
of hay for the beasts, so that they might feed abundantly in the fields
and meadows.

<span id="v.iv.i-p12"></span>Another question, however, arises from the
passage in Leviticus, where God permits the owners of the land and their
families to gather for food whatever shall then grow of itself. But
there was nothing to prevent them, like the strangers, and anybody else,
from eating of the fruits which were common to all, provided they did
not defraud the poor by their covetousness.  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md) The same thing is soon afterwards
added in the description of the Jubilee; for although that year, which
completed seven times seven years, was more holy than the rest, still
God allows all to eat in it the fruits grown of themselves. He speaks
more restrictedly in Exodus, in order to inculcate greater liberality
upon them; but in Leviticus He shews that there is no danger of any of
the produce of the land being lost, because permission is given both for
themselves and their servants and cattle, besides the hireling and the
stranger, to partake of it. Where He says, “that which groweth of its
own accord of thy harvest,” I understand it of the land which they
usually reaped; as also a little further on He calls their peculiar
right of ownership in their vines “their separation.”  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342.md) Although, therefore, the possessor
might boast that the property was his own, and consequently that the
harvest should be left entirely to himself, God reminds them that its
fruits were nevertheless common to all during the Sabbatical year. The
word “harvest,” therefore, is applied to the land which was sown, and
“separation” to the private vineyard, or its fruit. The old interpreter
has translated them “the grapes of first-fruits.” If it is preferred to
adopt this sense, Moses would expressly declare that no oblation of them
conferred on the owners of the property a right to claim as their own
what grew in their vineyard (during the year;)  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md) else it would have been a good excuse
to offer to God the first-fruits of the vintage, and under this pretext
for the Jews to contend that they had consecrated the whole produce in
the first-fruits. But God anticipates this gloss, by shewing that what
was said respecting the ordinary cultivation was improperly turned aside
to the extraordinary year of rest. But since the word <span
id="v.iv.i-p15.1"></span>נאזיר, *nazir,* means “separation,” I do not
see why we should change what accords very well. Still commentators
differ as to the meaning of this word; some understand it
“relinquishing,” because every owner resigned his private property, so
that the vintage might be common. Others explain it as expressing that
they had abstained from its cultivation for that year. My own opinion,
however, as I have said, is simply that the peculiar right of the
possessor is called his “separation;” so that it was not lawful for
others to touch the vintage except in the Sabbatical year. Thus
separation is opposed to common fields free to the public.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc04157.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p11"></span> “<span id="v.iv.i-p11.1"></span>La
condition des Juifs n’a gueres este honorable;” the condition of the
Jews was hardly honorable. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc04157.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p13"></span> Addition in *Fr.,* “<span
id="v.iv.i-p13.1"></span>et que chacun en preint ce qu’il pourroit,
comme d’un bien commun;’ and that each should take what they could of
them, as of a common property.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc04157.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p14"></span> See *Margin, A. V.,* <span
id="v.iv.i-p14.1"></span>[Le 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#005.md)<span
id="v.iv.i-p14.1"></span>, <span id="v.iv.i-p14.2"></span>ענבי נזירך*,
“*grapes of thy separation.” *S.M.,* “<span
id="v.iv.i-p14.3"></span>uvas a te derelictas.” *S. M*. says in his
note, “We follow the Chaldee interpreter, who renders these words *The
grapes of thy relinquishing;* but others render them *the grapes of thy
separation,* (that is, which hitherto thou hast separated or set apart
for thyself,) thou shalt not suffer to be common property.” — *W*. The
translation of *V*. is, “uvas primitiarum tuarum."

<span id="fn_343"></span>[344](cc04157.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="v.iv.i-p14.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p15"></span> Addition from *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 25:1-7,20-22](cc04158.md)
