[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04106)  [Next](cc04108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
29](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p2"></span><span id="iii.ix.iv-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
29:1-39](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.ix.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p3"></span>**1.** And in the seventh month, on the
first *day* of the month, ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do
no servile work: it is a day of blowing the trumpets unto you.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p4"></span>**1.** Mense autem septimo, primo die
ejusdem, convocatio sancta erit vobis: nullum opus servile facietis,
dies clangoris erit vobis.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p5"></span>**2.** And ye shall offer a burnt
offering for a sweet savour unto the LORD; one young bullock, one ram,
*and* seven lambs of the first year without blemish:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p6"></span>**2.** Et faeietis holocaustum in odorem
quietis Jehovae, juvencum filium bovis unum, arietem unum, agnos
anniculos septem immaculatos:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p7"></span>**3.** And their meat offering *shall be
of* flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals for a bullock, *and* two
tenth deals for a ram,

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p8"></span>**3.** Et minham eorum ex simila permixta
oleo, tres decimas per singulos juvencos, duas decimas per singulos
arietes:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p9"></span>**4.** And one tenth deal for one lamb,
throughout the seven lambs:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p10"></span>**4.** Et decimam unam per singulos
agnos, per septem agnos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p11"></span>**5.** And one kid of the goats *for* a
sin offering, to make an atonement for you:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p12"></span>**5.** Et hircum caprarum unum in
sacrificium pro peccato, ad expiandum vos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p13"></span>**6.** Beside the burnt offering of the
month, and his meat offering, and the daily burnt offering, and his meat
offering, and their drink offerings, according unto their manner, for a
sweet savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p14"></span>**6.** Praeter holocaustum calendarum,
et minham ejus, et holocaustum juge, minham que ejus, et libamina eorum,
secundum titus sues, in odorem quietis, oblatio ignita Jehovae.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p15"></span>**7.** And ye shall have on the tenth
*day* of this seventh month an holy convocation; and ye shall afflict
your souls: ye shall not do any work *therein:*

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p16"></span>**7.** Decimo autem die mensis septimi
hujus, convocatio sancta erit vobis, affligetisque animus vestras:
nullum opus facietis.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p17"></span>**8.** But ye shall offer a burnt
offering unto the LORD *for* a sweet savour; one young bullock, one ram,
*and* seven lambs of the first year; they shall be unto you without
blemish:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p18"></span>**8.** Et offeritis holocaustum Jehovae
in odorem quietis, juvencum filium bovis unum, arietem unum, agnos
anniculos septem: immaculati erunt vobis.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p19"></span>**9.** And their meat offering *shall be
of* flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals to a bullock, *and* two
tenth deals to one ram,

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p20"></span>**9.** Et minham eorum ex simila
conspersa oleo, tres decimas in singulos juvencos, duas decimas in
singulos arietes:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p21"></span>**10.** A several tenth deal for one
lamb, throughout the seven lambs:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p22"></span>**10.** Singulas decimas per agnos
singulos, per septem agnos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p23"></span>**11.** One kid of the goats *for* a sin
offering; beside the sin offering of atonement, and the continual burnt
offering, and the meat offering of it, and their drink offerings.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p24"></span>**11.** Hircum caprarum unum in
sacrificium pro peccato: praeter oblationem pro peccato expiationum: et
holocaustum juge, et minham ejus, libaminaque eorum.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p25"></span>**12.** And on the fifteenth day of the
seventh month ye shall have an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile
work, and ye shall keep a feast unto the LORD seven days:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p26"></span>**12.** Porre decimaquinta die mensis
septimi, convocatio sancta erit vobis: nullum opus servile facietis, et
celebrabitis solennitatem Jehovae septem diebus.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p27"></span>**13.** And ye shall offer a burnt
offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD;
thirteen young bullocks, two rams, *and* fourteen lambs of the first
year; they shall be without blemish:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p28"></span>**13.** Et holocaustum, et oblationem
ignitam in odorem quietis Jehovae, juvencos filios bovis tredecim,
arietes duos, agnos anniculos quatuordecim: immaculati erunt.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p29"></span>**14.** And their meat-offering *shall
be of* flour mingled with oil, three tenth deals unto every bullock of
the thirteen bullocks, two tenth deals to each ram of the two rams,

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p30"></span>**14.** Minham quoque eorum ex simila
conspersa oleo, tres decimas in juvencos singulos tredecim juvencis:
duas decimas in arietes singulos duobus arietibus.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p31"></span>**15.** And a several tenth deal to each
lamb of the fourteen lambs:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p32"></span>**15.** Et singulas declinus per agnos
singulos, quatuordecim agnos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p33"></span>**16.** And one kid of the goats *for* a
sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering,
and his drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p34"></span>**16.** Et hircum caprarum unum in
sacrificium pro peccato: prater holocaustum juge, minham ejus et libamen
ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p35"></span>**17.** And on the second day *ye shall
offer* twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year
without spot:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p36"></span>**17.** Die autem secundo juvencos
filios bovis duodecim, arietes duos, agnos anniculos quatuordecim
immaculatos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p37"></span>**18.** And their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
*shall be* according to their number, after the manner:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p38"></span>**18.** Et minham eorum, et libamina
eorum in juvencos, in arietes, in agnos secundum numerum eorum, juxta
morem.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p39"></span>**19.** And one kid of the goats *for* a
sin offering, beside the continual burnt offering, and the meat offering
thereof, and their drink offerings.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p40"></span>**19.** Et hircum caprarum unum in
sacrificium pro peccato: praeter holocaustum juge, et minham ejus, et
libamina eorum.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p41"></span>**20.** And on the third day eleven
bullocks, two rams, fourteen lambs of the first year without blemish;

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p42"></span>**20.** Die vero tertio juveneos
undecim, arietes duos, agnos anniculos quatuordecim immaculatos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p43"></span>**21.** And their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
*shall be* according to their number, after the manner:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p44"></span>**21.** Et minham eorum, et libamina
eorum in juvencos, in arietes, et in agnos, secundum numerum eorum,
juxta morere.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p45"></span>**22.** And one goat *for* a sin
offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering,
and his drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p46"></span>**22.** Et hircum in sacrificium pro
petcato unum, praeter holocaustum juge, et minham ejus, et libamen ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p47"></span>**23.** And on the fourth day ten
bullocks, two rams, *and* fourteen lambs of the first year without
blemish:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p48"></span>**23.** Die autem quarto juvencos decem,
arietes duos, agnos anniculos quatuordecim immaculatos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p49"></span>**24.** Their meat offering and their
drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
*shall be* according to their number, after the manner:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p50"></span>**24.** Minham eorum et libamina eorum
in juvencos, in arietes, et in agnos, secundum numerum eorum, juxta
morere.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p51"></span>**25.** And one kid of the goats *for* a
sin offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering,
and his drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p52"></span>**25.** Et hircum caprarum unum in
sacrificium pro peccato, praeter holocaustum juge, minham ejus et
libamen ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p53"></span>**26.** And on the fifth day nine
bullocks, two rams, *and* fourteen lambs of the first year without spot:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p54"></span>**26.** Et die quinto juvencos novem,
arietes duos, agnos annietrios quatuordecim immaculatos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p55"></span>**27.** And their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
*shall be* according to their number, after the manner:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p56"></span>**27.** Et minham eorum, et libamina
eorum, in juvencos, in arietes, et in agnos, secundum numerum eorum,
juxta morere.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p57"></span>**28.** And one goat *for* a sin
offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering,
and his drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p58"></span>**28.** Et hircum in sacrificium pro
peccato unum, procter holocaustum juge, et minham ejus, et libamen ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p59"></span>**29.** And on the sixth day eight
bullocks, two rams, *and* fourteen lambs of the first year without
blemish:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p60"></span>**29.** Die praterea sexto jurenons
otto, arietes duos, agnos anniculos quatuordecim immaculatos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p61"></span>**30.** And their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
*shall be* according to their number, after the manner:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p62"></span>**30.** Et minham eormn, et libamina
eorum in juvencos, in arietes, et in agnos, secundum numerum eorum juxta
morere.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p63"></span>**31.** And one goat *for* a sin
offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and
his drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p64"></span>**31.** Et hircum in sacrificium pro
peccato unum: procter holocaustum juge, et minham ejus, et libamina
ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p65"></span>**32.** And on the seventh day seven
bullocks, two rams, *and* fourteen lambs of the first year without
blemish:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p66"></span>**32.** Et die septimo juvencos septem,
arietes duos, agnos anniculos quatuordecim immaculatos.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p67"></span>**33.** And their meat offering and
their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs,
*shall be* according to their number, after the manner:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p68"></span>**33.** Et minham eorum, et libamina
eorum, in juvencos, in arietes, et in agnos, secundum numerum eorum
juxta morere.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p69"></span>**34.** And one goat *for* a sin
offering; beside the continual burnt offering, his meat offering, and
his drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p70"></span>**34.** Et hircum in sacrificium pro
peccato unum, prfeter holocaustum juge, et minham ejus, et libamen ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p71"></span>**35.** On the eighth day ye shall have
a solemn assembly: ye shall do no servile work *therein:*

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p72"></span>**35.** Die octavo solennitas erit
vobis: nullum opus servile facietis.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p73"></span>**36.** But ye shall offer a burnt
offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD: one
bullock, one ram, seven lambs of the first year without blemish:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p74"></span>**36.** Et offeretis holocaustum, et
oblationem ignitam odoris quietis jehovae, juvencum unum, arietem unum,
agnos anniculos septem immaculatos:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p75"></span>**37.** Their meat offering and their
drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, *shall
be* according to their number, after the manner:

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p76"></span>**37.** Et minham eorum, et libamina
eorum, in juvencum, in arietem, et in agnos, secundum numerum eorum
juxta morere.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p77"></span>**38.** And one goat *for* a sin
offering; beside the continual burnt offering, and his meat offering,
and his drink offering.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p78"></span>**38.** Et hircum in sacrificium pro
peccato unum: procter holocaustum juge, et minham ejus, et libamen ejus.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p79"></span>**39.** These *things* ye shall do unto
the LORD in your set feasts, beside your vows, and your freewill
offerings, for your burnt offerings, and for your meat offerings, and
for your drink offerings, and for your peace offerings.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p80"></span>**39.** Ista facietis Jehovae in
solemnitatibus vestris: prater vota vestra, et spontanea vestra in
holocaustis vestris, et minhis vestris, et libaminibus vestris, et
sacrificiis prosperitatum.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p81"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p82"></span><span id="iii.ix.iv-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p83"></span>**1** *And in the seventh month.* I have
already observed that the festivals are not here (*generally*) treated
of, but only the sacrifices, by which their solemnization was to be
graced. In the beginning of the seventh month was the memorial, as it
was called, of the blowing of trumpets. Because it was a minor festival,
Moses only commands one bullock to be killed; but the number was
increased on other grounds, for we have already seen that on the first
of every month two bullocks were sacrificed. This day, therefore, had
three larger victims, whilst the number of the others was doubled, so
that there were two rams and fourteen lambs. Thus, then, God consecrated
this day doubly to Himself, so that one celebration diminished nothing
of the other; else He might have seemed to have abrogated what He had
once commanded. The memorial of trumpets was not, then, an abolition of
the new-moon, but they kept both ordinances at the same time.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p84"></span><span id="iii.ix.iv-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p85"></span>**7.** *And ye shall have on the tenth
day.* This was the day of Atonement. For although they never came into
God’s presence without supplication for pardon, they then in a special
manner confessed their sins, because a fast was appointed in token of
their guilt. For thus it is written in <span
id="iii.ix.iv-p85.1"></span>[Le
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.ix.iv-p85.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p86"></span>"Whatsoever soul it be that shall not be
afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from among his people."

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p87"></span>As to the sacrifices, one bullock only
is required; the rest is as before, except that an exception is added,
which was omitted in the former cases. For another propitiation is
appointed besides the goat, to accord with the fact of their affliction.
For the acknowledgment of guilt would have been a dreadful torment to
their consciences without the hope of reconciliation. The reason of this
sacrifice will be soon explained.

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p88"></span><span id="iii.ix.iv-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p89"></span>**12.** *And on the fifteenth, day.*
Amongst their festivals this last was the chief  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md) in which they dwelt in tabernacles for
seven days; for whereas in the Passover they commemorated the night in
which they came forth free from the plagues of Egypt, by dwelling in
tabernacles they embraced the whole forty years in which their fathers
in the desert experienced the constant and consummate bounty of God.
That solemn convention, too, availed for another present purpose,
*i.e.,* of thanksgiving to God for the ingathering of the harvest. Hence
it was that they offered sacrifices every day and in greater number: on
the first day, thirteen bullocks, two rams, and fourteen lambs; on the
second, twelve bullocks; on the third, eleven; on the fourth, ten; on
the fifth, nine; on the sixth, eight; finally, on the seventh, seven;
and on the eighth, one. Nor is it carelessly that Moses expends so many
words on the recital; *first,* that nothing might be done except at
God’s command; *secondly,* lest it should be disagreeable or onerous to
be at such great expense, which they would have gladly avoided.
Wherefore, that they might cheerfully obey God’s command, he diligently
inculcates what victims God would have daily offered to Him. But why the
distribution was so unequal, I confess, is not clear to me, and it is
better to confess my ignorance than by too subtle speculations to vanish
into mere smoke.  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md) This notion,
indeed, is neither curious nor to be rejected, *i.e.,* that, by daily
diminishing the number, they came at last on the seventh day to the
number seven, which is the symbol of perfection; for the eighth was
superadded, merely as a conclusion. Finally, Moses subjoins that in the
continual sacrifice, as well as these extraordinary ones, they should
hold fast to what God prescribes, so that nothing should be altered
according to man’s fancy. The sacrifices which depend on the
Commandments of the Second Table, I have designedly postponed to their
proper place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc04107.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="iii.ix.iv-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p90"></span> “<span id="iii.ix.iv-p90.1"></span>La
plus *authentique.”* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc04107.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="iii.ix.iv-p90.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.iv-p91"></span> Scott’s conjecture is not without
force: “The decrease of the number of the bullocks which were sacrificed
on the several days of the feast, until on the last and great day only
one was offered, is the most observable circumstance in this law. The
reason is not evident, unless it be intimated that the Mosaic
institution would gradually wax old, and at length vanish away when the
promised Messiah came. (<span id="iii.ix.iv-p91.1"></span>[Heb
8:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.ix.iv-p91.1"></span>.)” As a specimen of the ancient opinions, I
subjoin the following, — “The Hebrews say that the offerings were made
for other nations; and, therefore, seventy calves were offered
altogether, according to the number of the seventy nations, divided into
seventy languages. But fourteen calves were offered on the first day,
and on the second day thirteen, thus decreasing one every day to the
last inclusive; by which is designated that the dominion of the Gentiles
was to be diminished and terminated under King Messiah, to whom all
nations are to be subdued,” etc. — De Lyra, *in loco.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Great Yearly Atonement](cc04108.md)
