[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04023)  [Next](cc04025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.i"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p2"></span><span id="ii.ix.i-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
21:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.ix.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p3"></span>**10.** When thou goest forth to war
against thine enemies, and the LORD thy God hath delivered them into
thine hands, and thou hast taken them captive,

<span id="ii.ix.i-p4"></span>**10.** Quum egressus fueris ad bellum
contra inimicos tuos, et dederit eos Jehova Deus tuus in manum tuam, et
ex eis captivos abduxeris:

<span id="ii.ix.i-p5"></span>**11.** And seest among the captives a
beautiful woman, and hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her
to thy wife;

<span id="ii.ix.i-p6"></span>**11.** Videris autem in captivitate
mulierem pulchram forma, et deamaris eam, et acceperis tibi in uxorem.

<span id="ii.ix.i-p7"></span>**12.** Then thou shalt bring her home to
thine house; and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails;

<span id="ii.ix.i-p8"></span>**12.** Introduces eam domum tuam: et radet
caput suum, ac praecidet ungues suos:

<span id="ii.ix.i-p9"></span>**13.** And she shall put the raiment of
her captivity from off her, and shall remain in thine house, and bewail
her father and her mother a full month: and after that thou shalt go in
unto her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.

<span id="ii.ix.i-p10"></span>**13.** Deponetque vestimentum
captivitatis suae a se, et manebit in domo tua, ae flebit patrem suum,
et matrem suam mensem integrum: et postea ingredieris ad eam, erisque
maritus ejus, et erit tibi uxor.

<span id="ii.ix.i-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.ix.i-p12"></span><span id="ii.ix.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p13"></span>**10.** *When thou goest forth to war.*
The same thing is now commanded respecting wives as above respecting
meats. As regarded the Canaanites, who were destined and devoted to
destruction, we have seen that the Israelites were prohibited from
taking their women to wife, lest this connection should be an enticement
to sin; but Moses now goes further, viz., that the Israelites, having
obtained a victory over other nations, should not marry any of the
captive women, unless purified by a solemn rite. This, then, is the sum,
that the Israelites should not defile themselves by profane marriages,
but in this point also should keep themselves pure and uncorrupt,
because they were separated from other people, to be the peculiar people
of God. It was better, indeed, that they should altogether abstain from
such marriages; yet it was difficult so to restrain their lust as that
they should not decline from chastity in the least, degree; and hence we
learn how much license conquerors allow themselves in war, so that there
is no room for perfect purity in them. Wherefore God so tempers His
indulgence as that the Israelites, remembering the adoption wherewith He
had honored them, should not disgrace themselves, but in the very fervor
of their lust should retain some religious affection. But the question
here is not of unlawful ravishment, but Moses only speaks of women who
have been made captives by the right of war, for we know that conquerors
have abused them with impunity, because they had them under their power
and dominion. But since many are led astray by the blandishments of
their wives, God applies a remedy, viz., that the abjuration of their
former life should precede their marriage; and that none should be
allowed to marry a foreign wife until she shall have first renounced her
own nation. To this refers the ceremony, that the woman should shave her
head, and cut her nails, and change her garments, and lament her father
and her family for an entire month, viz., that she may renounce her
former life, and pass over to another people. Some of the rabbins twist
the words to a different meaning, as if God would extinguish love in the
minds of the husbands by disfiguring the women; for the shaving of the
head greatly detracts from female beauty and elegance; and “to make the
nails,” for so the words literally mean, they understand as to let them
grow; and the prolongation of the nails has a disgusting appearance. But
their gloss is refuted by the context, in which she is commanded to put
off the raiment of her captivity.: But I have no doubt but that their
month of mourning, their shaven head, and the other signs, are intended
by God for their renewal, so that they may accustom themselves to
different habits. And with the same object they are commanded to bewail
their parents as if dead, that they may bid farewell to their own
people. To this the Prophet seems to allude in <span
id="ii.ix.i-p13.1"></span>[Ps
45:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.ix.i-p13.1"></span>,
when he says, “Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear;
forget also thine own people, and thy father’s house;” for he intimates
that otherwise the marriage of a foreign woman with Solomon would not be
pure and legitimate, unless she should relinquish her superstitions, and
devote herself to God’s service. Nor was it needless that God should
require the Israelites diligently to beware lest they should take wives
as yet aliens from the study of true religion, since experience most
abundantly shows how fatal a snare it is. But although we are not now
bound to this observance, yet the rule still holds good that men should
not rashly ally themselves with women still devoted to wicked
superstitions.  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc04024.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="ii.ix.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p14"></span> Addition in *Fr., “*<span
id="ii.ix.i-p14.1"></span>Pour s’envelopper en leur impiete."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judicial Supplements](cc04025.md)
