[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04044)  [Next](cc04046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
4:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>, 23, 24

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p3"></span>**12.** And the LORD spake unto you out
of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no
similitude; only *ye heard* a voice.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p4"></span>**12.** Tunc loquutus est Jehova ad vos
e medio ignis: vocem verborum audistis, at formam non vidistis praeter
vocem.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p5"></span>**13.** And he declared unto you his
covenant, which he commanded you to perform, *even* ten commandments;
and he wrote them upon two tables of stone.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p6"></span>**13.** Et exposuit vobis pactum suum
quod praecepit vobis ut faceretis: nempe decem verba, quae scrip-sit
super duas tabulas lapideas.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p7"></span>**14.** And the Lord commanded me at
that time to teach you statutes and judgments, that ye might do them in
the land whither ye go over to possess it.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p8"></span>**14.** Mihi praecepit Jehova tempore
illo ut docerem vos statuta et judicia, quae faceretis in terra, ad quam
transitis possidendam.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p9"></span>**15.** Take ye therefore good heed unto
yourselves; for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day *that* the
LORD spake unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire:

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p10"></span>**15.** Itaque custodiatis vos valde
super animabus vestris: (quoniam non vidistis ullam formam illo die, quo
loquutus est Jehova vobiscum in Horeb e medio ignis:)

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p11"></span>**16.** Lest ye corrupt *yourselves,*
and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeness
of male or female,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p12"></span>**16.** Ne forte corrumpamini, et
faciatis vobis sculptile, formam ullius simulachri, effigiem masculi aut
foeminae.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p13"></span>**17.** The likeness of any beast that
*is* on the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the
air,

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p14"></span>**17.** Effigiem cujusque animalis quod
est in terra: effigiem cujuscunque volucris alatae quae volat per
coelos:

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p15"></span>**18.** The likeness of any thing that
creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish that *is* in the waters
beneath the earth:

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p16"></span>**18.** Effigiem cujuscunque repentis
in terra: effigiem cujuscunque piscis qui est in aquis sub terra.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p17"></span>**19.** And lest thou lift up thine
eyes unto heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the
stars, *even* all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship
them, and serve them, which the LORD thy God hath divided unto all
nations under the whole heaven.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p18"></span>**19.** Neve attollas oculos tuos in
coelum: et quum videris solem, lunam, et stellas cum universo exercitu
coelorum, impellaris ut adores atque colas ea, quae distribuit Jehova
Deus tuus omnibus populis sub universo coelo.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p19"></span>**23.** Take heed unto yourselves, lest
ye forget the covenant of the LORD your God, which he made with you, and
make you a graven image, *or* the likeness of any *thing,* which the
LORD thy God hath forbidden thee.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p20"></span>**23.** Custodite vos, ne forte
obliviscamini foederis Jehovae Dei vestri, quod percussit vobiscum, et
faciatis vobis sculptlie, quamcunque simili-tudinem, sicut praecepit
Jehova Deus tuus.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p21"></span>**24.** For the LORD thy God *is a*
consuming fire, *even* a jealous God.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p22"></span>**24.** Nam Jehova Deus tuus, ignis
consumens est, et Deus zelotes.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p23"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p24"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p24.1"></span>[Exodus
34](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p25"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Exodus
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p26"></span>**14.** For thou shalt worship no other
god: for the LORD, whose name *is* Jealous, *is* a jealous God:

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p27"></span>**14.** Non incurvabis te Deo alieno.
Nam Jehova zelotes nomen ejus, Deus zelotes est.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p28"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p29"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p29.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p30"></span><span
id="iii.iii.ii-p30.1"></span>[Deut.
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#020)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p31"></span>**19.** And it shall be, if thou do at
all forget the LORD thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them,
and worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely
perish.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p32"></span>**19.** Si obliviscendo oblitus fueris
Jehovae Dei tui, et ambulaveris post deos alienos, et colueris eos, et
te in-curvaveris illis, testificor vobis hodie quod pereundi sitis
perituri.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p33"></span>**20.** As the nations which the LORD
destroyeth before your face, so shall ye perish; because ye would not be
obedient unto the voice of the LORD your God.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p34"></span>**20.** Sicut gentes quas Jehova
disperdit a facie vestra, sic peribitis: eo quod non obediveris voci
Jehovec Dei vestri.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p35"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p36"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p37"></span>**<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p37.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p37.2"></span>.** *And the Lord spake unto you.* It is a
confirmation of the Second Commandment, that God manifested Himself to
the Israelites by a voice, and not in a bodily form; whence it follows
that those who are not contented with His voice, but seek His visible
form, substitute imaginations and phantoms in His place. But here arises
a difficult question, for God made Himself known to the patriarchs in
other ways besides by His voice alone; thus Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
knew Him not only by hearing, but by sight. Moses himself saw Him in the
midst of the burning bush; and He also manifested Himself to the
Prophets under visible figures. Since it would be superfluous to heap
together many citations, let the remarkable vision of Isaiah suffice,
which is related in (<span id="iii.iii.ii-p37.3"></span>[Isa
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p37.3"></span>),
and those of Ezekiel, which we read of in (<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p37.4"></span>[Eze
1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p37.4"></span>
and <span id="iii.iii.ii-p37.5"></span>[Eze
10](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p37.5"></span>)
And yet God was not forgetful of Himself, when He thus presented Himself
to the sight of His servants. Wherefore, this argument does not appear
to be valid and good, that it is sinful to represent God in a visible
image, because His voice was once heard without His being seen; when, on
the other side, it is easy to object that visible forms have often been
exhibited, wherein He testified His presence. The solution is twofold:
first, that, although God may have invested Himself in certain forms for
the purpose of manifesting Himself, this must be accounted as a peculiar
circumstance, and not be taken as a general rule; secondly, that the
visions shewn to the patriarchs were testimonies of His invisible glory,
rather to elevate men’s minds to things above than to keep them
entangled amongst earthly elements. In the promulgation of His Law, God
first prescribed what believers must follow; because He saw that this
was the best method (*compendium*) for retaining the minds of His people
in true religion, and at the same time the best remedy for idolatry.
Unless we submit to this counsel of God, we shall not only betray a
licentious spirit of contention, but shall run directly against God,
like butting bulls. For it was not in vain that Moses laid down this
principle, that when God collected to Himself a Church, and handed down
a certain and inviolable rule for holy living, He had not invested
Himself in a bodily shape, but had exhibited the living image of His
glory in the doctrine itself. Hence we may conclude that all those who
seek for God in a visible figure, not only decline, but actually revolt,
from the true study of piety.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p38"></span>If any one should object that God is
not inconsistent with Himself, and yet, as has been said, that He has
more than once taken upon Himself a visible form, the reply is simple
and easy, that, whenever He appeared to the patriarchs in a visible
form, He gave a temporary sign, which still was by no means
contradictory of this commandment. Isaiah saw the Lord of hosts sitting
on His throne; yet he boldly cries out as from the mouth of God, “To
whom will ye liken me?” (<span id="iii.iii.ii-p38.1"></span>[Isa
40:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p38.1"></span>.) Nor need I repeat how constantly he
speaks against idolaters; certainly he inveighs more strongly than any
of the prophets against the folly, nay, the madness of those who make to
themselves any image of God; because they thus turn truth into
falsehood; and finally he assumes the same principle as that of Moses,
that the true nature of God is corrupted by tricks and delusions if a
corruptible thing be called His image. But what was His vision itself?
The seraphim, who surrounded God’s throne, sufficiently shewed by their
covering their faces with their wings that the sight of Him could not be
borne by mortals. As to what Ezekiel relates, no painter could represent
it; for God has always appeared distinguished from the shape of any
creature by those marks which surpass man’s apprehension. This
conclusion, therefore, always remains sure, that no image is suitable to
God, because He would not be perceived by His people otherwise than in a
voice. But then also fire was a symbol of His presence, yet He testified
by it that His glory is incomprehensible, and thus would prevent men
from idol-making. We have elsewhere explained what it is “to guard
themselves as to their souls.”  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) But
we infer, from his anxious exhortations, that they should take heed, how
great is the leaning of the human soul to idolatry. This is the tendency
of that attestation against them, which I have inserted from (<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p39.4"></span>[Deuteronomy
8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#000)<span id="iii.iii.ii-p39.4"></span>);
for Moses not only threatens them, but, as if summoning witnesses
according to the custom of solemn trials, denounces that they shall
perish, in order to inspire them with greater fear by this earnest mode
of address. Whence it appears that this insane lust (of idolatry) is not
to be repressed by ordinary means. With the same object he says that
they are “corrupted, or corrupt themselves,” who make any similitude of
God. Thus Paul also declares that in this way the truth is changed into
a lie, (<span id="iii.iii.ii-p39.5"></span>[Ro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p39.5"></span>;) and Jeremiah and Habakkuk condemn images
for their falsehood. (<span id="iii.iii.ii-p39.6"></span>[Jer
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p39.6"></span>; <span id="iii.iii.ii-p39.7"></span>[Hab
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p39.7"></span>.) No wonder, then, that an idol should be
called the “corruption” of men, since it adulterates the worship of God;
and it is a most just recompense to those who pollute the pure and
perfect knowledge of God, that they should be thence infected with a
rottenness which consumes their souls. Hence, also, the stupid ignorance
of the Papists is confuted who confine this prohibition to the ancient
people, as if it were now permitted to paint or to sculpture (images of
God)  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) as if they had been Jews whom
Paul was addressing, when he reasoned from the common origin of our
nature: “Forasmuch as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think
that the Godhead is like unto gold or silver,” or corruptible matter.
(<span id="iii.iii.ii-p40.1"></span>[Ac
17:29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p40.1"></span>)  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)
There is no necessity for entering into details; but the Spirit declares
no less plainly now that we must keep ourselves from idols, (<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p41.2"></span>[1Jo
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p41.2"></span>,) than He of old forbade their being made.
Moreover, it was an act of diabolical madness to make away with one of
the Ten Commandments, in order that they might rush into this foul and
detestable extravagance with impunity. They pretend that the Jews were
formerly prohibited from idolatry with greater strictness, because they
were too much disposed to it, as if they were not themselves much worse
in this respect. But, setting aside this, who does not see that the vice
of superstition, which is natural to the human mind, was corrected by
this remedy? Until, therefore, men have laid aside their nature, we
infer that this Commandment is necessary for them.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p42"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p43"></span>**19.** *And lest thou lift up thine
eyes.* Moses proceeds further, lest the Jews should imagine any divinity
in the sun, and moon, and stars; nor does he only recall them from the
error with which many were imbued,  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)
thinking that these were so many gods; but also anticipates another
superstition, lest, being ravished by the brightness of the stars, they
should conceive them to be *images* of God. And to this the expression,
to “be driven,” refers. For since God represents His glory in the
heavenly host, so also Satan, under this pretext, confuses and stupefies
men’s minds by a wily artifice, in order that they may worship God in
these luminaries, and thus stumble at the very threshold. Therefore,
that the Israelites may the better acknowledge how absurd it is to seek
for God in earthly things, or in the elements of the world, or in
corruptible matter, he expressly declares that they must not even lean
 <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) on heavenly creatures; since God’s
majesty is superior to the sun, and moon, and all the stars. Besides, he
reproves the absurdity of transferring the worship of God to the stars,
which, by God’s appointment, are to minister to us; for when he says
that “God hath divided them unto all nations,” it implies subjection; as
if he had said that the sun was our minister, and the moon, together
with all the stars, our handmaid. Still, by the word “divided,” God’s
admirable providence is fitly commended in respect to their varied
position, and course, and different offices; for the sun does not
enlighten and warm all lands at the same moment; and, again, it now
retires from us, and now approaches us more closely; the moon has her
circuits; the stars rise and set as the heaven revolves. I pass over the
slower movement of the planets; but, according to the aspect of the
stars, one climate is moister, another drier; one feels more heat,
another more cold. This variety is aptly called by Moses “dividing ” Yet
it aggravates the sin of superstition, if the Jews give themselves to
the service of the stars, which minister also to heathen nations; for
what can be more unworthy than for the children of God to worship the
sun, which is the servant of all the world? whence again it follows,
that in proportion to the dignity and excellence of the creatures
themselves, so is the ingratitude of men towards God all the more base,
if they adorn with His worship as with spoils, those creatures which He
has appointed to minister to their advantage. The silly notion in which
some of the Rabbins delight themselves,  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) is unworthy of mention, viz., that God
has divided the stars to the Gentiles, since they are subject to their
influences, from which by special privilege the Jews are free; as if the
condition of the human race had not been the same from the beginning.
But the reason which I have adduced plainly shews, that they depart most
widely from the meaning of Moses, and therefore pervert his intention;
viz., that the creatures which are destined for our use, are by no means
to be worshipped as God.

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p47"></span><span id="iii.iii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p48"></span>**23.** *Take heed unto yourselves,
lest ye forget.* There is no contradiction in the sense, that he should
first of all altogether forbid that idols should be made; and, secondly,
speak only of worshipping and adoring them; for it is already in itself
a wicked error to attribute any image to God; and another superstition
always accompanies it, that God is always improperly worshipped in this
visible symbol. There is a strong confirmation here of what I have
previously stated, that whatever holds down and confines our senses to
the earth, is contrary to the covenant of God; in which, inviting us to
Himself, He permits us to think of nothing but what is spiritual, and
therefore sets His voice against all the imaginations, whereby heathen
nations have always been deceived; because they have been deprived of
the light of that doctrine which would direct them to the heavenly
greatness of God Himself. But those who have been taught by God’s Law,
not only that He alone is to be worshipped, but that He may not be
represented by any visible effigy, are justly accounted
covenant-breakers, if they do not confine themselves within these
bounds; for they violate that Second Commandment (*caput*) by which they
are commanded to worship God spiritually; and consequently are forbidden
to make to themselves likenesses, or images, whereby they would deface
and pollute His glory. At the end of the verse, which some translate
“the likeness, which your God hath *forbidden,*”  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) the proper rendering is, “hath
*commanded,* or *enjoined*:” and hence the relative <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p49.3"></span>אור, *asher,* must be taken, as in many
other places, as an adverb of comparison. The meaning of Moses is indeed
by no means obscure; viz., that we must simply obey God’s word; and that
we must not dispute whether what He has forbidden is lawful or not; and
that no other rule of right is to be sought for, except that we should
follow what He has prescribed. Let the Papists dispute as they please,
that images are not to be removed because they are useful for the
people’s instruction; but let this be our wisdom, to acquiesce in what
God has chosen to decree in this matter. Although the threat which is
subjoined might have been placed amongst the sanctions, which we shall
hereafter consider in their proper place, yet I have been unwilling to
separate it from the Second Commandment, to which it is annexed. A
confirmation is added in Deuteronomy; viz., that God, who has not spared
foreign nations, will much less pardon His people; inasnmch as it is a
greater crime, and fouler ingratitude to forsake God when once He is
known, and to cast aside the teaching of His Law, than to follow errors
handed down from our forefathers. I have already explained in what sense
He is called a “jealous God;” but in <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p49.4"></span>[Ex
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p49.4"></span>, Moses has not deemed it sufficient simply
to honor God with this title; but, in amplification, he has added that
this is His name, in order that we may know that He can no more bear a
companion, or a rival, to be compared with Him, than He can cast away
His Godhead, or deny Himself. He compares Him to fire, to increase our
terror of Him. We know how audaciously the world indulges itself in
superstitions; so that, as if in very sport, it metamorphoses God just
as fancy leads. Wherefore, in order to incline men’s minds to reverence,
he sets before us in this figure God’s fearful vengeance; as though He
would instantly consume them, just as fire consumes stubble, if they
shall have dared to think of God otherwise than is right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc04045.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p39"></span> See *Lat.* of ver. 15. The explanation
to which he alludes is probably that given on <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p39.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p39.2"></span>. Vol. 1 p. 397.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc04045.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p39.8"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p40"></span> Added from *Fr.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc04045.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p41"></span> Addition in *Fr., “*<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p41.1"></span>Or, c’estoit aux Payens qu’il parloit
ainsi;” Now, they were heathens whom he thus addressed.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc04045.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p44"></span> See <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p44.1"></span>[Job
31:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p44.1"></span>. Any discussion on the history of Sabaism
would be superfluous here. Dr. Layard, (Nineveh and its Remains, vol. 2,
p. 446,) points out, that “representations of the heavenly bodies, as
sacred symbols, are of constant occurrence in the most ancient
sculptures;” whilst the “one symbol” of the supreme Deity is “a winged
figure in a circle,” sometimes assuming the form of “a winged globe,
wheel, or disc,” resembling the Egyptian representation of the sun, and
the Persian Ormuzd.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc04045.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p45"></span> *Lat. “*<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p45.1"></span>*subsistendum.” Fr. “*<span
id="iii.iii.ii-p45.2"></span>*s’amuser."*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc04045.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p46"></span> *S.M.* says, “Rabbi Aben-Ezra, and the
author of the ‘Bundle of Myrrh,’ foolishly think that the Gentiles were
under the dominion of decrees emanating from the stars; but that the
Jews were free, because the Lord turneth aside their noxious influences.
But this text teaches us, that the functions of the stars are
distributed among the nations, inasmuch as they afford light and heat,
and temper the cold to all men.” — *W*.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc04045.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii-p49"></span> So the *V*. which is followed by
*A.V*. and *S.M*. Our expositor seems to mean that <span
id="iii.iii.ii-p49.1"></span>אשר is here equivalent to *even as,* and
connects the last with the first clause of the verse; so that it should
be rendered as follows, “Take heed to yourselves, etc., *even as* the
Lord your God commanded you.” —*W*. The *Fr.* thus abbreviates the Latin
text: “<span id="iii.iii.ii-p49.2"></span>*La* ou j’ay translate, *Ce
que l’Eternel vostre Dieu vous a defendu,* vaut autant que s’il estoit
dit Comme ou Selon."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 11:16,17](cc04046)
