[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04110)  [Next](cc04112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#000)<span id="iii.x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p2"></span><span
id="iii.x.iii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
2:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)<span
id="iii.x.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p3"></span>**1.** And when any will offer a meat
offering unto the LORD, his offering shall be *of* fine flour; and he
shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon:

<span id="iii.x.iii-p4"></span>**1.** Anima quum offeret oblationem
minha Jehovae, simila erit oblatio ejus: fundetque super eam oleum, ac
thus superimponet.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p5"></span>**2.** And he shall bring it to Aaron’s
sons the priests: and he shall take thereout his handful of the flour
thereof, and of the oil thereof, with all the frankincense thereof; and
the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, *to be* an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD:

<span id="iii.x.iii-p6"></span>**2.** Afferet autem eam ad filios Aharon
sacerdotes, et accipiet inde plenum pugillum de simila ejus, et de oleo
ipsius supra totum thus ipsius, adolebitque sacerdos odorem ejus super
altare: oblatio ignita est odoris quietis Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p7"></span>**3.** And the remnant of the meat
offering *shall be* Aaron’s and his sons’: *it is* a thing most holy of
the offerings of the LORD made by fire.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p8"></span>**3.** Et residuum e minha, ipsius Aharon
erit et filiorum ejus, sanctum sanctorum est ex oblationibus ignitis
Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p9"></span>**4.** And if thou bring an oblation of a
meat offering baken in the oven, *it shall be* unleavened cakes of fine
flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p10"></span>**4.** Quinn vero obtuleris oblationem
minha, coctionem clibani, sit e simila placentae infermentatae mixtae
oleo, et lagana ex infermentatis mixta oleo.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p11"></span>**5.** And if thy oblation *be* a meat
offering *baken* in a pan, it shall be *of* fine flour unleavened,
mingled with oil.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p12"></span>**5.** Si minha sartaginis erit oblatio
tua, sit simila conspersa oleo infermentata.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p13"></span>**6.** Thou shalt part it in pieces, and
pour oil thereon: it *is* a meat offering.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p14"></span>**6.** Concides eam in frusta, et fundes
super cam oleum: minha est.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p15"></span>**7.** And if thy oblation *be* a meat
offering *baken* in the fryingpan, it shall be made *of* fine flour with
oil.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p16"></span>**7.** Quod si minha craticulm erit
oblatio tua, simila sit oleo conspersa.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p17"></span>**8.** And thou shalt bring the meat
offering that is made of these things unto the LORD: and when it is
presented unto the priest, he shall bring it unto the altar.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p18"></span>**8.** Afferesque minham ex illis factam
Jehovae: et offeres illam sacerdoti qui admovebit eam altari.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p19"></span>**9.** And the priest shall take from
the meat offering a memorial thereof, and shall burn *it* upon the
altar: *it is* an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the
LORD.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p20"></span>**9.** Tolletque sacerdos de minha
odorem ejus, et adolebit super altare: oblatio est ignita odoris quietis
Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p21"></span>**10.** And that which is left of the
meat offering *shall be* Aaron’s and his sons’: *it is* a thing most
holy of the offerings of the LORD made by fire.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p22"></span>**10.** Et quod superfuerit e minha erit
Aharon et filiorum ejus, sanctum sanctorum est ex oblationibus ignitis
Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p23"></span>**11.**: No meat offering, which ye
shall bring unto the LORD, shall be made with leaven: for ye shall burn
no leaven, nor any honey, in any offering of the LORD made by fire.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p24"></span>**11.** Omnis minha quam offeretis
Jehovae non fiet fermentata: quia de nullo fermento, et de nullo melle
adolebis oblationem ignitam Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p25"></span>**12.** As for the oblation of the
firstfruits, ye shall offer them unto the LORD: but they shall not be
burnt on the altar for a sweet savour.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p26"></span>**12.** In oblatione primitiarum
offeretis ea Jehovae: et super altare non ascendent in odorem quietis.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p27"></span>**13.** And every oblation of thy meat
offering shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suffer the salt
of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat offering: with
all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p28"></span>**13.** Et omnem oblationem minhae tuae
sale salies, neque cessare facies sal foederis Dei tui a minha tua: in
omni oblatione tua offeres sal.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p29"></span>**14.** And if thou offer a meat
offering of thy firstfruits unto the LORD, thou shalt offer for the meat
offering of thy firstfruits green ears of corn dried by the fire, *even*
corn beaten out of full ears.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p30"></span>**14.** Si vero obtuleris minham
primitiarum Jehovae, spicam tostam igni, triticum contusum spicae plenae
offeres minham primitiarum tuarum.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p31"></span>**15.** And thou shalt put oil upon it,
and lay frankincense thereon: it *is* a meat offering.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p32"></span>**15.** Et pones super eam oleum, pones
item thus super eam: minha est.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p33"></span>**16.** And the priest shall burn the
memorial of it, *part* of the beaten corn thereof, and *part* of the oil
thereof, with all the frankincense thereof: *it is* an offering made by
fire unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p34"></span>**16.** Et adolebit sacerdos odorem
ejus, de frumento ejus contuso et de oleo ejus ultra totum thus ipsius:
oblatio est ignita Jehovah.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p35"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.iii-p36"></span><span id="iii.x.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p37"></span>**1.** *And when any will offer.* In
this chapter Moses prescribes the rules for those offerings to which the
name of *minha* is peculiarly given. They were not bloody sacrifices,
nor offerings of animals, but only of cakes and oil. If any one would
offer plain flour, he is commanded to season it with frankincense and
oil, and also to choose fine flour, that the oblation may not be defiled
by the bran. Thus here, as in all the service of God, the rule is laid
down that nothing but what is pure should be offered; besides, by the
oil its savor is improved, and by the frankincense a fragrant odor is
imparted to it. We know that God is not attracted either by sweetness of
taste nor by pleasant scents; but it was useful to teach a rude people
by these symbols, lest they should corrupt God’s service by their own
foolish inventions. Moses afterwards commands, that whatever is
consecrated to God should be delivered into the hand of the priest, as
we have before seen that private persons were excluded from this honor
so that Christ’s peculiar dignity should remain to Him, *i.e.,* that by
Him alone access should be sought to God, and that all men might know
that no worship pleases God except what He sanctifies. The substance of
this type is shewn by the words of the Apostle, when he says that “by
him” we now “offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is,
the fruit of our lips giving thanks to His name.” (<span
id="iii.x.iii-p37.1"></span>[Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015)<span
id="iii.x.iii-p37.1"></span>.) But when the priest had burnt a handful
of the flour with the oil and frankincense, what remained was left for
his own use; for, as we have elsewhere seen, the holy of holies of the
burnt-offerings were given to the priests. Other kinds are then spoken
of, viz., cakes, baken in the oven; then such as were fried in a pan;
and thirdly, on a gridiron: for God would have the *minha* offered Him
of every kind of cake, so that the Israelites might learn to look to Him
in all their food, since nothing is clean to us except what He
consecrates by His blessing. This is the reason why Moses accurately
distinguishes between the cakes which were cooked either in the oven, or
the frying-pan, or on the gridiron.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p38"></span><span id="iii.x.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p39"></span>**11.** *No meat-offering, which ye
shall bring.* God here forbids leavened cakes to be offered to Him, by
which rite the ancients were taught that God’s service is corrupted if
any strange invention be mingled with it. Nor can it be doubted but
that. Christ alluded to this when He warned His disciples to “beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees,” (<span id="iii.x.iii-p39.1"></span>[Mt
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#011)<span
id="iii.x.iii-p39.1"></span>;) understanding by that word the fictions
whereby they had corrupted religion. The eating of leaven was forbidden
in the Passover for another reason, viz., that they might remember their
sudden departure, or rather flight, in which there had been no time to
prepare provisions for their journey. Although Paul extends it even
further, viz., that believers should abstain from all “leaven of malice
and wickedness.” (<span id="iii.x.iii-p39.2"></span>[1Co
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span
id="iii.x.iii-p39.2"></span>.) It is clear, however, that in this
general rule all adventitious corruptions are condemned, whereby pure
religion is polluted, as if it were said that no offerings would be
approved by God except such as were genuine and free from all strange
savor. With reference to the honey, the ground of its use is more
obscure, for I know not whether there is much dependence to be placed on
the subtle disquisitions of some respecting its nature.  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) But although I scarcely dare to make
any assertion as to this, still I pass by conceits, and advance what
seems to me more probable. Cooked honey immediately becomes sour, and
causes the bread with which it is mixed to ferment; these two things,
therefore, seem to be combined, that neither honey nor leaven should be
offered in the fire. As to what Moses adds just afterwards, “Ye shall
offer them among the first-fruits,” I know not whether it applies to the
leaven, as some think; assuredly the exception seems to be more simple,
that the first-fruits of honey would indeed be acceptable to God,
provided it did not corrupt the offerings of the altar. But no doubt the
ancients understood the meaning of this precept, else it would have been
useless, and thus knew that nothing was legitimate in the sacrifices
except what God appointed. But let us, since the use of the ceremony is
abolished, learn not to intrude our own imaginations or inventions in
God’s service, but to follow obediently the rule which he prescribes.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p41"></span><span id="iii.x.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p42"></span>**13.** *And every oblation of thy
meat-offering.* The reason for salting the victims was very similar,
viz., that God’s service might not be without savor; but the true
seasoning which gives grace to sacrifices is found nowhere except in
God’s word. Hence it follows that all modes of worship fabricated by men
are rejected as unsavory. For although they who profane God’s worship by
superstitions think themselves very acute, yet all that most approves
itself to them under the cloak of wisdom is mere fatuity. Nevertheless,
Christ deduces an exhortation from this ceremony, viz., that believers,
if they desire to please God, should patiently endure to be refined and
purified. “Every one,” He says,

<span id="iii.x.iii-p43"></span>"shall be salted with fire,  
and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt.” (<span
id="iii.x.iii-p43.2"></span>[Mr
9:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049)<span
id="iii.x.iii-p43.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.x.iii-p44"></span>In which words He signifies that, when
we are searched and tried by fire, we shall be acceptable sacrifices to
God, and that this is the seasoning of salt when our flesh with its
affections shall have been well macerated. Meanwhile, let us firmly hold
to this, that our service of God is not what it should be without, the
savor which is to be sought in the word; since in all the brains of men
not one particle of salt is to be found. I pass by other more subtle
allegories, in which I see no other use than to gratify curious ears.
“The salt of the covenant” is used in a different sense from “the
covenant of salt,” viz., as the salt which is employed in the sacrifice
according to the inviolable compact of God. Hence, too, is confirmed
what I have said before, that the keeping of God’s covenant always
occupies the first place in this service.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p45"></span><span id="iii.x.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p46"></span>**14.** *And if thou offer a
meat-offering.* This offering is different from that of the
first-fruits, since it was voluntary, whereas the first-fruits were paid
in obedience to the enactment of the Law. But if any one chose to add
anything to the first-fruits of his new corn, Moses lays down the rule,
that the ears should be dried in the fire, so that they might be more
easily pounded, and so might be burnt mixed with oil and frankincense;
for so I interpret his words, that he means the same thing by “ears of
corn dried by the fire,” and “corn beaten out of full ears.” He requires
full ears, that the people may select them, and not offer anything poor
or stunted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc04111.htm#fr_251) <span
id="iii.x.iii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p40"></span> They appear, indeed, to have been
manifold. “R. Salomon (says Corn. a Lapide, *in loco*) understands by
honey, sweet fruits, such as figs and dates. Philo, *lib. de Vict.,*
thinks that honey was forbidden in the sacrifices, because the bee is an
impure animal, generated by the putrid carcases of oxen.” Oleaster gives
as a reason that honey burns with an offensive smell; and many
commentators, because it was constantly offered in the Gentile
sacrifices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 3:1-17](cc04112)
