[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04160)  [Next](cc04162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#000)<span id="v.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p2"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
23:1-44](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001)<span id="v.v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="v.v.ii-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="v.v.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
and say unto them, *Concerning* the feasts of the LORD, which ye shall
proclaim *to be* holy convocations, *even* these *are* my feasts.

<span id="v.v.ii-p6"></span>**2.** Alloquere filios Israel, et die
illis, Hae sunt feriae quas vocabitis convocationes sanctas, hae sunt
solennitates meae.

<span id="v.v.ii-p7"></span>**3.** Six days shall work be done: but the
seventh day *is* the sabbath of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do
no work *therein*: it *is* the sabbath of the LORD in all your
dwellings.

<span id="v.v.ii-p8"></span>**3.** Sex diebus fiet opus, die autem
septimo Sabbathum est quietis, convocatio sancta: nullum opus facietis:
Sabbathum est Jehovae in cunctis habitationibus vestris.

<span id="v.v.ii-p9"></span>**4.** These *are* the feasts of the LORD,
*even* holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons.

<span id="v.v.ii-p10"></span>**4.** Hae sunt feriae quas celebrabitis:
hae sunt feriae Jehovae sanctae, quas celebrabitis temporibus suis.

<span id="v.v.ii-p11"></span>**5.** In the fourteenth *day* of the first
month at even *is* the LORD’S passover.

<span id="v.v.ii-p12"></span>**5.** Mense primo, quartadecima mensis, ad
vesperam Pesah Jehovae est.

<span id="v.v.ii-p13"></span>**6.** And on the fifteenth day of the same
month *is* the feast of unleavened bread unto the LORD: seven days ye
must eat unleavened bread.

<span id="v.v.ii-p14"></span>**6.** Quintodecimo autem die mensis hujus,
solennitas erit infermentatorum Jehovae, septem diebus infermentata
comedetis.

<span id="v.v.ii-p15"></span>**7.** In the first day ye shall have an
holy convocation: ye shall do no servile work therein.

<span id="v.v.ii-p16"></span>**7.** Die primo convocatio sancta erit
vobis: nullum opus servile facietis.

<span id="v.v.ii-p17"></span>**8.** But ye shall offer an offering made
by fire unto the LORD seven days: in the seventh day *is* an holy
convocation: ye shall do no servile work *therein.*

<span id="v.v.ii-p18"></span>**8.** Offeretis autem oblationem ignitam
Jehovae septem diebus: die septimo erit convocatio sancta, nullum opus
servile facietis.

<span id="v.v.ii-p19"></span>**9.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="v.v.ii-p20"></span>**9.** Adhaec loquutus est Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="v.v.ii-p21"></span>**10.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
and say unto them, When ye be come into the land which I give unto you,
and shall reap the harvest thereof, then ye shall bring a sheaf of the
firstfruits of your harvest unto the priest:

<span id="v.v.ii-p22"></span>**10.** Alloquere filios Israel, et dic
eis, Quum ingressi fueritis terrain quam ego do vobis, et messueritis
messem ejus, tunc offeretis omnes primitias messis vestrae ad
sacerdotem.

<span id="v.v.ii-p23"></span>**11.** And he shall wave the sheaf before
the LORD, to be accepted for you: on the morrow after the sabbath the
priest shall wave it.

<span id="v.v.ii-p24"></span>**11.** Qui offert omer coram Jehova, ut
sit acceptum pro vobis: in crastino Sabbathi offerer illud sacerdos.

<span id="v.v.ii-p25"></span>**12.** And ye shall offer that day when ye
wave the sheaf an he lamb without blemish of the first year for a burnt
offering unto the LORD.

<span id="v.v.ii-p26"></span>**12.** Facietisque die quo offeretis omer,
agnum integrum anniculum, in holocaustum Jehovae:

<span id="v.v.ii-p27"></span>**13.** And the meat offering thereof
*shall be* two tenth deals of fine flour mingled with oil, an offering
made by fire unto the LORD *for* a sweet savour: and the drink offering
thereof *shall be* of wine, the fourth *part* of an hin.

<span id="v.v.ii-p28"></span>**13.** Et minham ejus, duas decimas
similae permistae oleo, oblationem ignitam Jehovae in odorem quietis: et
libamen ejus vini quattam partem hin.

<span id="v.v.ii-p29"></span>**14.** And ye shall eat neither bread, nor
parched corn, nor green ears, until the selfsame day that ye have
brought an offering unto your God: *it shall be* a statute for ever
throughout your generations in all your dwellings.

<span id="v.v.ii-p30"></span>**14.** Panem vero et polentam, et spicam
plenam non comedetis usque ad hunc ipsum diem, donec obtuleris munus Dei
vestri: statutum perpetuum erit in generationibus vestris, in cunctis
habitaculis vestris.

<span id="v.v.ii-p31"></span>**15.** And ye shall count unto you from
the morrow after the sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of
the wave offering; seven sabbaths shall be complete:

<span id="v.v.ii-p32"></span>**15.** Numerabitis autem vobis dies a
postero die Sabbathi, a die qua obtuleris omer elevationis, septem
hebdomades plenae erunt.

<span id="v.v.ii-p33"></span>**16.** Even unto the morrow after the
seventh sabbath shall ye number fifty days; and ye shall offer a new
meat offering unto the LORD.

<span id="v.v.ii-p34"></span>**16.** Usque ad posterum diem Sabbathi
septimi numerabitis quinquaginta dies, et offeretis oblationem novam
Jehovae.

<span id="v.v.ii-p35"></span>**17.** Ye shall bring out of your
habitations two wave loaves of two tenth deals: they shall be of fine
flour; they shall be baken with leaven; *they are* the firstfruits unto
the LORD.

<span id="v.v.ii-p36"></span>**17.** Ex habitaculis vestris offeretis
panem oblationis: duae ex dunbus decimis similae erunt: cum fermento
coquentur primitiae Jehovae.

<span id="v.v.ii-p37"></span>**18.** And ye shall offer with the bread
seven lambs without blemish of the first year, and one young bullock,
and two rams: they shall be *for* a burnt offering unto the LORD, with
their meat offering and their drink offerings, *even* an offering made
by fire, of sweet savour unto the LORD.

<span id="v.v.ii-p38"></span>**18.** Offeretisque cum pane illo septem
agnos integros anniculos, et juvencum filium bovis unum, et arietes
duos, erunt holocaustum Jehovae: et oblatio eorum libaminaque eorum,
oblatio ignita erit odoris quietis Jehovae.

<span id="v.v.ii-p39"></span>**19.** Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of
the goats for a sin offering, and two lambs of the first year for a
sacrifice of peace offerings.

<span id="v.v.ii-p40"></span>**19.** Facietis quoque hircum caprarum
unum pro peccato, et duos agnos anniculos in sacrificium prosperitatum.

<span id="v.v.ii-p41"></span>**20.** And the priest shall wave them with
the bread of the firstfruits*, for* a wave offering before the LORD,
with the two lambs: they shall be holy to the LORD for the priest.

<span id="v.v.ii-p42"></span>**20.** Offeretque sacerdos illa ultra
panem primitiarum, elevationem coram Jehova cum duobus agnis, sanctitas
erunt Jehovae sacerdoti.

<span id="v.v.ii-p43"></span>**21.** And ye shall proclaim on the
selfsame day, *that* it may be an holy convocation unto you: ye shall do
no servile work *therein: it shall be* a statute for ever in all your
dwellings throughout your generations.

<span id="v.v.ii-p44"></span>**21.** Et celebrabitis hoc ipso die
celebritatem, convocatio sancta erit vobis: nullum opus servile
facietis: statutum perpetuum erit in cunctis habitaculis vestris, in
generationibus vestris.

<span id="v.v.ii-p45"></span>**22.** And when ye reap the harvest of
your land, thou shalt not make clean riddance of the corners of thy
field when thou reapest, neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy
harvest: ...

<span id="v.v.ii-p46"></span>**22.** Et cum messueritis messem terrae
vestrae, non complebis angulum agri tui in messe tua: nec quod residuum
erit in messe tua colliges.

<span id="v.v.ii-p47"></span>**23.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="v.v.ii-p48"></span>**23.** Loquutus est praeterea Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="v.v.ii-p49"></span>**24.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
saying, In the seventh month, in the first *day* of the month, shall ye
have a sabbath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, an holy convocation.

<span id="v.v.ii-p50"></span>**24.** Alloquere filios Israel, dicendo,
Mense septimo, primo die ejusdem erit vobis Sabbathum monimentum
clangoris, convocatio sancta.

<span id="v.v.ii-p51"></span>**25.** Ye shall do no servile work
*therein*: but ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the LORD.

<span id="v.v.ii-p52"></span>**25.** Nullum opus servile facietis, et
offeretis oblationem ignitam Jehovae.

<span id="v.v.ii-p53"></span>**26.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="v.v.ii-p54"></span>**26.** Loquutus est quoque Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="v.v.ii-p55"></span>**27.** Also on the tenth *day* of this
seventh month *there shall be* a day of atonement: it shall be an holy
convocation unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an
offering made by fire unto the LORD.

<span id="v.v.ii-p56"></span>**27.** Veruntamen (*vel,* utique) in
decimo mensis hujus septimi, dies expiationum erit: convocatio sancta
erit vobis, afiligetisque animas vestras, et offeretis sacrificium
ignitum Jehovae.

<span id="v.v.ii-p57"></span>**28.** And ye shall do no work in that
same day: for it *is* a day of atonement, to make an atonement for you
before the LORD your God.

<span id="v.v.ii-p58"></span>**28.** Nullum opus facietis hoc ipso die,
quid dies expiationum est ad expiandum vos (*vel,* super vos, ant pro
vobis) coram Jehova Deo vestro.

<span id="v.v.ii-p59"></span>**29.** For whatsoever soul *it be* that
shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from among
his people.

<span id="v.v.ii-p60"></span>**29.** Omnis enim anima quae non fuerit
afflicta eo ipso die, excidetur e populis suis.

<span id="v.v.ii-p61"></span>**30.** And whatsoever soul *it be* that
doeth any work in that same day, the same soul will I destroy from among
his people.

<span id="v.v.ii-p62"></span>**30.** Et quisquis fecerit quodcunque opus
eo ipso die, perdam animam illam e medio populi.

<span id="v.v.ii-p63"></span>**31.** Ye shall do no manner of work: *it
shall be* a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your
dwellings.

<span id="v.v.ii-p64"></span>**31.** Nullum opus facietis: statutum
perpetuum erit in generationibus vestris, in cunctis habitationibus
vestris.

<span id="v.v.ii-p65"></span>**32.** It *shall be* unto you a sabbath of
rest, and ye shall afflict your souls: in the ninth *day* of the month
at even, from even unto even, shall ye celebrate your sabbath.

<span id="v.v.ii-p66"></span>**32.** Sabbathum quietis est vobis, et
affligetis animas vestras nona mensis in vespera: a vespera usque ad
vesperam quiescetis in Sabbatho vestro.

<span id="v.v.ii-p67"></span>**33.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="v.v.ii-p68"></span>**33.** Loquutus est et Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="v.v.ii-p69"></span>**34.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
saying, The fifteenth day of this seventh month *shall be* the feast of
tabernacles *for* seven days unto the LORD.

<span id="v.v.ii-p70"></span>**34.** Alloquere filios Israel, dicendo,
Decimo quinto die mensis septimi hujus, solennitas tabernaculorum erit
septem diebus Jehovah.

<span id="v.v.ii-p71"></span>**35.** On the first day *shall be* an holy
convocation: ye shall do no servile work *therein.*

<span id="v.v.ii-p72"></span>**35.** Die primo erit convocatio sancta,
nullum opus servile facietis.

<span id="v.v.ii-p73"></span>**36.** Seven days ye shall offer an
offering made by fire unto the LORD: on the eighth day shall be an holy
convocation unto you; and ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto
the LORD: it *is* a solemn assembly; *and* ye shall do no servile work
*therein.*

<span id="v.v.ii-p74"></span>**36.** Septem diebus offeretis sacrificium
ignitum Jehovae, die octavo convocatio sancta erit vobis, et offeretis
sacrificium ignitum Jehovah, solennitas est, nullum opus servile
facietis.

<span id="v.v.ii-p75"></span>**37.** These *are* the feasts of the LORD,
which ye shall proclaim *to be* holy convocations, to offer an offering
made by fire unto the LORD, a burnt offering, and a meat offering, a
sacrifice, and drink offerings, every thing upon his day:

<span id="v.v.ii-p76"></span>**37.** Istae sunt festivitates Jehovae
quas vocabitis convocationes sanctas, ut offeratis in els sacrificium
ignitum Jehovae, holocaustum et oblationem, sacrificium et libamina suo
quodque die.

<span id="v.v.ii-p77"></span>**38.** Beside the sabbaths of the LORD,
and beside your gifts, and beside all your vows, and beside all your
freewill offerings, which ye give unto the LORD.

<span id="v.v.ii-p78"></span>**38.** Praeter Sabbatha Jehovae, et
praeter dona vestra, praeterque omnia vota vestra, et praeter omnes
spontaneas oblationes vestras, quas dabitis Jehovae.

<span id="v.v.ii-p79"></span>**39.** Also in the fifteenth day of the
seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shall
keep a feast unto the LORD seven days: on the first day *shall be* a
sabbath, and on the eighth day *shall be* a sabbath.

<span id="v.v.ii-p80"></span>**39.** Veruntamen (*vel,* utique) decimo
quinto die mensis septimi, quando congregaveritis fructum terrae,
celebrabitis celebritatem Jehovae septem diebus: die primo erit
Sabbathum, die quoque octavo erit Sabbathum.

<span id="v.v.ii-p81"></span>**40.** And ye shall take you on the first
day the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs
of thick trees, and willows of the brook; and ye shall rejoice before
the LORD your God seven days.

<span id="v.v.ii-p82"></span>**40.** Sumetisque vobis die primo fructum
arboris decorae, et ramos palmarum, et ramos arboris densarum frondium,
et salices torrentis, et laetabimini coram Jehova Deo vestro septem
diebus.

<span id="v.v.ii-p83"></span>**41.** And ye shall keep it a feast unto
the LORD seven days in the year. *It shall be* a statute for ever in
your generations: ye shall celebrate it in the seventh month.

<span id="v.v.ii-p84"></span>**41.** Celebrabitis, inquam, istam
celebritatem Jehovae septem diebus quotannis: statutum perpetuum erit in
generationibus vestris, mense septimo celebrabitis illam.

<span id="v.v.ii-p85"></span>**42.** Ye shall dwell in booths seven
days; all that are Israelites born shall dwell in booths:

<span id="v.v.ii-p86"></span>**42.** In tabernaculis habitabitis septem
diebus: onmis indigena ex Israele habitabit in tabernaculis.

<span id="v.v.ii-p87"></span>**43.** That your generations may know that
I made the children of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them
out of the land of Egypt: I *am* the LORD your God.

<span id="v.v.ii-p88"></span>**43.** Ut sciant generationes vestrae quod
in tabernaculis habitare feci filios Israel quando eduxi eos e terra
Aegypti: ego Jehova Deus vester.

<span id="v.v.ii-p89"></span>**44.** And Moses declared unto the
children of Israel the feasts of the LORD.

<span id="v.v.ii-p90"></span>**44.** Loquutus est igitur Moses de
solennitatibus Jehovae ad filios Israel.

<span id="v.v.ii-p91"></span> 

<span id="v.v.ii-p92"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p92.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p93"></span>**4.** *These are the feasts of the Lord.*
The other festivals which Moses here enumerates have an affinity to the
Sabbath. In the first place the Passover is put, the mystery of which I
have annexed, not without reason, to the First Commandment, for its
institution was there explained, inasmuch as it acted as a restraint on
the people from falling away to strange gods. In that rite they were
initiated to the service of God, that they might abandon all the
superstitions of the Gentiles, and acquiesce in the pure instruction of
the Law. The Passover, therefore, in itself was a supplement to the
First Commandment; yet the day recurring from year to year is fitly
enumerated amongst the other festivals. And surely it is plain that the
Fourth Commandment had no other object or use except to exercise the
people in the service of God; but since the killing of the lamb
represented the grace of adoption whereby God had bound them to Himself,
it was necessary to annex it to the First Commandment. Let my readers
therefore now be content with the other part, i.e., that its annual
celebration was a help to the perpetual recollection by the Israelites
of their redemption.

<span id="v.v.ii-p94"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p94.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p95"></span>**10.** *When ye be come to the land.*
Moses now lays down rules as to the second day of festival, which was
dedicated to the offering of the first-fruits. The ceremony is described
that they should deliver a handful into the hand of the priest; though
some think that the measure is signified which was the tenth part of an
*Ephah.* The word *Omer*  <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) means
both. But in this passage the expression “handful” is most appropriate,
since it represented in a lively manner the beginning of the harvest;
inasmuch as it was not lawful to taste even of parched grain before the
offering of the firstfruits. The priest lifted it up before the altar,
but with a waving motion; for thus the Hebrews distinguish between the
two modes,  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) <span
id="v.v.ii-p97.2"></span>תרומה, *therumah,* which was lifted up, and
<span id="v.v.ii-p97.3"></span>תנופה*, thenuphah,* which is mentioned
here, and which was waved towards the four points of the compass, and
then a sacrifice and libation were made. We know that heathen nations
 <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) thus invented gods and
goddesses presiding over the fruits, so that the earth was the great and
common mother of gods and men. Into this error the Jews would have
straightway fallen, or would have gorged themselves without thinking
about God, unless they had been reminded by this ceremony that the
Father of their subsistence was in heaven, whose minister the earth was
for providing their food. For since the whole harvest was consecrated in
the single handful, it was as if they had shewn that whatever the earth
produced altogether belonged to God. But thus the admirable goodness of
God was conspicuous, when, in claiming what was His own, He did not at
all diminish the food of the people; afterwards they received, as if
from His hand, whatever each individual had stored at home, just as
though it had come out of His sanctuary. Paul’s statement is well known,
“For if the first-fruit be holy, the lump is also holy,” (<span
id="v.v.ii-p99.6"></span>[Ro
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span id="v.v.ii-p99.6"></span>,)
wherein he alludes to this ancient ceremony of the Law. The word which
they translate “unto your acceptance,”  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) is the same which interpreters
elsewhere render “good pleasure,” and refer to the people, as if it were
said, “at your own will,” or “*ad libitum,”* as it is barbarously said.
But I have before shewn that it must be understood of the favor and
good-will of God, although it is transferred in a passive sense to the
people, as in <span id="v.v.ii-p100.2"></span>[Ps
106:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#004)<span id="v.v.ii-p100.2"></span>,
<span id="v.v.ii-p100.3"></span>רצון, *ratson,* or the favor of the
chosen people, means the gratuitous love wherewith God regards His
Church. But Moses signifies that the fruits of the earth cannot
otherwise be eaten with a clear conscience, because they would not feel
that God accepted them, and looked upon them with paternal affection.
The ceremony, now abolished, still remains in full force amongst us as
regards its substance, for nothing but the acknowledgment of God’s
bounty, which springs from faith and thanksgiving, sanctifies whatever
we receive of His hand.

<span id="v.v.ii-p101"></span>Next to the first-fruits comes the feast
of seven weeks, which the Greeks have rendered Pentecost, having
reference to the same object; for after they had offered the
first-fruits from the standing harvest, they added another token of
gratitude in the shape of the loaves and the greater sacrifice. It must
however be observed, that the two loaves are required of every family,
and that they consist of two-tenths; but that the sacrifices of seven
lambs, one bullock, and two rams, and also of a goat and two lambs, is
enjoined upon the whole people. This is in fact the legitimate
acknowledgment of God’s liberality, because the waving of the sheaf, as
being performed in haste, was but a trifling one; since we have seen
that before they touched the grain, God required that the first-fruits
should be offered to Him, until at leisure and in a more convenient
season they might more fully discharge their duty. Thus what we have
above observed respecting the first-fruits, was only a preparation for
the day of Pentecost, on which the holy oblation was not ears of wheat,
but loaves made of the new wheat.

<span id="v.v.ii-p102"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p103"></span>**24.** *In the seventh month, in the
first day of the month.* I wonder how it ever entered the mind of the
Jews  <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) that in the feast of
trumpets the deliverance of Isaac was commemorated, when a goat was
substituted to be slain in his stead;  <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) but they have invented this with their
wonted audacity. Surely it is as baseless as it is unreasonable. Others
more rightly suppose that it was a preparation for the approaching feast
of atonement, on account of the slight interval of time; for since this
day is distinguished by no peculiar mark, it is probable that it ought
not to be separated from the other which follows soon afterwards, viz.,
on the tenth day. Unless, perhaps, it is more probable that they were
thus called together once a year by the sound of trumpets, first of all,
that they might learn that all their sacred assemblies were appointed by
the voice of God; and secondly, that this His voice was thus renewed,
that they might always be ready to obey Him. And this seems to signify
by the expression, “a memorial of blowing of trumpets;” as if He had
said that the trumpets sounded in their ears once a year, that they
might be attentive to God’s voice throughout their lives, and ever
willing to follow whithersoever He should command them to go. Others
think that the trumpets sounded at the beginning of the month, that they
might prepare themselves for the three festivals, and also because this
month was remarkable both in the Sabbatical year and in the Jubilee. But
what, if when God displaced this month from being the beginning of the
year to stand seventh, He chose to leave it some traces of its original
dignity? for by general consent it is admitted that, until the people
came out of Egypt, this was the first month. Some even think that the
world was created in it, which is not without probable show of reason.
And the Jews now also, in political matters and in things which relate
to this earthly life, retain this original computation in accordance
with unbroken custom: it is only in sacred matters that they commence
the year in March. This indeed seems to me the probable reason why, on
the day now referred to, God renewed the memory of His dominion by a
solemn proclamation, and assigned this seventh month both to the Jubilee
and the Sabbatical year.  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) The
solemnity was completed in one day, differing very little from an
ordinary Sabbath, except by the trumpet-blowing and the sacrifice, as is
described in <span id="v.v.ii-p106.2"></span>[Nu
29](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#000)<span id="v.v.ii-p106.2"></span>.
For Moses there speaks of more than he does here; he there enumerates a
calf, a ram, seven lambs, a goat for a sin-offering, with its
accompaniments, besides the burnt-offering of the new moon, and commands
an offering to be made by fire of them all. Here he speaks generally in
a single word.

<span id="v.v.ii-p107"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p107.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p108"></span>**27.** *Also on the tenth day of this
seventh month.* The word <span id="v.v.ii-p108.1"></span>כפר, *caphar,*
whence the noun <span id="v.v.ii-p108.2"></span>כפרים, *cephurim,*
signifies both to propitiate and to blot out guilt and accusation by
means of expiation; <span id="v.v.ii-p108.3"></span>כפרים, therefore,
are atonements (*libationes*) for appeasing God; and the word is used in
the plural number, because they were not under the imputation of a
single kind of guilt, but had need of manifold reconciliations on
account of their many and various transgressions. This was indeed done
both publicly and privately throughout the rest of the year, for all the
victims they offered were so many satisfactions in order to obtain
pardon and to reconcile God. Still to these daily exercises was added
also a yearly feast-day as a special memorial, and as a sharper spur to
repentance: for it was fit that they should be stirred up to pious grief
by solemn fasting and sacrifices, inasmuch as they had provoked God’s
wrath against themselves through the whole year. Therefore on this
feast-day they were cited before His tribunal, in order that, placing
themselves there, they should acknowledge that they deserved this
judgment, and yet prayed that they might escape punishment; and this was
the object of the fast. Meanwhile they learnt from the sacrifices that
they were restored to His favor, since simple confession would have been
only a ground for despair. Thus, therefore, God required of them sorrow
and other indications of penitence, that on His part He might testify
that He was duly appeased so as to be propitious to them. The
expression, “ye shall afflict your souls,” here refers to the fast,
which was required as an outward profession of repentance. And assuredly
there was no weight in the fast of itself, since God plainly shews
through Isaiah that He makes no account of hypocrites, who trust that
they appease him by fasting, (<span id="v.v.ii-p108.4"></span>[Isa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003)<span id="v.v.ii-p108.4"></span>;)
but being withdrawn from mere luxurious food and all delicacies, they
were reminded of their misery, so that being cast down by grief and
humbled, they might more ardently and zealously seek for the remedy. For
remission of sins is promised to none but those who, affected with
serious sorrow, feel themselves to be lost and miserable, and
acknowledge and confess what they have deserved. In this way a door is
opened for imploring God’s mercy. Still it is not to be supposed that
those who are thus dissatisfied with themselves deserve pardon by their
preparation for it.  <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) But since
it would be contrary to God’s nature to embrace men with His favor who
are plunged in their iniquities and obstinate in sin; and again, since
it would be most unreasonable that by His clemency license to sin should
be given under the pretext of impunity, it is needful that penitence
should precede our reconciliation to God. Whence also it appears that He
so pardons sinners as still to hate their sins, since He only absolves
those who voluntarily condemn themselves, nor admits any into His favor
except those who forsake their sins; not that any one perfectly
renounces himself or his sins, but through indulgence that penitence is
acceptable to God,  <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) which might
justly be rejected on the ground of its deficiencies. Whereby also what
I have just said is confirmed, that it is not on account of the merit of
our penitence that God acquits us of our sins; as if we redeemed
ourselves from guilt and punishment by weeping, sorrowing, and
confession, whereas in the best of us all penitence will always be found
to be weak and imperfect. Wherefore the cause and the honor of our
pardon must only be ascribed to the gratuitous goodness of God. Hence I
have said that in their fast the Israelites professed their guilt and
condemnation, whilst they were expiated by the sacrifice, since there is
no other means of satisfaction.

<span id="v.v.ii-p111"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p112"></span>**29.** *For whatsoever soul it be that
shall not be afflicted.* Hence let us learn how greatly the sacrifice of
an afflicted and humbled heart pleases God; since He commands so severe
a punishment to be inflicted for the contempt of this ceremony. And
surely this would have been a proof of most gross indifference, if, when
God was inspiring men with the dread of His wrath, and inviting them to
tears, they should rest in security and ease, and give themselves up to
luxuries. On this account He declares with a terrible oath in Isaiah,
that will never pardon the Jews, to whom the hour of repentance never
came, but, when he reprovingly called upon them by His prophets to make
haste “to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with
sackcloth,” merrily feasted and drank together, and said, “Let us eat
and drink, for to-morrow we die.” (<span id="v.v.ii-p112.2"></span>[Isa
22:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012)<span
id="v.v.ii-p112.2"></span>.) And no wonder, since this is the extreme
height of impiety, to stupify our consciences in brutal contumacy, and
to rob God of His judicial power. As long as the sinner is so far
affected, and pricked by a sense of sins, as anxiously to sigh for a
remedy, there is some hope of his recovery; whilst he who shakes off
fear as well as shame, is in altogether a desperate state. Now, since it
was not without reason that God exercised His ancient people under the
Law with external rudiments, it was an act of profane and intolerable
carelessness to omit what was so necessary; and of still greater
hardness of heart purposely, as it were, to despise it, so that no one
need wonder at the severity of the punishment. In <span
id="v.v.ii-p112.3"></span>[Nu 29](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#000)<span
id="v.v.ii-p112.3"></span> the number of the victims is stated; but I
pass over this point, as not requiring to be expounded.

<span id="v.v.ii-p113"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p113.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p114"></span>**34.** *The fifteenth day of this seventh
month.* It is shewn in the end of the chapter why God instituted the
Feast of Tabernacles, viz, that the children of Israel might remember
that they dwelt in tents in the desert, when they had no certain
dwelling-place, but, as it were, passed a wandering life. The Passover
shewed how they were marvellously rescued from immediate death by the
hand of God; but by this other day God magnified the continuous and
daily flow of His grace; for it would not have been enough to
acknowledge His power in their actual departure, and to give Him thanks
for their momentary deliverance, unless they reflected altogether on the
progress of their perfect deliverance, which they had experienced during
forty years. In allusion to this the Prophet Zechariah, when he is
speaking of the second redemption, enjoins upon all the nations which
should be converted to God’s worship, that they should go up every year
to celebrate this day. (<span id="v.v.ii-p114.1"></span>[Zec
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016)<span
id="v.v.ii-p114.1"></span>.) And why this rather than the other
festivals? because their return from Babylon by a long and difficult
journey, endangered by the violent assaults of enemies, would be equally
memorable with the passage of the people from Egypt into the Promised
Land. Hence we gather that, though the ceremony is now abolished, yet
its use still exists in spirit and in truth, in order that the
incomparable power and mercy of God should be constantly kept before our
eyes, when He has delivered us from darkness and from the deep abyss of
death, and has translated us into the heavenly life. But it behooved
that the ancient people in their ignorance should be thus exercised,
that all from youth to old age, going forth from their homes, should be
brought, as it were, into the actual circumstances, and in that
spectacle should perceive what would have else never sufficiently
penetrated their minds; whilst at the same time they were instructed for
the time to come, that even in the land of Canaan they were to be
sojourners, since this is the condition prescribed to all the pious, and
children of God, that they should be strangers on earth, if they desire
to be inheritors of heaven. Especially, however, God would stir them up
to gratitude, that they might more highly estimate their quiet
occupation of the Promised Land, and the comfort of their houses, when
they recollected that they were brought hither by His hand out of the
desert, and from the most wretched destitution of all things.

<span id="v.v.ii-p115"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p115.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p116"></span>**36.** *Seven days ye shall offer.* They
only kept holiday on the first and eighth day, yet they dwelt in huts,
and for seven successive days offered sacrifices, of which a fuller
account was elsewhere given. What, therefore, Moses distinctly treats of
in the book of Numbers, I have preferred to introduce in another place,
where I have spoken of the sacrifices in general. All are not agreed
about the word I have translated “solemnity.”  <span
id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) <span id="v.v.ii-p117.3"></span>עצרת*,
gnatsereth,* is derived from <span id="v.v.ii-p117.4"></span>עצר*,
gnatsar,* which means both to restrain and to gather together. Some
interpreters, therefore, preserve the first etymology, translating it,
“it is the retaining or prohibition of God;” but since this meaning is
somewhat obscure, I have not hesitated to take it, as in other passages,
for a solemnity; for, without controversy, it sometimes means feast
days, sometimes assemblies or conventions. Let my readers, however, make
choice of whichever sense they prefer. After Moses has prescribed
concerning the rest and the offerings, he adds a caution, that there
should be no diminution of the ordinary service; for else they might,
have transferred fraudulently the sacrifices, which they were already
obliged to offer, to the feast days, and thus, as the saying is, have
endeavored to whitewash two walls out of the same pot. Wherefore, at the
beginning of verse 39, the particle <span id="v.v.ii-p117.5"></span>אך,
*ac,* seems to be taken *adversatively;*  <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) for there is an antithesis between the
peculiar service of this solemnity and the common rites which were to be
observed at other times; as if he had said, that when they had done all
which the Law required every day, still they were not to fail in this
observance; and hence, that they must comply severally with both the
general and special command, if they would properly do their duty.
Moreover, by reference to the time, he shews that they ought to be
cheerful in its performance, because they would then incur but little
loss, as the fruits would all be harvested; and this is what he refers
to when he says, “when ye have gathered in the fruit of the land;” as if
he had said, that he had regard to their convenience, since otherwise
they would have been at leisure at home; and thus he takes away all
excuse (for neglect.)

<span id="v.v.ii-p119"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p120"></span>**40.** *And ye shall take you on the
first day.* By this symbol the Jews were instructed that this day was to
be celebrated with joy and gladness; for it was not only a memorial of
the favor which He had graciously bestowed on their fathers in the
desert, when they were exposed to all the vicissitudes of heaven,  <span
id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) and He cherished them under His wings
as an eagle does her brood; but it was also an act of thanksgiving,
because He had provided them so commodious a reception in the Promised
Land; thus, by carrying the boughs, they proclaimed their joy and
triumph as it were. Nor would it have been reasonable that they should
go into the booths in sorrow and sadness, since they represented visibly
to them both the former and present goodness of God, and at the same
time gave them a foretaste of the life of heaven, inasmuch as they were
but sojourners on earth. Some suppose <span
id="v.v.ii-p121.2"></span>הדר, *hadar,*  <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) to be a proper name, but since it
everywhere means “comeliness,” I have been unwilling to depart from its
ordinary sense; nor do I curiously insist on the words, except so far as
it is necessary to ascertain the actual substance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_344"></span>[345](cc04161.htm#fr_344) <span
id="v.v.ii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p96"></span> “The word <span
id="v.v.ii-p96.1"></span>עמר*, gomer,* was both a measure, which was the
tenth part of an ephah, as also a sheaf, or handful, (<span
id="v.v.ii-p96.2"></span>δράγματα, *LXX.,*) as it is taken where Ruth is
said to have gathered among the sheaves; and the reason is, because
usually that which was beaten out of a sheaf might fill a *ghomer.”* —
Willet, *in loco.*

<span id="fn_345"></span>[346](cc04161.htm#fr_345) <span
id="v.v.ii-p96.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p97"></span> *Vide ante,* p. 132.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[347](cc04161.htm#fr_346) <span
id="v.v.ii-p97.4"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p98"></span> Compare Virgil, Georgic 1:—

<span id="v.v.ii-p99"></span><span id="v.v.ii-p99.1"></span>*Vos, O
clarissima mundi  
Lumina, labentem coelo quae ducitis annum,  
Liber et alma Ceres; vestro si munere tellus  
Chaoniam pingui glandem mutavit arista,  
Poculaque inventis Acheloia miscuit uvis, etc* — *5:5-9.*

<span id="fn_347"></span>[348](cc04161.htm#fr_347) <span
id="v.v.ii-p99.7"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p100"></span> See note \#284

<span id="fn_348"></span>[349](cc04161.htm#fr_348) <span
id="v.v.ii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p104"></span> “The Hebrews and Latins hold that the
feast of trumpets was instituted in memory of the patriarch Isaac having
been delivered from the sword of his father, and of the ram supplied in
his place, (<span id="v.v.ii-p104.1"></span>[Ge
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011)<span
id="v.v.ii-p104.1"></span>,) and thence that they used to blow rams’
horns on that day, etc. Moreover, the Hebrews report that on this very
day, *i.e.,* the first of the seventh month, Isaac was delivered from
slaughter. This blowing of trumpets was therefore a memorial of Isaac’s
deliverance, and also a silent prayer that God would remember them, and
as He had delivered Isaac, would also deliver his posterity from peril
of death.” — Corn. a Lapide, *in loco;* see also R. Salomon Jarchi, *in
loco.*

<span id="fn_349"></span>[350](cc04161.htm#fr_349) <span
id="v.v.ii-p104.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p105"></span> “<span id="v.v.ii-p105.1"></span>Se
trouva miraculeusement;” was found miraculously. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_350"></span>[351](cc04161.htm#fr_350) <span
id="v.v.ii-p105.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p106"></span> Add., “<span
id="v.v.ii-p106.1"></span>Outre les trois festes dont il sera parle
consequemment;” besides the three festivals which will be spoken of. —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_351"></span>[352](cc04161.htm#fr_351) <span
id="v.v.ii-p108.5"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p109"></span> “<span id="v.v.ii-p109.1"></span>Pour
s’estre disposez en bon estat, comme on parle.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_352"></span>[353](cc04161.htm#fr_352) <span
id="v.v.ii-p109.2"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p110"></span> “<span id="v.v.ii-p110.1"></span>Quand
elle n’est point feinte;*”* when it is not feigned. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_353"></span>[354](cc04161.htm#fr_353) <span
id="v.v.ii-p116.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p117"></span> *A. V*., “a solemn assembly.” *Margin,
“Heb., day of* restraint.” <span id="v.v.ii-p117.1"></span>עצרת from
<span id="v.v.ii-p117.2"></span>עצר to retain, detain, or restrain.
*S.M*. says the Latin interpreters commonly render the noun *an
assembly;* but the Hebrews interpret it *a retaining,* because the
people were still retained a day after the completion of seven days of
the solemnity. — *W*

<span id="fn_354"></span>[355](cc04161.htm#fr_354) <span
id="v.v.ii-p117.6"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p118"></span> “<span id="v.v.ii-p118.1"></span>Il y a
un mot qui emporte antant corame Neantmoins, ou Quoy qu’il en soil;”
there is a word which is equivalent to Nevertheless, or At any rate. —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_355"></span>[356](cc04161.htm#fr_355) <span
id="v.v.ii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p121"></span> “<span id="v.v.ii-p121.1"></span>De
pluyes, de gresles, de froid, et de chaud.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_356"></span>[357](cc04161.htm#fr_356) <span
id="v.v.ii-p121.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.ii-p122"></span> “The Jews limit this to the *citron;* but
this is a mere tradition of men. The words mean any tree whatsoever that
was attractive and goodly. Jahn says, ‘Any noble tree, such as the palm,
or the <span id="v.v.ii-p122.1"></span>malum Punicum.’ So Rosenmuller.”
— Bonar *in loco.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 23:14-17; 34:22-24; 34:20](cc04162)
