[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04116)  [Next](cc04118.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.ix-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.x.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p2"></span><span id="iii.x.ix-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
6:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.x.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.x.ix-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est praterea Jehova ipsi
Mosi, dicendo:

<span id="iii.x.ix-p5"></span>**2.** If a soul sin, and commit a
trespass against the LORD, and lie unto his neighbour in that which was
delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in a thing taken away by
violence, or hath deceived his neighbour;

<span id="iii.x.ix-p6"></span>**2.** Anima quum peccaverit, et
praevaricata fuerit praevaricationem contra Jehovam, mentiens nempe
fuerit proximo suo in deposito, ant in depositione manus, aut raptum,
ant vim fecerit proximo suo.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p7"></span>**3.** Or have found that which was lost,
and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in any of all these that
a man doeth, sinning therein:

<span id="iii.x.ix-p8"></span>**3.** Aut invenerit amissum, et negaverit
illud, ac juraverit falso in uno ex omnibus quae facere solet homo
peccando in ipsis.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p9"></span>**4.** Then it shall be, because he hath
sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took
violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten, or that
which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he found,

<span id="iii.x.ix-p10"></span>**4.** Quum ergo peccaverit, et dell
querit, tum reddet raptum quod rapuit, aut vi extortum quod vi extorsit,
aut depositum quod depositum fuerit apud illum, vel amissum quod
invenerit.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p11"></span>**5.** Or all that about which he hath
sworn falsely; he shall even restore it in the principal, and shall add
the fifth part more thereto, *and* give it unto him to whom it
appertaineth, in the day of his trespass offering.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p12"></span>**5.** Aut quidpiam aliud ex omnibus de
quibus juraverit falso, tune reddet illud in solidum, et quintum ipsius
addet illi: eique cujus erat reddet illud die oblationis pro delicto
suo.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p13"></span>**6.** And he shall bring his trespass
offering unto the LORD, a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy
estimation, for a trespass offerring, unto the priest:

<span id="iii.x.ix-p14"></span>**6.** Oblationem vero pro delicto suo
adducet Jehovae, arietem integrum e pecudibus, secundum estimationem
suam ad faciendum sacrificium pro delicto ad sacerdotem.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p15"></span>**7.** And the priest shall make an
atonement for him before the LORD; and it shall be forgiven him for any
thing of all that he hath done in trespassing therein.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p16"></span>**7.** Expiabit eum sacerdos eoram
Jehova, et remittetur el, expiabit inquam ab uno ex omnibus quae facere
solet homo delinquendo in eo.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p17"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.ix-p18"></span><span id="iii.x.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p19"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
Moses now no longer treats of the means of expiating errors when the
sinner is guilty through thoughtlessness; but he prescribes the mode of
reconciliation, when any one shall have wilfully and designedly offended
God. And this is well worthy of notice, lest those who may have been
guilty of voluntary sin should doubt whether God will be propitiated
towards them, provided they make application to the one sacrifice of
Christ, in which consists the entire substance of the shadows of the
Law. We must indeed beware lest we indulge ourselves under the cover of
God’s clemency and readiness to pardon, — for the lust of the flesh
provokes us to sin more than enough, without the addition of this snare,
— nor is it less than a blasphemous insult to God to take occasion and
license for sin, from the fact of His willingness to pardon. Let then
the fear of God reign in us, which will repress our wicked desires like
a rein, so that we should not wilfully fall into sin; and let His mercy
rather engender the hatred and detestation of sin in our hearts, than
incite us to audacity. Yet, at the same time, we must prudently take
heed, lest if we imagine God to be inexorable to our voluntary sins,
this excessive severity should overthrow the hope of salvation even in
those who are the holiest. For even now-a-days there are some madmen who
deny pardon to all who may have chanted to fall through the infirmity of
the flesh, since to morose men this severity has its charms, and by this
hallucination Novatus  <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270.md) greatly
troubled the Church of old. But if we all honestly examine ourselves, it
will plainly appear that those rigid censors, who affect the reputation
of sanctity by immoderate asperity, are the grossest hypocrites. For if
they would abandon their pride, and examine into their lives, which of
them would find himself free from concupiscence? and whose conscience
must not often smite him?

<span id="iii.x.ix-p22"></span>It is then monstrous blindness to exalt
men, clothed in human flesh, to such a pitch of perfection, as that
their conscience should not convict them of any fault or blame. And
nothing is more pestilent than this imposture of the devil, excluding
from the hope of pardon those who knowingly and willingly have sinned;
since there is not one even of God’s best servants, in whom the corrupt
affections of the flesh do not sometimes prevail; for although they be
neither adulterers, nor thieves, nor murderers, yet there is none whom
the last Commandment of the Law — “Thou shalt not covet,” — does not
convict of sin. And assuredly the more advance one has made in endeavors
after purity, the more he feels and acknowledges that he is still very
far from reaching its goal. Therefore, unless we would purposely close
the gate of salvation against us, we must hold that God is placable
towards all, who trust that their sin is forgiven them by the sacrifice
of Christ; for God is neither changed, nor is our condition worse than
that of the fathers, whereas under the Law God appointed sacrifices for
the expiation even of voluntary offenses. Hence it follows, that
although we are convicted of voluntary sin, yet a remedy is set before
us in the Gospel for procuring pardon: else would these ancient figures
be more than delusive, which had no other object than to be testimonies
and mirrors of the grace which was finally manifested to us in Christ.
If there ought to be a mutual agreement between the external
representation of grace under the Law, and the spiritual effect which
Christ brought in, it plainly appears that sins are no less forgiven to
us now, than to the ancient people; and thus that believers are reminded
by this symbol, that they are not to despair of reconciliation, whilst
they take no pleasure in their sins; but rather that they should boldly
seek for pardon in the perpetual sacrifice which constantly renders God
favorable to all the godly. And surely since repentance and faith are
the sure pledges of God’s favor, it cannot be but that they should be
received into His grace who are endued with these two gifts. Besides,
the remission of sins is an inestimable treasure, which God has
deposited in His Church, to be the peculiar blessing of His children; as
the Confession of Faith declares, “I believe in the Holy Catholic
Church, the forgiveness of sins.” Nor would what Paul proclaims
concerning the embassy entrusted to him be consistent, unless Christ’s
satisfaction daily propitiated God towards believers. (<span
id="iii.x.ix-p22.1"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.x.ix-p22.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.x.ix-p23"></span>The question here is not about some
trifling offense, but about the crime of unfaithfulness, doubled by the
addition of perjury. It is true that perfidy, or deceit, or violence,
are first mentioned, to mark the grossness of the sin; but the guilt
lies chiefly in the profanation of God’s name when the injury done to
man is sheltered under a false oath. At any rate, he is admitted to
pardon who has both iniquitously deceived his brother and has impiously
abused God’s name. Hence it appears that God spares wretched sinners
although they may have contaminated themselves by faithlessness, and
have aggravated the crime committed against men by sacrilege, having
insulted God through their perjury. But although Moses only enumerates
transgressions of the Eighth Commandment, still he teaches, according to
his usual manner, by *synecdoche* what must be done in the case of other
offenses also. If, then, anything shall have been taken away by
violence, or by fraud, and perjury has been superadded, he commands not
only that satisfaction should be made to the neighbor who is defrauded,
but that the price of atonement should also be offered to God. And the
reason for this is expressly given, because not only has a mortal man
been injured, but God has also been offended, who would have men conduct
themselves justly and reverently towards each other; and then the crime
is carried to extremity by the violation of God’s sacred name. The
sacrifice is not indeed required from a thief or robber, or from the
denier of a deposit, or the appropriator of anything lost, unless they
have also perjured themselves; yet the words of Moses are not without
their weight: if any one, by the denial of a deposit, or by theft, or
robbery, shall have “committed a trespass against the Lord;” whereby he
signifies, that whenever an injury is inflicted on men, God in their
person is offended, because every transgression of the Law violates and
perverts His justice.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p24"></span>We shall elsewhere see more about the
restitution to be made in case of theft or robbery, especially when a
person has been found guilty. This point, however, is alone referred to
directly in this passage, viz., that whoever injures or inflicts a loss
upon his brother, incurs guilt and condemnation before God; but if he
proceeds to such a pitch of obstinacy, as to cover his crime by falsely
appealing to the sacred name of God, he is polluted by double iniquity,
so that compensation of the damage is not sufficient, but he must also
make atonement to God. But we must understand this of those who, having
escaped from the fear of punishment, voluntarily repent. The notion of
some commentators who alter the copula into the disjunctive particle,
and consider perjury to be one of the various sins referred to, I reject
as foreign to the meaning of Moses. Others explain it thus: “If any
shall have committed robbery or theft, or shall have sworn falsely about
a thing lawful in itself:” but I do not see why the words should be
wrested thus; besides, their mistake is refitted by the context itself,
in which restitution is coupled with the sacrifices, and this could not
be applicable unless perjury were conjoined also with fraud or violence.
Nor does the disjunctive particle which follows help them; for after he
has commanded what was taken away by force or deceit to be restored,
because all the various points could not be separately expressed, it is
added, “Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely,” not as if the
guilt of perjury had been contracted in any other matters, but that he
might cut away all means of subterfuge, which the repetition also
confirms; for, after having introduced the crime of swearing falsely, he
again, as if more clearly explaining what he had said, commands the
restitution of the principal, together with the fifth part. But what is
it that he commands to be restored except what the deceiver had kept
back under cover of his oath? Of this a clearer exposition will be found
under the Eighth Commandment.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p25"></span>A satisfaction is therefore enjoined to
be made towards men together with the offering. Nor is it without reason
that God commands them to make up the loss on the day when the offering
is made, lest hypocrites should promise themselves impunity after having
enriched themselves by the property of another. It was indeed permitted
them to restore their property to others before they propitiated God by
the sacrifice; but God will not have His altar defiled, which would be
the case if thieves or robbers offered victims belonging to others. He
would, therefore, have the hands of those who sacrifice cleansed from
pollution. And surely those who offer a victim to God out of spoils
unjustly obtained, in some measure implicate Him as a participator in
their crime. Hence may profitable instruction be drawn, viz., that
hypocrites busy themselves in vain in reconciling God to themselves,
unless they honestly restore what they have unjustly taken. Meanwhile we
must observe the distinction in the words of Moses between the
satisfaction made to men and the sin-offering which propitiates God; for
we gather from hence, as I have said, that they obtain not pardon from
God who desire to remain enriched by their stolen property; and yet that
God is not appeased by anything but sacrifice. Clear proof of this
latter point may be gathered from the whole Law, which prescribes but
one means of reconciling God, *i.e.,* when the sinner makes atonement
for himself by offering a victim. Hence the diabolical figment as to
satisfactions is refuted  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271.md) by
which the Papists imagine that they are redeemed from God’s judgment;
for although God shall have remitted the guilt, they still think that
the liability to punishment remains, until the sinner shall have
delivered himself by his own works. To this end they have invented works
of supererogation, to be meritorious in redeeming from punishment;
hence, too, purgatory has come into existence. But when you have studied
all the writings of Moses, and diligently weighed whatsoever is revealed
in the Law as to the means of appeasing God, you will find that the Jews
were everywhere brought back to sacrifices. Now, it is certain that
whatever is attributed to sacrifices is so much taken away from men’s
own works. But if it were not God’s intention to down His ancient people
to outward ceremonies, it follows that it is only by the one Mediator,
through the outpouring of His blood, that men are absolved from all
liability either to guilt or punishment, so as to be restored to favor
by God.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p27"></span><span id="iii.x.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p28"></span>**7.** *And the priest shall make an
atonement.* From this form of expression also, which frequently occurs,
we must learn that the victim in itself was not the price of redemption,
but that expiation was founded on the priesthood. For they have
foolishly and falsely invented the notion that men work something
themselves in the sacraments,  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272.md)
whereas their virtue and effect proceeds from quite another quarter. The
offering, therefore, properly speaking, is passive rather than active as
regards man.  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273.md) The force of this
will be more clearly understood from the delusion of the Papists. They
are indeed compelled to acknowledge that in the sacraments men are
passive, in so far as they receive the grace there offered to them; but
they presently pervert this doctrine, by inventing their *opus
operatum,* as they call it. But, lest the people should think that they
bring from their own stores (*domo*) the price of their redemption,
Moses constantly inculcates that it is the peculiar office of the
priest, to appease God, and to blot out sin by expiation. It is also
worthy of observation that he adds, “before the Lord,” for by this
clause the profane notion is refuted, that men are purged by the legal
sacrifices only civilly, as they say, *i.e.,* before men, as if there
were no spiritual promise included in them. Now, if this were so, the
fathers would have been confirmed in the confidence of pardon by no
external symbols, than which nothing can be more absurd; but by this one
clause all ambiguity is removed, when Moses declares that they were
absolved “before the Lord."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc04117.htm#fr_270.md) <span
id="iii.x.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p20"></span> Novatus, a Carthaginian Presbyter, who
in conjunction with Novatian a Presbyter of Rome, was the founder of the
Novatian sect, a.d. 251, also called Cathari, or Aristeri. They
“considered the genuine Church of Christ to be a society, where virtue
and innocence reigned universally, and refused any longer to acknowledge
those as its members who had even once degenerated into
unrighteousness.” — Waddington’s Church Hist., vol. 1 pp. 165, 166.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p21"></span>*C.* mentions, Inst., book 4, ch. 1,
sect. 23, (Calvin Society’s Translation, vol. 3, p. 35,) the similarity
of some of the opinions held by the Anabaptists of his day to those of
the Novatians.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc04117.htm#fr_271.md) <span
id="iii.x.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p26"></span> For a statement of this doctrine, see
Canons of the Council of Trent, Sess. 6, Can. 30; Sess. 14. Caput. 8, 9,
Can. 12, 13, 14, 15. See *C.’s “*Antidote to the Canons of the Council
of Trent,” (Calvin Society’s Edition,) p. 160.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc04117.htm#fr_272.md) <span
id="iii.x.ix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p29"></span> “<span id="iii.x.ix-p29.1"></span>Qui’ls
apportassent rien du leur aux sacremens;” that they bring something of
their own to the sacraments. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc04117.htm#fr_273.md) <span
id="iii.x.ix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p30"></span> Addition in *Fr., “*<span
id="iii.x.ix-p30.1"></span>c’est a dire, qu’il n’y apporte rien du sien,
mais qu’il y recoit;” that is, that he brings nothing of his own to it,
but receives something from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 6:8-15,23-25,30](cc04118.md)
