[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc04142)  [Next](cc04144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
27](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
27:1-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>, 27-29

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad Mosen,
dicendo:

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
and say unto them, When a man shall make a singular vow, the persons
*shall be* for the LORD by thy estimation.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>**2.** Alloquere filios Israel, et die
els, Vir quum separaverit votum animarun secundum estimationem tuam
Jehovae.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>**3.** And thy estimation shall be of the
male from twenty years old even unto sixty years old, even thy
estimation shall be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the
sanctuary.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>**3.** Erit aestimatio tua pro masculo, a
filio viginti annorum usque ad fillum sexaginta annorum, erit aestimatio
tua quinquaginta siclorum argenteorum, secundum siclum sanctuarii.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span>**4.** And if it *be* a female, then thy
estimation shall be thirty shekels.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>**4.** Quod si foemina fuerit, erit
aestimatio triginta siclorum.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span>**5.** And if *it be* from five years old
even unto twenty years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male
twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12"></span>**5.** Si autem a filio quinque annorum
usque ad filium viginti annorum, erit aestimatio tua pro masculo viginti
siclorum, pro foemina vero decem siclorum.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p13"></span>**6.** And if *it be* from a month old
even unto five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male five
shekels of silver, and for the female thy estimation *shall be* three
shekels of silver.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p14"></span>**6.** Si vero a filio mensis usque ad
fillum quinque armorurn, erit aestimatio tua pro masculo, quinque
siclorum argenteorum,pro foemina vero aestimatio tua erit trium
siclorurn argenteorum.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p15"></span>**7.** And if *it be* from sixty years
old and above, if *it be* a male, then thy estimation shall be fifteen
shekels, and for the female ten shekels.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p16"></span>**7.** At si a filio sexaginta annorum,
et supra, si pro masculo, erit aestimatio tua quindecim siclorum, et pro
foemina decem siclorum.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p17"></span>**8.** But if he be poorer than thy
estimation, then he shall present himself before the priest, and the
priest shall value him; according to his ability that vowed shall the
priest value him.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p18"></span>**8.** Quod si panperior est quam ut
aestimationem tuam possit solvere, tune statuct ilium coram sacerdote,
et aestimabit eum sacerdos: secundum quod apprehenderit marius voventis,
aestimabit eum sacerdos.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19"></span>**9.** And if *it be* a beast, whereof
men bring an offering unto the LORD, all that *any man* giveth of such
unto the LORD shall be holy.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p20"></span>**9.** Si autem animal voverit de quo
offernut oblationem Jehovae, onme de quo dederit Jehovae erit sanctitas.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p21"></span>**10.** He shall not alter it, nor change
it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good: and if he shall at all change
beast for beast, then it and the exchange thereof shall be holy.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p22"></span>**10.** Non mutabit illud, neque
commntabit illud, melius deteriore, aut deterius meliore: quod si
commutando commutaverit animal animali, et illud et commutatio ejus erit
sanctitas.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p23"></span>**11.** And if *it be* any unclean beast,
of which they do not offer a sacrifice unto the LORD, then he shall
present the beast before the priest:

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p24"></span>**11.** Si autem fuerit quodlibet animal
immundum, de quo non offerunt oblationem Jehovae tunc statuet animal
coram sacerdote.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p25"></span>**12.** And the priest shall value it,
whether it be good or bad: as thou valuest it, *who art* the priest, so
shall it be.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26"></span>**12.** Aestimabitque illud sacerdos,
sive bonum sit, sive malum, secundum aestimationem tuam sic erit.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p27"></span>**13.** But if he will at all redeem it,
then he shall add a fifth *part* thereof unto thy estimation.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p28"></span>**13.** Si vero redimendo redemerit
illud, addet quintam ejus partem ultra aestimationem tuam.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29"></span>**14.** And when a man shall sanctify his
house *to be* holy unto the LORD, then the priest shall estimate it,
whether it be good or bad: as the priest shall estimate it, so shall it
stand.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p30"></span>**14.** Vir autem quum consecraverit
domum suam consecrationem Jehovae, aestimabit earn sacerdos, sive bona
sit, sire roma: secundum quod aestimaverit earn sacerdos, sic manebit:

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p31"></span>**15.** And if he that sanctified it will
redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth *part* of the money of thy
estimation unto it, and it shall be his.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p32"></span>**15.** Si autem consecrans redemerit
domum suam, addet quintam partem pecuniae aestimationis tuae super earn,
et illius erit.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p33"></span>**16.** And if a man shall sanctify unto
the LORD *some part* of a field of his possession, then thy estimation
shall be according to the seed thereof: an homer of barley seed *shall
be valued* at fifty shekels of silver.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p34"></span>**16.** Si vero de agro possessionis suae
consecraverit quis Jehovae, erit aestimatio tua secundum sementem ejus,
semen cori hordeorum quinquaginta siclis argenteis sestimabitur.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p35"></span>**17.** If he sanctify his field from the
year of jubile, according to thy estimation it shall stand.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p36"></span>**17.** Quod siab anno jubilaei
consecraverit agrum suum, secundum aestimationem tuam manebit.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p37"></span>**18.** But if he sanctify his field
after the jubile, then the priest shall reckon unto him the money
according to the years that remain, even unto the year of the jubile,
and it shall be abated from thy estimation.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p38"></span>**18.** Si vero post jubilaeum
consecraverit agrum suum, tum supputabit cum eo sacerdos pecuniam
secundum annos qui reinanent usque ad annum jubilaei, et detrahetur de
aestimatione tua.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p39"></span>**19.** And if he that sanctified the
field will in any wise redeem it, then he shall add the fifth *part* of
the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be assured to him.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p40"></span>**19.** Si autem redimendo redimat agrum
qui consecravit ipsum, addet quintam partem pecuniae aestimationis tuae
super eam, et manebit el.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p41"></span>**20.** And if he will not redeem the
field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shall not be
redeemed any more.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p42"></span>**20.** Si vero non redemerit agrum, et
si vendiderit agrum viro alteri, non redimet ultra:

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p43"></span>**21.** But the field, when it goeth out
in the jubile, shall be holy unto the LORD, as a field devoted; the
possession thereof shall be the priest’s.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p44"></span>**21.** Sed erit ager quum egredietur
jubilaeus, sanctitas Jehovae, sicut ager anathematis: sacerdoti erit
possessio ejus.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p45"></span>**22.** And if *a man* sanctify unto the
LORD a field which he hath bought, which *is* not of the fields of his
possession;

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p46"></span>**22.** Si vero agrum emptum a se qui non
erat de agro possessionis suae, consecraverit Jehovae:

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p47"></span>**23.** Then the priest shall reckon unto
him the worth of thy estimation, *even* unto the year of the jubile: and
he shall give thine estimation in that day, *as* a holy thing unto the
LORD.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p48"></span>**23.** Tunc supputabit illi sacerdos
numerum aestimationis tuae usque ad annum jubilaei, dabitque
aestimationem tuam in die illo sanctitatem Jehovae.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p49"></span>**24.** In the year of the jubile the
field shall return unto him of whom it was bought, *even* to him to whom
the possession of the land *did belong.*

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p50"></span>**24.** In anno jubilaei revertetur ager
ad eum a quo emerat ipsum, ad eum eujus erat possessio terrae.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p51"></span>**25.** And all thy estimations shall be
according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the
shekel.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p52"></span>**25.** Omnis autem aestimatio tua erit
secundum siclum sanctuarii: viginti obolorum est siclus.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p53"></span>**27.** And if *it be* of an unclean
beast, then he shall redeem *it* according to thine estimation, and
shall add a fifth *part* of it thereto: or if it be not redeemed, then
it shall be sold according to thy estimation.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p54"></span>**27.** Si vero fuerit ex animalibus
immundis, redimet juxta aestimationem tuam, et addet quintam partem ejus
ultra eam, et si non redimatur, vendatur juxta aestimationem tuam.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p55"></span>**28.** Notwithstanding no devoted thing
that a man shall devote unto the LORD of all that he hath, *both* of man
and beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or
redeemed: every devoted thing *is* most holy unto the LORD.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p56"></span>**28.** Veruntamen omne anathema quod
consecrabit aliquis Jehovae ex onmibus quae habet, de hominibus et
animalibus, et de agris possessionis suae, non vendetur neque redimetur.
Omne enim anathema sanetitas sane titatum erit Jehovah.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p57"></span>**29.** None devoted, which shall be
devoted of men, shall be redeemed; *but* shall surely be put to death.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p58"></span>**29.** Omne anathema quod consecrabitur
de hominibus non redimetur: moriendo morietur.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p59"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p60"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p61"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses.*
In this chapter Moses shews in what manner and at what price what once
has been offered is to be redeemed, supposing that the vows cannot be
conveniently paid. Now it is to be observed, that among the ancient
people there were two modes of consecration, the one by *anathema,*
which the Hebrews call <span id="iv.ii.iv-p61.1"></span>חרם, *cherem,*
the other for the use of the temple, and other exercises of religion.
The *anathema*  <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) might be made of
unclean animals, and other unholy things, as we may see in respect to
the city of Jericho, and similar instances; but it was not properly
allowable to make vows, except of a clean man or animal, or something
else which might be appropriated in the service of God. Thus of their
flocks they vowed goats and sheep; of their herds, oxen or calves, that
they might experience God’s goodness in their fecundity. If a person was
aggrieved at being without offspring, in asking it of God he offered in
his vow his son, or daughter; on which ground Samuel, before he was
conceived in the womb, was dedicated to God. (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p62.2"></span>[1Sa
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p62.2"></span>.) If any one had a weakly child born to him,
or if one of his children was very ill, or if he himself was in any
difficulty, it was customary to have resort to vows, that God might
protect what was dedicated to Him. Nor can it be doubted but that many
abused this and fell into foolish practices; but God tolerated these
errors as long as they were not opposed to His Law. Moreover, since it
often happens that those who are under the obligation of a vow change
their minds, and are not very eager and ready to pay it, nay, discharge
it with much pain and unwillingness; God permitted that what was
promised might be redeemed at a certain price, in order that their
offerings might be voluntary. By the imposition of this ransom, which
was of the nature of a fine, rashness was punished, and future
inconsideration prevented, so that they might consider well what they
were about before they made their vow, and that it might not be
disagreeable to them to stand by their promises. Besides, it is to be
remarked, that these vows were confirmed, not because they were
altogether pleasing to God, but lest the people should accustom
themselves to impious contempt of Him, if the deceiver might with
impunity refuse God what he had promised, Moses first treats of persons;
and estimates a male at fifty shekels of the sanctuary from twenty-five
years of age to sixty; since this is the best time of life in which a
man’s work is profitable. A woman he estimates at thirty shekels; since
for the most part less profit is made by a woman than a man; and
although it might occur that some women would be much more valuable than
men, since sometimes women are found to be industrious, prudent,
discreet, and strong to labor, whilst men are idle, dull, lazy, and
weak, still a general law must needs be given, for the examination would
have been too difficult if each individual was to be estimated according
to their good qualities. God then does not pay exact attention to the
merits of each, but is contented with the common calculation. He then
lays down rules as to an earlier age, viz., from five to twenty, and
rates the male at twenty shekels, the female at ten. He afterwards
descends to infants, and appoints the price of a male from one month to
five years, at five shekels, and a female at three. Fourthly, he
estimates those who are more than sixty, the male at fifteen shekels,
the female at ten; since old age debilitates the vigor both of mind and
body, and gradually destroys it. In the fifth place, an exception is
made lest the poor should be burdened beyond their slender means, that
the priest should diminish the price as much as he saw fit. Still this
diminution had reference also to the rich, if the person to be redeemed
was not worth the ordinary price, though it appears that God here
especially makes a provision for the poor from the words, “according
 <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) to what the hand of him that
vowed shall attain;” by which clause Moses  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) is wont to express poverty, or want,
because the poor and needy are not supplied with sufficient for their
desires.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p65"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p66"></span>**11.** *And if it be any unclean beast.*
Moses now, in the second place, treats of brute animals; which God
commands to be sacrificed to Him, if they are suitable for it, and does
not suffer the vow to be altered. But if they be imperfect or unclean,
He lays down the rule for their redemption. But the question here
arises, How it can be allowable to vow what God had forbidden to be
offered to Him, and so had prohibited from being brought into the
temple, as being unclean? Surely if it had entered into any one’s mind
to sacrifice an unclean animal, the superstition would be rejected, nay,
there would be need of expiation. But here, in my opinion, another kind
of offering is adverted to, which did not vitiate the sacrifices and
service of God by being contrary to the injunctions of His Law. There
was therefore nothing strange in His accepting such a vow, though He
punishes its levity by a pecuniary fine. Besides, suppose a strong and
well-tried horse was in danger, his master made a vow that if it were
saved he would be bound to pay its price; and so also in the other
cases. To vow was nothing else than to commit to God’s faithfulness and
protection whatever they wished to be preserved. Hence the too great
commonness of vows, which still it was necessary to discharge in some
way, lest God’s sacred name should be exposed to ridicule. This
estimation God left to the arbitration of the priest. But if an animal
might be offered in sacrifice, no redemption was allowed; and if any one
had substituted another animal, or paid the price of it, he was punished
for his fraud, for both (*i.e.,* the animal, and its substitute or
price) were consecrated to God. The estimation, which is imposed upon
one who had vowed, is irreversible, since God simply commands the
Israelites to stand by the judgment of the priest, and to abide by the
taxation, as it is called, enjoined upon them as a fixed rule; and,
besides, they were to add a fifth part, as an additional fine, to the
price appointed by the priest.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p67"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p68"></span>**14.** *And when a man shall sanctify
his house.* A third kind of vows follows, viz., the consecration of
houses and lands; under which head also an alternative is appointed, so
that religion may not be despised, and still the just possessors should
not be driven from their houses, or the lands be rendered useless from
the want of cultivation. Those persons vowed their houses, who sought of
God for themselves and families that they might inhabit them in health,
and safety, and in general prosperity; and he who wished to obtain
fertility for his fields, vowed one of ten or twenty acres. Undoubtedly
superstitious prayers were sometimes mixed up with this exercise of
piety, as if they might acquire favor for themselves by making a bargain
with God. Still, inasmuch as the thing was not wrong in itself, God
indulgently bore with the errors which could not be very easily
corrected, lest, in His hatred of them, He might altogether abolish what
was useful and laudable. Hence the redemption both of house and land was
permitted. But if any one had committed fraud in selling a piece of land
that was vowed, a heavier punishment is added, *i.e.,* that he should go
without it for ever. We shall speak more fully elsewhere of the year of
jubilee.  <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) At present this must
be observed, that, lest the partition of land made by Joshua should ever
be altered, since God had clearly shewn that it was done by His
authority, God recalled each of the tribes every fiftieth year to their
original share, and thus entirely restored the possessors whom poverty
had driven out. In proportion, then, to the closeness or remoteness of
that year, since possession would be so much the shorter or longer, land
was cheap or dear. God does not here measure the fields by the pole or
chain, but estimates them simply, as among a rude people, by the seed;
viz., if a field in sowing takes a homer  <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) of barley, it shall remain in the
hands of its possessor if he pays fifty shekels of the sanctuary. We
have elsewhere seen that these were double the ordinary shekel. But
since vows were often made in the middle or towards the end of the
jubilee, a distinction is stated; and God commands the priests to take
the time into consideration, and the nearer the jubilee-year may be to
diminish so much of the price. Where, however, a fraud had taken place,
God would not have the honest purchaser ejected; but, when the jubilee
was over, He assigned the field, which had been held for a time in
sacrilege, to the priests for ever. Moses compares this consecration to
an *anathema,* which the Hebrews call <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p70.3"></span>חרם, *cherem,*  <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) a word whose radical meaning is
*destroying* or *abolishing;* for which reason the Latins take a
“devoted” thing in a bad sense, as what is destined to final
destruction. The law is then extended to lands which had been sold, and
which, in the year of jubilee, returned to their former owners; because
the first allotment of the land was then wholly restored. For these
fields God commands a price to be paid, upon a calculation of the time,
so that only the produce and not the fee should be taken into account.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p72"></span>Now, since people have improperly and in
foolish mimicry imitated the vows which God permitted to the Jews under
the Law, so the Pope, in providing for their redemption, has dared in
his diabolical arrogance to rival God. The <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p72.1"></span>*titulus*  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) is well-known in the Third Book of
Decretals; “<span id="iv.ii.iv-p73.1"></span>*De* *voto, et ejus
redemptione;”* wherein its concocter, whoever he was, has so sought to
impose upon the world with his shameless nonsense, as not to hesitate to
heap together directly contradictory sentences; and even if there were
no contradictions there, still nothing is laid down except how votive
pilgrimages are to be redeemed, which plainly appear from Christ’s
declaration to be wrong since the preaching of the gospel. (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p73.2"></span>[Joh
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p73.2"></span>.) And assuredly it was a marvellous
fascination of the devil, that what was said under the Law as to the
payment of vows at Jerusalem, should be transferred to Christians, when
Christ had pronounced that the time had come when the true worshippers
without distinction of place should worship God everywhere in spirit and
in truth. If the hired wranglers  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) of the Pope object that the same rule
obtains in the redemption of vows, since a remedy or mitigation must not
be denied, if any should be too burdensome or grievous, I answer, that
men act wickedly, when they wrest to themselves what God has reserved
for His own discretion; for neither under the Law of old was it
allowable for a mortal man to alter a vow, unless by His permission. If
again they object, that the judgment was given to the priests, here
their folly is twice refuted; since they cannot shew that they have been
appointed judges; nor can they escape from the accusation of temerity,
since without any command they pronounce as to this redemption of vows,
whereas the priests of old advanced nothing except from God’s mouth, and
according to the fixed rule here laid down.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p75"></span>The exception as to the firstlings and
the tithes sufficiently proves that some vows were illicit, and such as
God repudiates; and therefore that they must not be made
indiscriminately, for it would have been a mere work of supererogation
to vow to God what He had already made His own; as we have shewn
elsewhere,  <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) where I have
inserted this passage. With respect to what is said of the *anathema,*
it must not be understood generally, since it was not lawful to subject
a man to it, unless he were worthy of death. This, then, must be
restricted to their enemies, whom they were otherwise at liberty to
destroy; a notorious example of which was the city of Jericho, with its
inhabitants and spoils. Now, since whatever was brought under this
*anathema* was devoted and accursed, God would have it destroyed, nor
does He allow of any compensation. Wherefore they anathematized their
fields I do not understand, unless perhaps they wished to expiate some
crime whereby pollution was contracted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc04143.htm#fr_316) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p62"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iv-p62.1"></span>Qui
vaut antant en Hebrieu, comme destruction, ou desolation;” which is
equivalent in Hebrew to destruction, or desolation. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc04143.htm#fr_317) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p62.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p63"></span> “According to his ability that vowed.” —
*A. V.* “According to *that* which the hand of him that vowed can
*attain.”* — *Ainsworth.*

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc04143.htm#fr_318) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p64"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iv-p64.1"></span>Car
cela signifie disette, ou defant, d’autant que les povres n’ont pas en
main ce qui seroit a souhaiter;” for this signifies want or deficiency,
since the poor have not *in hand* what might be desired. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc04143.htm#fr_319) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p69"></span> “<span id="iv.ii.iv-p69.1"></span>Sur le
quatrieme commandement;” under the fourth commandment.—*Fr.*

<span id="fn_320"></span>[321](cc04143.htm#fr_320) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p70"></span> *Lat. “*<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p70.1"></span>Corum,” from the LXX. translation <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p70.2"></span>κόρος

<span id="fn_321"></span>[322](cc04143.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p70.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p71"></span> “A field devoted.” — *A.V*. “<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p71.1"></span>Interdit.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc04143.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p72.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p73"></span> The reference is to Book 3 of the
Decretals of Gregory IX. He was Pope from 1227 to 1241; and these
decretals form the fifth division of the Papal Canon Law. A section of
Book 3, technically styled Titulus 34, is headed “Concerning a vow and
its redemption;” and all the eleven chapters of this Titulus relate to
the commutation of vows to go on pilgrimage, or on a crusade. The
portion especially alluded to by *C*. in the above remarks was obviously
ch. 7, which consists of extracts from an answer of Pope Innocent III.
to a Suffragan of the Archbishop of Sens, who had taken a crusader’s vow
for the purpose of obtaining access to the Count of Champagne, then in
Palestine, and wanted to know whether the Pope would sanction his
staying at home, since he had heard that the Count was dead. The Pope
replies, that as the cause which had induced him to make his vow no
longer existed, he might stay in his diocese; but that he should send to
the holy land a sum equal to what would have been the cost of his going,
staying, and returning. The notes to the same chapter quote other parts
of Innocent’s rescript, in which that Pope said, “Since the Word of God
is now fulfilled, saying, The hour shall come and now is, when neither
in this mountain nor in Jerusalem shall ye worship, etc., it may be
seen, that not less in your own Church than in the Eastern country, you
may advance the deliverance of that country by your pious prayers.” —
*Corpus Juris Canon. Lugd.* 1522, *cum licentia.* — *W.*

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc04143.htm#fr_323) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p73.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p74"></span> “<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p74.1"></span>Rabulae.” — Lat. “<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p74.2"></span>Les caphards, qui ont leurs langues a loage
pour maintenir la Papaute.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc04143.htm#fr_324) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p76"></span> See vol. 1 pp. 478-480, where ver. 26 is
commented on, amongst the supplements to the First Commandment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 30:1-16](cc04144)
