[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc04121)  [Next](cc04123.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 4: Harmony of the Law, Part II*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iii.x.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
15](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.x.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p2"></span><span id="iii.x.xiv-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
15:1-16](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.x.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p3"></span>**1.** And the LORD spake unto Moses,
saying,

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad
Mosen, dicendo:

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p5"></span>**2.** Speak unto the children of Israel,
and say unto them, When ye be come into the land of your habitations,
which I give unto you,

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p6"></span>**2.** Loquere ad filios Israel, et dicas
els, Quum ingressi fueritis terraim habitationum vestrarum quas ego
daturus sum vobis:

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p7"></span>**3.** And will make an offering by fire
unto the LORD, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice in performing a vow, or
in a freewill offering, or in your solemn feasts, to make a sweet savour
unto the LORD, of the herd, or of the flock:

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p8"></span>**3.** Et facere voletis oblationem
ignitam Jehovae holocaustum vel sacrificium, ut solvatis votum aut
sponte vestra, ant in solennitatibus vestris, ut faciatis odorem quietis
Jehovae de bobus aut ex pecudibus:

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p9"></span>**4.** Then shall he that offereth his
offering unto the LORD bring a meat offering of a tenth deal of flour
mingled with the fourth *part* of an hin of oil.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p10"></span>**4.** Tunc offeret offerens oblationem
suam Jehove pro minha similae decimam partem mistam cum quarta parte
olei.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p11"></span>**5.** And the fourth *part* of an hin
of wine for a drink offering shalt thou prepare with the burnt offering
or sacrifice, for one lamb.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p12"></span>**5.** Et vini pro libamine quartam
partem hin facies super holocaustum, aut ultra sacrificium pro agno uno.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p13"></span>**6.** Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare
*for* a meat offering two tenth deals of flour mingled with the third
*part* of an hin of oil.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p14"></span>**6.** Aut pro ariete facies minham
similae duas decimas permistae cum olci tertia parte hin.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p15"></span>**7.** And for a drink offering thou
shalt offer the third *part* of an hin of wine, *for* a sweet savour
unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p16"></span>**7.** Et vini pro libamine tertiam
partem hin offeretis in odorem quietis Jehovah.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p17"></span>**8.** And when thou preparest a bullock
*for* a burnt offering, or *for* a sacrifice in performing a vow, or
peace offerings unto the LORD:

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p18"></span>**8.** Quod si facere voles juveneum in
holocaustum, aut sacrificium ad solvendum votum, aut sacrificia
prosperitatum Jehovae:

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p19"></span>**9.** Then shall he bring with a
bullock a meat offering of three tenth deals of flour mingled with half
an hin of oil.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p20"></span>**9.** Offeres una cum juvenco minham,
similae tres decimas permistae cum olei dimidia parte hin.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p21"></span>**10.** And thou shalt bring for a drink
offering half an hin of wine, *for* an offering made by fire, of a sweet
savour unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p22"></span>**10.** Et vinum offeres pro libamine
dimidiam partem hin: oblationem ignitam odoris quietis Jehovae.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p23"></span>**11.** Thus shall it be done for one
bullock, or for one ram, or for a lamb, or a kid.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p24"></span>**11.** Sic facies bovi uni, aut arieti
uni, aut foetui tam de ovibus quam de capris.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p25"></span>**12.** According to the number that ye
shall prepare, so shall ye do to every one according to their number.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p26"></span>**12.** Juxta numerum quem facietis
singulis juxta numerum illorum.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p27"></span>**13.** All that are born of the country
shall do these things after this manner, in offering an offering made by
fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p28"></span>**13.** Omnis civis lacier sic ista ut
offerat oblationem odoris quietis Jehovah.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p29"></span>**14.** And if a stranger sojourn with
you, or whosoever *be* among you in your generations, and will offer an
offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the LORD; as ye do, so he
shall do.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p30"></span>**14.** Et quum peregrinatus fuerit apud
vos peregrinus, aut quicunque est in medio vestri per generationes
vestras, feceritque oblationem ignitam odoris quietis Jehovae,
quemadmodum facietis sic faciet.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p31"></span>**15.** One ordinance *shall be both*
for you of the congregation, and also for the stranger that sojourneth
*with you,* an ordinance for ever in your generations: as ye *are,* so
shall the stranger be before the LORD.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p32"></span>**15.** O congregatio, statutum unum
erit vobis et peregrino qui peregrinatur apud vos: statutum inquam
perpetuum per generationes vestras: sicut vos sic et peregrinus erit
coram Jehova.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p33"></span>**16.** One law and one manner shall be
for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p34"></span>**16.** Lex una et norma una erit vobis
et peregrino qui peregrinatur apud vos.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p35"></span> 

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p36"></span><span id="iii.x.xiv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p37"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake.* He partly
here adverts to those precepts of which he had treated more distinctly
and fully in Leviticus, and partly gathers into one place what he had
before spoken of in various places and more obscurely. For as yet he had
delivered no certain regulations as to the accessories to the
meat-offering of oil and wine; but what he had before appropriated to
particular cases he now commands to be observed generally, and what he
had treated of more accurately he now lightly passes over; for he does
not enter into full particulars, but only forbids that sacrifices should
be offered without flour, a libation of wine, and oil. We have seen
elsewhere that in the sacrifices and oblations, wherein God consulted
the rude condition of the people, He took as it were the character of a
man, as if He feasted there familiarly with them. In this sense He
elsewhere calls the sacrifices His meat,  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290.md) not because He, who is the life in
Himself and inspires the life of all, requires the supports of life, but
because, unless He descends to men, He cannot lift up their minds to
things above. Still, inasmuch as there was danger on the other side lest
the people should introduce many inane and superfluous pomps, as we see
that in their sacred feasts the Gentiles were foolishly and immoderately
luxurious, as if their delicacies gave pleasure to God, the measure of
each particular thing is prescribed, that they may not dare to invent
anything arbitrarily. The conjecture is probable that what had been
before delivered with sufficient clearness is here again recalled to
their memory. But since this reason is not expressly given, it will be
enough to hold fast what has been frequently stated, that although the
ceremonies might be of trifling importance, still it was necessary that
the lawful should be carefully distinguished from the unauthorized, in
order that the licentiousness of men might be anticipated, who would
otherwise have failed not to mingle their own leaven. The sum of this
passage is, that both in the solemn sacrifices which the Law demands, as
well as in the free-will-offerings, they should observe that proportion
of which we have treated elsewhere.

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p39"></span><span id="iii.x.xiv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p40"></span>**14.** *And if a stranger sojourn with
you.* He does not mean all strangers, but only those who, descending
from heathen nations, had professedly turned to God, and thus had been
received into the body of the Church; for the uncleanness of those who
remained in uncircumcision excluded them from the legal service. I
conceive that there were two reasons why God would have one and the same
form observed; *first,* that the proselytes who had been lately
incorporated might more cheerfully devote themselves to the exercises of
piety, when they saw themselves placed in the same position as the
children of Abraham; and *secondly,* lest if any distinction should be
made, corrupt mixtures should immediately creep in. Lest, therefore, the
purity of God’s worship should be gradually corrupted by absurd
imitation, the gate was shut against that variety which usually draws
men aside in different directions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc04122.htm#fr_290.md) <span
id="iii.x.xiv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiv-p38"></span> “<span id="iii.x.xiv-p38.1"></span>Son
pain et sa viande;” his bread and meat. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus 22:17-25; Deuteronomy 17:1](cc04123.md)
