<span class="small"></span>

[sacred-texts index](../index)  [Hinduism index](index.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Excerpts from

# A VEDIC READER

## For Students

### By Arthur Anthony Macdonell (1854-1930)

#### \[1917\]

##### Scanned at ith.oarc.science August 31, 2000.

# INTRODUCTION

## 1. AGE OF THE RIGVEDA.

THE Rigveda is undoubtedly the oldest literary monument of the
Indo-European languages. But the exact period when the hymns were
composed is a matter of conjecture. All that we can say with any
approach to certainty is that the oldest of them cannot date from later
than the thirteenth century B.C. This assertion is based on the
following grounds. Buddhism, which began to spread in India about 500
B.C., presupposes the existence not only of the Vedas, but also of the
intervening literature of the Brahmanas and Upanishads. The development
of language and religious thought apparent in the extensive literature
of the successive phases of these two Vedic periods renders it necessary
to postulate the lapse of seven or eight centuries to account for the
gradual changes, linguistic, religious, social, and political, that this
literature displays. On astronomical grounds, one Sanskrit scholar has
(cf. p. 146) concluded that the oldest Vedic hymns date from 3000 B.C.,
While another puts them as far back as 6000 B.C. These calculations are
based on the assumption that the early Indians possessed an exact
astronomical knowledge of the sun's course such as there is no evidence,
or even probability, that they actually possessed. On the other hand,
the possibility of such extreme antiquity seems to be disproved by the
relationship of the hymns of the Rigveda to the oldest part of the
Avesta, which can hardly date earlier than from about 800 B.C. That
relationship is so close that the language of the Avesta, if it were
known at a stage some five centuries earlier, could scarcely have
differed at all from that of the Rigveda. Hence the Indians could not
have separated from the Iranians much sooner than 1300 B.C. But,
according to Prof. Jacobi, the separation took place before 1500 B.C. In
that case we must assume that the Iranian and the Indian languages
remained practically unchanged for the truly immense period of over 3000
years. We must thus rest content with the moderate estimate of the
thirteenth century B.C. as the approximate date for the beginning of the
Rigvedic period. This estimate has not been invalidated by the discovery
in 1907 of the names of the Indian deities Mitra, Varuna, Indra,
Nasatya, in an inscription of about 1400 B.C. found in Asia Minor. For
the phonetic form in which these names there appear may quite well
belong to the Indo-Iranian period when the Indians and the Persians were
still one people. The date of the inscription leaves two centuries for
the separation of the Indians, their migration to India, and the
commencement of the Vedic hymn literature in the north-west of
Hindustan.

## 2. ORIGIN AND GROWTH OF THE COLLECTION.

When the Indo-Aryans entered India, they brought with them a religion in
which the gods were chiefly personified powers of Nature, a few of them,
such as Dyaus, going back to the Indo-European, others, such as Mitra,
Varuna, Indra, to the Indo-Iranian period. They also brought with them
the cult of fire and of Soma, besides a knowledge of the art of
composing religious poems in several metres, as a comparison of the
Rigveda and the Avesta shows. The purpose of these ancient hymns was to
propitiate the gods by praises accompanying the offering of malted
butter poured on the fire and of the juice of the Soma plant placed on
the sacrificial grass. The hymns which have survived in the Rigveda from
the early period of the Indo-Aryan invasion were almost exclusively
composed by a hereditary priesthood. They were handed down in different
families by memory, not by writing, which could hardly have been
introduced into India before about 700 B.C. These family groups of hymns
were gradually brought together till, with successive additions, they
assumed the earliest collected form of the Rigveda. Then followed the
constitution of the Samhita text, which appears to have taken place
about 600 B.C., at the end of the period of the Brahmanas, but before
the Upanishads, which form appendages to those works, came into
existence. The creators of the Samhita did not in any way alter the
diction of the hymns here collected together, but only applied to the
text certain rules of Sandhi which prevailed in their time, and by
which, in particular, vowels are either contracted or changed into
semi-vowels, and a is often dropped after e and o, in such a way as
constantly to obscure the metre. Soon after this work was concluded,
extraordinary precautions were taken to preserve from loss or corruption
the sacred text thus fixed. The earliest expedient of this kind was the
formation of the Pada or 'word' text, in which all the words of the
Samhita text are separated and given in their original form as
unaffected by the rules of Sandhi, and in which most compounds and some
derivatives and inflected forms are analysed. This text, which is
virtually the earliest commentary on the Rigveda, was followed by other
and more complicated methods of reciting the text, and by various works
called Anukramanis or 'Indexes', which enumerate from the beginning to
the end of the Rigveda the number of stanzas contained in each hymn, the
deities, and the metres of all the stanzas of the Rigveda. Thanks to
these various precautions the text of the Rigveda has been handed down
for 2,500 years with a fidelity that finds no parallel in any other
literature.

## 3. EXTENT AND DIVISIONS OF THE RIGVEDA.

The Rigveda consists of 1,017 or, counting eleven others of the eighth
Book which are recognized as later additions, 1,028 hymns. These contain
a total of about 10,600 stanzas, which give an average Of ten stanzas to
each hymn. The shortest hymn has only one stanza, while the longest has
fifty-eight. If printed continuously like prose in Roman characters, the
Samhita text would fill an octavo volume of about 600 pages of
thirty-three lines each. It has been calculated that in bulk the RV. is
equivalent to the extant poems of Homer.

There is a twofold division of the RV. into parts. One, which is purely
mechanical, is into Astakas or 'eighths' of about equal length, each of
which is subdivided into eight Adhyayas or 'lessons', while each of the
latter consists of Vargas or 'groups' of five or six stanzas. The other
division is into ten Mandalas or 'books' (lit. 'cycles') and Suktas or
'hymns'. The latter method is an historical one, indicating the manner
in which the collection came into being. This system is now invariably
followed by Western Scholars in referring to or quoting from the
Rigveda.

## 4. ARRANGEMENT OF THE RIGVEDA.

Six of the ten books, ii to vii, are homogeneous in character. The hymns
contained in each of them were, according to native Indian tradition,
composed or 'seen' by poets of the same family, which handed them down
as its own collection. The tradition is borne out by the internal
evidence of the seers' names mentioned in the hymns, and by that of the
refrains occurring in each of these books. The method of arrangement
followed in the 'family books' is uniform, for each of them is similarly
divided into groups addressed to different gods. On the other hand,
Books i, viii, and x were not composed each by a distinct family of
seers, while the groups of which they consist are constituted by being
the hymns composed by different individual seers. Book ix is
distinguished from the rest by all its hymns being addressed to one and
the same deity, Soma, and by its groups being based not on identity of
authorship, but of metre.

Family books.--In these the first group of hymns is invariably addressed
to Agni, the second to Indra, and those that follow to gods of less
importance. The hymns within these deity groups are arranged according
to the diminishing number of stanzas contained in them. Thus in the
second Book the Agni group of ten hymns begins with one of sixteen
stanzas and ends with one of only six. The first hymn of the next group
in the same book has twenty-one, the last only four stanzas. The entire
group of the family books is, moreover, arranged according to the
increasing number of the hymns in each of those books, if allowance is
made for later additions. Thus the second Book has forty-three, the
third sixty-two, the sixth seventy-five, and the seventh one hundred and
four hymns. The homogeneity of the family books renders it highly
probable that they formed the nucleus of the RV., which gradually
assumed its final shape by successive additions to these books.

The earliest of these additions appears to be the second half of Book i,
which, consisting of nine groups, each by a different author, was
prefixed to the family books, the internal arrangement of which it
follows. The eighth is like the family books as being in the main
composed by members of one family, the Kanvas; but it differs from them
in not beginning with hymns to Agni and in the prevalence of the
strophic metre called Pragatha. The fact of its containing fewer hymns
than the seventh book shows that it did not form a unit of the family
books; but its partial resemblance to them caused it to be the first
addition at the end of that collection. The first part of Book i (1-50)
is in several respects like Book viii: Kanvas seem to have been the
authors of the majority of these hymns; their favourite strophic metre
is again found here; and both collections contain many similar or
identical passages. There must have been some difference between the two
groups, but the reason why they should have been separated by being
added at the beginning and the end of an older collection has not yet
been shown.

The *ninth book* was added as a consequence of the first eight being
formed into a unit. It consists entirely of hymns addressed to Soma
while the juice was 'clarifying' (pavamana); on the other hand, the
family books contain not a single Soma hymn, and Books i and viii
together only three hymns invoking Soma in his general character. Now
the hymns of Book ix were composed by authors of the same families as
those of Books ii to vii, as is shown, for instance, by the appearance
here of refrains peculiar to those families. Hence it is to be assumed
that all the hymns to Soma Pavamana were removed from Books i to viii,
in order to form a single collection belonging to the sphere of the
Udgatr or chanting priest, and added after Books i-viii, which were the
sphere of the Hotr or reciting priest. The diction and recondite
allusions in the hymns of this book suggest that they are later than
those of the preceding books; but some of them may be early, as
accompanying the Soma ritual which goes back to the Indo-Iranian period.
The hymns of the first part of this book (1-60) are arranged according
to the decreasing number of their stanzas, beginning with ten and ending
with four. In the second part (61-114), which contains some very long
hymns (one of forty-eight and another of fifty-eight stanzas), this
arrangement is not followed. The two parts also differ in metre: the
hymns of the first are, excepting four stanzas, composed in Gayatri,
while the second consists mainly of groups in other metres; thus 68-84
form a Jagati and 87-97 a Tristubh group.

The *tenth book* was the final addition. Its language and subject matter
show that it is later in origin than the other books; its authors were,
moreover, clearly familiar with them. Both its position at the end of
the RV. and the fact that the number of its hymns (191) is made up to
that of the first book indicate its supplementary character. Its hymns
were composed by a large, number of seers of different families, some of
which appear in other' books; but the traditional attribution of
authorship is of little or no value in the case of a great many hymns.
In spite of its generally more modern character, it contains some hymns
quite as old and poetic as the average of those in other books. These
perhaps found a place here because for some reason they had been
overlooked while, the other collections were being formed. As regards
language, we find in the tenth book earlier grammatical forms and words
growing obsolete, while new words and meanings begin to emerge. As to
matter, a tendency to abstract ideas and philosophical speculation, as
well as the introduction of magical conceptions, such as belong to the
sphere of the Atharvaveda, is here found to prevail.

## 5. LANGUAGE.

The hymns of the RV. are composed in the earliest stage of that literary
language of which the latest, or Classical Sanskrit, was stereotyped by
the grammar of Panini at the end of the fourth century B.C. It differs
from the latter about as much as Homeric from Attic Greek. It exhibits a
much greater variety of forms than Sanskrit does. Its case-forms both in
nominal and pronominal inflexion are more numerous. It has more
participles and gerunds. It is, however, in verbal forms that its
comparative richness is most apparent. Thus the RV. very frequently uses
the subjunctive, which as such has entirely died out in Sanskrit; it has
twelve forms of the infinitive, while only a single one of these has
survived in Sanskrit. The language of the RV. also differs from Sanskrit
in its accent, which, like that of ancient Greek, is of a musical
nature, depending on the pitch of the voice, and is marked throughout
the hymns. This accent has in Sanskrit been changed not only to a stress
accent, but has shifted its position as depending on quantity, and is no
longer marked. The Vedic accent occupies a very important position in
Comparative Philology, while the Sanskrit accent, being secondary, has
no value of this kind.

The Sandhi of the RV. represents an earlier and a less conventional
stage than that of Sanskrit. Thus the insertion of a sibilant between
final n and a hard palatal or dental is in the RV. restricted to cases
where it is historically justified; in Sanskrit it has become universal,
being extended to cases where it has no justification. After e and o in
the RV. a is nearly always pronounced, while in Sanskrit it is
invariably dropped. It may thus be affirmed with certainty that no
student can understand Sanskrit historically without knowing the
language of the RV.

## 6. METRE.

The hymns of the RV. are without exception metrical. They contain on the
average ten stanzas, generally of four verses or lines, but also of
three and sometimes five. The line, which is called Pada, ('quarter')
and forms the metrical unit, usually consists of eight, eleven, or
twelve syllables. A stanza is, as a rule, made up of lines of the same
type; but some of the rarer kinds of stanza are formed by combining
lines of different length. There are about fifteen metres, but only
about seven of these are at all common. By far the most common are the
Tristubh (4 x 11 syllables), the Gayatri (3 x 8), and the Jagati (4 x
12), which together furnish two-thirds of the total number of stanzas in
the RV. The Vedic metres, which are the foundation of the Classical
Sanskrit metres except two, have a, quantitative rhythm in which short
and long syllables alternate and, which is of a generally iambic type.
It is only the rhythm of the last four or five syllables (called the
cadence) of the line that is rigidly determined, and the lines of eleven
and twelve syllables have a caesura as well. In their structure the
Vedic metres thus come half way between the metres of the Indo-Iranian
period, in which, as the Avesta shows, the principle is the number of
syllables only, and) those of Classical Sanskrit, in which (except the
sloka) the quantity of every single syllable in the line is fixed.
Usually a hymn of the Rigveda consists of stanzas in the same metre
throughout; a typical divergence from this rule is to mark the
conclusion of a hymn with a stanza in a different metre. Some hymns are
strophic in their construction. The strophes in them consist either of
three stanzas (called trca) in the same simple metre, generally Gayatri,
or of two stanzas in different mixed metres. The latter type of strophe
is called Pragatha and is found chiefly in the eighth book.

## 7. RELIGION OF THE RIGVEDA.

This is concerned with the worship of gods that are largely
personifications of the powers of nature. The hymns are mainly
invocations of these gods, and are meant to accompany the oblation of
Soma juice and the fire sacrifice of melted butter. It is thus
essentially a polytheistic religion, which assumes a pantheistic
colouring only in a few of its latest hymns. The gods are usually stated
in the RV. to be thirty-three in number, being divided into three groups
of eleven distributed in earth, air, and heaven, the three divisions of
the Universe. Troops of deities, such as the Maruts, are of course not
included in this number. The gods were believed to have had a beginning.
But they were not thought to have all come into being at the same time;
for the RV. occasionally refers to earlier gods, and certain deities are
described as the offspring of others. That they were considered to have
been originally mortal is implied in the statement that they acquired
immortality by drinking Soma or by receiving it as a gift from Agni and
Savitr.

The gods were conceived as human in appearance. Their bodily parts which
are frequently mentioned, are in many instances simply figurative
illustrations of the phenomena of nature represented by them. Thus the
arms of the Sun are nothing more than his rays; and the tongue and limbs
of Agni merely denote his flames. Some of the gods appear equipped as
warriors, especially Indra, others are described as priests, especially
Agni and Brhaspati. All of them drive through the air in cars, drawn
chiefly by steeds, but sometimes by other animals. The favourite food of
men is also that of the gods, consisting in milk, butter, grain, and the
flesh of sheep, goats, and cattle. It is offered to them in the
sacrifice, which is either conveyed to them in heaven by the god of
fire, or which they come in their cars to partake of on the strew of
grass prepared for their reception. Their favourite drink is the
exhilarating juice of the Soma plant. The home of the gods is heaven,
the third heaven, or the highest step of Visnu, where cheered by
draughts of Soma they live a life of bliss.

Attributes of the gods.--Among these the most prominent is power, for
they are constantly described as great and mighty. They regulate the
order of nature and vanquish the potent powers of evil. They hold sway
over all creatures; no one can thwart their ordinances or live beyond
the time they appoint; and the fulfilment of desires is dependent on
them. They are benevolent beings who bestow prosperity on mankind; the
only one in whom injurious traits appear being Rudra. They are described
as 'true' and 'not deceitful', being friends and protectors of the
honest and righteous, but punishing sin and guilt. Since in most cases
the gods of the RV. have not yet become dissociated from the physical
phenomena which they represent, their figures are indefinite in outline
and deficient in individuality. Having many features, such as power,
brilliance, benevolence, and wisdom in common with others, each god
exhibits but very few distinctive attributes. This vagueness is further
increased by the practice of invoking deities in pairs-a practice making
both gods share characteristics properly belonging to one along. When
nearly every power can thus be ascribed to every god, the identification
of one deity with another becomes easy. There are in fact several such
identifications in the RV. The idea is even found in more than one late
passage that various deities are but different forms of a single divine
being. This idea, however, never developed into monotheism, for none of
the regular sacrifices in the Vedic period were offered to a single god.
Finally, in other late hymns of the RV. we find the deities Aditi and
Prajapati identified not only with all the gods, but with nature as
well. This brings us to that pantheism which became characteristic of
later Indian thought in the form of the Vedanta philosophy.

The Vedic gods may most conveniently be classified as deities of heaven,
air, and earth, according to the threefold division suggested by the RV.
itself. The celestial gods are Dyaus, Varuna, Mitra, Surya, Savitr,
Pusan, the Asvins, and the goddesses Usas, Dawn, and Ratri, Night. The
atmospheric gods are Indra, Apam napat, Rudra, the Maruts, Vayu,
Parjanya, and the Waters. The terrestrial deities are Prthivi, Agni, and
Soma. This Reader contains hymns addressed to all these gods, with
detailed introductions describing their characters in the words, as far
as is possible, of the RV. itself. A few quite subordinate deities are
not included, partly because no entire hymn is addressed to them. Two
such belong to the celestial sphere. Trita, a somewhat obscure god, who
is mentioned only in detached stanzas of the RV., comes down from the
Indo-Iranian period. He seems to represent the 'third' or lightning form
of fire. Similar in origin to Indra, be was ousted by the latter at an
early period. Matarisvan is a divine being also referred to only in
scattered stanzas of the RV. He is described as having brought down the
hidden fire from heaven to men on earth, like the Prometheus of Greek
mythology. Among the terrestrial deities are certain rivers that are
personified and invoked in the RV. Thus the Sindhu (Indus) s celebrated
as a goddess in one hymn (x. 75, 2. 4. 6), and the Vipas (Bïas) and the
Sutudri (Sutlej), sister streams of the Panjab, in another (iii. 33).
The most important and oftenest lauded is, however, the Sarasvati (vi.
61; vii. 95). Though the personification goes much further here than in
the case of other streams, the connexion of the goddess with the river
is never lost sight of in the RV.

Abstract deities.--One result of the advance of thought during the
period of the RV. from the concrete towards the abstract was the rise of
abstract deities. The earlier and more numerous class of these seems to
have started from epithets which were applicable to one or more older
deities, but which came to acquire an independent value as the want of a
god exercising the particular activity in question began to be felt. We
find here names denoting either an agent (formed with the suffix tr or
tar), such as Dhatr 'Creator', or an attribute, such as Prajapati, 'Lord
of Creatures'. Thus Dhatr, otherwise an epithet of Indra, appears also
as an independent deity who creates heaven and earth, sun and moon. More
rarely occur Vidhatri the 'Disposer', Dhartr, the 'Supporter', Tratr,
the Protector', and Netr, the 'Leader'. The only agent god mentioned at
all frequently in the RV. is Tvastr, the 'Artificer', though no entire
hymn is addressed to him. He is the most skilful of workmen, having
among other things fashioned the bolt of Indra and a new -drinking-cup
for the gods. He is a guardian of Soma, which is called the 'food of
Tvastr', and which Indra drinks in Tvastr's house. He is the father of
Saranyu, wife of Vivasvant and mother of the primaeval twins Yama and
Yami. The name of the solar deity Savitr the 'Stimulator', belongs to
this class of agent gods (cf. p. 11).

There are a few other abstract deities whose names were originally
epithets of older gods, but now become epithets of the supreme god who
was being evolved at the end of the Rigvedic period. These appellations,
compound in form, are of rare and late occurrence. The most important is
Prajapati, 'Lord of Creatures' Originally an epithet of such gods as
Savitr and Soma, this name is employed in a late verse of the tenth book
to designate a distinct deity in the character of a Creator. Similarly,
the epithet Visvakarman, 'all-creating', appears as the name of an
independent deity to whom two hymns (x. 81. 82) are addressed.
Hiranyagarbha, the 'Golden Germ', once occurs as the name of the supreme
god described as the 'one lord of all that exists'. In one curious
instance it is possible to watch the rise of an abstract deity of this
type. The refrain of a late hymn of the RV. (x. 121) is kasmai devaya
havisa vidhema? 'to what god should we pay worship with oblation?' This
led to the word ká, 'who?' being used in the later Vedic literature as
an independent name, Ka, of the supreme god. The only abstract deity of
this type occurring in the oldest as well as the latest parts of the RV.
is Brhaspati (p. 83).

The second and smaller class of abstract deities comprises
personifications of abstract nouns. There are seven or eight of these
occurring in the tenth book. Two hymns (83, 84) are addressed to Manyu,
'Wrath', and one (x. 161) to Sraddha, 'Faith'. Anumati, 'Favour (of the
gods)', Aramati, 'Devotion', Sunrta, 'Bounty', Asuniti, 'Spirit-life',
and Nirrti, 'Decease', occur only in a few isolated passages.

A purely abstract deity, often incidentally celebrated throughout the
RV. is A-diti, 'Liberation', 'Freedom' (lit. 'un-binding'), whose main
characteristic is the power of delivering from the bonds of physical
suffering and moral guilt. She, however, occupies a unique position
among the abstract deities, owing to the peculiar way in which the
personification seems to have arisen. She is the mother of the small
group of deities called Adityas, often styled 'sons of Aditi'. This
expression at first most probably meant nothing more than 'sons of
liberation', according to an idiom common in the RV. and elsewhere. The
word was then personified, with the curious result that the mother is
mythologically younger than some at least of her sons, who (for instance
Mitra) date from the Indo-Iranian period. The goddess Diti, named only
three times in the RV., probably came into being as an antithesis to
Aditi, with whom she, is twice mentioned.

Godesses play an insignificant part in the RV. The only one of
importance is Usas (p. 92). Next come Sarasvati, celebrated in two whole
hymns (vi. 61; vii. 95) as well as parts of others, and Vac, 'Speech'
(x, 71. 125). With one hymn each are addressed Prthivi, 'Earth' (v. 84),
Ratri, 'Night' (x, 127, p. 203), and Aranyani, 'Goddess of the Forest'
(x. 146). Others are only sporadically mentioned. The wives of the great
gods are still more insignificant, being mere names formed from those of
their consorts, and altogether lacking in individuality: such are
Agnayi, Indrani, Varunani, spouses of Agni, Indra, and Varuna
respectively.

Dual Divinities.--A peculiar feature of the religion of the RV. is the
invocation of pairs of deities whose names are combined as compounds,
each member of which is in the dual. About a dozen such pairs are
celebrated in entire hymns, and about a dozen more in detached stanzas.
By far the largest number of hymns is addressed to the couple
Mitra-Varuna, though the names most frequently found as dual compounds
are those of Dyava-prthivi, 'Heaven and Earth' (p. 36). The latter pair,
having been associated as universal parents from the Indo-European
period onwards, in all probability furnished the analogy for this dual
type.

Groups of Deities.--There are also a few more or less definite groups of
deities, generally associated with some particular god. The Maruts (p.
21), who attend on Indra, are the most numerous group. The smaller group
of the Adityas, of whom Varuna is the chief, is constantly mentioned in
company with their mother Aditi. Their number is stated in the RV. to be
seven or, with the addition of Martanda, eight. One passage (ii. 27, 1)
enumerates six of them Mitra, Aryaman, Bhaga, Varuna, Daksa, Amsa: Surya
was probably regarded as the seventh. A much less important group,
without individual names or definite number, is that of the Vasus, whose
leader is generally Indra. There are, finally, the Visve devas (p. 147),
who, invoked in many hymns, form a comprehensive group, which in spite
of its name is, strange to say, sometimes conceived as a narrower group
associated with others like the Vasus and Adityas.

Lesser Divinities.--Besides the higher gods, a number of lesser divine
powers are known to the RV. The most prominent of these are the Rbhus,
who are celebrated in eleven hymns. They are a deft-handed trio, who by
their marvellous skill acquired the rank of deities. Among their five
main feats of dexterity the greatest consisted in transforming the bowl
of Tvastr into four shining cups.

The bowl and the cups have been various interpreted a s the moon with
its four phases or the year with its Seasons. The Rbhus further
exhibited their skill in renewing the youth of their parents, by whom
Heaven and Earth seem to have been meant.

Occasional mention is made in the RV. of an Apsaras, a celestial
water-nymph, the spouse of a corresponding genius named Gandharva. In a
few passages more Apsarases, than one are spoken of; but the only one
mentioned by name is Urvasi. Gandharva is in the RV. a single being
(like the Gandarewa of the Avesta), who dwells in the aerial sphere,
guards the celestial Soma, and is (as in the Avesta) connected with the
waters.

There are, lastly, a few divinities of the tutelary order, guardians
watching over the welfare of house or field. Such is the rarely
mentioned Vastospati, 'Lord of the Dwelling', who is invoked to grant a
favourable entry, to remove disease, and to bestow protection and
prosperity. Ksetrasya pati, 'Lord of the Field', is besought to grant
cattle and horses and to confer welfare. Sita, the 'Furrow', is once
invoked to dispense crops and rich blessings.

In addition to the great phenomena of nature, various features of the
earth's surface as well as artificial objects are to be found deified in
the RV. Thus besides Rivers and Waters (p. 115), already mentioned as
terrestrial goddesses, mountains are often addressed as divinities, but
only along with other natural objects, or in association with gods.
Plants are regarded as divine powers, one entire hymn (x. 97) being
devoted to their praise, chiefly with reference to their healing
properties. Sacrificial implements, moreover, are deified. The most
important of these is the sacrificial post which is praised and invoked
in a whole hymn (iii. 8). The sacrificial grass (barhis) and the Divine
Doors (dvaro devih), which lead to the place of sacrifice, are addressed
as goddesses. The pressing stones (gravanas) are invoked as deities in
three hymns (x. 76. 94. 175): spoken of as immortal, unaging, mightier
than heaven, they are besought to drive away demons and destruction. The
Mortar and Pestle used in pounding the Soma plant are also invoked in
the RV. (i. 28, 6. 6). Weapons, finally, are sometimes deified: armour,
bow, quiver, arrows, and drum being addressed in one of the hymns (vi.
75).

The Demons often mentioned in the hymns are of two kinds. The higher and
more powerful class are the aerial foes of the gods. These, are seldom
called asura in the RV., where in the older parts that word means a
divine being, like *ahura* in the Avesta (cf. p. 134). The term dasa, or
dasyu, properly the name of the dark aborigines, is frequently used in
the sense of fiend to designate the aerial demons. The conflict is
regularly one between a single god and a single demon, as exemplified by
Indra and Vrtra. The latter is by far the most frequently mentioned. His
mother being called Danu, he is sometimes alluded to by the metronymic
term Danava. Another powerful demon is Vala, the personified cave of the
cows, which he guards, and which are set free by Indra and his allies,
notably the Angirases. Other demon adversaries of Indra are Arbuda,
described as a wily beast, whose cows Indra drove out; Visvarapa, son of
Tvastr, a three-headed demon slain by both Trita and Indra, who seize
his cows; and Svarbhanu, who eclipses the sun. There are several other
individual demons, generally described as Dasas and slain by Indra. A
group of demons are the Panis ('niggards'), primarily foes of Indra,
who, with the aid of the dog Sarama, tracks and releases the cows hidden
by them.

The second or lower class of demons are terrestrial goblins, enemies of
men. By far the most common generic name for them is Raksas. They are
nearly always mentioned in connexion with some god who destroys them.
The much less common term Yalu or Yatudhana (primarily 'sorcerer')
alternates with Raksas, and perhaps expresses a species. A class of
demons scarcely referred to in the RV., but often mentioned in the later
Vedas, are the Pisacas, eaters of raw flesh or of corpses.

Not more than thirty hymns are concerned with subjects other than the
worship of gods or deified objects. About a dozen of these, almost
entirely confined to the tenth book, deal with magical practices, which
properly belong to the sphere of the Atharvaveda. Their contents are
augury (ii. 42. 43) or spells directed against poisonous vermin (i. 191)
or disease (x. 163), against a demon destructive of children (x. 162),
or enemies (x. 166), or rival wives (x. 145). A few are incantations to
preserve life (x. 58. 60), or to induce sleep (v. 55), or to procure
offspring (x. 183); while one is a panegyric of frogs as magical
bringers of rain (vii. 103, p. 141).

## 8. SECULAR MATTER IN THE RIGVEDA.

Secular hymns.--Hardly a score of the hymns are secular poems. These are
especially valuable as throwing direct light on the earliest thought and
civilization of India. One of the most noteworthy of them is the long
wedding hymn (x. 85). There are also five funeral hymns (x. 14-18). Four
of these are addressed to deities concerned with the future life; the
last, however, is quite secular in tone, and gives more information than
any of the rest about the funeral customs of early Vedic India (cf. p.
164).

Mythological dialogues. -Besides several mythological dialogues in which
the speakers are divine beings (iv. 62; x. 51. 52. 86. 108), there are
two in which both agents are human. One is a somewhat obscure colloquy
(x. 95) between a mortal lover Puraravas and the celestial nymph Urvasi,
who is on the point of forsaking him. It is the earliest form of the
story which much more than a thousand years later formed the subject of
Kalidasa's drama Vikramorvasi. The other (x. 10) is a dialogue between
Yama and Yami, the twin parents of the human race. This group of hymns
has a special literary interest as foreshadowing the dramatic works of a
later age.

Didactic hymns.--Four hymns are of a didactic character. One of these
(x. 34) is a striking poem, being a monologue in which a gambler laments
the misery he has brought on himself and his home by his inability to
resist the attraction of the dice. The rest which describe the various
ways in which men follow gain (ix. 112), or praise wise speech (x. 71),
or the value of good deeds (x. 117), anticipate the sententious poetry
for which post-Vedic literature is noted.

Riddles.--Two of the hymns consist of riddles. One of these (viii. 29,
p. 147) describes various gods without mentioning their names. More
elaborate and obscure is a long poem of fifty-two stanzas (i. 164), in
which a number of enigmas, largely connected with the sun, are
propounded in mystical and symbolic language. Thus the wheel of order
with twelve spokes, revolving round the heavens, and containing within
it in couples 720 sons, means the year with its twelve months and 360
days and 360 nights.

Cosmogonic hymns.--About half a dozen hymns consist of speculations on
the origin of the world through the agency of a Creator (called by
various names) as distinct from any of the ordinary gods. One of them
(x. 129, p. 207), which describes the world as due to the development of
the existent (sat) from the non-existent (a-sat), is particularly
interesting as the starting-point of the evolutional philosophy which in
later times assumed shape in the Sankhya system.

A semi-historical character attaches to one complete hymn (i. 126) and
to appendages of 3 to 5 stanzas attached to over thirty others, which
are called Danastutis, or 'praises of gifts'. These are panegyrics of
liberal patrons on behalf of whom the seers composed their hymns. They
yield incidental genealogical information about the poets and their
employers, as well as about the names and the habitat of the Vedic
tribes. They are late in date, appearing chiefly in the first and tenth,
as well as among the supplementary hymns of the eighth book.

Geographical data.--From the geographical data of the RV., especially
the numerous rivers there mentioned, it is to be inferred that the
Indo-Aryan tribes when the hymns were composed occupied the territory
roughly corresponding to the north-west Frontier Province, and the
Panjab of to-day. The references to flora and fauna bear out this
conclusion.

The *historical data* of the hymns show that the Indo-Aryans were still
engaged in war with the aborigines, many victories over these foes being
mentioned. That they were still moving forward as conquerors is
indicated by references to rivers as obstacles to advance. Though
divided into many tribes, they were conscious of religious and racial
unity, contrasting the aborigines with themselves by calling them
non-sacrificers and unbelievers, as well as 'black-skins' and the 'Dasa
colour' as opposed to the 'Aryan colour'.

Incidental references scattered throughout the hymns supply a good deal
of information about the social conditions of the time. Thus it is clear
that the family, with the father at its head, was the basis of society,
and that women held a freer and more honoured position than in later
times. Various crimes are mentioned, robbery, especially of cattle,
apparently being the commonest. Debt, chiefly as a result of gambling,
was known. Clothing consisted usually of an upper and a lower garment,
which were made of sheep's wool. Bracelets, anklets, necklaces, and
earrings were worn as ornaments. Men usually grew beards, but sometimes
shaved. Food mainly consisted of milk, clarified butter, grain,
vegetables, and fruit. Meat was eaten only when animals were sacrificed.
The commonest kind appears to have been beef, as bulls were the chief
offerings to the gods. Two kinds of spirituous liquor were made: Soma
was drunk at religious ceremonies only, while Sura, extracted from some
kind of grain, was used on ordinary occasions.

Occupations.--One of the chief occupations of the Indo-Aryan was
warfare. He fought either on foot or from a chariot, but there is no
evidence to show that he ever did so on horseback. The ordinary weapons
were bows and arrows, but spears and axes were also used.
Cattle-breeding appears to have been the main source of livelihood, cows
being the chief objects of desire in prayers to the gods. But
agriculture was also practised to some extent: fields were furrowed with
a plough drawn by bulls; corn was cut with sickles, being then threshed
and winnowed. Wild animals were trapped and snared, or hunted with bows
and arrows, occasionally with the aid of dogs. Boats propelled by
paddles were employed, as it seems mainly for the purpose of crossing
rivers. Trade was known only in the form of barter, the cow representing
the unit of value in exchange. Certain trades and crafts already
existed, though doubtless in a rudimentary stage. The occupations of the
wheelwright and the carpenter were, combined. The smith melted ore in a
forge, and made kettles and other vessels of metal. The tanner prepared
the skins of animals. Women plaited mats of grass or reeds, sewed, and
especially wove, but whether they ever did so professionally is
uncertain.

Amusements.--Among these chariot-racing was the favourite. The most
popular social recreation was playing with dice (cp. p. 186). Dancing
was also practised, chiefly by women. The people were fond of music, the
instruments used being the drum (dundubhi), the flute (vana), and the
lute (vina). Singing is also mentioned.

## 9. LITERARY MERIT OF THE RIGVEDA.

The diction of the hymns is on the whole natural and simple, free from
the use of compounds of more than two members. Considering their great
antiquity, the hymns are composed with a remarkable degree of metrical
skill and command of language. But as they were produced by a sacerdotal
class and were generally intended to accompany a ritual no longer
primitive, their poetry is often impaired by constant sacrificial
allusions. This is especially noticeable in the hymns addressed to the
two ritual deities Agni and Soma, where the thought becomes affected by
conceits and obscured by mysticism. Nevertheless the RV. contains much
genuine poetry. As the gods are mostly connected with natural phenomena,
the praises addressed to them give rise to much beautiful and even noble
imagery. The degree of literary merit in different hymns naturally
varies a good deal, but the average is remarkably high. The most
poetical hymns are those addressed to Dawn, equal if not superior in
beauty to the religious lyrics of any other literature. Some of the
hymns to Indra show much graphic power in describing his conflict with
the demon Vrtra. The hymns to the Maruts, or Storm gods, often depict
with vigorous imagery the phenomena of thunder and lightning, and the
mighty onset of the wind. One hymn to Parjanya (v. 83) paints the
devastating effects of the rain-storm with great vividness. The hymns in
praise of Varuna describe the various aspects of his sway as moral ruler
of the world in an exalted strain of poetry. Some of the mythological
dialogues set forth the situation with much beauty of language; for
example, the colloquy between Indra's messenger Sarama and the demons
who stole the cows (x. 108), and that between the primaeval twins Yama
and Yami (x. 10). The Gambler's lament (x. 34) is a fine specimen of
pathetic poetry. One of the funeral hymns (x. 18) expresses ideas
connected with death in language of impressive and solemn beauty. One of
the cosmogonic hymns (x. 129) illustrates how philosophical speculation
can be clothed in poetry of no mean order.

## 10. INTERPRETATION.

In dealing with the hymns of the RV. the important question arises, to
what extent are we able to understand their real sense, considering that
they have come down to us as an isolated relic from the remotest period
of Indian literature? The reply, stated generally, is that, as a result
of the labours of Vedic scholars, the meaning of a considerable
proportion of the RV. is clear, but of the remainder many hymns and a
great many single stanzas or passages are still obscure or
unintelligible. This was already the case in the time of Yaska, the
author of the Nirukta, the oldest extant commentary (c. 500 B.C.) on
about 600 detached stanzas of the RV.; for he quotes one of his
predecessors, Kautsa, as saying that the Vedic hymns we obscure,
unmeaning, and mutually contradictory.

In the earlier period of Vedic studies, commencing about the, middle of
the nineteenth century, the traditional method, which follows the great
commentary of Sayana (fourteenth century A.D.), and is represented by
the translation of the RV., begun by H.H. Wilson in 1850, was considered
adequate. It has since been proved that, though the native Indian
commentators are invaluable guides. in explaining the theological and
ritual texts of the Brahmanas and Satras, with the atmosphere of which
they were familiar, they did not possess a continuous tradition from the
time when the Vedic hymns were composed. That the gap between the poets
and the interpreters even earlier than Yaska must have been
considerable, is shown by the divergences of opinion among his
predecessors as quoted by him. Thus one of these, Aurnavabha, interprets
nasatyau, an epithet of the Asvins, as 'true, not false', another
Agrayana, as 'leaders of truth' (satyasya pranetarau), while Yaska
himself thinks it may mean 'nose-born' (nasika-prabhavau)! Yaska,
moreover, mentions several different schools of interpretation, each of
which explained difficulties in accordance with its own particular
theory. Yaska's own interpretations, which in all cases of doubt are
based on etymology, are evidently often merely conjectural, for he
frequently gives several alternative explanations of a word. Thus he
explains the epithet jata-vedas in as many as five different ways. Yet
he must have had more and better means of ascertaining the sense of
various obscure words than Sayana who lived nearly 2,000 years later.
Sayana's interpretations, however, sometimes differ from those of Yaska.
Hence either Yaska is wrong or Sayana does not follow the tradition.
Again, Sayana often gives several inconsistent explanations of a word in
interpreting the same passage or in commenting on the same word in
different passages. Thus asura, 'divine being', is variously rendered by
him as 'expeller of foes', 'giver of strength', 'giver of life', 'hurler
away of what is undesired', 'giver of breath or water', 'thrower of
oblations, priest', 'taker away of breath', 'expeller of water,
Parjanya', 'impeller', 'strong', 'wise', and 'rain-water' or 'a
water-discharging cloud'! In short it is clear from a careful
examination of their comments that neither Yaska nor Sayana possessed
any certain knowledge about a large number of words in the RV. Hence
their interpretations can be treated as decisive only if they are borne
out by probability, by the context, and by parallel passages.

For the traditional method Roth, the founder of Vedic philology,
substituted the critical method of interpreting the difficult parts of
the RV. from internal evidence by the minute comparison of all words
parallel in form and matter, while taking into consideration context,
grammar, and etymology, without ignoring either the help supplied by the
historical study of the Vedic language in its connexion with Sanskrit or
the outside evidence derived from the Avesta and from Comparative
Philology. In the application of his method Roth attached too much
weight to etymological considerations, while he undervalued the evidence
of native tradition. On the other hand, a reaction arose which, in
emphasizing the purely Indian character of the Vedic hymns, connects the
interpretation of them too closely with the literature of the post-Vedic
period and the much more advanced civilization there described. It is
important to note that the critical scholar has at his disposal not only
all the material that was open to the traditional interpreters, and to
which he is moreover able to apply the comparative and historical
methods of research, but also possesses over and above many valuable
aids that were unknown to the traditional school--the Avesta,
Comparative Philology, Comparative Religion and Mythology, and
Ethnology. The student will find in the notes of the *Reader* many
exemplifications of the usefulness of these aids to interpretation.
There is good reason to hope from the results already achieved that
steady adherence to the critical method, by admitting all available
evidence and by avoiding one-sidedness in its application, will
eventually clear up a large proportion of the obscurities and
difficulties that still confront the interpreter of the Rigveda.

# AGNI

As the personification of the sacrificial fire, Agni is second in
importance to Indra (ii. 12) only, being addressed in at least 200
hymns. The anthropomorphism of his physical appearance is only
rudimentary, and is connected chiefly with the sacrificial aspect of
fire. Thus he is butter-backed, flame-haired, and has a tawny beard,
sharp jaws, and golden teeth. Mention is often made of his tongue, with
which the gods eat the oblation. With a burning head he faces in all
directions.

He is compared with various animals: he resembles a bull that bellows,
and has horns which he sharpens; when born he is often called a calf; he
is kindled like a horse that brings the gods, and is yoked to convey the
sacrifice to them. He is also a divine bird; he is the eagle of the sky;
as dwelling in the waters he is like a goose; he is winged, and he takes
possession of the wood as a bird perches on a tree.

Wood or ghee is his food, melted butter his beverage; and he is
nourished three times a day. He is the mouth by which the gods eat the
sacrifice; and his flames are spoons with which he besprinkles the gods,
but he is also asked to consume the offerings himself. He is sometimes,
though then nearly always with other gods, invited to drink the Soma
juice.

His brightness is much dwelt upon: he shines like the sun; his lustre is
like the rays of the dawn and the sun, and like the lightnings of the
rain-cloud. He shines even at night, and dispels the darkness with his
beams. On the other hand, his path is black when he invades the forests
and shaves the earth as a barber a beard. His flames are like roaring
waves, and his sound is like the thunder of heaven. His red smoke rises
up to the firmament; like the erector of a post he supports the sky with
his smoke. 'Smoke-bannered' (dhuma-ketu) is his frequent and exclusive
epithet.

He has a shining, golden, lightning car, drawn by two or more ruddy and
tawny steeds. He is a charioteer of the sacrifice, and with his steeds
he brings the gods on his car.

He is the child of Heaven (Dyáus), and is often called the son of Heaven
and Earth (i. 160). He is also the offspring of the waters. The gods
generated him as a light for the Aryan or for man, and placed him among
men. Indra is called Agni's twin brother, and is more closely associated
with him than any other god.

The mythology of Agni, apart from his sacrificial activity, is mainly
concerned with his various births, forms, and abodes. Mention is often
made of his daily production from the two kindling sticks (aránis),
which are his parents or his mothers. From the dry wood Agni is born
living; as soon as born the child devours his parents. By the ten
maidens that produce him are meant the ten fingers of the kindler. Owing
to the force required to kindle Agni he is often called 'son of
strength' (sáhasah sunúh). Being produced every morning he is young; at
the same time no sacrificer is older than Agni, for he conducted the
first sacrifice. Again, Agni's origin in the aerial waters is often
referred to: he is an embryo of the waters; he is kindled in the waters;
he is a bull that has grown in the lap of the waters. As the 'son of
Waters' (ii. 35) he has become a separate deity. He is also sometimes
conceived as latent in terrestrial waters. This notion of Agni in the
waters is a prominent one in the RV. Thirdly, a celestial origin of Agni
is often mentioned: he is born in the highest heaven, and was brought
down from heaven by Matarisvan, the Indian Prometheus; and the
acquisition of fire by man is regarded as a gift of the gods as well as
a production of Matarisvan. The Sun (vii. 63) is further regarded as a
form of Agni. Thus Agni is the light of heaven in the bright sky; he was
born on the other side of the air and sees all things; he is born as the
sun rising in the morning. Hence Agni comes to have a triple character.
His births are three or threefold; the gods made him threefold; he is
threefold light; he has three heads, three bodies, three stations. This
threefold nature of Agni is clearly recognized in the RV., and
represents the earliest Indian trinity.

The universe being also regarded as divided into the two divisions of
heaven and earth, Agni is sometimes said to have two origins, and indeed
exclusively bears the epithet dvi-jánman *having two births*. As being
kindled in numerous dwellings Agni is also said to have many births.

Agni is more closely associated with human life than any other deity. He
is the only god called grhá-pati *lord of the house*, and is constantly
spoken of as a guest (átithi) in human dwellings. He is an immortal who
has taken up his abode among mortals. Thus be comes to be termed the
nearest kinsman of men. He is oftenest described as a father, sometimes
also as a brother or even as a son of his worshippers. He both takes the
offerings of men to the gods and brings the gods to the sacrifice. He is
thus characteristically a messenger (dutá) appointed by gods and by men
to be an 'oblation-bearer'.

As the centre of the sacrifice he comes to be celebrated as the divine
counterpart of the earthly priesthood. Hence he is often called priest
(rtvíj, vípra) domestic priest (puróhita), and more often than by any
other name invoking priest (hótr), also officiating priest (adhvaryú)
and playing priest (brahmán). His priesthood is the most salient feature
of his character; he is in fact the great priest, as Indra is the great
warrior.

Agni's wisdom is often dwelt upon. As knowing all the details of
sacrifice he is wise and all-knowing, and is exclusively called
jatá-vedas he who knows all created beings.

He is a great benefactor of his worshippers, protecting and delivering
them, and bestowing on them all kinds of boons, but pre-eminently
domestic welfare, offspring, and prosperity.

His greatness is often lauded, and is once even said to surpass that of
the other gods. His cosmic and creative powers are also frequently
praised.

From the ordinary sacrificial Agni who conveys the offering
(havya-váhana) is distinguished his corpse-devouring (kravyád) form that
burns the body on the funeral pyre (x. 14). Another function of Agni is
to burn and dispel evil spirits and hostile magic.

The sacrificial fire was already in the Indo-Iranian period the centre
of a developed ritual, and was personified and worshipped as a mighty,
wise, and beneficent god. It seems to have been an Indo-European
institution also, since the Italians and Greeks, as well as the Indians
and Iranians, had the custom of offering gifts to the gods in fire. But
whether it was already personified in that remote period is a matter of
conjecture.

The name of Agni (Lat. *igni-s*, Slavonic *ogni*) is Indo-European, and
may originally have meant the 'agile' as derived from the root ag *to
drive* (Lat. *ago*, Gk. *hágo*), Skt. ájami).

# SAVITR

This god is celebrated in eleven entire hymns and in many detached
stanzas as well. He is pre-eminently a golden deity: the epithets
golden-eyed, golden-handed, and golden-tongued are peculiar to him. His
car and its pole are golden. It is drawn by two or more brown,
white-footed horses. He has mighty golden splendour which he diffuses,
illuminating heaven, earth, and air. He raises aloft his strong golden
arms, with which be arouses and blesses all beings, and which extend to
the ends of the earth. He moves in his golden car, seeing all creatures,
on a downward and an upward path. Shining with the rays of the sun,
yellow-haired, Savitr raises up his light continually from the east. His
ancient paths in the air are dustless and easy to traverse, and on them
he protects his worshippers; for he conveys the departed spirit to where
the righteous dwell. He removes evil dreams, and makes men sinless; he
drives away demons and sorcerers. He observes fixed laws; the waters and
the wind are subject to him. The other gods follow his lead; and no
being can resist his will. In one stanza (iii. 62, 10) he is besought to
stimulate the thoughts of worshippers who desire to think of the glory
of god Savitr. This is the celebrated Savitri stanza which has been a
morning prayer in India for more than three thousand years. Savitr is
often distinguished from Surya (vii. 63), as when he is said to shine
with the rays of the Sun, to impel the sun, or to declare men sinless to
the sun. But in other passages it is hardly possible to keep the two
deities apart.

Savitr is connected with the evening as well as the morning; for at his
command night comes and he brings all beings to rest.

The word Savitr is derived from the root su to stimulate, which is
constantly and almost exclusively used with it in such a way as to form
a perpetual play on the name of the god. In nearly half its occurrences
the name is accompanied by devá god, when it means the 'Stimulator god'.
He was thus originally a solar deity in the capacity of the great
stimulator of life and motion in the world.

# MARÚTAS

This group of deities is prominent in the RV., thirty-three hymns being
addressed to them alone, seven to them with Indra, and one each to them
with Agni and Pusan (vi. 54). They form a troop (ganá, sárdhas), being
mentioned in the plural only. Their number is thrice sixty or thrice
seven. They are the sons of Rudra (ii. 33) and of Prsni, who is a cow
(probably representing the mottled storm-cloud). They are further said
to have been generated by Vayu, the god of Wind, in the wombs of heaven
and they are called the sons of heaven; but they are also spoken of as
self-born. They are brothers equal in age and of one mind, having the
same birthplace and the same abode. They have grown on earth, in air,
and in heaven, or dwell in the three heavens. The goddess Rodasi is
always mentioned in connexion with them; she stands beside them on their
car, and thus seems to have been regarded as their bride.

The brilliance of the Maruts is constantly referred to: they are golden,
ruddy, shine like fires, and are self-luminous. They are very often
associated with lightning: all the five compounds of vidyút in the RV.
are almost exclusively descriptive of them. Their lances represent
lightning, as their epithet rsti-vidyut *lightning-speared* shows. They
also have golden axes. They are sometimes armed with bows and arrows,
but this trait is probably borrowed from their father Rudra. They wear
garlands, golden mantles, golden ornaments, and golden helmets. Armlets
and anklets (khadí) are peculiar to them. The cars on which they ride
gleam with lightning, and are drawn by steeds (generally feminine) that
are ruddy or tawny, spotted, swift as thought. They are great and
mighty; young and unaging; dustless, fierce, terrible like lions, but
also playful like children or calves.

The noise made by them, and often mentioned, is thunder and the roaring
of the winds. They cause the mountains to quake and the two worlds to
tremble; they rend trees, and, like wild elephants, devour the forests.
One of their main activities is to shed rain: they cover the eye of the
sun with rain; they create darkness with the cloud when they shed rain;
and they cause the heavenly pail and the streams of the mountains to
pour. The waters they shed are often clearly connected with the thunder
storm. Their rain is often figuratively called milk, ghee, or honey.
They avert heat, but also dispel darkness, produce light, and prepare a
path for the sun.

They are several times called singers: they are the singers of heaven
they sing a song; for Indra when he slew the dragon, they sang a song
and pressed Soma. Though primarily representing the sound of the winds,
their song is also conceived as a hymn of praise. Thus they come to be
compared with priests, and are addressed as priests when in the company
of Indra.

Owing to their connexion. with the thunderstorm, the Maruts are
constantly associated with Indra (ii. 12) as his friends and allies,
increasing his strength and prowess with their prayers, hymns, and
songs, and generally assisting him in the fight with Vrtra. Indra indeed
accomplishes all his celestial exploits in their company. Sometimes,
however, the Maruts. accomplish these exploits alone. Thus they rent
Vrtra joint from joint, and disclosed the cows.

When not associated with Indra, the Maruts occasionally exhibit the
maleficent traits of their father Rudra. Hence they are implored to ward
off the lightning from their worshippers and not to let their ill-will
reach them, and are besought to avert their arrow and the stone which
they hurl, their lightning, and their cow- and man-slaying bolt. But
like their father Rudra, they are also supplicated to bring healing
remedies. These remedies appear to be the waters, for the Maruts bestow
medicine by raining.

The evidence of the RV. indicates that the Maruts are Storm-gods. The
name is probably derived from the root mar, *to shine*, thus meaning
'the shining ones'.

# VISNU

This deity occupies a subordinate position in the RV., being celebrated
in only five or six hymns. The only anthropomorphic traits mentioned
about him are the strides he takes, and the description of him as a
youth vast in body who is no longer a child. The central feature of his
nature consists in his three steps, connected with which are his
exclusive epithets 'wide-going' (uru-gayá) and 'wide-striding'
(uru-kramá). With these steps he traverses the earth or the terrestrial
spaces. Two of his steps are visible to men, but the third or highest is
beyond the flight of birds or mortal ken. His highest step is like an
eye fixed in heaven; it shines brightly down. It is his dear abode,
where pious men and the gods rejoice. There can be no doubt that these
three steps refer to the course of the sun, and in all probability to
its passage through the three divisions of the world: earth, air, and
heaven. Visnu sets in motion like a revolving wheel his ninety steeds (=
days) with their four names (= seasons), an allusion to the three
hundred and sixty days of the solar year. Thus Visnu seems to. have been
originally a personification of the activity of the sun, the
swiftly-moving luminary that with vast strides passes through the whole
universe. Visnu takes his steps for man's existence, to bestow the earth
on him as a dwelling. The most prominent secondary characteristic of
Visnu is his friendship for Indra, with whom he is often allied in the
fight with Vrtra. In hymns addressed to Visnu alone, Indra is the only
other deity incidentally associated with him. One hymn (vi. 69) is
dedicated to the two gods conjointly. Through the Vrtra myth the Maruts,
lndra's companions, are drawn into alliance with Visnu, who throughout
one hymn (v. 87) is praised in combination with them.

The name is most probably derived from vis *be active*, thus meaning
'the active one'.

## DYÁVA-PRTHIVÍ

Heaven and Earth are the most frequently named pair of deities in the
RV. They are so closely associated that, while they are invoked as a
pair in six hymns, Dyáus is never addressed alone in any hymn, and
Prthiv in only one of three stanzas. The dual compound Dyáva-Prthiví,
moreover, occurs much oftener than the name of Dyáus alone. Heaven and
Earth are also mentioned as ródasi *the two worlds* more than 100 times.
They are parents, being often called pitára, matára, jánitri, besides
being separately addressed as 'father' and 'mother'. They have made and
sustain all creatures; they are also the parents of the gods. At the
same time they are in different passages spoken of as themselves created
by individual gods. One of them is a prolific bull, the other a
variegated cow, being both rich in seed. They never grow old. They are
great and wide-extended; they are broad and vast abodes. They grant food
and wealth, or bestow great fame and dominion. Sometimes moral qualities
are attributed to them. They are wise and promote righteousness. As
father and mother they guard beings, and protect from disgrace and
misfortune. They are sufficiently personified to be called leaders of
the sacrifice and to be conceived as seating themselves around the
offering; but they never attained to a living personification or
importance in worship. These two deities are quite co-ordinate, while in
most of the other pairs one of the two greatly predominates.

# INDRA

Indra is invoked alone in about one-fourth of the hymns of the RV., far
more than are addressed to any other deity; for he is the favourite
national god of the Vedic people. He is more anthropomorphic on the
physical side, and more invested with mythological imagery, than any
other member of the pantheon. He is primarily a god of the thunderstorm
who vanquishes the demons of drought or darkness, and sets free the
waters or wing the light. He is secondarily the god of battle who aids
the victorious Aryan in overcoming his aboriginal foes.

His physical features, such as body and head, are often referred to
after he has drunk Soma he agitates his jaws and his beard; and his
belly is many times mentioned in connexion with his great powers of
drinking Soma. Being tawny (hári) in colour, he is also tawny-haired and
tawny-bearded. His arms are especially often referred to because they
wield the thunderbolt (vájra), which, mythologically representing the
lightning stroke, is his exclusive weapon. This bolt was fashioned for
him by Tvastr, being made of iron (ayasá), golden, tawny, sharp,
many-pointed, sometimes spoken of as a stone or rock. Several epithets,
compounds or derivatives of vájra, such as vájra-bahu *bearing the bolt
in his arm* and vajrín *wielder of the bolt* are almost without
exception applied to him. Sometimes he is described as armed with bow
and arrows; he also carries a hook (ankusá).

Having a golden car, drawn by two tawny steeds (hári), he is a
car-fighter (rathesthá). Both his car and his steeds were fashioned by
the Rbhus, the divine artificers.

As Indra is more addicted to Soma than any of the other gods, the common
epithet 'Soma-drinker' (Somapá) is characteristic of him. This beverage
stimulates him to carry out his warlike deeds; thus for the slaughter of
Vrtra he is said to have drunk three lakes of Soma. One whole hymn (x.
119) is a monologue in which Indra, intoxicated with Soma, boasts of his
greatness and his might.

Indra is often spoken of as having been born, and two whole hymns deal
with the subject of his birth. His father, the same as Agni's, appears
to be Dyaus; but the inference from other passages is that he is Tvastr,
the artificer among the gods. Agni is called Indra's twin brother, and
Pusan (vi. 54) is also his brother. His wife, who is often mentioned, is
Indrani. Indra is associated with various other deities. The Maruts, (i.
85) are his chief allies, who constantly help him in his conflicts.
Hence the epithet Marútvant *accompanied by the Maruts* is
characteristic of him. Agni is the god most often conjoined with him as
a dual divinity. Indra is also often coupled with Varuna (vii. 86) and
Vayu, god of Wind, less often with Soma (viii. 48), Brhaspati (iv. 50),
Pusan, and Visnu.

Indra is of vast size; thus it is said that he would be equal to the
earth even if it were ten times as large as it is. His greatness and
power are constantly dwelt on: neither gods nor men have attained to the
limit of his might; and no one like him is known among the gods. Thus
various epithets such as sákrá and sácivant *mighty*, sácipáti *lord of
might*, satákratu *having a hundred powers*, are characteristic of him.

The essential myth forming the basis of his nature is described with
extreme frequency and much variation. Exhilarated by Soma and generally
escorted by the Maruts, he attacks the chief demon of drought, usually
called Vrtra, but often also the serpent (áhi). Heaven and Earth tremble
when the mighty combat takes place. With his bolt be shatters Vrtra who
encompasses the waters, hence receiving the exclusive epithet apsu-jit,
*conquering in the waters*. The result of the conflict, which is
regarded as being constantly renewed, is that he pierces the mountain
and sets free the waters pent up like imprisoned cows. The physical
elements in the conflict are nearly always the bolt, the mountain,
waters or rivers, while lightning, thunder, cloud, rain are seldom
directly named. The waters are often terrestrial, but also often aerial
and celestial. The clouds are the mountains (párvata, girí), on which
the demons lie or dwell, or from which Indra caste them down, or which
he cleaves to release the waters. Or the cloud is a rock (ádri) which
encompasses the cows (as the waters are sometimes called), and from
which he releases them. Clouds, as containing the waters, figure as cows
also; they further appear under the names of udder (údhar), spring
(útsa), cask (kávandha), pail (kósa). The clouds, moreover, appear as
the fortresses (púras) of the aerial demons, being described as moving,
autumnal, made of iron or stone, and as 90, 99, or 100 in number. Indra.
shatters them and is characteristically called the 'fort-destroyer'
(parbhíd). But the chief and specific epithet of Indra is 'Vrtra-slayer'
(Vrtra-hán), owing to the essential importance, in the myth, of the
fight with the demon. In this fight the Maruts are his regular allies,
but Agni, Soma, and Visnu also often assist him. Indra also engages in
conflict with numerous minor demons; sometimes he is described as
destroying demons in general, the Raksases or the Asuras.

With the release of the waters is connected the winning of light, sun,
and dawn. Thus Indra is invoked to slay Vrtra and to win the light. When
he had slain Vrtra, releasing the waters for man, he placed the sun
visibly in the heavens. The sun shone forth when Indra blew the serpent
from the air. There is here often no reference to the Vrtra fight. Indra
is then simply said to find the light; he gained the sun or found it in
the darkness, and made a path for it. He produces the dawn as well as
the sun; he opens the darkness with the dawn and the sun. The cows.
mentioned along with the sun and dawn, or with the sun alone, as found,
released, or won by Indra, are here probably the morning beams, which
are elsewhere compared with cattle coming out of their dark stalls. Thus
when the dawns went to meet Indra, he became the lord of the cows; when
be overcame Vrtra he made visible the cows of the nights. There seems to
be a confusion between the restoration of the sun after the darkness of
the thunderstorm, and the recovery of the sun from the darkness of night
at dawn. The latter feature is probably an extension of the former.
Indra's connexion with the thunderstorm is in a few passages divested of
mythological imagery, as when he is said to have created the lightnings
of heaven and to have directed the action of the waters downwards. With
the Vrtra-fight, with the winning of the cows and of the sun, is also
connected the gaining of Soma. Thus when Indra drove the serpent from
the air, there shone forth fires, the sun. and Soma; he won Soma at the
same time as the cows.

Great cosmic actions are often attributed to Indra. He settled the
quaking mountains and plains. He stretches out heaven and earth like a
hide; he holds asunder heaven and earth as two wheels are kept apart by
the axle; he made the non-existent into the existent in a moment.
Sometimes the separation and support of heaven and earth are described
as a result of Indra's victory over a demon who held them together.

As the destroyer of demons in combat, Indra is constantly invoked by
warriors. As the great god of battle he is more frequently called upon
than any other deity to help the Aryans in their conflicts with earthly
enemies. He protects the Aryan colour and subjects the black skin. He
dispersed 50,000 of the black race. He subjected the Dasyus to the
Aryan, and gave land to the Aryan.

More generally Indra is praised as the protector, helper, and friend of
his worshippers. He is described as bestowing on them wealth, which is
considered the result of victories. His liberality is so characteristic
that the frequent attribute maghávan *bountiful* is almost exclusively
his.

Besides the central myth of the Vrtra-fight, several minor stories are
connected with Indra. In various passages he is described as shattering
the car of Usas, goddess of Dawn (iv. 51); this trait is probably based
on the notion of Indra's bringing the sun when kept back by the delaying
dawn. He is also said to have stopped the steeds of the Sun, apparently
by causing the latter to lose a wheel of his car. Indra is further
associated with the myth of the winning of Soma; for it is to him that
the eagle brings the draught of immortality from the highest heaven.
Another myth in the capture by Indra, with the help of Sarama, of the
cows confined in a cave by demons called Panis.

Various stories which, though mixed with mythological elements, probably
have an historical basis, are told of Indra's having fought in aid of
individual protégés, such as king Sudas, against terrestrial foes.

The attributes of Indra are chiefly those of physical superiority and
rule over the physical world. He is energetic and violent in action, an
irresistible fighter, an inexhaustible lavisher of the highest goods on
mankind, but at the same time sensual and immoral in various ways, such
as excess in eating and drinking, and cruelty in killing his own father
Tvastr. He forms a marked contrast to Varuna, the other great universal
monarch of the RV., who wields passive and peaceful sway, who uniformly
applies the laws of nature, who upholds moral order, and whose character
displays lofty ethical features.

The name of Indra is pre-Indian; for it occurs in the Avesta as that of
a demon; the term *verethraghna* (=Vrtrahán) is also found there as the
designation of the God of Victory, though unconnected with Indra. Thus
it seems likely that there was already in the Indo-Iranian period a god
resembling the Vrtra-slaying Indra of the RV. The etymology of the word
is doubtful, but its radical portion ind may be connected with that in
índ-u *drop*.

# RUDRÁ

This god occupies a subordinate position in the RV., being celebrated in
only three entire hymns, in part of another, and in one conjointly with
Soma. His hand, his arms, and his limbs are mentioned. He has beautiful
lips and wears braided hair. His colour is brown; his form is dazzling,
for he shines like the radiant sun, like gold. He is arrayed with golden
ornaments, and wears a glorious necklace (niská). He drives in a car.
His weapons are often referred to: he holds the thunderbolt in his arm,
and discharges his lightning shaft from the sky; but he is usually said
to be armed with a bow and arrows, which are strong and swift.

Rudra is very often associated with the Maruts (i. 85). He is their
father, and is said to have generated them from the shining udder of the
cow Prsni.

He is fierce and destructive like a terrible beast, and is called a
bull, as well as the ruddy (arusá) boar of heaven. He is exalted,
strongest of the strong, swift, unassailable, unsurpassed in might. He
is young and unaging, a lord (ísana) and father of the world. By his
rule and univeral dominion be is aware of the doings of men and gods, He
is bountiful (midhváms), easily invoked and auspicious (sivá). But he is
usually regarded as malevolent; for the hymns addressed to him chiefly
express fear of his terrible shafts and deprecation of his wrath. He is
implored not to slay or injure, in his anger, his worshippers and their
belongings, but to avert his great malignity and his cow-slaying,
man-slaying bolt from them, and to lay others low. He is, however, not
purely maleficent like a demon. He not only preserves from calamity, but
bestows blessings. His healing powers are especially often mentioned; he
has a thousand remedies, and is the greatest physician of physicians. In
this connexion be has two exclusive epithets, jálasa, cooling, and
jálasa-bhesaja, possessing cooling remedies.

The physical basis represented by Rudra is not clearly apparent. But it
seems probable that the phenomenon underlying his nature was the storm,
not pure and simple, but in its baleful aspect seen in the destructive
agency of lightning. His healing and beneficent powers would then have
been founded partly on the fertilizing and purifying action of the
thunderstorm, and partly on the negative action of sparing those whom be
might slay. Thus the deprecations of his wrath led to the application of
the euphemistic epithet sivá which became the regular name of Rudra's
historical successor in post-Vedic mythology.

The etymological sense of the name is somewhat uncertain, but would be
'Howler' according to the usual derivation from rud *cry*.

# APÁM NÁPAT

This deity is celebrated in one entire hymn (ii. 35), is invoked in two
stanzas of a hymn to the Waters, and is often mentioned incidentally
elsewhere. Brilliant and youthful, he shines without fuel in the waters
which surround and nourish him. Clothed in lightning, be is golden in
form, appearance, and colour. Standing in the highest place, he always
shines with undimmed splendour. Steeds, swift as thought, carry the Son
of Waters. In the last stanza of his hymn he is invoked as Agni and must
be identified with him; Agni, moreover, in some hymns addressed to him,
is spoken of as Apam napat. But the two are also distinguished; for
example, 'Agni, accordant with the Son of Waters, confers victory over
Vrtra'. The epithet asu-héman swiftly-speeding, applied three times to
Apam napat, in its only other occurrence refers to Agni. Hence Apam
napat appears to represent the lightning form of Agui which lurks in the
eloud. For Agni, besides being directly called Apam napat, is also
termed the embryo (gárbha) of the waters; and the third form of Agni is
described as kindled in the waters.

This deity is not a creation of Indian mythology, but goes back to the
Indo-Iranian period. For in the Avesta Apam napat is a spirit of the
waters, who lives in their depths, who is surrounded by females, who is
often invoked with them, who drives with swift steeds, and is said to
have seized the brightness in the depth of the ocean.

# MITRÁ

The association of Mitra with Varuna is so intimate that he is addressed
alone in one hymn only (iii. 59). Owing to the scantiness of the
information supplied in that hymn his separate character appears
somewhat indefirite.

Uttering his voice, he marshals men and watches the tillers with
unwinking eye. He is the great Aditya who marshals, yatayati, the
people, and the epithet yatayáj-jana *arraying men* together appears to
be peculiarly his. Savitr (i. 35) is identified with Mitra because of
his laws, and Visnu (i. 154) takes his three steps by the laws of Mitra:
statements indicating that Mitra regulates the course of the sun. Agni,
who goes at the head of the dawns (that is to say, is kindled before
dawn), produces Mitra, and when kindled is Mitra. In the Atharvaveda,
Mitra at sunrise is contrasted with Varuna in the evening, and in the
Brahmanas Mitra is connected with day, Varuna with night.

The conclusion from the Vedic evidence that Mitra was a solar deity, is
corroborated by the Avesta and by Persian religion in general, where
Mithra is undoubtedly a sun-god or a god of light specially connected
with the sun.

The etymology of the name is uncertain, but it must originally have
meant 'ally' or 'friend', for the word often means 'friend' in the RV.,
and the Avestic Mithra is the guardian of faithfulness. As the kindly
nature of the god is often referred to in the Veda, the term must in the
beginning have been applied to the sun-god in his aspect of a benevolent
power of nature.

# BRHASPÁTI

This god is addressed in eleven entire hymns, and in two others
conjointly with Indra. He is also, but less frequently, called Brahmanas
páti, 'Lord of prayer', the doublets alternating in the same hymn. His
physical features are few: he is sharp-horned and blue-backed;
golden-coloured and ruddy. He is armed with bow and arrows, and wields a
golden hatchet or an iron axe. He has a car, drawn by ruddy steeds,
which slays the goblins, bursts open the cow-stalls, and wins the light.
Called the father of the gods, he is also said to have blown forth their
births like a blacksmith. Like Agni, he is both a domestic and a
brahman. priest. He is the generator of all prayers, and without him
sacrifice does not succeed. His song goes to heaven, and he is
associated with singers. In several passages he is identified with Agni,
from whom, however, he is much oftener distinguished. He is often
invoked with Indra, some of whose epithets, such as maghávan *bountiful*
and vajrin *welder of the bolt* he shares. He has thus been drawn into
the Indra myth of the release of the cows. Accompanied by his singing
host he rends Vala with a roar, and drives out the cows. In to doing he
dispels the darkness and finds the light. As regards his relation to his
worshippers, he is said to help and protect the pious man, to prolong
life, and to remove disease.

Brhaspáti is a purely Indian deity. The double accent and the parallel
name Bráhmanas páti indicate that the first member is the genitive of a
noun brh, from the same root as bráhman, and that the name thus means
'Lord of prayer'.

He seems originally to have represented an aspect of Agni, as a divine
priest, presiding over devotion, an aspect which bad already attained an
independent character by the beginning of the Rigvedic period. As the
divine brahman priest he seems to have been the prototype of Brahma, the
chief of the later Hindu triad.

# USÁS

The goddess of Dawn is addressed in about twenty hymns. The
personification is but slight, the physical phenomenon always being
present to. the mind of the poet. Decked in gay attire like a dancer,
clothed in light, she appears in the east and unveils her charms. Rising
resplendent as from a bath she comes with light, driving away the
darkness and removing the black robe of night. She is young, being born
again and again, though ancient. Shining with a uniform hue, she wastes
away the life of mortals. She illumines the ends of the sky when she
awakes; she opens the gates of heaven; her radiant beams appear like
herds of cattle. She drives away evil dreams, evil spirits, and the
hated darkness. She discloses the treasures concealed by darkness, and
distributes them bountifully, She awakens every living being to motion.
When Usas shines forth, the birds, fly up from their nests and men seek
nourishment. Day by day appearing at the appointed place, she never
infringes the ordinance of nature and of the gods. She renders good
service to the gods by awakening all worshippers and causing the
sacrificial fires to be kindled. She brings the gods to drink the Soma
draught. She is borne on a shining car, drawn by ruddy steeds or kine,
which probably represent the red rays of morning.

Usas is closely associated with the Sun. She has opened paths for Surya
to travel; she brings the eye of the gods, and leads on the beautiful
white horse. She shines with the light of the Sun, with the light of her
lover. Surya follows her as a young man a maiden; she meets the god who
desires her. She thus comes to be spoken of as the wife of Surya. But as
preceding the Sun, she is occasionally regarded as his mother; thus she
is said to arrive with a bright child. She is also called the sister, or
the elder sister, of Night (x. 127), and their names are often conjoined
as a dual compound (usása-nákta and náktosása). She is born in the sky,
and in, therefore constantly called the 'daughter of Heaven '. As the
sacrificial fire is kindled at dawn, Usas is often associated with Agni,
who is sometimes, called her lover. Usas causes Agni to be kindled, and
Agni goes to meet the shining Dawn as she approaches. She is also often
connected with the twin gods of early morning, the Asvins (vii. 71).
When the Asvins' car is yoked, the daughter of the sky is born. They are
awakened by her, accompany her, and are her friends.

Usas brings the worshipper wealth and children, bestowing protection and
long life. She confers renown and glory on all liberal benefactors of
the poet. She is characteristically bountiful (maghóni).

The name of Usas is derived from the root vas, *to shine*, forms of
which are often used with reference to her in the hymns in which she is
invoked.

# PARJÁNYA

This deity occupies quite a subordinate position, being celebrated in
only three hymns. His name often means 'rain-cloud' in the literal sense
but in most passages it represents the personification, the cloud then
becoming an udder, a pail, or a water-skin. Parjanya is frequently
described as a bull that quickens the plants and the earth. The shedding
of rain is his most prominent characteristic. He flies around with a
watery car, and loosens the water-skin; he sheds rain-water as our
divine (ásara) father. In this activity he is associated with thunder
and lightning. He is in a special degree the producer and nourisher of
vegetation. He also produces fertility in cows, mares, and women. He is
several times referred to as a father. By implication his wife is the
Earth, and he is once called the son of Dyaus.

# PUSÁN

This god is celebrated in eight hymns, five of which occur in the sixth
Mandala. His individuality is vague, and his anthropomorphic traits are
scanty. His foot and his right band are mentioned; he wears braided hair
and a beard. He carries a golden spear, an awl, and a goad. His car is
drawn by goats instead of horses. His characteristic food is gruel
(karambhá).

He sees all creatures clearly and at once. He is the wooer of his mother
and the lover of his sister (Dawn), and was given by the gods to the
Sun-maiden Surya as a husband. He is connected with the marriage
ceremonial in the wedding hymn (x. 85). With his golden aerial ships
Pusan acts as the messenger of Surya. He moves onward observing the
universe, and makes his abode in heaven. He is a guardian who knows and
beholds all creatures. As best of charioteers he drove downward the
golden wheel of the sun. He traverses the distant path of heaven and
earth; he goes to and returns from both the beloved abodes. He conducts
the dead on the far-off path of the Fathers. He is a guardian of roads,
removing dangers out of the way; and is called 'son of deliverance'
(vimúco nápat). He follows and protects cattle, bringing them home
unhurt and driving back the lost. His bounty is often mentioned.
'Glowing' (aghrni) is one of his exclusive epithets. The name means
'prosperer', as derived from pus, *cause to thrive*. The evidence,
though not clear, indicates that Pusan was originally a solar deity,
representing the beneficent power of the sun manifested chiefly in its
pastoral aspect.

# ÁPAS

The Waters are addressed in four hymns, as well as in a few scattered
verses. The personification is only incipient, hardly extending beyond
the notion of their being mothers, young wives, and goddesses -who
bestow boons and come to the sacrifice. They follow the path of the
gods. Indra, armed with the bolt, dug out a channel for them, and they
never infringe his ordinances. They are celestial as well as
terrestrial, and the sea is their goal. They abide where the gods dwell,
in the seat of Mitra-Varuna, beside the sun. King Varuna moves in their
midst, looking down on the truth and the falsehood of men. They are
mothers and as such produce Agni. They give their auspicious fluid like
loving mothers. They are most motherly, the producers of all that is
fixed and that moves. They purify, carrying away defilement. They even
cleanse from moral guilt, the sins of violence, cursing, and lying. They
also bestow remedies, health, wealth, strength, long life, and
immortality. Their blessing and aid are often implored, and they are
invited to seat themselves on the sacrificial grass to receive the
offering of the Soma priest.

The Waters are several times associated with honey. They mix their milk
with honey. Their wave, rich in honey, became the drink of Indra, Whom
it exhilarated and to whom it gave heroic strength. They are invoked to
pour the wave which is rich in honey, gladdens the gods, is the draught
of Indra, and is produced in the sky. Here the celestial Waters seem to
be identified with the heavenly Soma, the beverage of Indra. Elsewhere
the Waters used in preparing the terrestrial Soma seem to be meant. When
they appear bearing ghee, milk, and honey, they are accordant with the
priests that bring well-pressed Soma for Indra, Soma (viii. 48) delights
in them like a young man in lovely maidens; he approaches them as a
lover; they are maidens who bow down before the youth.

The deification of the Waters is pre-Vedic, for they are invoked as
*apo* in the Avesta also.

# MITRÁ-VARUNA

This is the pair most frequently mentioned next to Heaven and Earth. The
hymns in which they are conjointly invoked are much more numerous than
those in which they are separately addressed. As Mitra (iii. 59) is
distinguished by hardly any individual traits, the two together have
practically the same attributes and functions as Varuna alone. They are
conceived as young. Their eye is the sun. Reaching out they drive with
the rays of the sun as with arms. They wear glistening garments. They
mount their car in the highest heaven. Their abode is golden and is
located in heaven; it is great, very lofty, firm, with a thousand
columns and a thousand doors. They have spies that are wise and cannot
be deceived. They are kings and universal monarchs. They are also called
Asuras, who wield dominion by means of mayá *occult power*, a term
mainly connected with them. By that power they send the dawns, make the
sun traverse the sky, and obscure it with cloud and rain. They are
rulers and guardians of the whole world. They support heaven, and earth,
and air.

They are lords of rivers, and they are the gods most frequently thought
of and prayed to as bestowers of rain. They have kine yielding
refreshment, and streams flowing with honey. They control the rainy
skies and the streaming waters. They bedew the pastures with ghee (=
rain) and the spaces with honey. They send rain and refreshment from the
sky. Rain abounding in heavenly water comes from them. One entire hymn
dwells on their powers of bestowing rain.

Their ordinances are fixed and cannot be obstructed even by the immortal
gods. They are upholders and cherishers of order. They are barriers
against falsehood, which they dispel, hate, and punish. They afflict
with disease those who neglect their worship.

The dual invocation of these gods goes back to the Indo-Iranian period,
for Ahura and Mithra are thus coupled in the Avesta.

# SÚRYA

Some ten hymns are addressed to Surya. Since the name designates the,
orb of the sun as well as the god, Surya is the most concrete of the
solar deities, his connexion with the luminary always being present to
the mind of the seers. The eye of Surya is several times mentioned; but
Surya, himself is also often called the eye of Mitra and Varuna, as well
as of Agni and of the gods. He is far-seeing, all-seeing, the spy of the
whole world; he beholds all beings, and the good and bad deeds of
mortals. He arouses men to perform their activities. He is the soul or
guardian of all that moves or is stationary. His car is drawn by one
steed called etasá, or by seven swift mares called hárit *bays*.

The Dawn or Dawns reveal or produce Surya; he shines from the lap of the
Dawns; but Dawn is also sometimes Surya's wife. He also bears the
metronymic Aditya or Aditeya, son of the goddess Aditi. His father is
Dyaus or Heaven. The gods raised him who had been hidden in the ocean,
and they placed him in the sky; various individual gods, too, are said
to have produced Surya or raised him to heaven.

Surya is in various passages conceived as a bird traversing space; he is
a ruddy bird that flies; or he is a flying eagle. He is also called a
mottled bull, or a white and brilliant steed brought by Dawn.
Occasionally he is, described as an inanimate object: he is a gem of the
sky, or a variegated stone set in the midst of heaven. He is a brilliant
weapon (áyudha) which Mitra-Varuna conceal with cloud and rain, or their
felly (paví), or a brilliant car placed by them in heaven. Surya is also
sometimes spoken of as, a wheel (cakrá), though otherwise the wheel of
Surya is mentioned. Surya shines for all the world, for men and gods. He
dispels the darkness, which he rolls up like a skin, or which his rays
throw off like a skin into the waters. He measures the days and prolong
life. He drives away sickness, disease, and evil dreams. All creatures
depend on him, and the epithet 'all-creating' (visvá-karman) is once
applied to him. By his greatness he is the divine priest (asuryà
puróhita) of the gods. At his rising he is besought to declare men
sinless to Mitra-Varuna and to other gods.

The name Súrya is a derivative of svàr *light*, and cognate with the
Avesta hvare *sun*, which has swift horses and is the eye of Ahura Mazda

# ASVÍNA.

These two deities are the most prominent gods after Indra, Agni, and
Soma, being invoked in more than fifty entire hymns and in parts of
several others. Though their name (asv-in *horseman*) is purely Indian,
and though they undoubtedly belong to the group of the deities of light,
the phenomenon which they represent is uncertain, because in all
probability their origin is to be sought in a very early pre-Vedic age.

They are twins and inseparable, though two or three passages suggest
that they may at one time have been regarded as distinct. They are young
and yet ancient. They are bright, lords of lustre, of golden brilliancy,
beautiful, and adorned with lotus-garlands. They are the only gods
called golden-pathed (híranya-vartani). They are strong and agile, fleet
as thought or as an eagle. They possess profound wisdom and occult
power. Their two most distinctive and frequent epithets are dasrá
*wondrous* and násatya *true*.

They are more closely associated with honey (mádhu) than any of the
other gods. They desire honey and are drinkers of it. They have a skin
filled with honey; they poured out a hundred jars of honey. They have a
honey-goad; and their car is honey-hued and honey-bearing. They give
honey to the bee and are compared with bees. They are, however, also
fond of Soma, being invited to drink it with Usas and Surya. Their car
is sunlike and, together with all its parts, golden. It is threefold and
has three wheels. It is swifter than thought, than the twinkling of an
eye. It was fashioned by the three divine artificers, the Rbhus. It is
drawn by horses, more commonly by birds or winged steeds; sometimes by
one or more buffaloes, or by a single asa (rásabha). It passes over the
five countries; it moves around the sky; it traverses heaven and earth
in one day; it goes round the sun in the distance. Their revolving
course (vartís), a term almost exclusively applicable to them, is often
mentioned. They come from heaven, air, and earth, or from the ocean;
they abide in the sea of heaven, but sometimes their locality is
referred to as unknown. The time of their appearance is between dawn and
sunrise: when darkness stands among the ruddy cows; Usas awakens them;
they follow after her in their car; at its yoking Usas is born. They
yoke their car to descend to earth and receive the offerings of
worshippers. They come not only in the morning, but also at noon and
sunset. They dispel darkness and chase away evil spirits.

The Asvins are children of Heaven; but they are also once said to be the
twin sons of Vivasvant and Tvastr's daughter Saranyú (probably the
rising Sun and Dawn). Pusan is once said to be their son; and Dawn seems
to be meant by their sister. They are often associated with the Sun
conceived as a female called either Surya or more commonly the daughter
of Surya. They are Surya's two husbands whom she chose and whose car she
mounts. Surya's companionship on their car is indeed characteristic.
Hence in the wedding hymn (x. 85) the Asvins are invoked to conduct the
bride home on their car, and they (with other gods) are besought to
bestow fertility on her.

The Asvins are typically succouring divinities. They are the speediest
deliverers from distress in general. The various rescues they effect are
of a peaceful kind, not deliverance from the dangers of battle. They are
characteristically divine physicians, healing diseases with their
remedies, restoring sight, curing the sick and the maimed. Several
legends are mentioned about those whom they restored to youth, cured of
various physical defects, or befriended in other ways. The name oftenest
mentioned is that of Bhujyu, whom they saved from the ocean in a ship.

The physical basis of the Asvins has been a puzzle from the time of the
earliest interpreters before Yuska, who offered various explanations,
while modern scholars also have suggested several theories. The two most
probable are that the Asvins represented either the morning twilight, as
half light and half dark, or the morning and the evening star. It is
probable that the Asvins date from the Indo-European period. The two
horsemen, sons of Dyaus, who drive across the heaven with their steeds,
and who have a sister, are parallel to the two famous horsemen of Greek
mythology, sons of Zeus, brothers of Helena; and to the two Lettic God's
sons who come riding on their steeds to woo the daughter of the Sun. In
the Lettic myth the morning star comes to look at the daughter of the
Sun. As the two Asvins wed the one Surya so the two Lettic God's sons
wed the one daughter of the Sun; the latter also (like the Dioskouroi
and the Asvins) are rescuers from the ocean, delivering the daughter of
the Sun or the Sun himself.

# VÁRUNA

Beside Indra (ii. 12) Varuna is the greatest of the gods of the RV.,
though the number of the hymns in which he is celebrated alone (apart
from Mitra) is small, numbering hardly a dozen.

His face, eye, arms, hands, and feet are mentioned. He moves his arms,
walks, drives, sits, eats, and drinks. His eye with which he observes
mankind is the sun. He is far-sighted and thousand-eyed. He treads down
wiles with shining foot. He sits on the strewn grass at the sacrifice.
He wears a golden mantle and puts on a shining robe. His car, which is
often mentioned, shines like the sun, and is drawn by well-yoked steeds.
Varuna sits in his mansions looking on all deeds. The Fathers behold him
in the highest heaven. The spies of Varuna are sometimes referred to:
they sit down around him; they observe the two worlds; they stimulate
prayer. By the golden-winged messenger of Varuna the sun is meant.
Varuna is often called a king, but especially a universal monarch
(samráj) The attribute of sovereignty (ksatrá) and the term ásura are
predominantly applicable to him. His divine dominion is often alluded to
by the word mayá occult power; the epithet mayín crafty is accordingly
used chiefly of him.

Varuna is mainly lauded as upholder of physical and moral order. He is a
great lord of the laws of nature. He established heaven and earth, and
by his law heaven and earth are held apart. He made the golden swing
(the sun) to shine in heaven; he has made a wide path for the sun; he
placed fire in the waters, the sun in the sky, Soma on the rock. The
wind which resounds through the air is Varuna's breath. By his
ordinances the moon shining brightly moves at night, and the stars
placed up on high are seen at night, but disappear by day. Thus Varuna
is lord of light both by day and by night. He is also a regulator of the
waters. He caused the rivers to flow; by his occult power they pour
swiftly into the ocean without filling it. It is, however, with the
aerial waters that he is usually connected. Thus he makes the inverted
cask (the cloud) to pour its waters on heaven, earth, and air, and to
moisten the ground.

Varuna's ordinances being constantly said to be fixed, he is
pre-eminently called dhrtravrata *whose laws are established*. The gods
themselves follow his ordinances. His power is; so great that neither
the birds as they fly nor the rivers as they flow can reach the limits
of his dominion. He embraces the universe, and the abodes of all beings.
He is all-knowing, and his omniscience is typical. He knows the flight
of the birds in the sky, the path of the ships in the ocean, the course
of the far-travelling wind beholding all the secret things that have
been or shall be done, he witnesses men's truth and falsehood. No
creature can even wink without his knowledge.

As a moral governor Varuna stands far above any other deity. His wrath
is aroused by sin, the infringement of his ordinances, which he severely
punishes. The fetters (pásas) with which he binds sinners are often
mentioned, and are characteristic of him. On the other hand, Varuna is
gracious to the penitent. He removes sin as if untying a rope. He
releases even from the sin committed by men's fathers. He spares him who
daily transgresses his laws when a suppliant, and is gracious to those
who have broken his laws by thoughtlessness. There is in fact no hymn to
Varuna in which the prayer for forgiveness of guilt does not occur.
Varuna is on a footing of friendship with his worshipper, who communes
with him in his celestial abode, and sometimes sees him with the mental
eye. The righteous hope to behold in the next world Varuna and Yama, the
two kings who reign in bliss.

The original conception of Varuna seems to have been the encompassing
sky. It has, however, become obscured, because it dates from an earlier
age. For it goes back to the Indo-Iranian period at least, since the
Ahura Mazda (the wise spirit) of the Avesta agrees with the Asura Varuna
in character, though not in name. It may even be older still; for the
name Varuna is perhaps identical with the Greek ouranos *sky*. In any
case, the word appears to be derived from the root vr *cover* or
*encompass*.

# MANDUKAS

The ... hymn \[vii. 103\], intended as a spell to produce rain, is a
panegyric of frogs, who are compared during the drought to heated
kettles, and are described as raising their voices together at the
commencement of the rains like Brahmin pupils repeating the lessons of
their teacher.

# VÍSVE DEVÁH

The comprehensive group called Vísve deváh or All-Gods occupies an
important position, for at least forty entire hymns are addressed to
them. It is an artificial sacrificial group intended to include all the
gods in order that none should be left out in laudations meant for the
whole pantheon. The ... hymn \[viii. 29\] though traditionally regarded
as meant for the Vísve deváh is a collection of riddles, in which each
stanza describes a deity by his characteristic marks, leaving his name
to be guessed. The deities meant in the successive stanzas are: 1. Soma,
2. Agni, 3. Tvastr, 4. Indra, 5. Rudra, 6. Pusan, 7. Visnu, 8. Asvins,
9. Mitra-Varuna, 10. Angirases.

# SÓMA

As the Soma sacrifice formed the centre of the ritual of the RV., the
god Soma is one of the most prominent deities. With rather more than 120
hymns (all those in Mandala ix, and about half a dozen in others)
addressed to him, becomes next to Agni (i. 1) in importance. The
anthropomorphism of his character is less developed than that of India
or Varuna because the plant and its juice are constantly present to the
mind of the poet. Soma has terrible and sharp weapons, which he grasps
in his hand; he wields a bow and a thousand-pointed shaft. He has a car
which is heavenly, drawn by a team like Vayu's. He is also said to ride
on the same car as Indra. He is the best of charioteers. In about half a
dozen hymns he is associated with Indra, Agni, Pusan, and Rudra
respectively as a dual divinity. He is sometimes attended by the Maruts,
the close allies of Indra. He comes to the sacrifice and receives
offerings on the sacred grass.

The Soma juice, which is intoxicating, is frequently termed mádhu or
*sweet draught*, but oftenest called índu *the bright drop*. The colour
Of Soma is brown (babhrú), ruddy (aruná), or more usually tawny (hári).
The whole of the ninth book consists of incantations chanted over the
tangible Soma, while the stalks are being pounded by stones, the juice
passes through a woollen strainer, and flows into wooden vats, in which
it is offered to the gods on the litter of sacred grass (barhís). These
processes are overlaid with confused and mystical imagery in endless
variation. The pressing stones with which the shoot (amsú) is crushed
are called ádri or grávan. The pressed juice as it passes through the
filter of sheep's wool is usually called pávamana or punaná *flowing
clear*. This purified (unmixed) Soma is sometimes called suddhá *pure*,
but much oftener sukrá, or súci *bright*; it is offered almost
exclusively to Vayu or India. The filtered Soma flows into jars (kalása)
or vats (dróna), where it is mixed with water and also with milk, by
which it is sweetened. The verb mrj *cleanse* is used with reference to
this addition of water and milk. Soma is spoken of as having three kinds
of admixture (asír): milk (gó), sour milk (dádhi), and barley (yáva).
The admixture being alluded to as a garment or bright robe, Soma is
described as 'decked with beauty'. Soma is pressed three times a day:
the Rbhus are invited to the evening pressing, Indra to the midday one,
which is his exclusively, while the morning libation is his first drink.
The three abodes (sadhástha) of Soma which are mentioned probably refer
to three tubs used in the ritual.

Soma's connexion with the waters, resulting from the admixture, is
expressed in the most various ways. He is the drop that grows in the
waters; he is the embryo of the waters or their child; they are his
mothers or his sisters; he is lord and king of streams; he produces
waters and causes heaven and earth to rain. The sound made by the
trickling Soma is often alluded to generally in hyperbolical usage, with
verbs meaning to roar or bellow, or even thunder. He is thus commonly
called a bull among the waters, which figure as cows. Soma is moreover
swift, being often compared with a steed, sometimes with a bird flying
to the wood. Owing to his yellow colour Soma's brilliance is the
physical aspect most dwelt upon by the poets. He is then often likened
to or associated with the sun.

The exhilarating power of Soma led to its being regarded as a divine
drink bestowing immortal life. Hence it is called amrta *draught of
immortality*. All the gods drink Soma; they drank it to gain
immortality; it confers immortality not only on gods, but on men. It
has, moreover, medicinal powers: Soma heals whatever is sick, making the
blind to see and the lame to walk. Soma also stimulates the voice, and
is called 'lord of speech'. He awakens eager thought: he is a generator
of hymns, a leader of poets, a seer among priests. Hence his wisdom is
much dwelt upon; thus he is a wise seer, and he knows the races of the
gods.

The intoxicating effect of Soma most emphasized by the poets is the
stimulus it imparts to Indra in his conflict with hostile powers. That
Soma invigorates Indra for the fight with Vrtra is mentioned in
innumerable passages. Through this association Indra's warlike exploits
and cosmic actions come to be attributed to Soma independently. He is a
victor unconquered in fight, born for battle. As a warrior he wins all
kinds of wealth for his worshippers.

Though Soma is several times regarded as dwelling or growing on the
mountains (like Haoma in the Avesta), his true origin and abode are
regarded as in heaven. Soma is the child of heaven, is the milk of
heaven, and is purified in heaven. He is the lord of heaven; he occupies
heaven, and his place is the highest heaven. Thence he was brought to
earth. The myth embodying this belief is that of the eagle that brings
Soma to Indra, and is most fully dealt with in the two hymns iv. 26 and
27. Being the most important of herbs, Soma is said to have been born as
the lord (páti) of plants, which also have him as their king; he is a
lord of the wood (vánaspáti), and has generated all plants. But quite
apart from his connexion with herbs, Soma is, like other leading gods,
called a king: he is a king of rivers; a king of the whole earth; a king
or father of the gods; a king of gods and mortals. In a few of the
latest hymns of the RV. Soma begins to be mystically identified with the
moon; in the AV. Soma several times means the moon; and in the Brahmanas
this identification has already become a commonplace.

We know that the preparation and the offering of Soma (the Avestan
Haoma) was already an important feature of Indo-Iranian worship, In both
the RV. and the Avesta it is stated that the stalks were pressed, that
the juice was yellow, and was mixed with milk; in both it grows on
mountains, and its mythical home is in heaven, whence it comes down to
earth; in both the Soma draught has become a mighty god and is called a
king; in both there are many other identical mythological traits
relating to Soma.

It is possible that the belief in an intoxicating divine beverage, the
home of which was in heaven, goes back to the Indo-European period. It
must then have been regarded as a kind of honey mead (Skt. mádhu, Gk.
*methu*, Anglo-Saxon *medu*).

The name of Soma (= Haoma) means *pressed juice*, being derived from the
root su (= Av. hu) *press*.

# FUNERAL HYMNS

The RV. contains a group of five hymns (x. 14-18) concerned with death
and the future life. From them we learn that, though burial was also
practised, cremation was the usual method of disposing of the dead, and
was the main source of the mythology relating to the future life. Agni
conveys the corpse to the other world, the Fathers, and the gods. He is
besought to preserve the body intact and to burn the goat which is
sacrificed as his portion. During the process of cremation Agni and Soma
are besought to heal any injury that bird, beast, ant, or serpent may
have inflicted on the body. The way to the heavenly world is a distant
path on which Savitr (i. 35) conducts and Pusan (vi. 54) protects the
dead. Before the pyre is lighted, the wife of the dead man, having lain
beside him, arises, and his bow is taken from his hand. This indicates
that in earlier times his widow and his weapons were burnt with the body
of the husband. Passing along by the path trodden by the Fathers, the
spirit of the dead man goes to the realm of light, and meets with the
Fathers who revel with Yama in the highest heaven. Here, uniting with a
glorious body, he enters upon a life of bliss which is free from
imperfections and bodily frailties, in which all desires are fulfilled,
and which is passed among the gods, especially in the presence of the
two kings Yama and Varuna.

# PITÁRAS

Two hymns (x. 15 and 54) are addressed to the Pitaras or Fathers, the
blessed dead who dwell in the third heaven, the third or highest step of
Visnu. The term as a rule applies to the early or first ancestors, who
followed the ancient paths, seers who made the paths by which the recent
dead go to join them. Various groups of ancestors are mentioned, such as
the Angirases and Atharvans, the Bhrgus and Vasisthas, who are identical
in name with the priestly families associated by tradition with the
composition of the Atharvaveda and of the second and seventh Mandalas of
the Rigveda. The Pitaras are classed as higher, lower, and middle, as
earlier and later, who though not always known to their descendants, are
known to Agni. They revel with Yama and feast with the gods. They are
fond of Soma, and thirst for the libations prepared for them on earth,
and eat the offerings along with him. They come on the same car as Indra
and the goods. Arriving in their thousands they range themselves on the
sacrificial grass to the south, and drink the pressed draught. They
receive oblations as their food. They are entreated to hear, intercede
for, and protect their worshippers, and besought not to injure their
descendants for any sin humanly committed against them. They are invoked
to give riches, children, and long life to their sons, who desire to be
in their good graces. The Vasisthas are once collectively implored to
help their descendants. Cosmical actions, like those of the gods, are
sometimes attributed to the Fathers. Thus they are said to have adorned
the sky with stars, to have placed darkness in the night and light in
the day; they found the light and generated the dawn. The path trodden
by the Fathers (pitryána) is different from that trodden by the gods
(devayána).

# HYMN OF THE GAMBLER

This \[x. 34\] is one, among the secular hymns, of a group of four which
have a didactic character. It is the lament of a gambler who, unable to
resist the fascination of the dice, deplores the ruin to which he has
brought on his family. The dice (aksás) consisted of the nuts of a large
tree called vibhidaka (*Terminalia bellerica*), which is still utilized
for this purpose in India.

# PÚRUSA

There are six or seven hymns dealing with the creation of the world as
produced from some original material. In the following one, the
well-known Purusa-sukta or hymn of Man, the gods are the agents of
creation, while the material out of which the world is made is the body
of a primaeval giant named Purusa. The act of creation is here treated
as a sacrifice in which Purusa is the victim, the parts when cut up
becoming portions of the universe. Both its language and its matter
indicate that it is one of the very latest hymns of the Rigveda. It not
only presupposes a knowledge of the three oldest Vedas, to which it
refers by name, but also, for the first and only time in the Rigveda,
mentions the four castes. The religious view is moreover different from
that of the old hymns, for it is pantheistic: 'Purusa is all this world,
what has been and shall be'. It is, in fact, the starting-point of the
pantheistic philosophy of India.

# RÁTRI

The goddess of night, under the name of Rátri is invoked in only one
hymn (x. 127). She is the sister of Usas, and like her is called a
daughter of heaven. She is not conceived as the. dark, but as the bright
starlit night. Decked with all splendour she drives away the darkness.
At her approach men, beasts, and birds go to rest. She protects her
worshippers from the wolf and the thief, guiding them to safety. Under
the name of nákta *n*., combined with usás, Night appears as a dual
divinity with Dawn in the form of Usása-nákta and Náktosása, occurring
in some twenty scattered stanzas of the Rigveda.

# HYMN OF CREATION

In the ... cosmogonic poem \[x. 129\] the origin of the world is
explained the evolution of the existent (sát) from the non-existent
(ásat). Water thus came into being first; from it was evolved
intelligence by heat. It is the starting-point of the natural philosophy
which developed into the Sankhya system.

# YAMÁ

Three hymns are addressed to Yama, the chief of the blessed dead. There
is also another (x. 10), which consists of a dialogue between him and
his sister Yami. He is associated with Varuna, Brhaspati, and especially
Agni, the conductor of the dead, who is called his friend and his
priest. He is not expressly designated a god, but only a being who rules
the dead. He is associated with the departed Fathers, especially the
Angirases, with whom he comes to the sacrifice to drink Soma.

Yama dwells in the remote recess of the sky. In his abode, which is the
home of the gods, he is surrounded by songs and the sound of the flute.
Soma is pressed for Yama, ghee is offered to him, and he comes to seat
himself at the sacrifice. He is invoked to lead his worshippers to the
gods, and to prolong life.

His father is Vivasvant and his mother Saranyu. In her dialogue with him
Yami speaks of Yama as the 'only mortal', and elsewhere he is said to
have chosen death and abandoned his body. He departed to the other
world, having found out the path for many, to where the ancient Fathers
passed away. Death is the path of Yama. His foot-fetter (pádbisa) is
spoken of as parallel to the bond of Varuna. The owl (úluka) and the
pigeon (kapóta) are mentioned as his messengers, but the two four-eyed,
broad-nosed, brindled dogs, sons of Sarama (sarameyáu) are his regular
emissaries. They guard the path along which the dead man hastens to join
the Fathers who rejoice with Yama. They watch men and wander about among
the peoples as Yama's messengers. They are besought to grant continued
enjoyment of the light of the sun.

As the first father of mankind and the first of those that died, Yama
appears to have originally been regarded as a mortal who became the
chief of the souls of the departed. He goes back to the Indo-Iranian
period, for the primaeval twins, from whom the human race is descended,
Yama and Yami, are identical with the Yima and Yimeh of the Avesta. Yama
himself may in that period have been regarded as a king of a golden age,
for in the Avesta he is the ruler of an earthly, and in the RV. that of
a heavenly paradise.

# VÁTA

This god, as Váta, the ordinary name of wind, is addressed in two short
hymns. He is invoked in a more concrete way than his doublet Vayú, who
is celebrated in one whole hymn and in parts of others. Vata's name is
frequently connected with forms of the root va, *blow*, from which it is
derived. He is once associated with the god of the rain-storm in the
dual form of Vata-Parjanyá, while Vayu is often similarly linked with
Indra as Índra-Vayú. Vata is the breath of the gods. Like Rudra he wafts
healing and prolongs life; for he has the treasure of immortality in his
house. His activity is chiefly mentioned in connexion with the
thunderstorm. He produces ruddy lights and makes the dawns to shine. His
swiftness often supplies a comparison for the speed of the gods or of
mythical steeds. His noise is also often mentioned.
