[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040367)  [Next](2040369) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p1.2"></span>Texts Explained;
Sixthly,</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p1.3"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p1.4"></span>[Proverbs viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p1.5"></span></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p1.6"></span>, Continued.</span> *Our Lord not said
in Scripture to be ‘created,’ or the works to be ‘begotten.’ ‘In the
beginning’ means in the case of the works ‘from the beginning.’
Scripture passages explained. We are made by God first, begotten next;
creatures by nature, sons by grace. Christ begotten first, made or
created afterwards. Sense of ‘First-born of the dead;’ of ‘First-born
among many brethren;’ of ‘First-born of all creation,’ contrasted with
‘Only-begotten.’ Further interpretation of ‘beginning of ways,’ and ‘for
the works.’ Why a creature could not redeem; why redemption was
necessary at all. Texts which contrast the Word and the works.*

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p2"></span>57. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>For</span> had He been a creature, He
had not said, ‘He begets me,’ for the creatures are from without, and
are works of the Maker; but the Offspring is not from without nor a
work, but from the Father, and proper to His Essence. Wherefore they are
creatures; this God’s Word and Only-begotten Son. For instance, Moses
did not say of the creation, ‘In the beginning He begat,’ nor ‘In the
beginning was,’ but ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth <span id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580) .’ Nor did David say in
the Psalm, ‘Thy hands have “begotten me,”’ but ‘made me and fashioned
me <span id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581) ,’ everywhere applying the
word ‘made’ to the creatures. But to the Son contrariwise; for he has
not said ‘I made,’ but ‘I begat <span
id="fr_2582"></span>[2583](#fn_2582) ,’ and ‘He begets me,’ and ‘My
heart uttered a good Word <span id="fr_2583"></span>[2584](#fn_2583) .’
And in the instance of the creation, ‘In the beginning He made;’ but in
the instance of the Son, ‘In the beginning was the Word <span
id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584) .’ And there is this difference,
that the creatures are made upon the beginning, and have a beginning of
existence connected with an interval; wherefore also what is said of
them, ‘In the beginning He made,’ is as much as saying of them, ‘From
the beginning He made:’—as the Lord, knowing that which He had made,
taught, when He silenced the Pharisees, with the words, ‘He which made
them from the beginning, made them male and female <span
id="fr_2585"></span>[2586](#fn_2585) ;’ for from some beginning, when
they were not yet, were originate things brought into being and created.
This too the Holy Spirit has signified in the Psalms, saying, ‘Thou,
Lord, at the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth <span
id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586) ;’ and again, ‘O think upon Thy
congregation which Thou hast purchased from the beginning <span
id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587) ;’ now it is plain that what takes
place at the beginning, has a beginning of creation, and that from some
beginning God purchased His congregation. And that ‘In the beginning He
made,’ from his saying ‘made,’ means ‘began to make,’ Moses himself
shews by saying, after the completion of all things, ‘And God blessed
the seventh day and sanctified it, because that in it He had rested from
all His work which God began to make <span
id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588) .’ Therefore the creatures began to
be made; but the Word of God, not having beginning of being, certainly
did not begin to be, nor begin to come to be, but was ever. And the
works have their beginning in their making, and their beginning precedes
their coming to be; but the Word, not being of things which come to be,
rather comes to be Himself the Framer of those which have a beginning.
And the being of things originate is measured by their becoming <span
id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589) , and from some beginning does God
begin to make them through the Word, that it may be known that they were
not before their origination; but the Word has His being, in no other
beginning <span id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590) than the Father,
whom <span id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591) they allow to be without
beginning, so that He too exists without beginning in the Father, being
His Offspring, not His creature.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p15"></span><span id="page_380">p. 380</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-Page_380"></span>58. Thus does divine
Scripture recognise the difference between the Offspring and things
made, and shew that the Offspring is a Son, not begun from any
beginning, but eternal; but that the thing made, as an external work of
the Maker, began to come into being. John therefore delivering divine
doctrine <span id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592) about the Son, and
knowing the difference of the phrases, said not, ‘In the beginning has
become’ or ‘been made,’ but ‘In the beginning was the Word;’ that we
might understand ‘Offspring’ by ‘was,’ and not account of Him by
intervals, but believe the Son always and eternally to exist. And with
these proofs, how, O Arians, misunderstanding the passage in
Deuteronomy, did you venture a fresh act of irreligion <span
id="fr_2593"></span>[2594](#fn_2593) against the Lord, saying that ‘He
is a work,’ or ‘creature,’ or indeed ‘offspring?’ for offspring and work
you take to mean the same thing; but here too you shall be shewn to be
as unlearned as you are irreligious. Your first passage is this, ‘Is not
He thy Father that bought thee? did He not make thee and create
thee <span id="fr_2594"></span>[2595](#fn_2594) ?’ And shortly after in
the same Song he says, ‘God that begat thee thou didst desert, and
forgattest God that nourished thee <span
id="fr_2595"></span>[2596](#fn_2595) .’ Now the meaning conveyed in
these passages is very remarkable; for he says not first ‘He begat,’
lest that term should be taken as indiscriminate with ‘He made,’ and
these men should have a pretence for saying, ‘Moses tells us indeed that
God said from the beginning, “Let Us make man <span
id="fr_2596"></span>[2597](#fn_2596) ,”’ but he soon after says himself,
‘God that begat thee thou didst desert,’ as if the terms were
indifferent; for offspring and work are the same. But after the words
‘bought’ and ‘made,’ he has added last of all ‘begat,’ that the sentence
might carry its own interpretation; for in the word ‘made’ he accurately
denotes what belongs to men by nature, to be works and things made; but
in the word ‘begat’ he shews God’s lovingkindness exercised towards men
after He had created them. And since they have proved ungrateful upon
this, thereupon Moses reproaches them, saying first, ‘Do ye thus requite
the Lord?’ and then adds, ‘Is not He thy Father that bought thee? Did He
not make thee and create thee <span id="fr_2597"></span>[2598](#fn_2597)
?’ And next he says, ‘They sacrificed unto devils, not to God, to gods
whom they knew not. New gods and strange came up, whom your fathers knew
not; the God that begat thee thou didst desert <span
id="fr_2598"></span>[2599](#fn_2598) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p23"></span>59. For God not only created them
to be men, but called them to be sons, as having begotten them. For the
term ‘begat’ is here as elsewhere expressive of a Son, as He says by the
Prophet, ‘I begat sons and exalted them;’ and generally, when Scripture
wishes to signify a son, it does so, not by the term ‘created,’ but
undoubtedly by that of ‘begat.’ And this John seems to say, ‘He gave to
them power to become children of God, even to them that believe on His
Name; which were begotten not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God <span
id="fr_2599"></span>[2600](#fn_2599) .’ And here too the cautious
distinction <span id="fr_2600"></span>[2601](#fn_2600) is well kept up,
for first he says ‘become,’ because they are not called sons by nature
but by adoption; then he says ‘were begotten,’ because they too had
received at any rate the name of son. But the People, as says the
Prophet, ‘despised’ their Benefactor. But this is God’s kindness to man,
that of whom He is Maker, of them according to grace He afterwards
becomes Father also; becomes, that is, when men, His creatures, receive
into their hearts, as the Apostle says, ‘the Spirit of His Son, crying,
Abba, Father <span id="fr_2601"></span>[2602](#fn_2601) .’ And these are
they who, having received the Word, gained power from Him to become sons
of God; for they could not become sons, being by nature creatures,
otherwise than by receiving the Spirit of the natural and true Son.
Wherefore, that this might be, ‘The Word became flesh,’ that He might
make man capable of Godhead. This same meaning may be gained also from
the Prophet Malachi, who says, ‘Hath not One God created us? Have we not
all one Father <span id="fr_2602"></span>[2603](#fn_2602) ?’ for first
he puts ‘created,’ next ‘Father,’ to shew, as the other writers, that
from the beginning we were creatures by nature, and God is our Creator
through the Word; but afterwards we were made sons, and thenceforward
God the Creator becomes our Father also. Therefore ‘Father’ is proper to
the Son; and not ‘creature,’ but ‘Son’ is proper to the Father.
Accordingly this passage also proves, that we are not sons by nature,
but the Son who is in us <span id="fr_2603"></span>[2604](#fn_2603) ;
and again, that God is not our Father by nature, but of that Word in us,
in whom and because of whom we ‘cry, Abba, Father <span
id="fr_2604"></span>[2605](#fn_2604) .’ And so in like manner, the
Father calls them sons in whomsoever He sees His own Son, and says, ‘I
begat;’ since begetting is significant of a Son, and making is
indicative of the works. And thus it is that we are not <span
id="page_381">p. 381</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-Page_381"></span>begotten first, but made; for it is
written, ‘Let Us make man <span id="fr_2605"></span>[2606](#fn_2605) ;’
but afterwards, on receiving the grace of the Spirit, we are said
thenceforth to be begotten also; just as the great Moses in his Song
with an apposite meaning says first ‘He bought,’ and afterwards ‘He
begat;’ lest, hearing ‘He begat,’ they might forget their own original
nature; but that they might know that from the beginning they are
creatures, but when according to grace they are said to be begotten, as
sons, still no less than before are men works according to nature.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p31"></span>60. And that creature and
offspring are not the same, but differ from each other in nature and the
signification of the words, the Lord Himself shews even in the Proverbs.
For having said, ‘The Lord created me a beginning of His ways;’ He has
added, ‘But before all the hills He begat me.’ If then the Word were by
nature and in His Essence <span id="fr_2606"></span>[2607](#fn_2606) a
creature, and there were no difference between offspring and creature,
He would not have added, ‘He begat me,’ but had been satisfied with ‘He
created,’ as if that term implied ‘He begat;’ but, as it is, after
saying, ‘He created me a beginning of His ways for His works,’ He has
added, not simply ‘begat me,’ but with the connection of the conjunction
‘But,’ as guarding thereby the term ‘created,’ when he says, ‘But before
all the hills He begat me.’ For ‘begat me’ succeeding in such close
connection to ‘created me,’ makes the meaning one, and shews that
‘created’ is said with an object <span
id="fr_2607"></span>[2608](#fn_2607) , but that ‘begat me’ is prior to
‘created me.’ For as, if He had said the reverse, ‘The Lord begat me,’
and went on, ‘But before the hills He created me,’ ‘created’ would
certainly precede ‘begat,’ so having said first ‘created,’ and then
added ‘But before all the hills He begat me,’ He necessarily shews that
‘begat’ preceded ‘created.’ For in saying, ‘Before all He begat me,’ He
intimates that He is other than all things; it having been shewn to be
true <span id="fr_2608"></span>[2609](#fn_2608) in an earlier part of
this book, that no one creature was made before another, but all things
originate subsisted at once together upon one and the same command <span
id="fr_2609"></span>[2610](#fn_2609) . Therefore neither do the words
which follow ‘created,’ also follow ‘begat me;’ but in the case of
‘created’ is added ‘beginning of ways,’ but of ‘begat me,’ He says not,
‘He begat me as a beginning,’ but ‘before all He begat me.’ But He who
is before all is not a beginning of all, but is other than all <span
id="fr_2610"></span>[2611](#fn_2610) ; but if other than all (in which
‘all’ the beginning of all is included), it follows that He is other
than the creatures; and it becomes a clear point, that the Word, being
other than all things and before all, afterwards is created ‘a beginning
of the ways for works,’ because He became man, that, as the Apostle has
said, He who is the ‘Beginning’ and ‘First-born from the dead, in all
things might have the preeminence <span
id="fr_2611"></span>[2612](#fn_2611) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p38"></span>61. Such then being the difference
between ‘created’ and ‘begat me,’ and between ‘beginning of ways’ and
‘before all,’ God, being first Creator, next, as has been said, becomes
Father of men, because of His Word dwelling in them. But in the case of
the Word the reverse; for God, being His Father by nature, becomes
afterwards both His Creator and Maker, when the Word puts on that flesh
which was created and made, and becomes man. For, as men, receiving the
Spirit of the Son, become children through Him, so the Word of God, when
He Himself puts on the flesh of man, then is said both to be created and
to have been made. If then we are by nature sons, then is He by nature
creature and work; but if we become sons by adoption and grace, then has
the Word also, when in grace towards us He became man, said, ‘The Lord
created me.’ And in the next place, when He put on a created nature and
became like us in body, reasonably was He therefore called both our
Brother and ‘First-born <span id="fr_2612"></span>[2613](#fn_2612) .’
For though it was after us <span id="fr_2613"></span>[2614](#fn_2613)
that He was made man for us, and our brother by similitude of body,
still He is therefore called and is the ‘First-born’ of us, because, all
men being lost, according to the transgression of Adam, His flesh before
all others was saved and liberated, as being the Word’s body <span
id="fr_2614"></span>[2615](#fn_2614) ; and henceforth we, becoming
incorporate with It, are saved after Its pattern. For in It the Lord
becomes our guide to the Kingdom of Heaven and to His own Father,
saying, ‘I am the way’ and ‘the door <span
id="fr_2615"></span>[2616](#fn_2615) ,’ and ‘through Me all must enter.’
Whence also is He said to be ‘First-born from the dead <span
id="fr_2616"></span>[2617](#fn_2616) ,’ not that He died before us, for
we had died first; but because having undergone death for us and
abolished it, He was the first to rise, as man, for our sakes raising
His own Body. Henceforth He having risen, we too from Him and because of
Him rise in due course from the dead.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p44"></span><span id="page_382">p. 382</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-Page_382"></span>62. But if He is also called
‘First-born of the creation <span id="fr_2617"></span>[2618](#fn_2617)
,’ still this is not as if He were levelled to the creatures, and only
first of them in point of time (for how should that be, since He is
‘Only-begotten?’), but it is because of the Word’s condescension <span
id="fr_2618"></span>[2619](#fn_2618) to the creatures, according to
which He has become the ‘Brother’ of ‘many.’ For the term
‘Only-begotten’ is used where there are no brethren, but
‘First-born <span id="fr_2619"></span>[2620](#fn_2619) ’ because of
brethren. Accordingly it is nowhere written in the Scriptures, ‘the
first-born of God,’ nor ‘the creature of God;’ but ‘Only-begotten’ and
‘Son’ and ‘Word’ and ‘Wisdom,’ refer to Him as proper to the
Father <span id="fr_2620"></span>[2621](#fn_2620) . Thus, ‘We have seen
His glory, the glory as of the Only-begotten of the Father <span
id="fr_2621"></span>[2622](#fn_2621) ;’ and ‘God sent His Only-begotten
Son <span id="fr_2622"></span>[2623](#fn_2622) ;’ and ‘O Lord, Thy Word
endureth for ever <span id="fr_2623"></span>[2624](#fn_2623) ;’ and ‘In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God;’ and ‘Christ the
Power of God and the Wisdom of God <span
id="fr_2624"></span>[2625](#fn_2624) ;’ and ‘This is My beloved Son;’
and ‘Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God <span
id="fr_2625"></span>[2626](#fn_2625) .’ But ‘first-born’ implied the
descent to the creation <span id="fr_2626"></span>[2627](#fn_2626) ; for
of it has He been called first-born; and ‘He created’ implies His grace
towards the works, for for them is He created. If then He is
Only-begotten, as indeed He is, ‘First-born’ needs some explanation; but
if He be really First-born, then He is not Only-begotten <span
id="fr_2627"></span>[2628](#fn_2627) . For the same cannot be both
Only-begotten and First-born, except in different relations;—that is,
Only-begotten, because of His generation from the Father, as has been
said; and First-born, because of His condescension to the creation and
His making the many His brethren. Certainly, those two terms being
inconsistent with each other, one should say that the attribute of being
Only-begotten has justly the preference in the instance of the Word, in
that there is no other Word, or other Wisdom, but He alone is very Son
of the Father. Moreover <span id="fr_2628"></span>[2629](#fn_2628) , as
was before <span id="fr_2629"></span>[2630](#fn_2629) said, not in
connection with any reason, but absolutely <span
id="fr_2630"></span>[2631](#fn_2630) it is said of Him, ‘The
Only-begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father <span
id="fr_2631"></span>[2632](#fn_2631) ;’ but the word ‘First-born’ has
again the creation as a reason in connection with it, which Paul
proceeds to say, ‘for in Him all things were created <span
id="fr_2632"></span>[2633](#fn_2632) .’ But if all the creatures were
created in Him, He is other than the creatures, and is not a creature,
but the Creator of the creatures.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p61"></span>63. Not then because He was from
the Father was He called ‘First-born,’ but because in Him the creation
came to be; and as before the creation He was the Son, through whom was
the creation, so also before He was called the First-born of the whole
creation, not the less was the Word Himself with God and the Word was
God. But this also not understanding, these irreligious men go about
saying, ‘If He is First-born of all creation, it is plain that He too is
one of the creation.’ Senseless men! if He is simply ‘First-born <span
id="fr_2633"></span>[2634](#fn_2633) of the whole creation,’ then He is
other than the whole creation; for he says not, ‘He is First-born above
the rest of the creatures,’ lest He be reckoned to be as one of the
creatures, but it is written, ‘of the whole creation,’ that He may
appear other than the creation <span
id="fr_2634"></span>[2635](#fn_2634) . Reuben, for instance, is not said
to be first-born of all the children of Jacob <span
id="fr_2635"></span>[2636](#fn_2635) , but of Jacob himself and his
brethren; lest he should be thought to be some other beside the children
of Jacob. Nay, even concerning the Lord Himself the Apostle says not,
‘that He may become First-born of <span id="page_383">p. 383</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-Page_383"></span>all,’ lest He be thought to
bear a body other than ours, but ‘among many brethren <span
id="fr_2636"></span>[2637](#fn_2636) ,’ because of the likeness of the
flesh. If then the Word also were one of the creatures, Scripture would
have said of Him also that He was First-born of other creatures; but in
fact, the saints saying that He is ‘First-born of the whole
creation <span id="fr_2637"></span>[2638](#fn_2637) ,’ the Son of God is
plainly shewn to be other than the whole creation and not a creature.
For if He is a creature, He will be First-born of Himself. How then is
it possible, O Arians, for Him to be before and after Himself? next, if
He is a creature, and the whole creation through Him came to be, and in
Him consists, how can He both create the creation and be one of the
things which consist in Him? Since then such a notion is in itself
unseemly, it is proved against them by the truth, that He is called
‘First-born among many brethren’ because of the relationship of the
flesh, and ‘First-born from the dead,’ because the resurrection of the
dead is from Him and after Him; and ‘First-born of the whole creation,’
because of the Father’s love to man, which brought it to pass that in
His Word not only ‘all things consist <span
id="fr_2638"></span>[2639](#fn_2638) ,’ but the creation itself, of
which the Apostle speaks, ‘waiting for the manifestation of the sons of
God, shall be delivered’ one time ‘from the bondage of corruption into
the glorious liberty of the children of God <span
id="fr_2639"></span>[2640](#fn_2639) .’ Of this creation thus delivered,
the Lord will be First-born, both of it and of all those who are made
children, that by His being called first, those that come after Him may
abide <span id="fr_2640"></span>[2641](#fn_2640) , as depending on the
Word as a beginning <span id="fr_2641"></span>[2642](#fn_2641) .

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p71"></span>64. And I think that the
irreligious men themselves will be shamed from such a thought; for if
the case stands not as we have said, but they will rule it that He is
‘First-born of the whole creation’ as in essence—a creature among
creatures, let them reflect that they will be conceiving Him as brother
and fellow of the things without reason and life. For of the whole
creation these also are parts; and the ‘First-born’ must be first indeed
in point of time but only thus, and in kind and similitude <span
id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642) must be the same with all. How then
can they say this without exceeding all measures of irreligion? or who
will endure them, if this is their language? or who can but hate them
even imagining such things? For it is evident to all, that neither for
Himself, as being a creature, nor as having any connection according to
essence with the whole creation, has He been called ‘First-born’ of it:
but because the Word, when at the beginning He framed the creatures,
condescended to things originate, that it might be possible for them to
come to be. For they could not have endured His nature, which was
untempered splendour, even that of the Father, unless condescending by
the Father’s love for man He had supported them and taken hold of them
and brought them into existence <span
id="fr_2643"></span>[2644](#fn_2643) ; and next, because, by this
condescension of the Word, the creation too is made a son <span
id="fr_2644"></span>[2645](#fn_2644) through Him, that He might be in
all respects ‘First-born’ of it, as has been said, both in creating, and
also in being brought for the sake of all into this very world. For so
it is written, ‘When He bringeth the First-born into the world, He
saith, Let all the Angels of God worship Him <span
id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645) .’ Let Christ’s enemies hear and
tear themselves to pieces, because His coming into the world is what
makes Him called ‘First-born’ of all; and thus the Son is the Father’s
‘Only-begotten,’ because He alone is from Him, and He is the ‘First-born
of creation,’ because of this adoption of all as sons <span
id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646) . And as He is First-born among
brethren and rose from the dead ‘the first fruits of them that
slept <span id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647) ;’ so, since it became
Him ‘in all things to have the preeminence <span
id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648) ,’ therefore He is created ‘a
beginning of ways,’ that we, walking along it and entering through Him
who says, ‘I am the Way’ and ‘the Door,’ and partaking of the knowledge
of the Father, may also hear the words, ‘Blessed are the undefiled in
the Way,’ and ‘Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God <span id="fr_2649"></span>[2650](#fn_2649) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p80"></span>65. And thus since the truth
declares that the Word is not by nature a creature, it is fitting now to
say, in what sense He is ‘beginning of <span id="page_384">p. 384</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-Page_384"></span>ways.’ For when the first
way, which was through Adam, was lost, and in place of paradise we
deviated unto death, and heard the words, ‘Dust thou art, and unto
dust <span id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650) shalt thou return,’
therefore the Word of God, who loves man, puts on Him created flesh at
the Father’s will <span id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651) , that
whereas the first man had made it dead through the transgression, He
Himself might quicken it in the blood of His own body <span
id="fr_2652"></span>[2653](#fn_2652) , and might open ‘for us a way new
and living,’ as the Apostle says, ‘through the veil, that is to say, His
flesh <span id="fr_2653"></span>[2654](#fn_2653) ;’ which he signifies
elsewhere thus, ‘Wherefore, if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creation; old things are passed away, behold all things are become
new <span id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654) .’ But if a new creation
has come to pass, some one must be first of this creation; now a man,
made of earth only, such as we are become from the transgression, he
could not be. For in the first creation, men had become unfaithful, and
through them that first creation had been lost; and there was need of
some one else to renew the first creation, and preserve the new which
had come to be. Therefore from love to man none other than the Lord, the
‘beginning’ of the new creation, is created as ‘the Way,’ and
consistently says, ‘The Lord created me a beginning of ways for His
works;’ that man might walk no longer according to that first creation,
but there being as it were a beginning of a new creation, and with the
Christ ‘a beginning of its ways,’ we might follow Him henceforth, who
says to us, ‘I am the Way:’—as the blessed Apostle teaches in
Colossians, saying, ‘He is the Head of the body, the Church, who is the
Beginning, the First-born from the dead, that in all things He might
have the preeminence.’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p86"></span>66. For if, as has been said,
because of the resurrection from the dead He is called a beginning, and
then a resurrection took place when He, bearing our flesh, had given
Himself to death for us, it is evident that His words, ‘He created me a
beginning of ways,’ is indicative not of His essence <span
id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655) , but of His bodily presence. For
to the body death was proper <span id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656)
; and in like manner to the bodily presence are the words proper, ‘The
Lord created me a beginning of His ways.’ For since the Saviour was thus
created according to the flesh, and had become a beginning of things new
created, and had our first fruits, viz. that human flesh which He took
to Himself, therefore after Him, as is fit, is created also the people
to come, David saying, ‘Let this be written for another generation, and
the people that shall be created shall praise the Lord <span
id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657) .’ And again in the twenty-first
Psalm, ‘The generation to come shall declare unto the Lord, and they
shall declare His righteousness, unto a people that shall be born whom
the Lord made <span id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658) .’ For we shall
no more hear, ‘In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely
die <span id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659) ,’ but ‘Where I am, there
ye’ shall ‘be also;’ so that we may say, ‘We are His workmanship,
created unto good works <span id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660) .’
And again, since God’s work, that is, man, though created perfect, has
become wanting through the transgression, and dead by sin, and it was
unbecoming that the work of God should remain imperfect (wherefore all
the saints were praying concerning this, for instance in the hundred and
thirty-seventh Psalm, saying, ‘Lord, Thou shalt requite for me; despise
not then the works of Thine hands <span
id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661) ’); therefore the perfect <span
id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662) Word of God puts around Him an
imperfect body, and is said to be created ‘for the works;’ that, paying
the debt <span id="fr_2663"></span>[2664](#fn_2663) in our stead, He
might, by Himself, perfect what was wanting to man. Now immortality was
wanting to him, and the way to paradise. This then is what the Saviour
says, ‘I glorified Thee on the earth, I perfected the work which Thou
hast given Me to do <span id="fr_2664"></span>[2665](#fn_2664) ;’ and
again, ‘The works which the Father hath given Me to perfect, the same
works that I do, bear witness of Me;’ but ‘the works <span
id="fr_2665"></span>[2666](#fn_2665) ’ He here says that the Father had
given Him to perfect, are those for which He is created, saying in the
Proverbs, ‘The Lord created me a beginning of His ways, for His works;’
for it is all one to say, ‘The Father hath given me the works,’ and ‘The
Lord created me for the works.’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p98"></span>67. When then received He the
works to perfect, O God’s enemies? for from this also ‘He created’ will
be understood. If ye say, ‘At the beginning when He brought them into
being out of what was not,’ it is an untruth; for they were not yet
made; whereas He appears to speak as taking what was already in being.
Nor is it pious to refer to the time <span id="page_385">p. 385</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-Page_385"></span>which preceded the Word’s
becoming flesh, lest His coming should thereupon seem superfluous, since
for the sake of these works that coming took place. Therefore it remains
for us to say that when He has become man, then He took the works. For
then He perfected them, by healing our wounds and vouchsafing to us the
resurrection from the dead. But if, when the Word became flesh, then
were given to Him the works, plainly when He became man, then also is He
created for the works. Not of His essence then is ‘He created’
indicative, as has many times been said, but of His bodily generation.
For then, because the works were become imperfect and mutilated from the
transgression, He is said in respect to the body to be created; that by
perfecting them and making them whole, He might present the Church unto
the Father, as the Apostle says, ‘not having spot or wrinkle or any such
thing, but holy and without blemish <span
id="fr_2666"></span>[2667](#fn_2666) .’ Mankind then is perfected in Him
and restored, as it was made at the beginning, nay, with greater grace.
For, on rising from the dead, we shall no longer fear death, but shall
ever reign in Christ in the heavens. And this has been done, since the
own Word of God Himself, who is from the Father, has put on the flesh,
and become man. For if, being a creature, He had become man, man had
remained just what he was, not joined to God; for how had a work been
joined to the Creator by a work <span
id="fr_2667"></span>[2668](#fn_2667) ? or what succour had come from
like to like, when one as well as other needed it <span
id="fr_2668"></span>[2669](#fn_2668) ? And how, were the Word a
creature, had He power to undo God’s sentence, and to remit sin, whereas
it is written in the Prophets, that this is God’s doing? For ‘who is a
God like unto Thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by
transgression <span id="fr_2669"></span>[2670](#fn_2669) ?’ For whereas
God has said, ‘Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return <span
id="fr_2670"></span>[2671](#fn_2670) ,’ men have become mortal; how then
could things originate undo sin? but the Lord is He who has undone it,
as He says Himself, ‘Unless the Son shall make you free <span
id="fr_2671"></span>[2672](#fn_2671) ;’ and the Son, who made free, has
shewn in truth that He is no creature, nor one of things originate, but
the proper Word and Image of the Father’s Essence, who at the beginning
sentenced, and alone remitteth sins. For since it is said in the Word,
‘Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return,’ suitably through the
Word Himself and in Him the freedom and the undoing of the condemnation
has come to pass.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p105"></span>68. ‘Yet,’ they say, ‘though the
Saviour were a creature, God was able to speak the word only and undo
the curse.’ And so another will tell them in like manner, ‘Without His
coming among us at all, God was able just to speak and undo the curse;’
but we must consider what was expedient for mankind, and not what simply
is possible with God <span id="fr_2672"></span>[2673](#fn_2672) . He
could have destroyed, before the ark of Noah, the then transgressors;
but He did it after the ark. He could too, without Moses, have spoken
the word only and have brought the people out of Egypt; but it profited
to do it through Moses. And God was able without the judges to save His
people; but it was profitable for the people that for a season judges
should be raised up to them. The Saviour too might have come among us
from the beginning, or on His coming might not have been delivered to
Pilate; but He came ‘at the fulness of the ages <span
id="fr_2673"></span>[2674](#fn_2673) ,’ and when sought for said, ‘I am
He <span id="fr_2674"></span>[2675](#fn_2674) .’ For what He does, that
is profitable for men, and was not fitting in any other way; and what is
profitable and fitting, for that He provides <span
id="fr_2675"></span>[2676](#fn_2675) . Accordingly He came, not ‘that He
might be ministered unto, but that He might minister <span
id="fr_2676"></span>[2677](#fn_2676) ,’ and might work our salvation.
Certainly He was able to speak the Law from heaven, but He saw that it
was expedient to men for Him to speak from Sinai; and that He has done,
that it might be possible for Moses to go up, and for them hearing the
word near them the rather to believe. Moreover, the good reason of what
He did may be seen thus; if God had but spoken, because it was in His
power, and so the curse had been undone, the power had been shewn of Him
who gave the word, but man had become such as Adam was before the
transgression, having received grace from without <span
id="fr_2677"></span>[2678](#fn_2677) , and not having it united to the
body; (for he was such when he was placed in Paradise) nay, perhaps had
become worse, <span id="page_386">p. 386</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-Page_386"></span>because he had learned to
transgress. Such then being his condition, had he been seduced by the
serpent, there had been fresh need for God to give command and undo the
curse; and thus the need had become interminable <span
id="fr_2678"></span>[2679](#fn_2678) , and men had remained under guilt
not less than before, as being enslaved to sin; and, ever sinning, would
have ever needed one to pardon them, and had never become free, being in
themselves flesh, and ever worsted by the Law because of the infirmity
of the flesh.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p113"></span>69. Again, if the Son were a
creature, man had remained mortal as before, not being joined to God;
for a creature had not joined creatures to God, as seeking itself one to
join it <span id="fr_2679"></span>[2680](#fn_2679) ; nor would a portion
of the creation have been the creation’s salvation, as needing salvation
itself. To provide against this also, He sends His own Son, and He
becomes Son of Man, by taking created flesh; that, since all were under
sentence of death, He, being other than them all, might Himself for all
offer to death His own body; and that henceforth, as if all had died
through Him, the word of that sentence might be accomplished (for ‘all
died <span id="fr_2680"></span>[2681](#fn_2680) ’ in Christ), and all
through Him might thereupon become free from sin and from the curse
which came upon it, and might truly abide <span
id="fr_2681"></span>[2682](#fn_2681) for ever, risen from the dead and
clothed in immortality and incorruption. For the Word being clothed in
the flesh, as has many times been explained, every bite of the serpent
began to be utterly staunched from out it; and whatever evil sprung from
the motions of the flesh, to be cut away, and with these death also was
abolished, the companion of sin, as the Lord Himself says <span
id="fr_2682"></span>[2683](#fn_2682) , ‘The prince of this world cometh,
and findeth nothing in Me;’ and ‘For this end was He manifested,’ as
John has written, ‘that He might destroy the works of the devil <span
id="fr_2683"></span>[2684](#fn_2683) .’ And these being destroyed from
the flesh, we all were thus liberated by the kinship of the flesh, and
for the future were joined, even we, to the Word. And being joined to
God, no longer do we abide upon earth; but, as He Himself has said,
where He is, there shall we be also; and henceforward we shall fear no
longer the serpent, for he was brought to nought when he was assailed by
the Saviour in the flesh, and heard Him say, ‘Get thee behind Me,
Satan <span id="fr_2684"></span>[2685](#fn_2684) ,’ and thus he is cast
out of paradise into the eternal fire. Nor shall we have to watch
against woman beguiling us, for ‘in the resurrection they neither marry
nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels <span
id="fr_2685"></span>[2686](#fn_2685) ;’ and in Christ Jesus it shall be
‘a new creation,’ and ‘neither male nor female, but all and in all
Christ <span id="fr_2686"></span>[2687](#fn_2686) ;’ and where Christ
is, what fear, what danger can still happen?

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p122"></span>70. But this would not have come
to pass, had the Word been a creature; for with a creature, the devil,
himself a creature, would have ever continued the battle, and man, being
between the two, had been ever in peril of death, having none in whom
and through whom he might be joined to God and delivered from all fear.
Whence the truth shews us that the Word is not of things originate, but
rather Himself their Framer. For therefore did He assume the body
originate and human, that having renewed it as its Framer, He might
deify it <span id="fr_2687"></span>[2688](#fn_2687) in Himself, and thus
might introduce us all into the kingdom of heaven after His likeness.
For man had not been deified if joined to a creature, or unless the Son
were very God; nor had man been brought into the Father’s presence,
unless He had been His natural and true Word who had put on the body.
And as we had not been delivered from sin and the curse, unless it had
been by nature human flesh, which the Word put on (for we should have
had nothing common with what was foreign), so also the man had not been
deified, unless the Word who became flesh had been by nature from the
Father and true and proper to Him. For therefore the union was of this
kind, that He might unite what is man by nature to Him who is in the
nature of the Godhead, and his salvation and deification might be sure.
Therefore let those who deny that the Son is from the Father by nature
and proper to His Essence, deny also that He took true human flesh <span
id="fr_2688"></span>[2689](#fn_2688) of Mary Ever-Virgin <span
id="fr_2689"></span>[2690](#fn_2689) ; for in neither case had it been
of profit to us men, whether the Word were not true and naturally Son
<span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-Page_387"></span>of God, or the flesh not true which
He assumed. But surely He took true flesh, though Valentinus rave; yea
the Word was by nature Very God, though Ario-maniacs rave <span
id="fr_2690"></span>[2691](#fn_2690) ; and in that flesh has come to
pass the beginning <span id="fr_2691"></span>[2692](#fn_2691) of our new
creation, He being created man for our sake, and having made for us that
new way, as has been said.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p128"></span>71. The Word then is neither
creature nor work; for creature, thing made, work, are all one; and were
He creature and thing made, He would also be work. Accordingly He has
not said, ‘He created Me a work,’ nor ‘He made Me with the works,’ lest
He should appear to be in nature and essence <span
id="fr_2692"></span>[2693](#fn_2692) a creature; nor, ‘He created Me to
make works,’ lest, on the other hand, according to the perverseness of
the irreligious, He should seem as an instrument <span
id="fr_2693"></span>[2694](#fn_2693) made for our sake. Nor again has He
declared, ‘He created Me before the works,’ lest, as He really is before
all, as an Offspring, so, if created also before the works, He should
give ‘Offspring’ and ‘He created’ the same meaning. But He has said with
exact discrimination <span id="fr_2694"></span>[2695](#fn_2694) , ‘for
the works;’ as much as to say, ‘The Father has made Me, into flesh, that
I might be man,’ which again shews that He is not a work but an
offspring. For as he who comes into a house, is not part of the house,
but is other than the house, so He who is created for the works, must be
by nature other than the works. But if otherwise, as you hold, O Arians,
the Word of God be a work, by what <span
id="fr_2695"></span>[2696](#fn_2695) Hand and Wisdom did He Himself come
into being? for all things that came to be, came by the Hand and Wisdom
of God, who Himself says, ‘My hand hath made all these things <span
id="fr_2696"></span>[2697](#fn_2696) ;’ and David says in the Psalm,
‘And Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundations of the
earth, and the heavens are the work of Thy hands <span
id="fr_2697"></span>[2698](#fn_2697) ;’ and again, in the hundred and
forty-second Psalm, ‘I do remember the time past, I muse upon all Thy
works, yea I exercise myself in the works of Thy hands <span
id="fr_2698"></span>[2699](#fn_2698) .’ Therefore if by the Hand of God
the works are wrought, and it is written that ‘all things were made
through the Word,’ and ‘without Him was not made one thing <span
id="fr_2699"></span>[2700](#fn_2699) ,’ and again, ‘One Lord Jesus,
through whom are all things <span id="fr_2700"></span>[2701](#fn_2700)
,’ and ‘in Him all things consist <span
id="fr_2701"></span>[2702](#fn_2701) ,’ it is very plain that the Son
cannot be a work, but He is the Hand <span
id="fr_2702"></span>[2703](#fn_2702) of God and the Wisdom. This
knowing, the martyrs in Babylon, Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, arraign
the Arian irreligion. For when they say, ‘O all ye works of the Lord,
bless ye the Lord,’ they recount things in heaven, things on earth, and
the whole creation, as works; but the Son they name not. For they say
not, ‘Bless, O Word, and praise, O Wisdom;’ to shew that all other
things are both praising and are works; but the Word is not a work nor
of those that praise, but is praised with the Father and worshipped and
confessed as God <span id="fr_2703"></span>[2704](#fn_2703) , being His
Word and Wisdom, and of the works the Framer. This too the Spirit has
declared in the Psalms with a most apposite distinction, ‘the Word of
the Lord is true, and all His works are faithful <span
id="fr_2704"></span>[2705](#fn_2704) ;’ as in another Psalm too He says,
‘O Lord, how manifold are Thy works! in Wisdom hast Thou made them
all <span id="fr_2705"></span>[2706](#fn_2705) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p143"></span>72. But if the Word were a work,
then certainly He as others had been made in Wisdom; nor would Scripture
distinguish Him from the works, nor while it named them works, preach
Him as Word and own Wisdom of God. But, as it is, distinguishing Him
from the works, He shews that Wisdom is Framer of the works, and not a
work. This distinction Paul also observes, writing to the Hebrews, ‘The
Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,
reaching even to the dividing of soul and spirit, joints and marrow, and
a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, neither is there
any creature hidden before Him, but all things are naked and open unto
the eyes of Him with whom is our account <span
id="fr_2706"></span>[2707](#fn_2706) .’ For behold he calls things
originate ‘creature;’ but the Son he recognises as the Word of God, as
if He were other than the creatures. And again saying, ‘All things are
naked and open to the eyes of Him with whom is our account,’ he
signifies that He is other than all of them. For hence it is that He
judges, but each of all things originate is bound to give account to
Him. And so also, when the whole creation is groaning together with us
in order to be set free from the bondage of corruption, the Son is
thereby shewn to be other than the creatures. For if He were creature,
He too would be one of those who groan, and would need one who should
bring adoption and deliverance to Himself as well as others. But if the
whole creation groans together, for the sake of freedom from the bondage
of corruption, whereas the Son is not of those that groan nor of those
who need freedom, but He it is who gives sonship and freedom to all,
saying to the Jews of His <span id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-Page_388"></span>time <span
id="fr_2707"></span>[2708](#fn_2707) , ‘The servant remains not in the
house for ever, but the Son remaineth for ever; if then the Son shall
make you free, ye shall be free indeed <span
id="fr_2708"></span>[2709](#fn_2708) ;’ it is clearer than the light
from these considerations also, that the Word of God is not a creature
but true Son, and by nature genuine, of the Father. Concerning then ‘The
Lord hath created me a beginning of the ways,’ this is sufficient, as I
think, though in few words, to afford matter to the learned to frame
more ample refutations of the Arian heresy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[379:2581](2040368.htm#fr_2580) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p3"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[379:2582](2040368.htm#fr_2581) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p4"></span> [Ps. cxix.
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#073)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2582"></span>[379:2583](2040368.htm#fr_2582) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p5"></span> [Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2583"></span>[379:2584](2040368.htm#fr_2583) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p6"></span> [Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[379:2585](2040368.htm#fr_2584) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p7"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2585"></span>[379:2586](2040368.htm#fr_2585) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p8"></span> [Matt. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[379:2587](2040368.htm#fr_2586) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p9"></span> [Ps. cii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[379:2588](2040368.htm#fr_2587) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p10"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[379:2589](2040368.htm#fr_2588) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p11"></span> [Gen. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[379:2590](2040368.htm#fr_2589) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p12"></span> *Supr.* i. 29, n. 10.

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[379:2591](2040368.htm#fr_2590) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p13.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p13.2"></span>ρχῇ</span>, vid. *Orat.* iv. 1.

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[379:2592](2040368.htm#fr_2591) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p14"></span> In this passage ‘was from the
beginning’ is made equivalent with ‘was not before generation,’ and both
are contrasted with ‘without beginning’ or ‘eternal;’ vid. the bearing
of this on Bishop Bull’s explanation of the Nicene Anathema, *supr. Exc.
B,* where this passage is quoted.

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[380:2593](2040368.htm#fr_2592) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p16.1"></span>θεολογῶν</span>, vid. §71, note.

<span id="fn_2593"></span>[380:2594](2040368.htm#fr_2593) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p17"></span> The technical sense of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p17.2"></span>εὐσέβεια,
ἀσέβεια</span>, pietas, impietas, for ‘orthodoxy, heterodoxy,’ has been
noticed *supr.* p. 150, and derived from [1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p17.4"></span>. The word is contrasted ch. iv. 8.
with the (perhaps Gnostic) ‘profane and old-wives fables,’ and with
‘bodily exercise.’

<span id="fn_2594"></span>[380:2595](2040368.htm#fr_2594) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p17.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p18"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p18.1"></span>[Deut. xxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p18.3"></span>. LXX.

<span id="fn_2595"></span>[380:2596](2040368.htm#fr_2595) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p18.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p19"></span> [Deut.
32.18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2596"></span>[380:2597](2040368.htm#fr_2596) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p20"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2597"></span>[380:2598](2040368.htm#fr_2597) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p21"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p21.1"></span>[Deut. xxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p21.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2598"></span>[380:2599](2040368.htm#fr_2598) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p22"></span> [Deut.
32.17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2599"></span>[380:2600](2040368.htm#fr_2599) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p24"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p24.1"></span>[John
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p24.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2600"></span>[380:2601](2040368.htm#fr_2600) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p25.1"></span>παρατηρήσεως</span>, §12, note.

<span id="fn_2601"></span>[380:2602](2040368.htm#fr_2601) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p26"></span> *De Decr.* 31 fin.

<span id="fn_2602"></span>[380:2603](2040368.htm#fr_2602) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p27"></span> [Mal. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2603"></span>[380:2604](2040368.htm#fr_2603) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p28.1"></span>τὸν ἐν ἡμῖν υἱ& 231·ν</span>. vid.
also *supr.* 10. circ. fin. 56. init. and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p28.3"></span>τὸν ἐν αὐτοῖς οἰκοῦντα λόγον</span>.
61. init. Also *Orat.* i. 50 fin. iii. 23–25. and *de Decr.* 31 fin.
*Or.* i. 48, note 7, §56, n. 5. *infr.* notes on 79.

<span id="fn_2604"></span>[380:2605](2040368.htm#fr_2604) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p28.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p29"></span> [Gal. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2605"></span>[381:2606](2040368.htm#fr_2605) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p30"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2606"></span>[381:2607](2040368.htm#fr_2606) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p32"></span> §45, note 2.

<span id="fn_2607"></span>[381:2608](2040368.htm#fr_2607) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p33"></span> Ch. 20.

<span id="fn_2608"></span>[381:2609](2040368.htm#fr_2608) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p34"></span> pp. 367, 374.

<span id="fn_2609"></span>[381:2610](2040368.htm#fr_2609) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p35"></span> §48.

<span id="fn_2610"></span>[381:2611](2040368.htm#fr_2610) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p36"></span> §6, note 49.

<span id="fn_2611"></span>[381:2612](2040368.htm#fr_2611) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p37"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2612"></span>[381:2613](2040368.htm#fr_2612) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p39"></span> [Rom. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p39.1"></span>. Bishop Bull’s hypothesis about the
sense of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p39.3"></span>πρωτοτόκος τῆς κτίσεως</span> has been
commented on *supr.* p. 347. As far as Athan.’s discussion proceeds in
this section, it only relates to <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p39.5"></span>πρωτοτόκος</span> of *men* (i.e. from
the dead), and is equivalent to the ‘beginning of ways.’

<span id="fn_2613"></span>[381:2614](2040368.htm#fr_2613) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p39.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p40"></span> Marcellus seems to have argued
against Asterius from the same texts (Euseb. *in Marc.* p. 12), that,
since Christ is called ‘first-born from the dead,’ though others had
been recalled to life before Him, therefore He is called ‘first-born of
creation,’ not in point of time, but of dignity. vid. Montacut. *Not.*
p. 11. Yet Athan. argues contrariwise. *Orat.* iv. 29.

<span id="fn_2614"></span>[381:2615](2040368.htm#fr_2614) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p41"></span> §10. n. 7; *Orat.* iii. 31. note.

<span id="fn_2615"></span>[381:2616](2040368.htm#fr_2615) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p42"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p42.1"></span>[John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p42.3"></span>; x. 9.

<span id="fn_2616"></span>[381:2617](2040368.htm#fr_2616) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p42.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p43"></span> [Rev. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2617"></span>[382:2618](2040368.htm#fr_2617) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p45"></span> Here again, though speaking of
the ‘first-born of creation,’ Athan. simply views the phrase as
equivalent to ‘first-born of the *new* creation or *“brother”* of many;’
and so *infr.* ‘first-born because of the brotherhood He has made with
many.’

<span id="fn_2618"></span>[382:2619](2040368.htm#fr_2618) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p46"></span> Bp. Bull considers <span
class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p46.2"></span>συγκατάβασις</span> as equivalent to a
figurative <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p46.3"></span>γέννησις</span>, an idea which (vid.
*supr.* p. 346 *sq.*) seems quite foreign from Athan.’s meaning. In
Bull’s sense of the word, Athan. could not have said that the senses of
Only-begotten and First-born were contrary to each other, *Or.* i. 28.
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p46.5"></span>Συγκαταβῆναι</span> occurs *supr.* 51
fin. of the Incarnation. What is meant by it will be found *infr.*
78–81. viz. that our Lord came ‘to implant in the creatures a type and
semblance of His Image;’ which is just what is here maintained against
Bull. The whole passage referred to is a comment on the word <span
class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p46.7"></span>συγκατάβασις</span>, and begins and
ends with an introduction of that word. Vid. also *c.* *Gent.* 47.

<span id="fn_2619"></span>[382:2620](2040368.htm#fr_2619) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p46.9"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p47"></span> Vid. [Rom. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2620"></span>[382:2621](2040368.htm#fr_2620) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p48"></span> This passage has been urged
against Bull *supr. Exc. B.* All the words (says Athan.) which are
proper to the Son, and describe Him fitly, are expressive of what is
‘internal’ to the Divine Nature, as Begotten, Word, Wisdom, Glory, Hand,
&c., but (as he adds presently) the ‘first-born,’ like ‘beginning of
ways,’ is relative to creation; and therefore cannot denote our Lord’s
essence or Divine subsistence, but something temporal, an office,
character, or the like.

<span id="fn_2621"></span>[382:2622](2040368.htm#fr_2621) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p49"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2622"></span>[382:2623](2040368.htm#fr_2622) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p50"></span> [1 John iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2623"></span>[382:2624](2040368.htm#fr_2623) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p51"></span> [Ps. cxix.
89](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#089)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2624"></span>[382:2625](2040368.htm#fr_2624) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p52"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2625"></span>[382:2626](2040368.htm#fr_2625) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p53"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p53.1"></span>[Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p53.3"></span>; xvi. 16.

<span id="fn_2626"></span>[382:2627](2040368.htm#fr_2626) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p53.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p54"></span> This passage is imitated by
Theodoret. *in Coloss*. i. 15, but the passages from the Fathers
referable to these Orations are too many to enumerate.

<span id="fn_2627"></span>[382:2628](2040368.htm#fr_2627) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p55"></span> This passage is imitated by
Theodoret. *in Coloss*. i. 15, but the passages from the Fathers
referable to these Orations are too many to enumerate.

<span id="fn_2628"></span>[382:2629](2040368.htm#fr_2628) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p56"></span> We now come to a third and wider
sense of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p56.2"></span>πρωτότοκος</span>, as found (not in
[Rom. 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029), [Col.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p56.4"></span>, where by ‘creation’ Athan.
understands ‘all things visible and invisible.’ As then ‘for the works’
was just now taken to argue that ‘created’ was used in a relative and
restricted sense, the same is shewn as regards ‘first-born’ by the words
‘for in Him all things were created.’

<span id="fn_2629"></span>[382:2630](2040368.htm#fr_2629) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p56.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p57"></span> i. 52.

<span id="fn_2630"></span>[382:2631](2040368.htm#fr_2630) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p58.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p58.2"></span>πολελυμένως</span>; *supr.* i. 56,
note 6, and §§53, 56, and so <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p58.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p58.5"></span>πολύτως</span> Theophylact to express
the same distinction *in loc. Coloss.*

<span id="fn_2631"></span>[382:2632](2040368.htm#fr_2631) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p58.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p59"></span> [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2632"></span>[382:2633](2040368.htm#fr_2632) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p60"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2633"></span>[382:2634](2040368.htm#fr_2633) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p62"></span> It would be perhaps better to
translate ‘first-born to the creature,’ to give Athan.’s idea; <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p62.2"></span>τῆς κτίσεως</span>
not being a partitive genitive, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p62.4"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> a superlative
(though he presently so considers it), but a simple appellative and
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p62.6"></span>τῆς
κτ</span>. a common genitive of relation, as ‘the king of a country,’
‘the owner of a house.’ ‘First-born of creation’ is like ‘author, type,
life of creation.’ Hence S. Paul goes on at once to say, ‘for *in* Him
all things were made,’ not simply ‘by and for,’ as at the end of the
verse; or as Athan. says here, ‘because in Him the creation came to be.’
On the distinction of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p62.8"></span>διὰ</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p62.9"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p62.10"></span>ν</span>,
referring respectively to the first and second creations, vid. *In illud
Omn.* 2. (*Supr.* p. 88.)

<span id="fn_2634"></span>[382:2635](2040368.htm#fr_2634) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p62.12"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p63"></span> To understand this passage, the
Greek idiom must be kept in view. Cf. Milton’s imitation ‘the fairest of
her daughters Eve.’ Vid. as regards the very word <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p63.2"></span>πρῶτος</span>,
[John i. 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p63.3"></span>; and *supr.* §30, note 3, also <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p63.5"></span>πλείστην ἢ
ἔμπροσθεν</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p63.6"></span>3 *Maccab*. 7,
21. Accordingly as in the comparative to obviate this exclusion, we put
in the word ‘other’ (ante ‘alios immanior omnes), so too in the Greek
superlative, ‘Socrates is wisest of “other” heathen.’ Athanasius then
says in this passage, that ‘first-born of creatures’ implies that our
Lord was not a creature; whereas it is not said of Him ‘first-born of
brethren,’ lest He should he excluded from men, but first-born “among”
brethren,’ where ‘among’ is equivalent to ‘other.’

<span id="fn_2635"></span>[382:2636](2040368.htm#fr_2635) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p63.9"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p64"></span> [Gen. xlix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p64.1"></span>, LXX. Vid. also *contr.* *Gent.* 41
sq. where the text [Col. i. 15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p64.3"></span> is quoted.

<span id="fn_2636"></span>[383:2637](2040368.htm#fr_2636) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p64.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p65"></span> [Rom. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2637"></span>[383:2638](2040368.htm#fr_2637) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p66"></span> [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2638"></span>[383:2639](2040368.htm#fr_2638) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p67"></span> [Col.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2639"></span>[383:2640](2040368.htm#fr_2639) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p68"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p68.1"></span>[Rom.
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p68.3"></span>. Thus there are two senses in which
our Lord is ‘first-born to the creation;’ viz. in its first origin, and
in its restoration after man’s fall; as he says more clearly in the next
section.

<span id="fn_2640"></span>[383:2641](2040368.htm#fr_2640) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p68.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p69"></span> *De Decr.* 19, n. 3.

<span id="fn_2641"></span>[383:2642](2040368.htm#fr_2641) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p70"></span> i. 48, n. 7.

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[383:2643](2040368.htm#fr_2642) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p72"></span> §20.

<span id="fn_2643"></span>[383:2644](2040368.htm#fr_2643) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p73"></span> He does not here say with
Asterius that God could not create man immediately, for the Word is God,
but that He did not create him without at the same time infusing a grace
or presence from Himself into his created nature to enable it to endure
His external plastic hand; in other words, that he was created *in Him,*
not as something external to Him (in spite of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p73.2"></span>διὰ</span>
*supr.*63, n. 1. vid. *supr. de Decr.* 19. 3. and *Gent.* 47. where the
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p73.4"></span>συγκατάβασις</span> is spoken of.

<span id="fn_2644"></span>[383:2645](2040368.htm#fr_2644) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p73.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p74"></span> As God *created* Him, in that He
created human nature in Him, so is He *first-born,* in that human nature
is adopted in Him. Leo *Serm.* 63. 3.

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[383:2646](2040368.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p75"></span> [Heb. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[383:2647](2040368.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76"></span> Thus he considers that
‘first-born’ is mainly a title, connected with the Incarnation, and also
connected with our Lord’s office at the creation (vid. parallel of
Priesthood, §8, n. 4). In each economy it has the same meaning; it
belongs to Him as the type, idea, or rule on which the creature was made
or new-made, and the life by which it is sustained. Both economies are
mentioned *Incarn.* 13, 14. *Orat.* i. 51. iii. 20. *infr.* 76. init. He
came <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.2"></span>τὴν τοῦ
ἀρχετύπου πλάσιν ἀναστήσασθαι ἑαυτῷ</span> *contr.Apoll.* ii. 5. And so
again, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.4"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.5"></span>ἰδέα ὅπερ λόγον εἰρήκασι</span>. Clem.
*Strom.* v. 3. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.7"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.8"></span>δέαν ἰδεῶν καὶ ἀρχὴν λεκτέον τὸν
πρωτότοκον πάσης κτίσεως</span> Origen. *contr.* *Cels.* vi. 64. fin.
‘Whatever God was about to make in the creature, was already in the
Word, nor would be in the things, were it not in the Word.’ August. in
[Psalm xliv. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.10"></span>. He elsewhere calls the Son, ‘ars
quædam omnipotentis atque sapientis Dei, plena omnium rationum viventium
incommutabilium.’ *de Trin.* vi. 11. And so Athan. *infr.* iii. 9. fin.
Eusebius, in commenting on the very passage which Athan. is discussing
(<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.11"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.13"></span>), presents a remarkable contrast to
these passages, as making the Son, not the ἰδέα, but the external
minister of the Father’s <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.16"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.17"></span>δέα</span>. *de Eccl. Theol.* pp.
164, 5. vid. *supr.* §31, n. 7.

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[383:2648](2040368.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p76.19"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p77"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[383:2649](2040368.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p78"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2649"></span>[383:2650](2040368.htm#fr_2649) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p79"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p79.1"></span>[Ps. cxix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p79.3"></span>; [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p79.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[384:2651](2040368.htm#fr_2650) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p81"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[384:2652](2040368.htm#fr_2651) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p82"></span> §31, n. 8.

<span id="fn_2652"></span>[384:2653](2040368.htm#fr_2652) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p83"></span> Vid. *Or.* i. §48, 7, i. 51, 5,
*supr.* 56, 5. Irenæus, *Hær*. iii. 19, n. 1. Cyril. *in Joan*. lib. ix.
cir. fin. This is the doctrine of S. Athanasius and S. Cyril, one may
say, *passim.*

<span id="fn_2653"></span>[384:2654](2040368.htm#fr_2653) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p84"></span> [Heb. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[384:2655](2040368.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p85"></span> [2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[384:2656](2040368.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p87"></span> §45, n. 2.

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[384:2657](2040368.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p88"></span> Athanasius here says that our
Lord’s body was subject to death; and so *Incarn.* 20, e. also 8, b. 18.
init. *Orat.* iii. 56. And so <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p88.2"></span>τὸν ἄνθρωπον σαθρωθέντα</span>.
*Orat.* iv. 33. And so S. Leo in his Tome lays down that in the
Incarnation, suscepta est ab æternitate mortalitas. *Ep.* 28. 3. And S.
Austin, Utique vulnerabile atque mortale corpus habuit \[Christus\]
*contr.* *Faust.* xiv. 2. A Eutychian sect denied this doctrine (the
Aphthartodocetæ), and held that our Lord’s manhood was naturally indeed
corrupt, but became from its union with the Word incorrupt from the
moment of conception; and in consequence it held that our Lord did not
suffer and die, except by miracle. vid. Leont. *c.* *Nest.* ii. (Canis.
t. i. pp. 563, 4, 8.) vid. *supr*. i. 43 and 44, notes; also *infr.* 76,
note. And further, note on iii. 57.

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[384:2658](2040368.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p88.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p89"></span> [Ps. cii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[384:2659](2040368.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p90"></span> [Psa.
22.32](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#032)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[384:2660](2040368.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p90.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p91"></span> [Gen. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[384:2661](2040368.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p92"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p92.1"></span>[John xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p92.3"></span>; [Eph. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p92.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[384:2662](2040368.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p92.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p93"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p93.1"></span>[Ps. cxxxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p93.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[384:2663](2040368.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p93.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p94"></span> Cf. *Orat.* iv. 11.

<span id="fn_2663"></span>[384:2664](2040368.htm#fr_2663) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p95"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p95.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p95.2"></span>νθ᾽ ἡμῶν τὴν ὀφειλὴν ἀποδιδούς</span>,
and so the Lord’s death <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p95.4"></span>λύτρον πάντων</span>. *Incarn. V.D.*
25. <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p95.6"></span>λύτρον
καθάρσιον</span>. Naz. *Orat.* 30, 20. fin. also *supr.* 9, 13, 14, 47,
55, 67. *In Illud. Omn.* 2 fin.

<span id="fn_2664"></span>[384:2665](2040368.htm#fr_2664) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p95.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p96"></span> [John xvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2665"></span>[384:2666](2040368.htm#fr_2665) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p97"></span> [John
5.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2666"></span>[385:2667](2040368.htm#fr_2666) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p99"></span> [Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2667"></span>[385:2668](2040368.htm#fr_2667) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p99.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p100"></span> Vid. *de Decr.* 10, 2. 4; *Or.*
i. 49, §16, n. 7. Iren. *Hær.* iii. 20.

<span id="fn_2668"></span>[385:2669](2040368.htm#fr_2668) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p101"></span> Cf. *infr. Orat.* iv. 6. vid.
also iii. 33 init. August. Trin. xiii. 18. Id. *in Psalm* 129, n. 12.
Leon. *Serm.* 28, n. 3. Basil. *in Psalm* 48, n. 4. Cyril. *de rect.
fid.* p. 132. vid. also Procl. *Orat.* i. p. 63. (ed. 1630.) Vigil.
*contr.* *Eutych.* v. p. 529, e. Greg. *Moral.* xxiv. init. Job. *ap.*
Phot. 222. p. 583.

<span id="fn_2669"></span>[385:2670](2040368.htm#fr_2669) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p101.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p102"></span> [Mic. vii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2670"></span>[385:2671](2040368.htm#fr_2670) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p102.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p103"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2671"></span>[385:2672](2040368.htm#fr_2671) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p103.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p104"></span> Vid. [John viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2672"></span>[385:2673](2040368.htm#fr_2672) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p106"></span> Vid. also *Incarn.* 44. In this
statement Athan. is supported by Naz. *Orat.* 19, 13. Theodor. *adv.
Gent.* vi. p. 876, 7. August. *de Trin.* xiii. 13. It is denied in a
later age by S. Anselm, but S. Thomas and the schoolmen side with the
Fathers. vid. Petav. *Incarn.* ii. 13. However, it will be observed from
what follows that Athan. thought the Incarnation still absolutely
*essential* for the renewal of human nature in holiness. Cf. *de
Incarn.* 7. That is, we might have been pardoned, we could not have been
new-made, without the Incarnation; and so *supr.* 67.

<span id="fn_2673"></span>[385:2674](2040368.htm#fr_2673) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p106.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p107"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2674"></span>[385:2675](2040368.htm#fr_2674) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p107.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p108"></span> [John xviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2675"></span>[385:2676](2040368.htm#fr_2675) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p108.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p109"></span> ‘Was it not in His power, had He
wished it, even in a day to bring on the whole rain \[of the deluge\]?
in a day, nay in a moment?’ Chrysost. *in Gen. Hom.* 24, 7. He proceeds
to apply this principle to the pardon of sin. On the subject of God’s
power as contrasted with His acts, Petavius brings together the
statements of the Fathers, *de Deo,* v. 6.

<span id="fn_2676"></span>[385:2677](2040368.htm#fr_2676) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p109.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p110"></span> Vid. [Matt. xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2677"></span>[385:2678](2040368.htm#fr_2677) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p110.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p111"></span> Athan. here seems to say that
Adam in a state of innocence had but an external divine assistance, not
an habitual grace; this, however, is contrary to his own statements
already referred to, and the general doctrine of the fathers. vid. e.g.
Cyril. *in* *Joan.* v. 2. August. *de Corr. et Grat.* 31. vid also
*infr.* §76, note.

<span id="fn_2678"></span>[386:2679](2040368.htm#fr_2678) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p111.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p112"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p112.1"></span>εἰς ἄπειρον</span>, *de Decr.* 8.

<span id="fn_2679"></span>[386:2680](2040368.htm#fr_2679) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p114"></span> *De Decr.* 10.

<span id="fn_2680"></span>[386:2681](2040368.htm#fr_2680) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p115"></span> [2 Cor. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2681"></span>[386:2682](2040368.htm#fr_2681) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p115.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p116"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p116.1"></span>διαμείνωσιν</span>, §63, n. 8; §73,
*Gent.* 41, *Serm. Maj. de Fid.* 5.

<span id="fn_2682"></span>[386:2683](2040368.htm#fr_2682) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p116.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p117"></span> [John xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p117.1"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p117.2"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p117.3"></span>χει</span> t. rec. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p117.4"></span>εὑρίσκει</span>
Ath. *et al.*

<span id="fn_2683"></span>[386:2684](2040368.htm#fr_2683) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p117.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p118"></span> [1 John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2684"></span>[386:2685](2040368.htm#fr_2684) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p118.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p119"></span> [Matt. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2685"></span>[386:2686](2040368.htm#fr_2685) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p119.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p120"></span> [Mark xii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2686"></span>[386:2687](2040368.htm#fr_2686) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p120.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p121"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p121.1"></span>[Gal. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p121.3"></span>; iii. 28.

<span id="fn_2687"></span>[386:2688](2040368.htm#fr_2687) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p123"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p123.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p123.2"></span>ν ἑαυτῷ θεοποιήσῃ</span>. *supr.* p.
65, note 5. vid. also *ad Adelph.* 4. a. *Serap.* i. 24, e. and §56,
note 5. and iii. 33. *De Decr.* 14. *Orat*. i. 42. vid. also *Orat.*
iii. 23. fin. 33. init. 34. fin. 38, b. 39, d. 48. fin. 53. For our
becoming <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p123.4"></span>θεοὶ</span> vid. *Orat.* iii. 25.
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p123.6"></span>θεοὶ κατὰ
χάριν</span>. Cyr. *in Joan.* p. 74. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p123.8"></span>θεοφορούμεθα</span>. *Orat.* iii. 23,
c. 41, a. 45 init. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p123.10"></span>χριστόφοροι</span>. ibid. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p123.12"></span>θεούμεθα</span>.
iii. 48 fin. 53. Theodor. *H. E.* i. p. 846. init.

<span id="fn_2688"></span>[386:2689](2040368.htm#fr_2688) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p123.14"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p124"></span> §45, n. 2.

<span id="fn_2689"></span>[386:2690](2040368.htm#fr_2689) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p124.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125"></span> Vid. also Athan. *in Luc.*
(Migne xxvii. 1393 c). This title, which is commonly applied to S. Mary
by later writers, is found Epiph. *Hær.* 78, 5. Didym. *Trin.* i. 27. p.
84. Rufin. *Fid.* i. 43. Lepor. *ap Cassian. Incarn.* i. 5. Leon. *Ep.*
28, 2. Cæsarius has <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.3"></span>ειπαῖς</span>. *Qu.* 20. On the
doctrine itself vid. a letter of S. Ambrose and his brethren to
Siricius, and the Pope’s letter in response. (Coust. *Ep. Pont.* p.
669–682.) Also Pearson On the Creed, Art. 3. \[§§9, 10, p. 267 in Bohn’s
ed.\] He replies to the argument from ‘until’ in [Matt. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.5"></span>, by referring to <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.7"></span>Gen. xxviii 15; [Deut. xxxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.9"></span>; [1 Sam. xv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#035)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.10"></span>; [2 Sam. vi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#023)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.11"></span>; [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.12"></span>. He might also have referred to
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.14"></span>[Psalm cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.16"></span>; [1 Cor. xv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.17"></span>. which are the more remarkable,
because they were urged by the school of Marcellus as a proof that our
Lord’s kingdom would have an end, and are explained by Euseb. *Eccl.
Theol.* iii. 13, 14. Vid. also Cyr. *Cat.* 15, 29; where the true
meaning of ‘until’ (which may be transferred to [Matt. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.19"></span>), is well brought out. ‘He who is
King *before* He subdued His enemies, how shall He not *the rather* be
King, after He has got the mastery over them?’

<span id="fn_2690"></span>[387:2691](2040368.htm#fr_2690) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p125.21"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p126"></span> *De Syn.* 13, n. 4.

<span id="fn_2691"></span>[387:2692](2040368.htm#fr_2691) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p126.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p127"></span> i. 48, n. 7.

<span id="fn_2692"></span>[387:2693](2040368.htm#fr_2692) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p129"></span> §45, note 2.

<span id="fn_2693"></span>[387:2694](2040368.htm#fr_2693) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p130"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p130.1"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p130.2"></span>ργανον</span>, note on iii. 31.

<span id="fn_2694"></span>[387:2695](2040368.htm#fr_2694) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p130.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p131"></span> §12, note.

<span id="fn_2695"></span>[387:2696](2040368.htm#fr_2695) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p131.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p132"></span> §22, n. 2.

<span id="fn_2696"></span>[387:2697](2040368.htm#fr_2696) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p132.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p133"></span> [Is. lxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2697"></span>[387:2698](2040368.htm#fr_2697) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p133.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p134"></span> [Ps. cii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2698"></span>[387:2699](2040368.htm#fr_2698) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p134.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p135"></span> [Psa.
143.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2699"></span>[387:2700](2040368.htm#fr_2699) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p135.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p136"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2700"></span>[387:2701](2040368.htm#fr_2700) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p136.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p137"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p137.1"></span>[1 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p137.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2701"></span>[387:2702](2040368.htm#fr_2701) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p137.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p138"></span> [Col. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2702"></span>[387:2703](2040368.htm#fr_2702) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p138.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p139"></span> §31, n. 4.

<span id="fn_2703"></span>[387:2704](2040368.htm#fr_2703) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p139.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p140"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p140.1"></span>θεολογούμενος</span>. vid. *de Decr.*
31, n. 5. also *Incarn. c. Ar.* 3. 19, *Serap.* i. 28. 29. 31. *contr.
Sab. Greg.* and *passim ap. Euseb. contr. Marcell.* e.g. p. 42, d. 86,
a. 99, d. 122, c. 124, b. &c. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p140.3"></span>κυριολογεῖν</span>, *In Illud. Omn.*
6, *contr. Sab. Greg.* §4, f.

<span id="fn_2704"></span>[387:2705](2040368.htm#fr_2704) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p140.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p141"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2705"></span>[387:2706](2040368.htm#fr_2705) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p141.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p142"></span> [Psa.
104.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2706"></span>[387:2707](2040368.htm#fr_2706) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p143.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p144"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p144.1"></span>[Heb.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p144.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2707"></span>[388:2708](2040368.htm#fr_2707) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p144.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p145"></span> §1, n. 6.

<span id="fn_2708"></span>[388:2709](2040368.htm#fr_2708) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p146"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p146.1"></span>[John
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.viii-p146.3"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Texts Explained; Sixthly, the Context of Proverbs viii. 22 Vz.
22-30. It is right to interpret this passage by the Regula Fidei.
'Founded' is used in contrast to superstructure; and it implies, as in
the case of stones in building, previous existence. 'Before the world'
signifies the divine intention and purpose. Recurrence to Prov. viii.
22, and application of it to created Wisdom as seen in the works. The
Son reveals the Father, first by the works, then by the
Incarnation.](2040369)
