[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040188)  [Next](2040190.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—*Letter of Julius to
the Eusebians at Antioch.*

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p2"></span>Eusebius and his fellows wrote also to
Julius, and thinking to frighten me, requested him to call a council,
and to be himself the judge, if he so pleased <span
id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533.md) . When therefore I went up to Rome,
Julius wrote to Eusebius and his fellows as was suitable, and sent
moreover two of his own Presbyters <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534.md) , Elpidius and Philoxenus <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535.md) . But they, when they heard of me,
were thrown into confusion, as not expecting my going up thither; and
they declined the proposed Council, alleging unsatisfactory reasons for
so doing, but in truth they were afraid lest the things should be proved
against them which Valens and Ursacius afterwards confessed <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536.md) . However, more than fifty Bishops
assembled, in the place where the Presbyter Vito held his congregation;
and they acknowledged my defence, and gave me the confirmation <span
id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537.md) both of their communion and their
love. On <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-Page_111"></span>the other hand, they expressed great
indignation against Eusebius and his fellows, and requested that Julius
would write to the following effect to those of their number who had
written to him. Which accordingly he did, and sent it by the hand of
Count Gabianus.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p8"></span>The Letter of Julius.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p9"></span>Julius to his dearly beloved
brethren <span id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538.md) , Danius, Flacillus,
Narcissus, Eusebius, Maris, Macedonius, Theodorus, and their friends,
who have written to me from Antioch, sends health in the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p11"></span>21. I have read your letter <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md) which was brought to me by my
Presbyters Elpidius and Philoxenus, and I am surprised to find that,
whereas I wrote to you in charity and with conscious sincerity, you have
replied to me in an unbecoming and contentious temper; for the pride and
arrogance of the writers is plainly exhibited in that letter. Yet such
feelings are inconsistent with the Christian faith; for what was written
in a charitable spirit ought likewise to be answered in a spirit of
charity and not of contention. And was it not a token of charity to send
Presbyters to sympathize with them that are in suffering, and to desire
those who had written to me to come thither, that the questions at issue
might obtain a speedy settlement, and all things be duly ordered, so
that our brethren might no longer be exposed to suffering, and that you
might escape further calumny? But something seems to shew that your
temper is such, as to force us to conclude that even in the terms in
which you appeared to pay honour to us, you have expressed yourselves
under the disguise of irony. The Presbyters also whom we sent to you,
and who ought to have returned rejoicing, did on the contrary return
sorrowful on account of the proceedings they had witnessed among you.
And I, when I had read your letter, after much consideration, kept it to
myself, thinking that after all some of you would come, and there would
be no need to bring it forward, lest if it should be openly exhibited,
it should grieve many of our brethren here. But when no one arrived, and
it became necessary that the letter should be produced, I declare to
you, they were all astonished, and were hardly able to believe that such
a letter had been written by you at all; for it is expressed in terms of
contention rather than of charity.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p13"></span>Now if the author of it wrote with an
ambition of exhibiting his power of language, such a practice surely is
more suitable for other subjects: in ecclesiastical matters, it is not a
display of eloquence that is needed, but the observance of Apostolic
Canons, and an earnest care not to offend one of the little ones of the
Church. For it were better for a man, according to the word of the
Church, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the sea, than that he should offend even one of the little
ones <span id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540.md) . But if such a letter was
written, because certain persons have been aggrieved on account of their
meanness of spirit towards one another (for I will not impute it to
all); it were better not to entertain any such feeling of offence at
all, at least not to let the sun go down upon their vexation; and
certainly not to give it room to exhibit itself in writing.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p15"></span>22. Yet what has been done that is a
just cause of vexation? or in what respect was my letter to you such?
Was it, that I invited you to be present at a council? You ought rather
to have received the proposal with joy. Those who have confidence in
their proceedings, or as they choose to term them, in their decisions,
are not wont to be angry, if such decision is inquired into by others;
they rather shew all boldness, seeing that if they have given a just
decision, it can never prove to be the reverse. The Bishops who
assembled in the great Council of Nicæa agreed, not without the will of
God, that the decisions of one council should be examined in
another <span id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541.md) , to the end that the
judges, having before their eyes that other trial which was to follow,
might be led to investigate matters with the utmost caution, and that
the parties concerned in their sentence might have assurance that the
judgment they received was just, and not dictated by the enmity of their
<span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-Page_112"></span>former judges. Now if you are
unwilling that such a practice should be adopted in your own case,
though it is of ancient standing, and has been noticed and recommended
by the great Council, your refusal is not becoming; for it is
unreasonable that a custom which had once obtained in the Church, and
been established by councils, should be set aside by a few individuals.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p17"></span>For a further reason they cannot
justly take offence in this point. When the persons whom you, Eusebius
and his fellows, dispatched with your letters, I mean Macarius the
Presbyter, and Martyrius and Hesychius the Deacons, arrived here, and
found that they were unable to withstand the arguments of the Presbyters
who came from Athanasius, but were confuted and exposed on all sides,
they then requested me to call a Council together, and to write to
Alexandria to the Bishop Athanasius, and also to Eusebius and his
fellows, in order that a just judgment might be given in presence of all
parties. And they undertook in that case to prove all the charges which
had been brought against Athanasius. For Martyrius and Hesychius had
been publicly refuted by us, and the Presbyters of the Bishop Athanasius
had withstood them with great confidence: indeed, if one must tell the
truth, Martyrius and his fellows had been utterly overthrown; and this
it was that led them to desire that a Council might be held. Now
supposing that they had not desired a Council, but that I had been the
person to propose it, in discouragement of those who had written to me,
and for the sake of our brethren who complain that they have suffered
injustice; even in that case the proposal would have been reasonable and
just, for it is agreeable to ecclesiastical practice, and well pleasing
to God. But when those persons, whom you, Eusebius and his fellows,
considered to be trustworthy, when even they wished me to call the
brethren together, it was inconsistent in the parties invited to take
offence, when they ought rather to have shewn all readiness to be
present. These considerations shew that the display of anger in the
offended persons is petulant, and the refusal of those who decline to
meet the Council is unbecoming, and has a suspicious appearance. Does
any one find fault, if he sees that done by another, which he would
allow if done by himself? If, as you write, each council has an
irreversible force, and he who has given judgment on a matter is
dishonoured, if his sentence is examined by others; consider, dearly
beloved, who are they that dishonour councils? who are setting aside the
decisions of former judges? Not to inquire at present into every
individual case, lest I should appear to press too heavily on certain
parties, the last instance that has occurred, and which every one who
hears it must shudder at, will be sufficient in proof of the others
which I omit.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p18"></span>23. The Arians who were
excommunicated for their impiety by Alexander, the late Bishop of
Alexandria, of blessed memory, were not only proscribed by the brethren
in the several cities, but were also anathematised by the whole body
assembled together in the great Council of Nicæa. For theirs was no
ordinary offence, neither had they sinned against man, but against our
Lord Jesus Christ Himself, the Son of the living God. And yet these
persons who were proscribed by the whole world, and branded in every
Church, are said now to have been admitted to communion again; which I
think even you ought to hear with indignation. Who then are the parties
who dishonour a council? Are not they who have set at nought the votes
of the Three hundred <span id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) , and have
preferred impiety to godliness? The heresy of the Arian madmen was
condemned and proscribed by the whole body of Bishops everywhere; but
the Bishops Athanasius and Marcellus have many supporters who speak and
write in their behalf. We have received testimony in favour of
Marcellus <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543.md) , that he resisted the
advocates of the Arian doctrines in the Council of Nicæa; and in favour
of Athanasius <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544.md) , that at Tyre
nothing was brought home to him, and that in the Mareotis, where the
Reports against him are said to have been drawn up, he was not present.
Now you know, dearly beloved, that *ex parte* proceedings are of no
weight, but bear a suspicious appearance. Nevertheless, these things
being so, we, in order to be accurate, and neither shewing any
prepossession in favour of yourselves, nor of those who wrote in behalf
of the other party, invited those who had written to us to come hither;
that, since there were many who wrote in their behalf, all things might
be enquired into in a council, and neither the guiltless might be
condemned, nor the person on his trial be accounted innocent. We then
are not the parties who dishonour a council, but they who at once and
recklessly have received the Arians whom all had condemned, and contrary
to the decision of the judges. The greater part of those judges have now
departed, and are with Christ; but some of them are still in this life
of trial, and <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-Page_113"></span>are indignant at learning that certain
persons have set aside their judgment.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p22"></span>24. We have also been informed of the
following circumstance by those who were at Alexandria. A certain
Carpones, who had been excommunicated by Alexander for Arianism, was
sent hither by one Gregory with certain others, also excommunicated for
the same heresy. However, I had learnt the matter also from the
Presbyter Macarius, and the Deacons Martyrius and Hesychius. For before
the Presbyters of Athanasius arrived they urged me to send letters to
one Pistus at Alexandria, though at the same time the Bishop Athanasius
was there. And when the Presbyters of the Bishop Athanasius came, they
informed me that this Pistus was an Arian, and that he had been
excommunicated <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545.md) by the Bishop
Alexander and the Council of Nicæa, and then ordained <span
id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546.md) by one Secundus, whom also the great
Council excommunicated as an Arian. This statement Martyrius and his
fellows did not gainsay, nor did they deny that Pistus had received his
ordination from Secundus. Now consider, after this who are most justly
liable to blame? I, who could not be prevailed upon to write to the
Arian Pistus; or those, who advised me to do dishonour to the great
Council, and to address the irreligious as if they were religious
persons? Moreover, when the Presbyter Macarius, who had been sent hither
by Eusebius with Martyrius and the rest, heard of the opposition which
had been made by the Presbyters of Athanasius, while we were expecting
his appearance with Martyrius and Hesychius, he departed in the night,
in spite of a bodily ailment; which leads us to conjecture that his
departure arose from shame on account of the exposure which had been
made concerning Pistus. For it is impossible that the ordination of the
Arian Secundus should be considered valid in the Catholic Church. This
would indeed be dishonour to the Council, and to the Bishops who
composed it, if the decrees they framed, as in the presence of God, with
such extreme earnestness and care, should be set aside as worthless.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p25"></span>25. If, as you write <span
id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547.md) , the decrees of all Councils ought to
be of force, according to the precedent in the case of Novatus <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548.md) and Paul of Samosata, all the more
ought not the sentence of the Three hundred to be reversed, certainly a
general Council ought not to be set at nought by a few individuals. For
the Arians are heretics as they, and the like sentence has been passed
both against one and the other. And, after such bold proceedings as
these, who are they that have lighted up the flame of discord? for in
your letter you blame us for having done this. Is it we, who have
sympathised with the sufferings of the brethren, and have acted in all
respects according to the Canon; or they who contentiously and contrary
to the Canon have set aside the sentence of the Three hundred, and
dishonoured the Council in every way? For not only have the Arians been
received into communion, but Bishops also have made a practice of
removing from one place to another <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549.md) . Now if you really believe that all
Bishops have the same and equal authority <span
id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550.md) , and you do not, as you assert,
account of them according to the magnitude of their cities; he that is
entrusted with a small city ought to abide in the place committed to
him, and not from disdain of his trust to remove to one that has never
been put under him; despising that which God has given him, and making
much of the vain applause of men. You ought then, dearly beloved, to
have come and not declined, that the matter may be brought to a
conclusion; for this is what reason demands.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p30"></span>But perhaps you were prevented by the
time fixed upon for the Council, for you complain in your letter that
the interval before the day we appointed <span
id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551.md) was too short. But this, beloved, is a
mere excuse. Had the day forestalled any when on the journey, the
interval allowed would then have been proved to be too short. But when
persons do not wish to come, and detain even my Presbyters up to the
month of January <span id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552.md) , it is the
mere excuse of those who have no confidence in their cause; otherwise,
as I said before, they would have come, not regarding the length of the
journey, not considering the shortness of the time, but trusting to the
justice and reasonableness of their cause. But perhaps they did not come
on account of the aspect of the times <span
id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553.md) , for again you declare in your
letter, that we ought to have considered the present circumstances of
the East, and not to have urged you to come. Now if as you say you did
not come because the times were such, you ought to have considered such
times beforehand, and not to have become the authors of schism, and of
mourning and lamentation in the Churches. But as the matter stands, men,
who have been <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-Page_114"></span>the cause of these things, shew that
it is not the times that are to blame, but the determination of those
who will not meet a Council.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p34"></span>26. But I wonder also how you could
ever have written that part of your letter, in which you say, that I
alone wrote, and not to all of you, but to Eusebius and his fellows
only. In this complaint one may discover more of readiness to find fault
than of regard for truth. I received the letters against Athanasius from
none other than Martyrius, Hesychius and their fellows, and I
necessarily wrote to them who had written against him. Either then
Eusebius and his fellows ought not alone to have written, apart from you
all, or else you, to whom I did not write, ought not to be offended that
I wrote to them who had written to me. If it was right that I should
address my letter to you all, you also ought to have written with them:
but now considering what was reasonable, I wrote to them, who had
addressed themselves to me, and had given me information. But if you
were displeased because I alone wrote to them, it is but consistent that
you should also be angry, because they wrote to me alone. But for this
also, beloved, there was a fair and not unreasonable cause. Nevertheless
it is necessary that I should acquaint you that, although I wrote, yet
the sentiments I expressed were not those of myself alone, but of all
the Bishops throughout Italy and in these parts. I indeed was unwilling
to cause them all to write, lest the others should be overpowered by
their number. The Bishops however assembled on the appointed day, and
agreed in these opinions, which I again write to signify to you; so
that, dearly beloved, although I alone address you, yet you may be
assured that these are the sentiments of all. Thus much for the excuses,
not reasonable, but unjust and suspicious, which some of you have
alleged for your conduct.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p35"></span>27. Now although what has already
been said were sufficient to shew that we have not admitted to our
communion our brothers Athanasius and Marcellus either too readily, or
unjustly, yet it is but fair briefly to set the matter before you.
Eusebius and his fellows wrote formerly against Athanasius and his
fellows, as you also have written now; but a great number of Bishops out
of Egypt and other provinces wrote in his favour. Now in the first
place, your letters against him are inconsistent with one another, and
the second have no sort of agreement with the first, but in many
instances the former are answered by the latter, and the latter are
impeached by the former. Now where there is this contradiction in
letters, no credit whatever is due to the statements they contain. In
the next place if you require us to believe what you have written, it is
but consistent that we should not refuse credit to those who have
written in his favour; especially, considering that you write from a
distance, while they are on the spot, are acquainted with the man, and
the events which are occurring there, and testify in writing to his
manner of life, and positively affirm that he has been the victim of a
conspiracy throughout.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p36"></span>Again, a certain Bishop Arsenius was
said at one time to have been made away with by Athanasius, but we have
learned that he is alive, nay, that he is on terms of friendship with
him. He has positively asserted that the Reports drawn up in the
Mareotis were *ex parte* ones; for that neither the Presbyter Macarius,
the accused party, was present, nor yet his Bishop, Athanasius himself.
This we have learnt, not only from his own mouth, but also from the
Reports which Martyrius, Hesychius and their fellows, brought to
us <span id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554.md) ; for we found on reading
them, that the accuser Ischyras was present there, but neither Macarius,
nor the Bishop Athanasius; and that the Presbyters of Athanasius desired
to attend, but were not permitted. Now, beloved, if the trial was to be
conducted honestly, not only the accuser, but the accused also ought to
have been present. As the accused party Macarius attended at Tyre, as
well as the accuser Ischyras, when nothing was proved, so not only ought
the accuser to have gone to the Mareotis, but also the accused, so that
in person he might either be convicted, or by not being convicted might
shew the falseness of the accusation. But now, as this was not the case,
but the accuser only went out thither, with those to whom Athanasius
objected, the proceedings wear a suspicious appearance.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p38"></span>28. And he complained also that the
persons who went to the Mareotis went against his wish, for that
Theognius, Maris, Theodorus, Ursacius, Valens, and Macedonius, who were
the persons they sent out, were of suspected character. This he shewed
not by his own assertions merely, but from the letter of Alexander who
was Bishop of Thessalonica; for he produced a letter written by him to
Dionysius <span id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555.md) , the Count who
presided in the Council, in which he shews most clearly that there was a
conspiracy on foot against Athanasius. He has also brought forward a
genuine document, all in the handwriting of the accuser Ischyras
himself <span id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556.md) , in which he calls God
Almighty to <span id="page_115">p. 115</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-Page_115"></span>witness that no cup was broken, nor
table overthrown, but that he had been suborned by certain persons to
invent these accusations. Moreover, when the Presbyters of the Mareotis
arrived <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557.md) , they positively
affirmed that Ischyras was not a Presbyter of the Catholic Church and
that Macarius had not committed any such offence as the other had laid
to his charge. The Presbyters and Deacons also who came to us testified
in the fullest manner in favour of the Bishop Athanasius, strenuously
asserting that none of those things which were alleged against him were
true, but that he was the victim of a conspiracy.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p42"></span>And all the Bishops of Egypt and
Libya wrote and protested <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558.md) that
his ordination was lawful and strictly ecclesiastical, and that all that
you had advanced against him was false, for that no murder had been
committed, nor any persons despatched on his account, nor any cup
broken, but that all was false. Nay, the Bishop Athanasius also shewed
from the *ex parte* reports drawn up in the Mareotis, that a catechumen
was examined and said <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559.md) , that he
was within with Ischyras, at the time when they say Macarius the
Presbyter of Athanasius burst into the place; and that others who were
examined said,—one, that Ischyras was in a small cell,—and another, that
he was lying down behind the door, being sick at that very time, when
they say Macarius came thither. Now from these representations of his,
we are naturally led to ask the question, How was it possible that a man
who was lying behind the door sick could get up, conduct the service,
and offer? and how could it be that Oblations were offered when
catechumens were within <span id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560.md) ? for if
there were catechumens present, it was not yet the time for presenting
the Oblations. These representations, as I said, were made by the Bishop
Athanasius, and he showed from the reports, what was also positively
affirmed by those who were with him, that Ischyras has never been a
presbyter at all in the Catholic Church, nor has ever appeared as a
presbyter in the assemblies of the Church; for not even when Alexander
admitted those of the Meletian schism, by the indulgence of the great
Council, was he named by Meletius among his presbyters, as they
deposed <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561.md) ; which is the strongest
argument possible that he was not even a presbyter of Meletius; for
otherwise, he would certainly have been numbered with the rest. Besides,
it was shewn also by Athanasius from the reports, that Ischyras had
spoken falsely in other instances: for he set up a charge respecting the
burning of certain books, when, as they pretend, Macarius burst in upon
them, but was convicted of falsehood by the witnesses he himself brought
to prove it.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p47"></span>29. Now when these things were thus
represented to us, and so many witnesses appeared in his favour, and so
much was advanced by him in his own justification, what did it become us
to do? what did the rule of the Church require of us, but that we should
not condemn him, but rather receive him and treat him like a Bishop, as
we have done? Moreover, besides all this he continued here a year and
six months <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562.md) , expecting the
arrival of yourselves and of whoever chose to come, and by his presence
he put everyone to shame, for he would not have been here, had he not
felt confident in his cause; and he came not of his own accord, but on
an invitation by letter from us, in the manner in which we wrote to
you <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563.md) . But still you complain
after all of our transgressing the Canons. Now consider; who are they
that have so acted? we who received this man with such ample proof of
his innocence, or they who, being at Antioch at the distance of six and
thirty posts <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564.md) , nominated a
stranger to be Bishop, and sent him to Alexandria with a military force;
a thing which was not done even when Athanasius was banished into Gaul,
though it would have been done then, had he been really proved guilty of
the offence. But when he returned, of course he found his Church
unoccupied and waiting for him.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p51"></span>30. But now I am ignorant under what
colour these proceedings have been carried on. In the first place, if
the truth must be spoken, it was not right, when we had written to
summon a council, that any persons should anticipate its decisions: and
in the next place, it was not fitting that such novel proceedings should
be adopted against the Church. For what canon of the Church, or what
Apostolical tradition warrants this, that when a Church was at peace,
and so many Bishops were in unanimity with Athanasius the Bishop of
Alexandria, Gregory should be sent thither, a stranger to the city, not
having been baptized <span id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-Page_116"></span>there, nor known to the general body,
and desired neither by Presbyters, nor Bishops, nor Laity—that he should
be appointed at Antioch, and sent to Alexandria, accompanied not by
presbyters, nor by deacons of the city, nor by bishops of Egypt, but by
soldiers? for they who came hither complained that this was the case.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p52"></span>Even supposing that Athanasius was in
the position of a criminal after the Council, this appointment ought not
to have been made thus illegally and contrary to the rule of the Church,
but the Bishops of the province ought to have ordained one in that very
Church, of that very Priesthood, of that very Clergy <span
id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565.md) ; and the Canons received from the
Apostles ought not thus to be set aside. Had this offence been committed
against any one of you, would you not have exclaimed against it, and
demanded justice as for the transgression of the Canons? Dearly beloved,
we speak honestly, as in the presence of God, and declare, that this
proceeding was neither pious, nor lawful, nor ecclesiastical. Moreover,
the account which is given of the conduct of Gregory on his entry into
the city, plainly shews the character of his appointment. In such
peaceful times, as those who came from Alexandria declared them to have
been, and as the Bishops also represented in their letters, the Church
was set on fire; Virgins were stripped; Monks were trodden under foot;
Presbyters and many of the people were scourged and suffered violence;
Bishops were cast into prison; multitudes were dragged about from place
to place; the holy Mysteries <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566.md) ,
about which they accused the Presbyter Macarius, were seized upon by
heathens and cast upon the ground; and all to constrain certain persons
to admit the appointment of Gregory. Such conduct plainly shews who they
are that transgress the Canons. Had the appointment been lawful, he
would not have had recourse to illegal proceedings to compel the
obedience of those who in a legal way resisted him. And notwithstanding
all this, you write that perfect peace prevailed in Alexandria and
Egypt. Surely not, unless the work of peace is entirely changed, and you
call such doings as these peace.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p55"></span>31. I have also thought it necessary
to point out to you this circumstance, viz. that Athanasius positively
asserted that Macarius was kept at Tyre under a guard of soldiers, while
only his accuser accompanied those who went to the Mareotis; and that
the Presbyters who desired to attend the inquiry were not permitted to
do so, while the said inquiry respecting the cup and the Table was
carried on before the Prefect and his band, and in the presence of
Heathens and Jews. This at first seemed incredible, but it was proved to
have been so from the Reports; which caused great astonishment to us, as
I suppose, dearly beloved, it does to you also. Presbyters, who are the
ministers of the Mysteries, are not permitted to attend, but an enquiry
concerning Christ’s Blood and Christ’s Body is carried on before an
external judge, in the presence of Catechumens, nay, worse than that,
before Heathens and Jews, who are in ill repute in regard to
Christianity. Even supposing that an offense had been committed, it
should have been investigated legally in the Church and by the Clergy,
not by heathens who abhor the Word and know not the Truth. I am
persuaded that both you and all men must perceive the nature and
magnitude of this sin. Thus much concerning Athanasius.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p56"></span>32. With respect to Marcellus <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567.md) , forasmuch as you have charged him
also of impiety towards Christ, I am anxious to inform you, that when he
was here, he positively declared that what you had written concerning
him was not true; but being nevertheless requested by us to give an
account of his faith, he answered in his own person with the utmost
boldness, so that we recognised that he maintains nothing outside the
truth. He made a confession <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568.md) of
the same godly doctrines concerning our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ as
the Catholic Church confesses; and he affirmed that he had held these
opinions for a very long time, and had not recently adopted them: as
indeed our Presbyters <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569.md) , who were
at a former date present at the Council of Nicæa, testified to his
orthodoxy; for he maintained then, as he has done now, his opposition to
Arianism (on which points it is right to admonish you, lest any of you
admit such heresy, instead of abominating it as alien from sound
doctrine <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) .md). Seeing then that he
professed orthodox opinions, and had testimony to his orthodoxy, what, I
ask again in his case, ought we to have done, except to receive him as a
Bishop, as we did, and not reject him from our communion? These things I
have written, not so much for the purpose of defending their cause,
<span id="page_117">p. 117</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-Page_117"></span>as in order to convince you, that we
acted justly and canonically in receiving these persons, and that you
are contentious without a cause. But it is your duty to use your anxious
endeavours and to labour by every means to correct the irregularities
which have been committed contrary to the Canon, and to secure the peace
of the Churches; so that the peace of our Lord which has been given to
us <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571.md) may remain, and the Churches
may not be divided, nor you incur the charge of being authors of schism.
For I confess, your past conduct is an occasion of schism rather than of
peace.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p62"></span>33. For not only the Bishops
Athanasius and Marcellus and their fellows came hither and complained of
the injustice that had been done them, but many other Bishops also <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572.md) , from Thrace, from Cœle-Syria, from
Phœnicia and Palestine, and Presbyters, not a few, and others from
Alexandria and from other parts, were present at the Council here, and
in addition to their other statements, lamented before all the assembled
Bishops the violence and injustice which the Churches had suffered, and
affirmed that similar outrages to those which had been committed in
Alexandria had occurred in their own Churches, and in others also. Again
there lately came Presbyters with letters from Egypt and Alexandria, who
complained that many Bishops and Presbyters who wished to come to the
Council were prevented; for they said that, since the departure of
Athanasius <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573.md) even up to this time,
Bishops who are confessors <span id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574.md) have
been beaten with stripes, that others have been cast into prison, and
that but lately aged men, who have been an exceedingly long period in
the Episcopate, have been given up to be employed in the public works,
and nearly all the Clergy of the Catholic Church with the people are the
objects of plots and persecutions. Moreover they said that certain
Bishops and other brethren had been banished for no other reason than to
compel them against their will to communicate with Gregory and his Arian
associates. We have heard also from others, what is confirmed by the
testimony of the Bishop Marcellus, that a number of outrages, similar to
those which were committed at Alexandria, have occurred also at Ancyra
in Galatia <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575.md) . And in addition to
all this, those who came to the Council reported against some of you
(for I will not mention names) certain charges of so dreadful a nature
that I have declined setting them down in writing: perhaps you also have
heard them from others. It was for this cause especially that I wrote to
desire you to come, that you might be present to hear them, and that all
irregularities might be corrected and differences healed. And those who
were called for these purposes ought not to have refused, but to have
come the more readily, lest by failing to do so they should be suspected
of what was alleged against them, and be thought unable to prove what
they had written.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p67"></span>34. Now according to these
representations, since the Churches are thus afflicted and treacherously
assaulted, as our informants positively affirmed, who are they that have
lighted up a flame of discord <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576.md) ?
We, who grieve for such a state of things and sympathize with the
sufferings of the brethren, or they who have brought these things about?
While then such extreme confusion existed in every Church, which was the
cause why those who visited us came hither, I wonder how you could write
that unanimity prevailed in the Churches. These things tend not to the
edification of the Church, but to her destruction; and those who rejoice
in them are not sons of peace, but of confusion: but our God is not a
God of confusion, but of peace <span id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577.md) .
Wherefore, as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ knows, it was
from a regard for your good name, and with prayers that the Churches
might not fall into confusion, but might continue as they were regulated
by the Apostles, that I thought it necessary to write thus unto you, to
the end that you might at length put to shame those who through the
effects of their mutual enmity have brought the Churches to this
condition. For I have heard, that it is only a certain few <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578.md) who are the authors of all these
things.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p71"></span>Now, as having bowels of mercy, take
ye care to correct, as I said before, the irregularities which have been
committed contrary to the Canon, so that if any mischief has already
befallen, it may be healed through your zeal. And write not that I have
preferred the communion of Marcellus and Athanasius to yours, for such
like complaints are no indications of peace, but of contentiousness and
hatred of the brethren. For this cause I have written the foregoing,
that you may understand that we acted not unjustly in admitting them to
our communion, and so may cease this strife. If <span id="page_118">p.
118</span> <span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-Page_118"></span>you had come hither,
and they had been condemned, and had appeared unable to produce
reasonable evidence in support of their cause, you would have done well
in writing thus. But seeing that, as I said before, we acted agreeably
to the Canon, and not unjustly, in holding communion with them, I
beseech you for the sake of Christ, suffer not the members of Christ to
be torn asunder, neither trust to prejudices, but seek rather the peace
of the Lord. It is neither holy nor just, in order to gratify the petty
feeling of a few persons, to reject those who have never been condemned
and thereby to grieve the Spirit <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579.md)
. But if you think that you are able to prove anything against them, and
to confute them face to face let those of you who please come hither:
for they also promised that they would be ready to establish completely
the truth of those things which they have reported to us.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p73"></span>35. Give us notice therefore of this,
dearly beloved, that we may write both to them, and to the Bishops who
will have again to assemble, so that the accused may be condemned in the
presence of all, and confusion no longer prevail in the Churches. What
has already taken place is enough: it is enough surely that Bishops have
been sentenced to banishment in the presence of Bishops; of which it
behoves me not to speak at length, lest I appear to press too heavily on
those who were present on those occasions. But if one must speak the
truth, matters ought not to have proceeded so far; their petty feeling
ought not to have been suffered to reach the present pitch. Let us grant
the “removal,” as you write, of Athanasius and Marcellus, from their own
places, yet what must one say of the case of the other Bishops and
Presbyters who, as I said before, came hither from various parts, and
who complained that they also had been forced away, and had suffered the
like injuries? O beloved, the decisions of the Church are no longer
according to the Gospel, but tend only to banishment and death <span
id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580.md) . Supposing, as you assert, that some
offence rested upon those persons, the case ought to have been conducted
against them, not after this manner, but according to the Canon of the
Church. Word should have been written of it to us all <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581.md) , that so a just sentence might
proceed from all. For the sufferers were Bishops, and Churches of no
ordinary note, but those which the Apostles themselves had governed in
their own persons <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p77"></span>And why was nothing said to us
concerning the Church of the Alexandrians in particular? Are you
ignorant that the custom has been for word to be written first to us,
and then for a just decision to be passed from this place <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583.md) ? If then any such suspicion rested
upon the Bishop there, notice thereof ought to have been sent to the
Church of this place; whereas, after neglecting to inform us, and
proceeding on their own authority as they pleased, now they desire to
obtain our concurrence in their decisions, though we never condemned
him. Not so have the constitutions <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584.md) of Paul, not so have the traditions of
the Fathers directed; this is another form of procedure, a novel
practice. I beseech you, readily bear with me: what I write is for the
common good. For what we have received from the blessed Apostle
Peter <span id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585.md) , that I signify to you;
and I should not have written this, as deeming that these things were
manifest unto all men, had not these proceedings so disturbed us.
Bishops are forced away from their sees and driven into banishment,
while others from different quarters are appointed in their place;
others are treacherously assailed, so that the people have to grieve for
those who are forcibly taken from them, while, as to those who are sent
in their room, they are obliged to give over seeking the man whom they
desire, and to receive those they do not.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p81"></span>I ask of you, that such things may no
longer be, but that you will denounce in writing those persons who
attempt them; so that the Churches may no longer be afflicted thus, nor
any Bishop or Presbyter be treated with insult, nor any one be compelled
to act contrary to his judgment, as they have represented to us, lest we
become a laughing-stock among the heathen, and above all, lest we excite
the wrath of God <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-Page_119"></span>against us. For every one of us shall
give account in the Day of judgment <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586.md) of the things which he has done in
this life. May we all be possessed with the mind of God! so that the
Churches may recover their own Bishops, and rejoice evermore in Jesus
Christ our Lord; through Whom to the Father be glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p83"></span>I pray for your health in the Lord,
brethren dearly beloved and greatly longed for.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p84"></span>36. Thus wrote the Council of Rome by
Julius, Bishop of Rome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_533"></span>[110:534](2040189.htm#fr_533.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p3"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 339. vid. *Hist. Arian.* §11.
\[Socrates (iii. 5) and Sozomenus (ii. 8, &c.), confuse the Antiochene
Synod, which sent the letter referred to, with the Synod of the
‘Dedication’ held in 341 <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span>, after the receipt of the
letter of Julius.\]

<span id="fn_534"></span>[110:535](2040189.htm#fr_534.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p4"></span> Vito and Vincentius, Presbyters, had
represented Silvester at Nicæa. Liberius sent Vincentius, Bishop, and
Marcellus, Bishop, to Constantius; and again Lucifer, Bishop, and
Eusebius, Bishop. \[The practice was common to all bishops, not peculiar
to that of Rome.\] S. Basil suggests that Damasus should send legates
into the East, Ep. 69<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p4.2"></span>. The Council
of Sardica, Can. 5, recognised the Pope’s power of sending legates into
foreign Provinces to hear certain appeals; “ut de *Latere suo*
Presbyterum mittat.” \[It *conferred* the power (1) upon Julius (2)
without any right of initiative, in Can. 3; Can. 5 simply regulates the
exercise of the power thus conferred. The genuineness of these Canons
has been disputed: at Rome they were quoted in the fifth century as
‘Nicene.’\] vid. Thomassin. *de Eccl. Disc.* Part I. ii. 117. \[D.C.B.
iii. 530, D.C.A. 197, 1658.\]

<span id="fn_535"></span>[110:536](2040189.htm#fr_535.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p5"></span> \[Date uncertain; see Prolegg. ch.
ii. §6 (1) *sub fin.*, and note there.\]

<span id="fn_536"></span>[110:537](2040189.htm#fr_536.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p6"></span> Infr. §58.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[110:538](2040189.htm#fr_537.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p7"></span> Vid. infr. §36.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[111:539](2040189.htm#fr_538.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p10"></span> By Danius, which had been considered
the same name as Dianius, Bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, Montfaucon
*in loc.* understands the notorious Arian Bishop of Nicæa, called
variously Diognius (supr. §13.), Theognius (infr §28.), Theognis
(Philost. *Hist.* ii. 7.), Theogonius, (Theod. *Hist.* i. 19.), and
assigns some ingenious and probable reasons for his supposition.
\[‘Danius’ was the Bishop of Cæsarea in Cappad., he also signs at
Philippopolis. See D.C.B. under <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p10.2"></span>Dianius</span> and <span
class="c10"><span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p10.3"></span>Basil</span>.\]
Flacillus, Arian Bishop of Antioch, as Athan. names him, is called
Placillus (in S. Jerome’s *Chronicon,* p. 785.), Placitus (Soz. iii.
5.), Flacitus (Theod. *Hist.* i. 21.). Theodorus was Arian Bishop of
Heraclea, whose Comments on the Psalms are supposed to be those which
bear his name in Corderius’s Catena. \[He was not a thorough Arian.\]

<span id="fn_539"></span>[111:540](2040189.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p12"></span> Some of the topics contained in the
Eusebian Letter are specified in Julius’s answer. It acknowledged,
besides, the high dignity of the \[church\] of Rome, as being a “School
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p12.2"></span>φροντιστήριον</span>) of Apostles and a
Metropolis of orthodoxy from the beginning,” but added that “doctors
came to it from the east; and they ought not themselves to hold the
second place, for they were superior in virtue, though not in their
Church.” And they said that they would hold communion with Julius if he
would agree to their depositions and substitutions in the Eastern Sees.
Soz. iii. 8.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[111:541](2040189.htm#fr_540.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p14"></span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p14.1"></span>[Matt. xviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p14.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[111:542](2040189.htm#fr_541.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p16"></span> As this determination does not find
a place among the now received Canons of the Council, the passage in the
text becomes of great moment in the argument in favour of the twenty
Canons extant in Greek being but a portion of those passed at Nicæa.
vid. Alber. *Dissert. in Hist. Eccles.* vii. Abraham Ecchellensis has
argued on the same side (apud Colet. *Concil.* t. ii. p. 399. Ed. Ven.
1728), also Baronius, though not so strongly, Ann. 325. nn. 157 &c. and
Montfaucon *in loc.* Natalis Alexander, *Sæc*. 4. *Dissert.* 28 argues
against the larger number, and Tillemont, *Mem.* vi. 674. \[But it is
far more likely that Julius is making a free use of Can. Nic. 5; the
Arabic canons are apparently referred to in the above note: no one now
defends them.\]

<span id="fn_542"></span>[112:543](2040189.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p19"></span> The number of the Fathers at the
Nicene Council is generally considered to have been 318, the number of
Abraham’s servants, <span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p19.2"></span>[Gen. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p19.4"></span>. Anastasius (*Hodeg.* 3. fin.) referring
to the first three Ecumenical Councils, speaks of the faith of the 318,
the 150, and the 200. \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1).\]

<span id="fn_543"></span>[112:544](2040189.htm#fr_543.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p19.6"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p20"></span> Cf. §32.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[112:545](2040189.htm#fr_544.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p21"></span> Cf. §73.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[113:546](2040189.htm#fr_545.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p23"></span> Cf. supr. *Depos. Ar.*

<span id="fn_546"></span>[113:547](2040189.htm#fr_546.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p24"></span> Cf. *Ep. Æg.* 7, 19, *Hist. Ar.* 63.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[113:548](2040189.htm#fr_547.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p26"></span> Vid. also Hilar. *Fragm.* iii. 20.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[113:549](2040189.htm#fr_548.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p27"></span> The instance of Novatian makes
against the Eusebians, because for some time after Novatian was
condemned in the West, his cause was abandoned in the East. Tillemont,
*Mem.* t. 7. p. 277.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[113:550](2040189.htm#fr_549.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p28"></span> Vid. supr. §6.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[113:551](2040189.htm#fr_550.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p29"></span> Cyprian. *de Unit. Eccl.* 4.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[113:552](2040189.htm#fr_551.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p31.1"></span>προθεσμία</span>

<span id="fn_552"></span>[113:553](2040189.htm#fr_552.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p32"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p32.2"></span>a.d.</span> 340.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[113:554](2040189.htm#fr_553.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p33"></span> The Persian war. *Hist. Arian.* §11.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[114:555](2040189.htm#fr_554.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p37"></span> Infr. §83 fin.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[114:556](2040189.htm#fr_555.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p39"></span> Infr. §80.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[114:557](2040189.htm#fr_556.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p40"></span> §64.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[115:558](2040189.htm#fr_557.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p41"></span> §74.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[115:559](2040189.htm#fr_558.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p43"></span> Supr. §6.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[115:560](2040189.htm#fr_559.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p44"></span> Infr. §83.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[115:561](2040189.htm#fr_560.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p45"></span> Bingh. *Ant.* X. v. 8.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[115:562](2040189.htm#fr_561.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p46"></span> Infr. §71.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[115:563](2040189.htm#fr_562.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p48"></span> Spring of 339 <span
class="c10"><span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p48.2"></span>a.d.</span> to autumn
of 340.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[115:564](2040189.htm#fr_563.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p49"></span> *Hist. Ar*. 9.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[115:565](2040189.htm#fr_564.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p50"></span> Or rather, halts, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p50.2"></span>μοναὶ</span>. They
are enumerated in the Itinerary of Antoninus, and are set down on
Montfaucon’s plate. The route passes over the Delta to Pelusium, and
then coasts all the way to Antioch. These <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p50.4"></span>μοναὶ</span> were day’s journeys,
Coustant in Hilar. [Psalm 118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p50.6"></span>, Lit. 5. 2. or half a day’s journey,
Herman. ibid; and were at unequal intervals, Ambros. in [Psalm
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p50.7"></span>, Serm. 5. §5. Gibbon says that by the
government conveyances, “it was easy to travel an 100 miles in a day
along the Roman roads.” ch. ii. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p50.8"></span>Μονὴ</span> or mansio properly means the
building, where soldiers or other public officers rested at night (hence
its application to monastic houses). Such buildings included granaries,
stabling, &c. vid. Con. Theod. ed. Gothofr. 1665. t. 1. p. 47, t. 2. p.
507. Du Cange *Gloss.* t. 4. p. 426. [Col.
2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#000.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p50.10"></span>.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[116:566](2040189.htm#fr_565.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p53"></span> Vid. Bingh. *Ant.* II. xi.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[116:567](2040189.htm#fr_566.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p54"></span> Athan. only suggests this, supr.
*Encyc.* 3. S. Hilary says the same of the conduct of the Arians at
Toulouse; “Clerks were beaten with clubs; Deacons bruised with lead;
nay, even *on Christ Himself* (the Saints understand my meaning) hands
were laid.” Contr. Constant. 11.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[116:568](2040189.htm#fr_567.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p57"></span> Julius here acquits Marcellus; but
he is considered heretical by S. Epiphanius, *loc. cit.* S. Basil.
*Epp.* 69, 125, 263, 265. S. Chrysostom in *Hebr. Hom.* ii. 2.
Theodoret, *Hær.* ii. 10. vid. Petav. *de Trin.* i. 13. who condemns
him, and Bull far more strongly, *Def. F. N.* ii. 1. §9. Montfaucon
defends him (in a special Dissertation, *Collect. Nov.* tom. 2.) and
Tillemont. *Mem.* tom. 7. p. 513, and Natalis Alex. Sæc. iv. Dissert.
30. \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) c.\]

<span id="fn_568"></span>[116:569](2040189.htm#fr_568.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p58"></span> Vid. Epiph. *Hær.* 72. 2, 3. and
§47. *infr.*

<span id="fn_569"></span>[116:570](2040189.htm#fr_569.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p59"></span> Vincentius and Vito.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[116:571](2040189.htm#fr_570.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p60"></span> [1 Tim. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[117:572](2040189.htm#fr_571.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p61"></span> [Joh. xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[117:573](2040189.htm#fr_572.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p63"></span> The names of few are known; perhaps
Marcellus, Asclepas, Paul of Constantinople, Lucius of Adrianople. vid.
Montf. *in loc.* Tillem. *Mem.* tom. 7. p. 272.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[117:574](2040189.htm#fr_573.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p64"></span> These outrages took place
immediately on the dismission of Elpidius and Philoxenus, the Pope’s
legates, from Antioch. Athan. *Hist. Ar.* 12.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[117:575](2040189.htm#fr_574.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p65"></span> e.g. Sarapammon and Potamo, both
Confessors, who were of the number of the Nicene Fathers, and had
defended Athan. at Tyre, were, the former banished, the latter beaten to
death. vid. infr. *Hist. Ar.* 12.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[117:576](2040189.htm#fr_575.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p66"></span> The Pseudo-Sardican Council, i.e.
that of Philippopolis, retort this accusation on the party of Marcellus;
Hilar. *Fragm.* iii. 9. but the character of the outrages fixes them on
the Arians, vid. infr. §45, note \[There were doubtless outrages on both
sides\].

<span id="fn_576"></span>[117:577](2040189.htm#fr_576.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p68"></span> Vid. supr. §25.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[117:578](2040189.htm#fr_577.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p69"></span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p69.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p69.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[117:579](2040189.htm#fr_578.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p69.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p70"></span> Ad *Ep. Æg.* 5. *de Syn.* 5.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[118:580](2040189.htm#fr_579.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p72"></span> [Eph. iv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[118:581](2040189.htm#fr_580.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p74"></span> *Hist. Arian.* §67.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[118:582](2040189.htm#fr_581.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p75"></span> Coustant *in loc.* fairly insists on
the word “all,” as shewing that S. Julius does not here claim the
prerogative of judging *by himself* all Bishops whatever, and that what
follows relates merely to the Church of Alexandria.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[118:583](2040189.htm#fr_582.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p76"></span> St. Peter (Greg. M. Epist. vii. Ind.
15. 40.) or St. Mark (Leo Ep. 9<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p76.2"></span>.)
at Alexandria. St. Paul at Ancyra in Galatia (Tertull. *contr. Marcion.*
iv. 5.) vid. Coustant. *in loc.*

<span id="fn_583"></span>[118:584](2040189.htm#fr_583.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p78"></span> Socrates says somewhat differently,
“Julius wrote back….that they acted against the Canons, because they had
not called him to a Council, the Ecclesiastical Canon commanding that
the Churches ought not to make Canons beside the will of the Bishop of
Rome.” Hist. ii. 17. Sozomen in like manner, “for it was a sacerdotal
law, to declare invalid whatever was transacted beside the will of the
Bishop of the Romans.” Hist. iii. 10. vid. Pope Damasus ap. Theod. Hist.
v. 10. Leon. Epist. 14. &c. In the passage in the text the prerogative
of the Roman see is limited, as Coustant observes, to the instance of
Alexandria; and we actually find in the third century a complaint lodged
against its Bishop Dionysius with the Pope. \[Prolegg. ch. iv. §4.\]

<span id="fn_584"></span>[118:585](2040189.htm#fr_584.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.1"></span>διατάξεις</span>. St. Paul says <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.3"></span>οὕτως ἐν ταῖς
ἐκκλησίαις διατάσσομαι</span> <span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.4"></span>[1
Cor. vii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#017.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.6"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.7"></span>τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ διατάξομαι</span>. Ibid. xi.
34. vid. Pearson, Vind. Ignat. p. 298. Hence Coustant in col. Athan.
would suppose Julius to refer to <span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.9"></span>[1
Cor. v. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.11"></span>. which Athan. actually quotes, *Ep.
Encycl.* §2. supr. p. 93. Pearson, *loc. cit.* considers the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.13"></span>διατάξεις</span> of
the Apostles, as a collection of regulation and usages, which more or
less represented, or claimed to represent, what may be called St. Paul’s
*rule,* or St. Peter’s *rule,* &c. Cotelier considers the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.15"></span>διατάξεις</span> as
the same as the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.16"></span>διδαχαὶ</span>, the “doctrine” or
“teaching” of the Apostles. Præfat. in Const. Apost. So does Beveridge,
Cod. Can. Illustr. ii. 9. §5.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[118:586](2040189.htm#fr_585.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p79.18"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p80"></span> \[Petri\] in Sede sua vivit potestas
et excellit auctoritas. Leon. Serm. iii. 3. vid. contra Barrow on the
Supremacy, p. 116. ed. 1836. “not one Bishop, but all Bishops together
through the whole Church, do succeed St. Peter, or any other Apostle.”

<span id="fn_586"></span>[119:587](2040189.htm#fr_586.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p82"></span> [Matt. xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.ii-p82.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letters of the Council of Sardica to the Churches of Egypt and of
Alexandria, and to all Churches.](2040190.md)
