[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040079)  [Next](2040081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.v-p1"></span> §34. *The soul, then, if only it get
rid of the stains of sin is able to know God directly, its own rational
nature imaging back the Word of God, after whose image it was created.
But even if it cannot pierce the cloud which sin draws over its vision,
it is confronted by the witness of creation to God*.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.v-p2"></span>We repeat then what we said before, that
just as men denied God, and worship things without soul, so also in
thinking they have not a rational soul, they receive at once the
punishment of their folly, namely, to be reckoned among irrational
creatures: and so, since as though from lack of a soul of their own they
superstitiously worship soulless gods, they are worthy of pity and
guidance. 2. But if they claim to have a soul, and pride themselves on
the rational principle, and that rightly, why do they, as though they
had no soul, venture to go against reason, and think not as they ought,
but make themselves out higher even than the Deity? For having a soul
that is immortal and invisible to them, they make a likeness of God in
things visible and mortal. Or why, in like manner as they have departed
from God, do they not betake themselves to Him again? For they are able,
as they turned away their understanding from God, and feigned as gods
things that were not, in like manner to ascend with the intelligence of
their soul, and turn back to God again. 3. But turn back they can, if
they lay aside the filth of all lust which they have put on, and wash it
away persistently, until they have got rid of all the foreign matter
that has affected their soul, and can shew it in its simplicity as it
was made, that so they may be able by it to behold the Word of the
Father after Whose likeness they were originally made. For the soul is
made after the image and likeness of God, as divine Scripture also
shews, when it says in the person of God <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) : “Let us make man after our Image and
likeness.” Whence also when it gets rid of all the filth of sin which
covers it and retains only the likeness of the Image in its purity, then
surely this latter being thoroughly brightened, the soul beholds as in a
mirror the Image of the Father, even the Word, and by His means reaches
the idea of the Father, Whose Image the Saviour is. 4. Or, if the soul’s
own teaching is insufficient, by reason of the external things which
cloud its intelligence, and prevent its seeing what is higher, yet it is
further possible to attain to the knowledge of God from the things which
are seen, since Creation, as though in written characters, declares in a
loud voice, by its order and harmony, its own Lord and Creator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[22:152](2040080.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="vi.ii.ii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.v-p3"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md)<span id="vi.ii.ii.v-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III](2040081.md)
