[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040149)  [Next](2040151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.liii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.liii-p1"></span> §53. *The whole fabric of Gentilism
levelled at a blow by Christ secretly addressing the conscience of Man.*

<span id="vii.ii.liii-p2"></span>And to mention one proof of the
divinity of the Saviour, which is indeed utterly surprising,—what mere
man or magician or tyrant or king was ever able by himself to engage
with so many, and to fight the battle against all idolatry and the whole
demoniacal host and all magic, and all the wisdom of the Greeks, while
they were so strong and still flourishing and imposing upon all, and at
one onset to check them all, as was our Lord, the true Word of God, Who,
invisibly exposing each man’s error, is by Himself bearing off all men
from them all, so that while they who were worshipping idols now trample
upon them, those in repute for magic burn their books, and the wise
prefer to all studies the interpretation of the Gospels? 2. For whom
they used to worship, them they are deserting, and Whom they used to
mock as one crucified, Him they worship as Christ, confessing Him to be
God. And they that are called gods among them are routed by the Sign of
the Cross, while the Crucified Saviour is proclaimed in all the world as
God and the Son of God. And the gods worshipped among the Greeks are
falling into ill repute at their hands, as scandalous beings; while
those who receive the teaching of Christ live a chaster life than they.
3. If, then, these and the like are human works, let him who will point
out similar works on the part of men of former time, and so convince us.
But if they prove to be, and are, not men’s works, but God’s, why are
the unbelievers so irreligious as not to recognise the Master that
wrought them? 4. For their case is as though a man, from the works of
creation, failed to know God their Artificer. For if they knew His
Godhead from His power over the universe, they would have known that the
bodily works of Christ also are not human, but are the works of the
Saviour of all, the Word of God. And did they thus know, “they would
not,” as Paul said <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) , “have
crucified the Lord of glory.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_345"></span>[65:346](2040150.htm#fr_345) <span
id="vii.ii.liii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.liii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="vii.ii.liii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Word Incarnate, as is the case with the Invisible God, is
known to us by His works. By them we recognise His deifying mission. Let
us be content to enumerate a few of them, leaving their dazzling
plentitude to him who will behold.](2040151)
