[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040192)  [Next](2040194.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c8"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Part II.</span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*Documents connected
with the charges of the Meletians against S. Athanasius.*

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p3"></span>59. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Peter</span> was Bishop among us before
the persecution, and during the course of it he suffered martyrdom. When
Meletius, who held the title of bishop in Egypt, was convicted of many
crimes, and among the rest of offering sacrifice to idols, Peter deposed
him in a general council of the bishops. Whereupon Meletius did not
appeal to another council, or attempt to justify himself before those
who should come after, but made a schism, so that they who espoused his
cause are even yet called Meletians instead of Christians <span
id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663.md) . He began immediately to revile the
bishops, and made false accusations, first against Peter himself, and
against his successor Achillas, and after Achillas, against
Alexander <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664.md) . And he thus
practised craftily, following the example of Absalom, to the end that,
as he was disgraced by his deposition, he might by his calumnies mislead
the simple. While Meletius was thus employed, the Arian heresy also had
arisen. But in the Council of Nicæa, while the heresy was anathematized,
and the Arians were cast out, the Meletians on whatever grounds <span
id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665.md) (for it is not necessary now to
mention the reason) were received. Five months however had not yet
passed <span id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666.md) when, the blessed
Alexander having died, the Meletians, who ought to have remained quiet,
and to have been grateful that they were received on any terms, like
dogs unable to forget their vomit, were again troubling the Churches.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p8"></span>Upon learning this, Eusebius, who had
the lead in the Arian heresy, sends and buys the Meletians with large
promises, becomes their secret friend, and arranges with them for their
assistance on any occasion when he might wish for it. At first he sent
to me, urging me to admit Arius and his fellows to communion <span
id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667.md) , and threatened me in his verbal
communications, while in his letters he \[merely\] made a request. And
when I refused, declaring that it was not right that those who had
invented <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-Page_132"></span>heresy contrary to the truth, and had
been anathematized by the Ecumenical <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668.md) Council, should be admitted to
communion, he caused the Emperor also, Constantine, of blessed memory,
to write to me, threatening me, in case I should not receive Arius and
his fellows, with those afflictions, which I have before undergone, and
which I am still suffering. The following is a part of his letter.
Syncletius and Gaudentius, officers of the palace <span
id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669.md) , were the bearers of it.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p12"></span>Part of a Letter from the Emperor
Constantine.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p13"></span>Having therefore knowledge of my
will, grant free admission to all who wish to enter into the Church. For
if I learn that you have hindered or excluded any who claim to be
admitted into communion with the Church, I will immediately send some
one who shall depose you by my command, and shall remove you from your
place.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p14"></span>60. When upon this I wrote and
endeavoured to convince the Emperor, that that anti-Christian heresy had
no communion with the Catholic Church, Eusebius forthwith, availing
himself of the occasion which he had agreed upon with the Meletians,
writes and persuades them to invent some pretext, so that, as they had
practised against Peter and Achillas and Alexander, they might devise
and spread reports against us also. Accordingly, after seeking for a
long time, and finding nothing, they at last agree together, with the
advice of Eusebius and his fellows, and fabricate their first accusation
by means of Ision, Eudæmon, and Callinicus <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670.md) , respecting the linen vestments <span
id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671.md) , to the effect that I had imposed a
law upon the Egyptians, and had required its observance of them first.
But when certain Presbyters of mine were found to be present, and the
Emperor took cognizance of the matter, they were condemned (the
Presbyters were Apis and Macarius), and the Emperor wrote, condemning
Ision, and ordering me to appear before him. His letters were as
follows <span id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p18"></span>Eusebius, having intelligence of
this, persuades them to wait; and when I arrive, they next accuse
Macarius of breaking the cup, and bring against me the most heinous
accusation possible, viz. that, being an enemy of the Emperor, I had
sent a purse of gold to one Philumenus. The Emperor therefore heard us
on this charge also in Psammathia <span
id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673.md) , when they, as usual, were condemned,
and driven from the presence; and, as I returned, he wrote the following
letter to the people.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p20"></span>Constantine, Maximus, Augustus, to
the people of the Catholic Church at Alexandria.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p21"></span>61. Beloved brethren, I greet you
well, calling upon God, Who is the chief witness of my intention, and on
the Only-begotten, the Author of our Law, Who is Sovereign over the
lives of all men, and Who hates dissensions. But what shall I say to
you? That I am in good health? Nay, but I should be able to enjoy better
health and strength, if you were possessed with mutual love one towards
another, and had rid yourselves of your enmities, through which, in
consequence of the storms excited by contentious men, we have left the
haven of brotherly love. Alas! what perverseness is this! What evil
consequences are produced every day by the tumult of envy which has been
stirred up among you! Hence it is that evil reports have settled upon
the people of God. Whither has the faith of righteousness departed? For
we are so involved in the mists of darkness, not only through manifold
errors, but through the faults of ungrateful men, that we bear with
those who favour folly, and though we are aware of them, take no heed of
those who set aside goodness and truth. What strange inconsistency is
this! We do not convict our enemies, but we follow the example of
robbery which they set us, whereby the most pernicious errors, finding
no one to oppose them, easily, if I may so speak, make a way for
themselves. Is there no understanding among us, for the credit of our
common nature, since we are thus neglectful of the injunctions of the
law?

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p22"></span>But some one will say, that love is a
thing brought out by nature. But, I ask, how is it that we who have got
the law of God for our guide in addition to our natural advantages, thus
tolerate the disturbances and disorders raised by our enemies, who seem
inflamed, as it were, with firebrands? How is it, that having eyes, we
see not, neither understand, though we are surrounded by the
intelligence of the law? What a stupor has seized upon our life, that we
are thus neglectful of ourselves, and that although God admonishes us!
Is it not an intolerable evil? and ought we not to esteem such men as
our enemies, and not the household and people of God? For they are
infuriated against us, abandoned as they are: they lay grievous crimes
to our charge, and make attacks upon us as enemies.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p23"></span>62. And I would have you yourselves
to consider with what exceeding madness they do <span id="page_133">p.
133</span> <span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-Page_133"></span>this. The foolish men
carry their maliciousness at their tongues’ end. They carry about with
them a sort of leaden anger, so that they reciprocally smite one
another, and involve us by way of increasing their own punishment. The
good teacher is accounted an enemy, while he who clothes himself with
the vice of envy, contrary to all justice makes his gain of the gentle
temper of the people; he ravages, and consumes, he decks himself out,
and recommends himself with false praises; he subverts the truth, and
corrupts the faith, until he finds out a hole and hiding-place for his
conscience. Thus their very perverseness makes them wretched, while they
impudently prefer themselves to places of honour, however unworthy they
may be. Ah! what a mischief is this! they say “Such an one is too old;
such an one is a mere boy; the office belongs to me; it is due to me,
since it is taken away from him. I will gain over all men to my side,
and then I will endeavour with my power to ruin him.” Plain indeed is
this proclamation of their madness to all the world; the sight of
companies, and gatherings, and rowers under command <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674.md) in their offensive cabals. Alas! what
preposterous conduct is ours, if I may say it! Do they make an
exhibition of their folly in the Church of God? And are they not yet
ashamed of themselves? Do they not yet blame themselves? Are they not
smitten in their consciences, so that they now at length shew that they
entertain a proper sense of their deceit and contentiousness? Theirs is
the mere force of envy, supported by those baneful influences which
naturally belong to it. But those wretches have no power against your
Bishop. Believe me, brethren, their endeavours will have no other effect
than this, after they have worn down our days, to leave to themselves no
place of repentance in this life. Wherefore I beseech you, lend help to
yourselves; receive kindly our love, and with all your strength drive
away those who desire to obliterate from among us the grace of
unanimity; and looking unto God, love one another. I received gladly
your Bishop Athanasius, and addressed him in such a manner, as being
persuaded that he was a man of God. It is for you to understand these
things, not for me to judge of them. I thought it becoming that the most
reverend Athanasius himself should convey my salutation to you, knowing
his kind care of you, which, in a manner worthy of that peaceable faith
which I myself profess, is continually engaged in the good work of
declaring saving knowledge, and will be able to exhort you as is
suitable, May God preserve you, beloved brethren.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p25"></span>Such was the letter of Constantine.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p26"></span>63. After these occurrences the
Meletians remained quiet for a little time, but afterwards shewed their
hostility again, and contrived the following plot, with the aim of
pleasing those who had hired their services. The Mareotis is a country
district of Alexandria, in which Meletius was not able to make a schism.
Now while the Churches still existed within their appointed limits, and
all the Presbyters had congregations in them, and while the people were
living in peace, a certain person named Ischyras <span
id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675.md) , who was not a clergyman, but of a
worthless disposition, endeavoured to lead astray the people of his own
village, declaring himself to be a clergyman. Upon learning this, the
Presbyter of the place informed me of it when I was going through my
visitation of the Churches, and I sent Macarius the Presbyter with him
to summon Ischyras. They found him sick and lying in a cell, and charged
his father to admonish his son not to continue any such practices as had
been reported against him. But when he recovered from his sickness,
being prevented by his friends and his father from pursuing the same
course, he fled over to the Meletians; and they communicate with
Eusebius and his fellows, and at last that calumny is invented by them,
that Macarius had broken a cup, and that a certain Bishop named Arsenius
had been murdered by me. Arsenius they placed in concealment, in order
that he might seem made away with, when he did not make his appearance;
and they carried about a hand, pretending that he had been cut to
pieces. As for Ischyras, whom they did not even know, they began to
spread a report that he was a Presbyter, in order that what he said
about the cup might mislead the people. Ischyras, however, being
censured by his friends, came to me weeping, and said that no such thing
as they had reported had been done by Macarius, and that himself had
been suborned by the Meletians to invent this calumny. And he wrote the
following letter.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p28"></span>To the Blessed pope <span
id="fr_676"></span>[677](#fn_676.md) Athanasius, Ischyras sends health in
the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p30"></span>64. As when I came to you, my Lord
Bishop, desiring to be received into the Church, you reproved me for
what I formerly said, as though I had proceeded to such lengths of my
own free choice, I therefore <span id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-Page_134"></span>submit to you this my apology in
writing, in order that you may understand, that violence was used
towards me, and blows inflicted on me by Isaac and Heraclides, and Isaac
of Letopolis, and those of their party. And I declare, and take God as
my witness in this matter, that of none of the things which they have
stated, do I know you to be guilty. For no breaking of a cup or
overturning of the Holy Table ever took place, but they compelled me by
violent usage to assert all this. And this defence I make and submit to
you in writing, desiring and claiming for myself to be admitted among
the members of your congregation. I pray that you may have health in the
Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p31"></span>I submit this my handwriting to you
the Bishop Athanasius in the presence of the Presbyters, Ammonas of
Dicella, Heraclius of Phascos, Boccon of Chenebri, Achillas of Myrsine,
Didymus of Taphosiris, and Justus from Bomotheus <span
id="fr_677"></span>[678](#fn_677.md) ; and of the Deacons, Paul, Peter, and
Olympius, of Alexandria, and Ammonius, Pistus, Demetrius, and Gaius, of
the Mareotis.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p33"></span>65. Notwithstanding this statement of
Ischyras, they again spread abroad the same charges against me
everywhere, and also reported them to the Emperor Constantine. He too
had heard before of the affair of the cup in Psammathia <span
id="fr_678"></span>[679](#fn_678.md) , when I was there, and had detected
the falsehood of my enemies. But now he wrote to Antioch to
Dalmatius <span id="fr_679"></span>[680](#fn_679.md) the Censor requiring
him to institute a judicial enquiry respecting the murder. Accordingly
the Censor sent me notice to prepare for my defence against the charge.
Upon receiving his letters, although at first I paid no regard to the
thing because I knew that nothing of what they said was true, yet seeing
that the Emperor was moved, I wrote to my fellow-ministers into Egypt,
and sent a deacon, desiring to learn something of Arsenius, for I had
not seen the man for five or six years. Well, not to relate the matter
at length, Arsenius was found in concealment, in the first instance in
Egypt, and afterwards my friends discovered him again in concealment in
Tyre also. And what was most remarkable, even when he was discovered he
would not confess that he was Arsenius, until he was convicted in court
before Paul, who was then Bishop of Tyre, and at last out of very shame
could not deny it.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p36"></span>This he did in order to fulfil his
contract with Eusebius and his fellows, lest, if he were discovered, the
game they were playing should at length be broken up; which in fact came
to pass. For when I wrote the Emperor word, that Arsenius was
discovered, and reminded him of what he had heard in Psammathia
concerning Macarius the Presbyter, he stopped the proceedings of the
Censor’s court, and wrote condemning the proceedings against me as
calumnious, and commanded Eusebius and his fellows, who were coming into
the East to appear against me, to return. Now in order to shew that they
accused me of having murdered Arsenius (not to bring forward the letters
of many persons on the subject), it shall be sufficient only to produce
one from Alexander the Bishop of Thessalonica, from which the tenor of
the rest may be inferred. He then being acquainted with the reports
which Archaph, who is also called John, circulated against me on the
subject of the murder, and having heard that Arsenius was alive, wrote
as follows.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p37"></span>Letter of Alexander.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p38"></span>To his dearly beloved son and
fellow-minister like-minded, the lord Athanasius, Alexander the Bishop
sends health in the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p39"></span>66. I congratulate the most excellent
Sarapion, that he is striving so earnestly to adorn himself with holy
habits, and is thus advancing to higher praise the memory of his father.
For, as the Holy Scripture somewhere says, ‘though his father die, yet
he is as though he were not dead <span id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680.md)
:’ for he has left behind him a memorial of his life. What my feelings
were towards the ever memorable Sozon, you yourself, my lord <span
id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681.md) , are not ignorant, for you know the
sacredness of his memory, as well as the goodness of the young man. I
have received only one letter from your reverence, which I had by the
hands of this youth. I mention this to you, my lord, in order that you
may know. Our dearly beloved brother and deacon Macarius, afforded me
great pleasure by writing to me from Constantinople, that the false
accuser Archaph had met with disgrace, for having given out before all
men that a live man had been murdered. That he will receive from the
righteous Judge, together with all the tribe of his associates, that
punishment, which his crimes deserve, the unerring Scriptures assure us.
May the Lord of all preserve you for <span id="page_135">p. 135</span>
<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-Page_135"></span>very many years, my lord, in
every way most kind.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p42"></span>67. And they who lived with Arsenius
bear witness, that he was kept in concealment for this purpose, that
they might pretend his death; for in searching after him we found the
person \[who had done so\], and he in consequence wrote the following
letter to John, who played the chief part in this false accusation.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p43"></span>To his dearly beloved brother John,
Pinnes, Presbyter of the Monastery <span
id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682.md) of Ptemencyrcis, in the home of
Anteopolis, sends greeting.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p45"></span>I wish you to know, that Athanasius
sent his deacon into the Thebais, to search everywhere for Arsenius; and
Pecysius the Presbyter, and Silvanus the brother of Helias, and
Tapenacerameus, and Paul monk of Hypsele, whom he first fell in with,
confessed that Arsenius was with us. Upon learning this we caused him to
be put on board a vessel, and to sail to the lower countries with Helias
the monk. Afterwards the deacon returned again suddenly with certain
others, and entered our monastery, in search of the same Arsenius, and
him they found not, because, as I said before, we had sent him away to
the lower countries; but they conveyed me together with Helias the monk,
who took him out of the way, to Alexandria, and brought us before the
Duke <span id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683.md) ; when I was unable to
deny, but confessed that he was alive, and had not been murdered: the
monk also who took him out of the way confessed the same. Wherefore I
acquaint you with these things, Father, lest you should determine to
accuse Athanasius; for I said that he was alive, and had been concealed
with us, and all this is become known in Egypt, and it cannot any longer
be kept secret.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p47"></span>I, Paphnutius, monk of the same
monastery, who wrote this letter, heartily salute you. I pray for your
health.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p48"></span>The following also is the letter
which the Emperor wrote when he learnt that Arsenius was found to be
alive.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p49"></span>Constantine, Victor, Maximus,
Augustus, to the pope Athanasius.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p50"></span>68. Having read the letters of your
wisdom, I felt the inclination to write in return to your fortitude, and
to exhort you that you would endeavour to restore the people of God to
tranquillity, and to merciful feelings. For in my own mind I hold these
things to be of the greatest importance, that we should cultivate truth,
and ever keep righteousness in our thoughts, and have pleasure
especially in those who walk in the right way of life. But as concerning
those who are deserving of all execration, I mean the most perverse and
ungodly Meletians, who have at last stultified themselves by their
folly, and are now raising unreasonable commotions by envy, uproar, and
tumult, thus making manifest their own ungodly dispositions, I will say
thus much. You see that those who they pretended had been slain with the
sword, are still amongst us, and in the enjoyment of life. Now what
could be a stronger presumption against them, and one so manifestly and
clearly tending to their condemnation, as that those whom they declared
to have been murdered, are yet in the enjoyment of life, and accordingly
will be able to speak for themselves?

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p51"></span>But this further accusation was
advanced by these same Meletians. They positively affirmed that you,
rushing in with lawless violence, had seized upon and broken a cup,
which was deposited in the most Holy Place; than which there certainly
could not be a more serious charge, nor a more grievous offence, had
such a crime actually been perpetrated. But what manner of accusation is
this? What is the meaning of this change and variation and difference in
the circumstances of it, insomuch that they now transfer this same
accusation to another person <span id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684.md) , a
fact which makes it clearer, so to speak, than the light itself, that
they designed to lay a plot for your wisdom? After this, who can be
willing to follow them, men that have fabricated such charges to the
injury of another, seeing too that they are hurrying themselves on to
ruin, and are conscious that they are accusing you of false and feigned
crimes? Who then, as I said, will follow after them, and thus go
headlong in the way of destruction; in that way in which it seems they
alone suppose that they have hope of safety and of help? But if they
were willing to walk according to a pure conscience, and to be directed
by the best wisdom, and to go in the way of a sound mind, they would
easily perceive that no help can come to them from Divine Providence,
while they are given up to such doings, and tempt their own destruction.
I should not call this a harsh judgment of them, but the simple truth.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p53"></span><span id="page_136">p. 136</span>
<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-Page_136"></span>And finally, I will add, that I
wish this letter to be read frequently by your wisdom in public, that it
may thereby come to the knowledge of all men, and especially reach the
ears of those who thus act, and thus raise disturbances; for the
judgment which is expressed by me according to the dictates of equity is
confirmed also by real facts. Wherefore, seeing that in such conduct
there is so great an offence, let them understand that I have thus
judged; and that I have come to this determination, that if they excite
any further commotion of this kind, I will myself in person take
cognizance of the matter, and that not according to the ecclesiastical,
but according to the civil laws, and so I will in future find them out,
because they clearly are robbers, so to speak, not only against human
kind, but against the divine doctrine itself. May God ever preserve you,
beloved brother!

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p54"></span>69. But that the wickedness of the
calumniators might be more fully displayed, behold Arsenius also wrote
to me after he was discovered in his place of concealment; and as the
letter which Ischyras had written confessed the falsehood of their
accusation, so that of Arsenius proved their maliciousness still more
completely.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p55"></span>To the blessed Pope Athanasius,
Arsenius, Bishop of those who were heretofore under Meletius in the city
of the Hypselites, together with the Presbyters and Deacons, wishes much
health in the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p56"></span>Being earnestly desirous of peace and
union with the Catholic Church, over which by the grace of God you
preside, and wishing to submit ourselves to the Canon of the Church,
according to the ancient rule <span id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685.md) ,
we write unto you, dearly beloved Pope, and declare in the name of the
Lord, that we will not for the future hold communion with those who
continue in schism, and are not yet at peace with the Catholic Church,
whether Bishops, Presbyters, or Deacons. Neither will we take part with
them if they wish to establish anything in a Council; neither will we
send letters of peace <span id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686.md) unto them
nor receive such from them; neither yet without the consent of you, the
bishop of the metropolis, will we publish any determination concerning
Bishops, or on any other general ecclesiastical question; but we will
yield obedience to all the canons that have heretofore been ordained,
after the example of the Bishops <span id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687.md)
Ammonian, Tyrannus, Plusian, and the rest. Wherefore we beseech your
goodness to write to us speedily in answer, and likewise to our
fellow-ministers concerning us, informing them that we will henceforth
abide by the fore-mentioned resolution and will be at peace with the
Catholic Church, and at unity with our fellow-ministers in the
\[various\] districts. And we are persuaded that your prayers, being
acceptable unto God, will so prevail with Him, that this peace shall be
firm and indissoluble unto the end, according to the will of God the
Lord of all, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p60"></span>The sacred Ministry that is under
you, we and those that are with us salute. Very shortly, if God permit,
we will come to visit your goodness. I, Arsenius, pray for your health
in the Lord for many years, most blessed Pope.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p61"></span>70. But a stronger and clearer proof
of the calumny against us is the recantation of John, of which the most
God-beloved Emperor Constantine of blessed memory is a witness, for
knowing how John had accused himself, and having received letters from
him expressing his repentance, he wrote to him as follows.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p62"></span>Constantine, Maximus, Augustus to
John.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p63"></span>The letters which I have received
from your prudence were extremely pleasing to me, because I learned from
them what I very much longed to hear, that you had laid aside every
petty feeling, had joined the Communion of the Church as became you, and
were now in perfect concord with the most reverend Bishop Athanasius. Be
assured therefore that so far I entirely approve of your conduct;
because, giving up all skirmishing, you have done that which is pleasing
to God, and have embraced the unity of His Church. In order therefore
that you may obtain the accomplishment of your wishes, I have thought it
right to grant you permission to enter the public conveyance <span
id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688.md) , and to come <span id="page_137">p.
137</span> <span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-Page_137"></span>to the court <span
id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689.md) of my clemency. Let it then be your
care to make no delay; but as this letter gives you authority to use the
public conveyance, come to me immediately, that you may have your
desires fulfilled, and by appearing in my presence may enjoy that
pleasure which it is fit for you to receive. May God preserve you
continually, dearly beloved brother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_663"></span>[131:664](2040193.htm#fr_663.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p4"></span> Cf. *Orat.* i. 2 and notes.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[131:665](2040193.htm#fr_664.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p5"></span> Ad. *Ep. Æg.* §22. supr. §11.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[131:666](2040193.htm#fr_665.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p6"></span> \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1) *ad fin.*\]
Athan. speaks more openly against this arrangement. infr. §71.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[131:667](2040193.htm#fr_666.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p7"></span> \[According to the tenses in the
original the five months mark the date not of Alexander’s death (April
17, 328), but of the renewed Meletian troubles. The settlement did not
keep them quiet for five months. The *terminus a quo* of the five months
is somewhat doubtful; but it certainly is not the Council of Nicæa, see
§71, &c. Montf. *Monit. in Vit. S. Athanasii,* also Prolegg. ch. ii. §3
(1) and ch. v. §3 a.\]

<span id="fn_667"></span>[131:668](2040193.htm#fr_667.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p9"></span> Ad. *Ep Æg.* 23.

<span id="fn_668"></span>[132:669](2040193.htm#fr_668.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p10"></span> Supr. §7, and *de Decr.* 27.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[132:670](2040193.htm#fr_669.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>παλατῖνοι</span>, vid. *Apol. ad Const.*
§19.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[132:671](2040193.htm#fr_670.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p15"></span> Infr. §71 fin. Sozom. ii. 25.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[132:672](2040193.htm#fr_671.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p16.1"></span>στιχάρια</span>, ecclesiastical. \[See
D.C.A. p. 1933.\]

<span id="fn_672"></span>[132:673](2040193.htm#fr_672.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p16.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p17"></span> They are lost.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[132:674](2040193.htm#fr_673.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p19"></span> Suburb of Nicomedia, infr. §65.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[133:675](2040193.htm#fr_674.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p24.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p24.2"></span>ρχιερεσίαν</span>

<span id="fn_675"></span>[133:676](2040193.htm#fr_675.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p27"></span> Cf. §§46, 72, 77.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[133:677](2040193.htm#fr_676.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p29"></span> Cf. *de Syn.* 16, \[and *Fest Ind.*
passim\].

<span id="fn_677"></span>[134:678](2040193.htm#fr_677.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p32"></span> \[Cf. the list of Mareotic clergy
*supr.,* p. 72. The three deacons of Alexandria are in the list, p.
71\].

<span id="fn_678"></span>[134:679](2040193.htm#fr_678.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p34"></span> Vid. §60.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[134:680](2040193.htm#fr_679.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p35"></span> Dalmatius was the name of father and
son, the brother and nephew of Constantine. Socrates, *Hist.* i. 27.
gives the title of Censor to the son; but the *Chron. Pasch.* p. 531
(Dind.) gives it to the father. Valesius, and apparently Tillemont
(*Empereurs,* vol. 4. p. 657) think Socrates mistaken. The younger
Dalmatius was created Cæsar by Constantine a few years before his death;
and as well as his brother Hannibalian, and a number of other relatives,
was put to death by the soldiery, on the death of Constantine. vid.
*Hist. Ar.* 69. \[Gwatkin, p. 108 note\].

<span id="fn_680"></span>[134:681](2040193.htm#fr_680.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p40"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
30.4](../../../bib/apo/sir030.htm#004.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[134:682](2040193.htm#fr_681.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p41.1"></span>δέσποτα</span>. Theod. *H. E.* i. 5.
init.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[135:683](2040193.htm#fr_682.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p44"></span> \[The <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p44.1"></span>μονὴ</span> here is not a monastery in
the later sense, but a village or cluster of cells. This intercepted
letter demonstrates the existence of *Meletian* monks, of which there is
other evidence also: (see below, Introd. to *Vit. Ant.* The objection of
Weingarten to the genuineness of this letter is purely arbitrary)\].

<span id="fn_683"></span>[135:684](2040193.htm#fr_683.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p46"></span> According to the system of
government introduced by Diocletian and Constantine, there were
thirty-five military commanders of the troops, under the Magistri
militum, and all of these bore the name of duces or dukes; the comites,
or counts, were ten out of the number, who were distinguished as
companions of the Emperor. vid. Gibbon, ch. 17. Three of these dukes
were stationed in Egypt \[i.e. in the whole prefecture; one only in the
province of Egypt in the narrower sense\].

<span id="fn_684"></span>[135:685](2040193.htm#fr_684.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p52"></span> Cf. §28.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[136:686](2040193.htm#fr_685.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p57"></span> Vid. *supr.* p. 92, note 3; the
(so-called) Apostolical Canon apparently referred to here, is Can. 27.
according to Beveridge.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[136:687](2040193.htm#fr_686.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p58"></span> Cf. p. 95, note 4.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[136:688](2040193.htm#fr_687.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p59"></span> i.e. Meletian Bishops who had
conformed; or, since they are not in the list, §71. Catholic Bishops
with whom the conforming party were familiar; or Meletians after the
return of Meletius. vid. Tillemont, *Mem.* vol. 8. p. 658.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[136:689](2040193.htm#fr_688.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p64"></span> On the “cursus publicus,” vid.
Gothofred. *in Cod. Theod.* viii. tit. 5. It was provided for the
journeys of the Emperor, for persons whom he summoned, for magistrates,
ambassadors, and for such private persons as the Emperor indulged in the
use of it, which was gratis. The use was granted by Constantine to the
Bishops who were summoned to Nicæa, as far as it went, in addition
(though aliter Valesius in loc.) to other means of travelling. Euseb.
*v. Const.* iii. 6. The cursus publicus brought the Bishops to the
Council of Tyre. *ibid.* iv. 43. In the conference between Liberius and
Constantius, Theod. *Hist.* ii. 13. it is objected that the cursus
publicus is not sufficient to convey Bishops to the Council which
Liberius proposes; he answers that the Churches are rich enough to
convey their Bishops as far as the sea. Thus S. Hilary was compelled
(data evectionis copia, Sulp. Sev. *Hist.* ii. 57.) to attend at
Seleucia, as Athan. at Tyre. Julian complains of the abuse of the cursus
publicus, perhaps with an allusion to these Councils of Constantius.
vid. *Cod. Theod.* viii. tit. 5. l. 12. where Gothofred quotes Liban.
*Epitaph. in Julian.* vol. i. p. 569. ed. Reiske.) Vid. the well-known
passage of Ammianus, who speaks of the Councils being the ruin of the
res vehicularia *Hist.* xxi. 16. The Eusebians at Philippopolis say the
same thing. Hilar. *Frag.* iii. 25. The Emperor provided board and
perhaps lodging for the Bishops at Ariminum; which the Bishops of
Aquitaine, Gaul, and Britain, declined, except three British from
poverty. Sulp. *Hist.* ii. 56. Hunneric in Africa, after assembling 466
Bishops at Carthage, dismissed them without modes of conveyance,
provision, or baggage. Victor Utic. *Hist.* iii. init. In the Emperor’s
letter previous to the assembling of the sixth Ecumenical Council, <span
class="c10"><span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p64.2"></span>a.d.</span> 678,
(Harduin, *Conc.* t. 3. p. 1048 fin.) he says he has given orders for
the conveyance and maintenance of its members. Pope John VIII. reminds
Ursus, Duke of Venice (<span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p64.3"></span>a.d.</span> 876.), of the same duty of
providing for the members of a Council, “secundum pios principes, qui in
talibus munifice semper erant intenti.” Colet. *Concil.* (Ven. 1730,) t.
xi. p. 14.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[137:690](2040193.htm#fr_689.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p64.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p65.1"></span>στρατόπεδον·</span> vid. Chrys. *on the
Statues,* p. 382, note 6. Gothofr. in Cod. Theod. vi. 32, 1. 1. Castra
sunt ubi Princeps est. ibid. 35, l. 15. also Kiesling. *de Discipl.
Cler.* i. 5. p. 16. Beveridge *in Can. Apost.* 83. interprets <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.ii.ii.i-p65.3"></span>στρατεία</span> of
any civil engagement as opposed to clerical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Documents connected with the Council of Tyre.](2040194.md)
