[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040374)  [Next](2040376) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—Texts Explained;
Tenthly,</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p1.2"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p1.3"></span>[Matthew xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p1.4"></span>;
[John iii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p1.5"></span></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p1.6"></span>, &c.</span> *These texts intended to
preclude the Sabellian notion of the Son; they fall in with the Catholic
doctrine concerning the Son; they are explained by ‘so’ in* <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p1.7"></span>*[John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p1.8"></span>.
(Anticipation of the next chapter.) Again they are used with reference
to our Lord’s human nature; for our sake, that we might receive and not
lose, as receiving in Him. And consistently with other parts of
Scripture, which shew that He had the power, &c., before He received it.
He was God and man, and His actions are often at once divine and human.*

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p2"></span>35 (*continued*). For, ‘The Father
loveth the Son, and hath given all things into His hand;’ and, ‘All
things were given unto Me of My Father;’ and, ‘I can do nothing of
Myself, but as I hear, I judge <span
id="fr_3058"></span>[3059](#fn_3058) ;’ and the like passages do not
shew that the Son once had not these prerogatives—(for had not He
eternally what the Father has, who is the Only Word and Wisdom of the
Father in essence, who also says, ‘All that the Father hath are
Mine <span id="fr_3059"></span>[3060](#fn_3059) ,’ and what are Mine,
are the Father’s? for if the things of the Father are the Son’s and the
Father hath them ever, it is plain that what the Son hath, being the
Father’s, were ever in the Son),—not then because once He had them not,
did He say this, but because, whereas the Son hath eternally what He
hath, yet He hath them from the Father.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p5"></span>36. For lest a man, perceiving that the
Son has all that the Father hath, from the exact likeness and identity
of that He hath, should wander into the irreligion of Sabellius,
considering Him to be the Father, therefore He has said ‘Was given unto
Me,’ and ‘I received,’ and ‘Were delivered to Me <span
id="fr_3060"></span>[3061](#fn_3060) ,’ only to shew that He is not the
Father, but the Father’s Word, and the Eternal Son, who because of His
likeness to the Father, has eternally what He has from Him, and because
He is the Son, has from the Father what He has eternally. Moreover that
‘Was given’ and ‘Were delivered,’ and the like, do not impair <span
id="fr_3061"></span>[3062](#fn_3061) the Godhead of the Son, but rather
shew Him to be truly <span id="fr_3062"></span>[3063](#fn_3062) Son, we
may learn from the passages themselves. For if all things are delivered
unto Him, first, He is other than that all which He has received; next,
being Heir of all things, He alone is the Son and proper according to
the Essence of the Father. For if He were one of all, then He were not
‘heir of all <span id="fr_3063"></span>[3064](#fn_3063) ,’ but every one
had received according as the Father willed and gave. But now, as
receiving all things, He is other than them all, and alone proper to the
Father. Moreover that ‘Was given’ and ‘Were delivered’ do not shew that
once He had them not, we may conclude from a similar passage, and in
like manner concerning them all; for the Saviour Himself says, ‘As the
Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given also to the Son to have
life in Himself <span id="fr_3064"></span>[3065](#fn_3064) .’ Now from
the words ‘Hath given,’ He signifies that He is not the Father; but in
saying ‘so,’ He shews the Son’s natural likeness and propriety towards
the Father. If then once the Father had not, plainly the Son once had
not; for as <span id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-Page_414"></span>the Father, ‘so’ also the Son has. But
if this is irreligious to say, and religious on the contrary to say that
the Father had ever, is it not unseemly in them when the Son says that,
‘as’ the Father has, ‘so’ also the Son has, to say that He has not
‘so <span id="fr_3065"></span>[3066](#fn_3065) ,’ but otherwise? Rather
then is the Word faithful, and all things which He says that He has
received, He has always, yet has from the Father; and the Father indeed
not from any, but the Son from the Father. For as in the instance of the
radiance, if the radiance itself should say, ‘All places the light hath
given me to enlighten, and I do not enlighten from myself, but as the
light wills,’ yet, in saying this, it does not imply that it once had
not, but it means, ‘I am proper to the light, and all things of the
light are mine;’ so, and much more, must we understand in the instance
of the Son. For the Father, having given all things to the Son, in the
Son still <span id="fr_3066"></span>[3067](#fn_3066) hath all things;
and the Son having, still the Father hath them; for the Son’s Godhead is
the Father’s Godhead, and thus the Father in the Son exercises His
Providence <span id="fr_3067"></span>[3068](#fn_3067) over all things.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p14"></span>37. And while such is the sense of
expressions like these, those which speak humanly concerning the Saviour
admit of a religious meaning also. For with this end have we examined
them beforehand, that, if we should hear Him asking where Lazarus is
laid <span id="fr_3068"></span>[3069](#fn_3068) , or when He asks on
coming into the parts of Cæsarea, ‘Whom do men say that I am?’ or, ‘How
many loaves have ye?’ and, ‘What will ye that I shall do unto you <span
id="fr_3069"></span>[3070](#fn_3069) ?’ we may know, from what has been
already said, the right <span id="fr_3070"></span>[3071](#fn_3070) sense
of the passages, and may not stumble as Christ’s enemies the Arians.
First then we must put this question to the irreligious, why they
consider Him ignorant? for one who asks, does not for certain ask from
ignorance; but it is possible for one who knows, still to ask concerning
what He knows. Thus John was aware that Christ, when asking, ‘How many
loaves have ye?’ was not ignorant, for he says, ‘And this He said to
prove him, for He Himself knew what He would do <span
id="fr_3071"></span>[3072](#fn_3071) .’ But if He knew what He was
doing, therefore not in ignorance, but with knowledge did He ask. From
this instance we may understand similar ones; that, when the Lord asks,
He does not ask in ignorance, where Lazarus lies, nor again, whom men do
say that He is; but knowing the thing which He was asking, aware what He
was about to do. And thus with ease is their clever point exploded; but
if they still persist <span id="fr_3072"></span>[3073](#fn_3072) on
account of His asking, then they must be told that in the Godhead indeed
ignorance is not, but to the flesh ignorance is proper, as has been
said. And that this is really so, observe how the Lord who inquired
where Lazarus lay, Himself said, when He was not on the spot but a great
way off, ‘Lazarus is dead <span id="fr_3073"></span>[3074](#fn_3073) ,’
and where he was dead; and how that He who is considered by them as
ignorant, is He Himself who foreknew the reasonings of the disciples,
and was aware of what was in the heart of each, and of ‘what was in
man,’ and, what is greater, alone knows the Father and says, ‘I in the
Father and the Father in Me. <span id="fr_3074"></span>[3075](#fn_3074)
’

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p22"></span>38. Therefore this is plain to every
one, that the flesh indeed is ignorant, but the Word Himself, considered
as the Word, knows all things even before they come to be. For He did
not, when He became man, cease to be God <span
id="fr_3075"></span>[3076](#fn_3075) ; nor, whereas He is God does He
shrink from what is man’s; perish the thought; but rather, being God, He
has taken to Him the flesh, and being in the flesh deifies the flesh.
For as He asked questions in it, so also in it did He raise the dead;
and He shewed to all that He who quickens the dead and recalls the soul,
much more discerns the secret of all. And He knew where Lazarus lay, and
yet He asked; for the All-holy Word of God, who endured all things for
our sakes, did this, that so carrying our ignorance, He might vouchsafe
to us the knowledge of His own only and true Father, and of Himself,
sent because of us for the salvation of all, than which no grace could
be greater. <span id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-Page_415"></span>When then the Saviour uses the words
which they allege in their defence, ‘Power is given to Me,’ and,
‘Glorify Thy Son,’ and Peter says, ‘Power is given unto Him,’ we
understand all these passages in the same sense, that humanly because of
the body He says all this. For though He had no need, nevertheless He is
said to have received what He received humanly, that on the other hand,
inasmuch as the Lord has received, and the grant is lodged with Him, the
grace may remain sure. For while mere man receives, he is liable to lose
again (as was shewn in the case of Adam, for he received and he
lost <span id="fr_3076"></span>[3077](#fn_3076) ), but that the grace
may be irrevocable, and may be kept sure <span
id="fr_3077"></span>[3078](#fn_3077) by men, therefore He Himself
appropriates <span id="fr_3078"></span>[3079](#fn_3078) the gift; and He
says that He has received power, as man, which He ever had as God, and
He says, ‘Glorify Me,’ who glorifies others, to shew that He hath a
flesh which has need of these things. Wherefore, when the flesh
receives, since that which receives is in Him, and by taking it He hath
become man, therefore He is said Himself to have received.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p27"></span>39. If then (as has many times been
said) the Word has not become man, then ascribe to the Word, as you
would have it, to receive, and to need glory, and to be ignorant; but if
He has become man (and He has become), and it is man’s to receive, and
to need, and to be ignorant, wherefore do we consider the Giver as
receiver, and the Dispenser to others do we suspect to be in need, and
divide the Word from the Father as imperfect and needy, while we strip
human nature of grace? For if the Word Himself, considered as Word, has
received and been glorified for His own sake, and if He according to His
Godhead is He who is hallowed and has risen again, what hope is there
for men? for they remain as they were, naked, and wretched, and dead,
having no interest in the things given to the Son. Why too did the Word
come among us, and become flesh? if that He might receive these things,
which He says that He has received, He was without them before that, and
of necessity will rather owe thanks Himself to the body <span
id="fr_3079"></span>[3080](#fn_3079) , because, when He came into it,
then He receives these things from the Father, which He had not before
His descent into the flesh. For on this shewing He seems rather to be
Himself promoted because of the body <span
id="fr_3080"></span>[3081](#fn_3080) , than the body promoted because of
Him. But this notion is Judaic. But if that He might redeem
mankind <span id="fr_3081"></span>[3082](#fn_3081) , the Word did come
among us; and that He might hallow and deify them, the Word became flesh
(and for this He did become), who does not see that it follows, that
what He says that He received, when He became flesh, that He mentions,
not for His own sake, but for the flesh? for to it, in which He was
speaking, pertained the gifts given through Him from the Father. But let
us see what He asked, and what the things altogether were which He said
that He had received, that in this way also they may be brought to
feeling. He asked then glory, yet He had said, ‘All things were
delivered unto Me <span id="fr_3082"></span>[3083](#fn_3082) .’ And
after the resurrection, He says that He has received all power; but even
before that He had said, ‘All things were delivered unto Me,’ He was
Lord of all, for ‘all things were made by Him;’ and ‘there is One Lord
by whom are all things <span id="fr_3083"></span>[3084](#fn_3083) .’ And
when He asked glory, He was as He is, the Lord of glory; as Paul says,
‘If they had known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory <span id="fr_3084"></span>[3085](#fn_3084) ;’ for He had that
glory which He asked when He said, ‘the glory which I had with Thee
before the world was <span id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p35"></span>40. Also the power which He said He
received after the resurrection, that He had before He received it, and
before the resurrection. For He of Himself rebuked Satan, saying, ‘Get
thee behind Me, Satan <span id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086) ;’ and
to the disciples He gave the power against him, when on their return He
said, ‘I beheld Satan, as lightning, fall from heaven <span
id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087) .’ And again, that what He said
that He had received, that He possessed before receiving it, appears
from His driving away the demons, and from His unbinding what Satan had
bound, as He did in the case of the daughter of Abraham; and from His
remitting sins, saying to the paralytic, and to the woman who washed His
feet, ‘Thy sins be forgiven thee <span
id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088) ;’ and from His both raising the
dead, and repairing the first nature of the blind, granting to him to
see. And all this He did, not waiting till He should receive, but being
‘possessed of power <span id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089) .’ From
all this it is plain that what He had as Word, that when He had become
man and was risen again, He says that He received humanly <span
id="fr_3090"></span>[3091](#fn_3090) ; that for His sake men might
henceforward upon earth have power against demons, as having become
partakers of a divine nature; and in heaven, as being delivered from
corruption, might reign everlastingly. Thus we must acknowledge this
once for all, that nothing which He says that He received, did He
receive as not possessing before; for the Word, as being God, had them
always; but in these passages He is said humanly to have received, that,
whereas the flesh received in Him, henceforth from it the <span
id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-Page_416"></span>gift
might abide <span id="fr_3091"></span>[3092](#fn_3091) surely for us.
For what is said by Peter, ‘receiving from God honour and glory, Angels
being made subject unto Him <span id="fr_3092"></span>[3093](#fn_3092)
,’ has this meaning. As He inquired humanly, and raised Lazarus
divinely, so ‘He received’ is spoken of Him humanly, but the subjection
of the Angels marks the Word’s Godhead.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p43"></span>41. Cease then, O abhorred of
God <span id="fr_3093"></span>[3094](#fn_3093) , and degrade not the
Word; nor detract from His Godhead, which is the Father’s <span
id="fr_3094"></span>[3095](#fn_3094) , as though He needed or were
ignorant; lest ye be casting your own arguments against the Christ, as
the Jews who once stoned Him. For these belong not to the Word, as the
Word; but are proper to men and, as when He spat, and stretched forth
the hand, and called Lazarus, we did not say that the triumphs were
human, though they were done through the body, but were God’s, so, on
the other hand, though human things are ascribed to the Saviour in the
Gospel, let us, considering the nature of what is said and that they are
foreign to God, not impute them to the Word’s Godhead, but to His
manhood. For though ‘the Word became flesh,’ yet to the flesh are the
affections proper; and though the flesh is possessed by God in the Word,
yet to the Word belong the grace and the power. He did then the Father’s
works through the flesh; and as truly contrariwise were the affections
of the flesh displayed in Him; for instance, He inquired and He raised
Lazarus, He chid <span id="fr_3095"></span>[3096](#fn_3095) His Mother,
saying, ‘My hour is not yet come,’ and then at once He made the water
wine. For He was Very God in the flesh, and He was true flesh in the
Word. Therefore from His works He revealed both Himself as Son of God,
and His own Father, and from the affections of the flesh He shewed that
He bore a true body, and that it was His own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3058"></span>[413:3059](2040375.htm#fr_3058) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p3"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p3.1"></span>[John iii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p3.3"></span>;
[Matt. xi. 27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p3.4"></span>; [John v.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p3.5"></span>

<span id="fn_3059"></span>[413:3060](2040375.htm#fr_3059) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p3.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p4"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p4.1"></span>[John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p4.3"></span>;
xvii. 10.

<span id="fn_3060"></span>[413:3061](2040375.htm#fr_3060) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p6"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p6.1"></span>[John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p6.3"></span>;
[Mat. xxviii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p6.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3061"></span>[413:3062](2040375.htm#fr_3061) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p6.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p7"></span> *Or.* i. 45; *ad Adelph.* 4.

<span id="fn_3062"></span>[413:3063](2040375.htm#fr_3062) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p8"></span> *Or.* ii. 19, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3063"></span>[413:3064](2040375.htm#fr_3063) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p9"></span> [Heb. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3064"></span>[413:3065](2040375.htm#fr_3064) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p10"></span> [John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3065"></span>[414:3066](2040375.htm#fr_3065) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p11"></span> *Or.* ii. 55, n. 8.

<span id="fn_3066"></span>[414:3067](2040375.htm#fr_3066) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p12.1"></span>πάλιν</span>. vid. *Or.* i. 15, n. 6. Thus
iteration is not duplication in respect to God; though *how* this is, is
the inscrutable Mystery of the Trinity in Unity. Nothing can be named
which the Son is in Himself, as distinct from the Father; we are but
told His *relation* towards the Father, and thus the sole meaning we are
able to attach to Person is a relation of the Son towards the Father;
and distinct from and beyond that relation, He is but the One God, who
is also the Father. This sacred subject has been touched upon *supr.
Or.* iii. 9, n. 8. In other words, there is an indestructible essential
relation existing in the One Indivisible infinitely simple God, such as
to constitute Him, viewed on each side of that relation (what in human
language we call) Two (and in like manner Three), yet without the notion
of number really coming in. When we speak of ‘Person,’ we mean nothing
more than the One God in substance, viewed relatively to Him the One
God, as viewed in that Correlative which we therefore call another
Person. These various statements are not here intended to explain, but
to bring home to the mind *what* it is which faith receives. We say
‘Father, Son, and Spirit,’ but when we would abstract a general idea of
Them in order to number Them, our abstraction really does hardly more
than carry us back to the One Substance. Such seems the meaning of such
passages as Basil. *Ep.* 8, 2; *de Sp. S.* c. 18; Chrysost. *in Joan.
Hom.* ii. 3 fin. ‘In respect of the Adorable and most Royal Trinity,
‘first’ and ‘second’ have no place; for the Godhead is higher than
number and times.’ Isid. *Pel. Ep.* 3, 18. Eulog. *ap.* Phot. 230. p.
864. August. *in Joan.* 39, 3 and 4; *de Trin.* v. 10. ‘Unity is not
number, but is itself the principle of all things.’ Ambros. *de Fid.* i.
n. 19. ‘A trine numeration then does not make number, which they rather
run into, who make some difference between the Three.’ Boeth. *Trin.
unus Deus,* p. 959. The last remark is found in Naz. *Orat.* 31, 18.
Many of these references are taken from Thomassin *de Trin.* 17.

<span id="fn_3067"></span>[414:3068](2040375.htm#fr_3067) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p13"></span> §§11, n. 4, 15, n. 11.

<span id="fn_3068"></span>[414:3069](2040375.htm#fr_3068) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p15"></span> Vid. *infr.* 46; [John xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#034)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3069"></span>[414:3070](2040375.htm#fr_3069) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p16"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p16.1"></span>[Matt. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p16.3"></span>; [Mark vi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#038)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p16.4"></span>; [Matt. xx.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#032)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p16.5"></span>

<span id="fn_3070"></span>[414:3071](2040375.htm#fr_3070) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p16.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p17"></span> ii. 44, n. 1.

<span id="fn_3071"></span>[414:3072](2040375.htm#fr_3071) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p18"></span> [John vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#006)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3072"></span>[414:3073](2040375.htm#fr_3072) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p19"></span> Petavius refers to this passage in
proof that S. Athanasius did not in his real judgment consider our Lord
ignorant, but went on to admit it in argument after having first given
his own real opinion. vid. §45, n. 2.

<span id="fn_3073"></span>[414:3074](2040375.htm#fr_3073) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p20"></span> [John xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3074"></span>[414:3075](2040375.htm#fr_3074) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p21"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p21.1"></span>[John ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p21.3"></span>; xiv. 11.

<span id="fn_3075"></span>[414:3076](2040375.htm#fr_3075) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p23"></span> *Or.* ii. 8, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3076"></span>[415:3077](2040375.htm#fr_3076) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p24"></span> *Or.* ii. 68.

<span id="fn_3077"></span>[415:3078](2040375.htm#fr_3077) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p25"></span> ii. 69, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3078"></span>[415:3079](2040375.htm#fr_3078) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p26.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p26.2"></span>διοποιεῖται</span>, cf. 33, n. 5.

<span id="fn_3079"></span>[415:3080](2040375.htm#fr_3079) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p28"></span> *Infr.* 51.

<span id="fn_3080"></span>[415:3081](2040375.htm#fr_3080) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p29"></span> *Or.* i. 38.

<span id="fn_3081"></span>[415:3082](2040375.htm#fr_3081) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p30"></span> Redemption an *internal* work. vid.
*supr.* ii. 55, n. 1.

<span id="fn_3082"></span>[415:3083](2040375.htm#fr_3082) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p31"></span> [Luke x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3083"></span>[415:3084](2040375.htm#fr_3083) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p32"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p32.1"></span>[1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p32.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3084"></span>[415:3085](2040375.htm#fr_3084) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p32.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p33"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[415:3086](2040375.htm#fr_3085) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p34"></span> [Joh. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[415:3087](2040375.htm#fr_3086) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p36"></span> [Luke iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#008)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[415:3088](2040375.htm#fr_3087) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p37"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p37.1"></span>[Luke
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p37.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[415:3089](2040375.htm#fr_3088) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p37.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p38"></span> Vid. [Luke
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#016), [Matt.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#005), [Luke
7:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#048)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p38.1"></span>[Matt. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#005)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p38.3"></span>;
[Luke vii. 48](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#048)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p38.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[415:3090](2040375.htm#fr_3089) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p38.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p39"></span> [Is. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p39.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_3090"></span>[415:3091](2040375.htm#fr_3090) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p40"></span> *Or.* i. 45.

<span id="fn_3091"></span>[416:3092](2040375.htm#fr_3091) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p41.1"></span>διαμείνῃ</span>, *Or.* ii. 69, 3.

<span id="fn_3092"></span>[416:3093](2040375.htm#fr_3092) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p41.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p42"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p42.1"></span>[2 Pet. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p42.3"></span>; [1 Pet. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p42.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3093"></span>[416:3094](2040375.htm#fr_3093) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p44.1"></span>θεοστυγεῖς</span>, *supr.* §16, n. 7.
*infr.* §58, *de Mort. Ar.* 1. *In illud Omn.* 6.

<span id="fn_3094"></span>[416:3095](2040375.htm#fr_3094) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p44.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p45"></span> §1, n. 11.

<span id="fn_3095"></span>[416:3096](2040375.htm#fr_3095) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46"></span> [John ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)<span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.3"></span>πέπληττε</span>; and
so <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.6"></span>πετίμησε</span>,
Chrysost. *in loc. Joan.* and Theophyl. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.8"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.9"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.10"></span>δεσπότης ἐπιτιμᾷ</span>, Theodor. *Eran.*
ii. p. 106. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.12"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.13"></span>ντρέπει</span>, Anon. ap. Corder. *Cat.
in loc.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.15"></span>μέμφεται</span>, Alter Anon. ibid. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.17"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.18"></span>πιτιμᾶ οὐκ ἀτιμάζων
ἀλλὰ διορθούμενος</span>, Euthym. *in loc.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.20"></span>οὐκ ἐπέπληξεν</span>, Pseudo-Justin.
*Quæst. ad Orthod.* 136. It is remarkable that Athan. dwells on these
words as implying our Lord’s humanity (i.e. because Christ appeared to
*decline* a miracle), when one reason assigned for them by the Fathers
is that He wished, in the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.22"></span>τί μοι καί σοι</span>, to remind S. Mary
that He was the Son of God and must be ‘about His Father’s business.’
‘Repeliens ejus intempestivam festinationem,’ Iren. *Hær.* iii. 16, n.
7. It is observable that <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.24"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.25"></span>πιπλήττει</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.26"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.v-p46.27"></span>πιτιμᾷ</span> are the
words used by Cyril, &c. (*infr.* §54, note 4), for our Lord’s treatment
of His own sacred body. But they are very vague words, and have a strong
meaning or not, as the case may be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Texts Explained; Eleventhly, Mark xiii. 32 and Luke ii. 52. Arian
explanation of the former text is against the Regula Fidei; and against
the context. Our Lord said He was ignorant of the Day, by reason of His
human nature. If the Holy Spirit knows the Day, therefore the Son knows;
if the Son knows the Father, therefore He knows the Day; if He has all
that is the Father's, therefore knowledge of the Day; if in the Father,
He knows the Day in the Father; if He created and upholds all things, He
knows when they will cease to be. He knows not as Man, argued from Matt.
xxiv. 42. As He asked about Lazarus's grave, &c., yet knew, so He knows;
as S. Paul says, 'whether in the body I know not,' &c., yet knew, so He
knows. He said He knew not for our profit, that we be not curious (as in
Acts i. 7, where on the contrary He did not say He knew not). As the
Almighty asks of Adam and of Cain, yet knew, so the Son knows\[as God\].
Again, He advanced in wisdom also as man, else He made Angels perfect
before Himself. He adva](2040376)
