[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040326)  [Next](2040328) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xix.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> 24. *Irruption of Syrianus.*

<span id="xix.ii.xxiv-p2"></span>This were sufficient to put a stop to
the madness of these impious men, and to prove that their desire is for
nothing else, but only through a love of contention to utter revilings
and insults. But forasmuch as having once dared to fight against Christ,
they have now become officious, let them enquire and learn into the
manner of my withdrawal from their own friends. For the Arians were
mixed with the soldiers in order to exasperate them against me, and, as
they were unacquainted with my person, to point me out to them. And
although they are destitute of all feelings of compassion, yet when they
hear the circumstances they will surely be quiet for very shame. It was
now night <span id="fr_1499"></span>[1500](#fn_1499) , and some of the
people were keeping a vigil preparatory to a communion on the morrow,
when the General Syrianus suddenly came upon us with more than five
thousand soldiers, having arms and drawn swords, bows, spears, and
clubs, as I have related above. With these he surrounded the Church,
stationing his soldiers near at hand, in order that no one might be able
to leave the Church and pass by them. Now I considered that it would be
unreasonable in me to desert the people during such a disturbance, and
not to endanger myself in their behalf; therefore I sat down upon my
throne, and desired the Deacon to read a Psalm, and the people to
answer, ‘For His mercy endureth for ever <span
id="fr_1500"></span>[1501](#fn_1500) ,’ and then all to withdraw and
depart home. But the General having now <span id="page_264">p.
264</span> <span id="xix.ii.xxiv-Page_264"></span>made a forcible entry,
and the soldiers having surrounded the sanctuary for the purpose of
apprehending us, the Clergy and those of the laity, who were still
there, cried out, and demanded that we too should withdraw. But I
refused, declaring that I would not do so, until they had retired one
and all. Accordingly I stood up, and having bidden prayer, I then made
my request of them, that all should depart before me, saying that it was
better that my safety should be endangered, than that any of them should
receive hurt. So when the greater part had gone forth, and the rest were
following, the monks who were there with us and certain of the Clergy
came up and dragged us away. And thus (Truth is my witness), while some
of the soldiers stood about the sanctuary, and others were going round
the Church, we passed through, under the Lord’s guidance, and with His
protection withdrew without observation, greatly glorifying God that we
had not betrayed the people, but had first sent them away, and then had
been able to save ourselves, and to escape the hands of them which
sought after us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[263:1500](2040327.htm#fr_1499) <span
id="xix.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> *Apol. Const.* 25.

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[263:1501](2040327.htm#fr_1500) <span
id="xix.ii.xxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ii.xxiv-p4"></span> [Ps. cxxxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001)<span id="xix.ii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>
\[on psalmody at Alexandria, cf. Aug. *Conf.* x. 33.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Athanasius's wonderful escape.](2040328)
