[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040019)  [Next](2040021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p1"></span> §7. *The Golden Decade,* 346–356.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p2"></span>(1). This period is divided into two by
the death of Constans in 350, or perhaps more exactly by the final
settlement of sole power in the hands of Constantius on the day of
Mursa, Sept. 28, 351 <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) . The
*internal* condition of the Church at Alexandria, however, was not
seriously disturbed even in the second period. From this point of view
the entire period may be treated as one. Its opening was auspicious.
Egypt fully participated in the ‘profound and wonderful peace’ (p. 278)
of the Churches. The Bishops of province after province were sending in
their letters of adhesion to the Synod of Sardica (*ib.* and p. 127),
and those of Egypt signed to a man.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p4"></span>The public rejoicing of the Alexandrian
Church had something of the character of a ‘mission’ in modern Church
life. A wave of religious enthusiasm passed over the whole community.
‘How many widows and how many orphans, who were before hungry and naked,
now through the great zeal of the people were no longer hungry, and went
forth clothed;’ ‘in a word, so great was their emulation in virtue, that
you would have thought every family and every house a Church, by reason
of the goodness of its inmates and the prayers which were offered to
God’ (p. 278). Increased strictness of life, the sanctification of home,
renewed application to prayer, and practical charity, these were a
worthy welcome to their long-lost pastor. But most conspicuous was the
impulse to asceticism. Marriages were renounced and even dissolved in
favour of the monastic life; the same instincts were at work (but in
greater intensity) as had asserted themselves at the close of the era of
the pagan persecutions (p. 200, §4, *fin*.). Our knowledge of the
history of the Egyptian Church under the ten years’ peaceful rule of
Athanasius is confined to a few details and to what we can infer from
results.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p5"></span>Strong as was the position of Athanasius
in Egypt upon his return from exile, his hold upon the country grew with
each year of the decade. When circumstances set Constantius free to
resume the Arian campaign, it was against Athanasius that he worked; at
first from the remote West, then by attempts to remove or coax him from
Alexandria. But Athanasius was in an impregnable position, and when at
last the city was seized by the *coup de main* of 356, from his hidings
places in Egypt he was more inaccessible still, more secure in his
defence, more free to attack. Now the extraordinary development of
Egyptian <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>Monachism</span> must be placed in the first
rank of the causes which strengthened Athanasius in Egypt. The
institution was already firmly rooted there (cf. p. 190), and Pachomius,
a slightly older contemporary of Athanasius himself, had converted a
sporadic manifestation of the ascetic impulse into an organised form of
Community Life. Pachomius himself had died on May 9, 346 (*infr*. p.
lx., note 3, and p. 569, note 3: cf. *Theolog. Literaturztg.* 1890, p.
622), but Athanasius was welcomed soon after his arrival by a deputation
from the Society of Tabenne, who also conveyed a special message from
the aged Antony. Athanasius placed himself at the head of the monastic
movement, and we cannot doubt that while he won the enthusiastic
devotion of these dogged and ardent Copts, his influence on the movement
tended to restrain extravagances and to correct the morbid exaltation of
the monastic ideal. It is remarkable that the only letters which survive
from this decade (pp. 556–560) are to monks, and that they both support
what has just been said. The army of Egyptian monks was destined to
become a too powerful weapon, a scandal and a danger to the Church: but
the monks were the main secret of the power and ubiquitous activity of
Athanasius in his third exile, and that power was above all built up
during the golden decade.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p6"></span>Coupled with the growth of monachism is
the transformation of the episcopate. The great power enjoyed by the
Archbishop of Alexandria made it a matter of course that in a prolonged
episcopate discordant elements would gradually vanish and unanimity
increase. This was the case under Athanasius: but the unanimity
reflected in the letter *ad Afros* had practically already come about in
the year of the return of Ath. from Aquileia, when nearly every bishop
in Egypt signed the Sardican letter (p. 127; the names include the new
bishops of 346–7 in *Letter* 19, with one or two exceptions). Athanasius
not infrequently (pp. 559 *sq*. and *Vit. Pach.* 72) filled up vacancies
in the episcopate from among the monks, and Serapion of Thmuis, his most
trusted suffragan, remained after his elevation in very close relation
with the monasteries.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p7"></span>Athanasius consecrated bishops not only
for Egypt, but for the remote Abyssinian kingdom of Auxume as well. The
visit of Frumentius to Alexandria, and his consecration as bishop for
Auxume, are referred by Rufinus i. 9 (Socr. i. 19, &c.) to the beginning
of the episcopate of Athanasius. But the chronology of the story
(Gwatkin, pp. 93 *sqq.*, D.C.B. ii. 236 where the argument is faulty)
forbids this altogether, while the letter of Constantius (p. 250) is
most natural if the consecration of Frumentius were then a comparatively
recent matter, scarcely intelligible if it had taken place before the
‘deposition’ of Athan. by the council of Tyre. Athanasius had found
Egypt distracted by religious dissensions; but by the time of the third
exile we hear very little of Arians excepting in Alexandria itself (see
p. 564); the ‘Arians’ of the rest of Egypt were the remnant of the
Meletians, whose monks are still mentioned by Theodoret (cf. p. 299
*sq*.). An incident which shews the growing numbers of the Alexandrian
Church during this period is the necessity which arose at Easter in one
year of using the unfinished Church of the Cæsareum (for its history cf.
p. 243, note 6, and *Hist. Aceph.* vi., *Fest. Ind.* xxxvii., xxxviii.,
xl.) owing to the vast crowds of worshippers. The Church was a gift of
Constantius, and had been begun by Gregory, and its use before
completion and dedication was treated by the Arians as an act of
presumption and disrespect on the part of Athanasius.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p8"></span><span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span> <span
id="v.ii.viii-Page_xlix"></span>(2.) But while all was so happy in
Egypt, the ‘profound peace’ of the rest of the Church was more apparent
than real. The temporary revulsion of feeling on the part of
Constantius, the engrossing urgency of the Persian war, the readiness of
Constans to use his formidable power to secure justice to the Nicene
bishops in the East, all these were causes which compelled peace, while
leaving the deeper elements of strife to smoulder untouched. The rival
depositions and anathemas of the hostile Councils remained without
effect. Valens was in possession at Mursa, Photinus at Sirmium.
Marcellus was, probably, not at Ancyra (Zahn 82); but the Arians deposed
at Sardica were all undisturbed, while Athanasius was more firmly
established than ever at Alexandria. On the whole, the Episcopate of the
East was entirely in the hands of the reaction—the Nicene element, often
large, among the laity was in many cases conciliated with difficulty.
This is conspicuously the case at Antioch, where the temporising policy
of Leontius managed to retain in communion a powerful body of orthodox
Christians, headed by Diodorus and Flavian, whose energy neutralised the
effect of his own steadily Arian policy (particulars, Gwatkin, pp. 133,
*sqq.,* Newman, *Arians*4, p. 455—from Thdt. *H. E*. ii. 24). The
Eustathian schism at Antioch was, apparently, paralleled by a Marcellian
schism at Ancyra, but such cases were decidedly the exception.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p9"></span>Of the mass of instances where the
bishops were not Arian but simply conservative, the Church of Jerusalem
is the type. We have the instructions given to the Catechumens of this
city between 348 and 350 by <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.viii-p9.1"></span>Cyril</span>, who in the latter year (*Hort*,
p. 92) became bishop, and whose career is typical of the rise and
development of so-called semi-Arianism. Cyril, like the conservatives
generally, is strongly under the influence of Origen (see Caspari iv.
146–162, and of. the *Catechesis* in Heurtley *de Fid. et Symb.* 62 with
the Regula Fidei in Orig. *de Princ.* i.). The instructions insist
strongly on the necessity of *scriptural* language, and while
contradicting the doctrines of Arius (without mentioning his name; cf.
Athanasius on Marcellus and Photinus in pp. 433–447) Cyril tacitly
protests against the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.viii-p9.2"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.viii-p9.3"></span>μοούσιον</span> as of human contrivance
(*Cat.* v. 12), and uses in preference the words ‘like to the Father
according to the Scriptures’ or ‘in all things.’ This language is that
of Athanasius also, especially in his earlier works (pp. 84 *sqq*.), but
in the latter phase of the controversy, especially in the Dated Creed of
359, which presents striking resemblances to Cyril’s Catecheses, it
became the watchword of the party of reaction. The Church of Jerusalem
then was orthodox substantially, but rejected the Nicene formula, and
this was the case in the East generally, except where the bishops were
positively Arian. All were aggrieved at the way in which the Eastern
councils had been treated by the West, and smarted under a sense of
defeat (cf. Bright, Introd. to *Hist. Tr.*, p. xviii.).

<span id="v.ii.viii-p10"></span>Accordingly the murder of Constans in
350 was the harbinger of renewed religious discord. For a time the
political future was doubtful. Magnentius, knowing what Athanasius had
to fear from Constantius, made a bid for the support of Egypt.
Clementius and Valens, two members of a deputation to Constantius, came
round by way of Egypt to ascertain the disposition of the country, and
especially of its Bishop. Athanasius received them with bitter
lamentations for Constans, and, fearing the possibility of an invasion
by Magnentius, he called upon his congregation to pray for the Eastern
Emperor. The response was immediate and unanimous: ‘O Christ, send help
to Constantius’ (p. 242). The Emperor had, in fact, sought to secure the
fidelity of Athanasius by a letter (pp. 247, 278), assuring him of his
continued support. And until the defeat of Magnentius at Mursa, he kept
his word. That victory, which was as decisive for Valens as it was for
Constantius (Gibbon, ii. 381, iii. 66, ed. Smith), was followed up by a
Council at Sirmium, which successfully ousted the too popular Photinus
(cf. pp. 280, 298; on the appeal of Photinus, and the debate between him
and Basil of Ancyra, apparently in 355, see Gwatkin, pp. 145 *sq*., note
6). This was made the occasion for a new onslaught upon Marcellus in the
anathemas appended to a reissue of the ‘fourth Antiochene’ or
Philippopolitan Creed (p. 465; on the tentative character of these
anathemas as a polemical move, cf. Gwatkin, p. 147, note 1). The Emperor
was occupied for more than a year with the final suppression of
Magnentius (Aug. 10, 353), but ‘the first Winter after his victory,
which he spent at Arles, was employed against an enemy more odious to
him than the vanquished tyrant of Gaul’ (Gibbon).

<span id="v.ii.viii-p11"></span>It is unnecessary to detail the tedious
and unedifying story of the councils of Arles and Milan. The former was
a provincial council of Gaul, attended by legates of the Roman see. All
present submissively registered the imperial condemnation of Athanasius.
The latter, delayed till 355 by the Rhenish campaign of Constantius, was
due to the request of Liberius, who desired to undo the evil work of his
legates, and to the desire of the Emperor to follow up the verdict of a
provincial with that of a more representative Synod. The number of
bishops present was probably very small (the numbers in Socrates ii. 36,
Soz. iv. 9, may refer to those who afterwards signed under compulsion,
p. 280, cf. the case of Sardica, p. 127, note 10). The proceedings were
a drama in three acts, first, submission, the legates protesting;
secondly, stormy protest, after the arrival of Eusebius of Vercellæ;
thirdly, open coercion. The deposition of Athanasius was proffered to
each bishop for signature, and, if he refused, a sentence of banishment
was at once pronounced, the emperor sitting with the ‘velum’ drawn, much
as though an English judge were to assume the black cap at the
*beginning* of a capital trial. He cut short argument by announcing that
‘he was for the prosecution,’ and remonstrance by the sentence of exile
(p. 299); the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.viii-p11.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.viii-p11.2"></span>περ ἐγὼ βούλομαι τούτο κανών</span> put into
his mouth by Athanasius (p. 281) represents at any rate the spirit of
his <span id="page_l">p. l</span> <span
id="v.ii.viii-Page_l"></span>proceedings as justly as does ‘*la
tradizione son’ io*’ that of the autocrat of a more recent council. At
this council no creed was put forth: until the enemy was dislodged from
Alexandria the next step would be premature. But a band of exiles were
sent in strict custody to the East, of some of whom we shall hear later
on (pp. 561, 481, 281, cf. p. 256, and the excellent monograph of
Krüger, *Lucifer von Calaris,* pp. 9–23).

<span id="v.ii.viii-p12"></span>Meanwhile, Athanasius had been
peacefully pursuing his diocesan duties, but not without a careful
outlook as the clouds gathered on the horizon. The prospect of a revival
of the charges against him moved him to set in order an unanswerable
array of documents, in proof, firstly of the unanimity, secondly of the
good reason, with which he had been acquitted of them (see p. 97). He
had also, in view of revived assertions of Arianism, drawn up the two
letters or memoranda on the rationale of the Nicene formula and on the
opinion ascribed to his famous predecessor, Dionysius (the *Apology* was
probably written about 351, the date of the *de Decr.*, and *de Sent.
Dion.* <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) falls a little later.md). In
353 he began to apprehend danger, from the hopes with which the
establishment of Constantius in the sole possession of the Empire was
inspiring his enemies, headed by Valens in the West, and Acacius of
Cæsarea in the East. Accordingly, he despatched a powerful deputation to
Constantius, who was then at Milan, headed by Serapion, his most trusted
suffragan (cf. p. 560, note 3a; p. 497, §3, copied by Soz. iv. 9; *Fest.
Ind.* xxv.). The legates sailed May 19, but on the 23rd Montanus, an
officer of the Palace, arrived with an Imperial letter, declining to
receive any legates, but granting an alleged request of Athanasius to be
allowed to come to Italy (p. 245 *sq*.). As he had made no request of
the kind, Athanasius naturally suspected a plot to entice him away from
his stronghold. The letter of Constantius did not convey an absolute
command, so Athanasius, protesting his willingness to come when ordered
to do so, resolved to remain where he was for the present. ‘All the
people were exceedingly troubled,’ according to our chroniclers. ‘In
this year Montanus was sent against the bishop, but a tumult having been
excited, he retired without effect.’ Two years and two months later,
i.e., in July–Aug. 355 (p. 497), force was attempted instead of
stratagem, which the proceedings of Arles had, of course, made useless.
‘In this year Diogenes, the Secretary of the Emperor, came with the
intention of seizing the bishop,’ and ‘Diogenes pressed hard upon all,
trying to dislodge the bishop from the city, and he afflicted all pretty
severely; but on Sept. 4 <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) he pressed
sharply, and stormed a Church, and this he did continually for four
months…until Dec. 23. But as the people and magistrates vehemently
withstood Diogenes, he returned back without effect on the 23rd of
December aforesaid’ (*Fest. Ind*. xxvii., *Hist. Aceph*. iii.). The
fatal blow was clearly imminent. By this time the exiles had begun to
arrive in the East, and rumours came <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) that not even the powerful and popular
Liberius, not even ‘Father’ Hosius himself, had been spared. Athanasius
might well point out to Dracontius (p. 558) that in declining the
bishopric of the ‘country district of Alexandria’ he was avoiding the
post of danger. On the sixth of January the ‘Duke’ Syrianus arrived in
Alexandria, concentrating in the city drafts from all the legions
stationed in Egypt and Libya. Rumour was active as to the intentions of
the commandant, and Athanasius felt justified in asking him whether he
came with any orders from the Court. Syrianus replied that he did not,
and Athanasius then produced the letter of Constantius referred to above
(written 350–351). The magistrates and people joined in the
remonstrance, and at last Syrianus protested ‘by the life of Cæsar’ that
he would remain quiet until the matter had been referred to the Emperor.
This restored confidence, and on Thursday night, Feb. 8, Athanasius was
presiding at a crowded service of preparation for a Communion on the
following morning (Friday after Septuagesima) in the Church of Theonas,
which with the exception of the unfinished Cæsareum was the largest in
the city (p. 243). Suddenly the church was surrounded and the doors
broken in, and just after midnight Syrianus and the ‘notary’ Hilary
‘entered with an infinite force of soldiers.’ Athanasius (his fullest
account is p. 263) calmly took his seat upon the throne (in the recess
of the apse), and ordered the deacon to begin the 136th psalm, the
people responding at each verse ‘for His mercy endureth for ever.’
Meanwhile the soldiers crowded up to the chancel, and in spite of
entreaties the bishop refused to escape until the congregation were in
safety. He ordered the prayers to proceed, and only at the last moment a
crowd of monks and clergy seized the Archbishop and managed to convey
him in the confusion out of the church in a half-fainting state (protest
of Alexandrians, p. 301), <span id="page_li">p. li</span> <span
id="v.ii.viii-Page_li"></span>but thankful that he had been able to
secure the escape of his people before his own (p. 264). From that
moment Athanasius was lost to public view for ‘six years and fourteen
days’ (*Hist. Aceph.,* i.e., Mechir 13, 356–Mechir 27, 362), ‘for he
remembered that which was written, Hide thyself as it were for a little
moment, until the indignation be overpast (pp. 288, 252, 262).
Constantius and the Arians had planned their blow with skill and
delivered it with decisive effect. But they had won a ‘Cadmean Victory.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xlviii:67](2040020.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="v.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p3"></span> See below.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[l:68](2040020.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="v.ii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p13"></span> In *de Sent. Dion.* 23, 24, Arius is
spoken of in a way consistent with his being still alive. But the phase
of the Arian controversy to which the tract relates begins a decade
after Arius’ death, and we therefore follow the indications which class
the *de Sent.* with the *de Decr.*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[l:69](2040020.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="v.ii.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p14"></span> All the following dates are affected by
Leap-Year, 355–6, see Table C, p. 501, and correct p. 246, note 3, to
Jan. 6.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[l:70](2040020.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="v.ii.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p15"></span> Definite information came only after
Feb. 8, see p. 248.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Third Exile, 356-362.](2040021.md)
