[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040425)  [Next](2040427) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>Letter XIX</span>.—*(For 347.) Coss.
Rufinus, Eusebius; Præf. the same Nestorius; Indict. v; Easter-day,
Prid. Id. Apr., Pharmuthi xvii; Æra Dioclet. 63; Moon 15.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p2"></span>‘<span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>Blessed</span> is God, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ <span id="fr_4438"></span>[4439](#fn_4438) ,’ for such
an introduction is fitting for an Epistle, and more especially now, when
it brings thanksgiving to the Lord, in the Apostle’s words, because He
hath brought us from a distance, and granted us again to send openly to
you, as usual, the Festal Letters. For this is the season of the feast,
my brethren, and it is near; being not now proclaimed by trumpets, as
the history records <span id="fr_4439"></span>[4440](#fn_4439) , but
being made known and brought near to us by the Saviour, Who suffered on
our behalf and rose again, even as Paul preached, saying, ‘Our Passover,
Christ, is sacrificed <span id="fr_4440"></span>[4441](#fn_4440) .’
Henceforth the feast of the Passover is ours, not that of a stranger,
nor is it any longer of the Jews <span
id="fr_4441"></span>[4442](#fn_4441) . For the time of shadows is
abolished, and those former things have ceased, and now the month of new
things <span id="fr_4442"></span>[4443](#fn_4442) is at hand, in which
every man should keep the feast, in obedience to Him who said, ‘Observe
the <span id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-Page_545"></span>month of new things, and keep the
Passover to the Lord thy God <span id="fr_4443"></span>[4444](#fn_4443)
.’ Even the heathen fancy they keep festival, and the Jews
hypo-critically feign to do so. But the feast of the heathen He
reproves, as the bread <span id="fr_4444"></span>[4445](#fn_4444) of
mourners, and He turns His face from that of the Jews, as being
outcasts, saying, ‘Your new moons and your sabbaths My soul hateth <span
id="fr_4445"></span>[4446](#fn_4445) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p11"></span>2. For actions not done lawfully
and piously, are not of advantage, though they may be reputed to be so,
but they rather argue hypocrisy in those who venture upon them.
Therefore, although such persons feign to offer sacrifices, yet they
hear from the Father, ‘Your whole burnt-offerings are not acceptable,
and your sacrifices do not please Me; and although ye bring fine flour,
it is vanity, incense also is an abomination unto Me <span
id="fr_4446"></span>[4447](#fn_4446) .’ For God does not need
anything <span id="fr_4447"></span>[4448](#fn_4447) ; and, since nothing
is unclean to Him, He is full in regard to them, as He testifies, by
Isaiah, saying, ‘I am full <span id="fr_4448"></span>[4449](#fn_4448) .’
Now there was a law given about these things, for the instruction of the
people, and to prefigure things to come, for Paul saith to the
Galatians; ‘Before faith came, we were kept guarded under the law, being
shut up in the faith which should afterwards be revealed unto us;
wherefore the law was our instructor in Christ, that we might be
justified by faith <span id="fr_4449"></span>[4450](#fn_4449) .’ But the
Jews knew not, neither did they understand, therefore they walked in the
daytime as in darkness, feeling for, but not touching, the truth we
possess, which \[was contained\] in the law; conforming to the letter,
but not submitting to the spirit. And when Moses was veiled, they looked
on him, but turned away their faces from him when he was uncovered. For
they knew not what they read, but erroneously substituted one thing for
another. The prophet, therefore, cried against them, saying, ‘Falsehood
and faithlessness have prevailed among them.’ The Lord also therefore
said concerning them, ‘The strange children have dealt falsely with Me;
the strange children have waxen old <span
id="fr_4450"></span>[4451](#fn_4450) .’ But how gently does He reprove
them, saying, ‘Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed Me, for he
wrote of Me <span id="fr_4451"></span>[4452](#fn_4451) .’ But being
faithless, they went on to deal falsely with the law, affirming things
after their own pleasure, but not understanding the Scripture; and,
further, as they had hypocritically made a pretence of the plain text of
Scripture, and had confidence in this, He is angry with them, saying by
Isaiah, ‘Who hath required these of your hands <span
id="fr_4452"></span>[4453](#fn_4452) ?’ And by Jeremiah, since they were
very bold, he threatens, ‘Gather together your whole burnt-offerings
with your sacrifices, and eat flesh, for I spake not unto your fathers,
nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of
Egypt, concerning whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices <span
id="fr_4453"></span>[4454](#fn_4453) .’ For they did not act as was
right, neither was their zeal according to law, but they rather sought
their own pleasure in such days, as the prophet accuses them, beating
down their bondsmen, and gathering themselves together for strifes and
quarrels, and they smote the lowly with the fist, and did all things
that tended to their own gratification. For this cause, they continue
without a feast until the end, although they make a display now of
eating flesh, out of place and out of season. For, instead of the
legally-appointed lamb, they have learned to sacrifice to Baal; instead
of the true unleavened bread, ‘they collect the wood, and their fathers
kindle the fire, and their wives prepare the dough, that they may make
cakes to the host of heaven, and pour out libations to strange gods,
that they may provoke Me to anger, saith the Lord <span
id="fr_4454"></span>[4455](#fn_4454) .’ They have the just reward of
such devices, since, although they pretend to keep the Passover, yet joy
and gladness is taken from their mouth, as saith Jeremiah, ‘There hath
been taken away from the cities of Judah, and the streets of Jerusalem,
the voice of those who are glad, and the voice of those who rejoice; the
voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride <span
id="fr_4455"></span>[4456](#fn_4455) .’ Therefore now, ‘he who among
them sacrificeth an ox, is as he who smiteth a man, and he who
sacrificeth a lamb is as he who killeth a dog, he that offereth fine
flour, is as \[if he offered\] swine’s blood, he that giveth
frankincense for a memorial, is as a blasphemer <span
id="fr_4456"></span>[4457](#fn_4456) .’ Now these things will never
please God, neither thus hath the word required of them. But He saith,
‘These have chosen their own ways; and their abominations are what their
soul delighteth in <span id="fr_4457"></span>[4458](#fn_4457) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p24"></span>3. And what does this mean my
brethren? For it is right for us to investigate the saying of the
prophet, and especially on account of heretics who have turned their
mind against the law. By Moses then, God gave commandment respecting
sacrifices, and all the book called Leviticus is entirely taken up with
the arrangement of these matters, so that He might accept the offerer.
So through the Prophets, He blames him who despised these things, as
disobedient to the command<span id="page_546">p. 546</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-Page_546"></span>ment saying, ‘I have not required
these at your hands. Neither did I speak to your fathers respecting
sacrifices, nor command them concerning whole burnt-offerings <span
id="fr_4458"></span>[4459](#fn_4458) .’ Now it is the opinion of some,
that the Scriptures do not agree together, or that God, Who gave the
commandment, is false. But there is no disagreement whatever, far from
it, neither can the Father, Who is truth, lie; ‘for it is impossible
that God should lie <span id="fr_4459"></span>[4460](#fn_4459) ,’ as
Paul affirms. But all these things are plain to those who rightly
consider them, and to those who receive with faith the writings of the
law. Now it appears to me—may God grant, by your prayers, that the
remarks I presume to make may not be far from the truth—that not at
first were the commandment and the law concerning sacrifices, neither
did the mind of God, Who gave the law, regard whole burnt-offerings, but
those things which were pointed out and prefigured by them. ‘For the law
contained a shadow of good things to come.’ And, ‘Those things were
appointed until the time of reformation <span
id="fr_4460"></span>[4461](#fn_4460) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p28"></span>4. Therefore, the whole law did not
treat of sacrifices, though there was in the law a commandment
concerning sacrifices, that by means of them it might begin to instruct
men and might withdraw them from idols, and bring them near to God,
teaching them for that present time. Therefore neither at the beginning,
when God brought the people out of Egypt, did He command them concerning
sacrifices or whole burnt-offerings, nor even when they came to mount
Sinai. For God is not as man, that He should be careful about these
things beforehand; but His commandment was given, that they might know
Him Who is truly God, and His Word, and might despise those which are
falsely called gods, which are not, but appear in outward show. So He
made Himself known to them in that He brought them out of Egypt, and
caused them to pass through the Red Sea. But when they chose to serve
Baal, and dared to offer sacrifices to those that have no existence, and
forgot the miracles which were wrought in their behalf in Egypt, and
thought of returning thither again; then indeed, after the law, that
commandment concerning sacrifices was ordained as law; so that with
their mind, which at one time had meditated on those which are not, they
might turn to Him Who is truly God, and learn not, in the first place,
to sacrifice, but to turn away their faces from idols, and conform to
what God commanded. For when He saith, ‘I have not spoken concerning
sacrifices, neither given commandment concerning whole burnt-offerings,’
He immediately adds, ‘But this is the thing which I commanded them,
saying, Obey My voice, and I will be to you a God, and ye shall be to Me
a people, and ye shall walk in all the ways that I command you <span
id="fr_4461"></span>[4462](#fn_4461) .’ Thus then, being before
instructed and taught, they learned not to do service to any one but the
Lord. They attained to know what time the shadow should last, and not to
forget the time that was at hand, in which no longer should the bullock
of the herd be a sacrifice to God, nor the ram of the flock, nor the
he-goat <span id="fr_4462"></span>[4463](#fn_4462) , but all these
things should be fulfilled in a purely spiritual manner, and by constant
prayer, and upright conversation, with godly words; as David sings, ‘May
my meditation be pleasing to Him. Let my prayer be set forth before Thee
as incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the evening
sacrifice <span id="fr_4463"></span>[4464](#fn_4463) .’ The Spirit also,
who is in him, commands, saying, ‘Offer unto God the sacrifice of
praise, and pay to the Lord thy vows. Offer the sacrifice of
righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord <span
id="fr_4464"></span>[4465](#fn_4464) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p33"></span>5. Samuel, that great man, no less
clearly reproved Saul, saying, ‘Is not the word better than a gift <span
id="fr_4465"></span>[4466](#fn_4465) ?’ For hereby a man fulfils the
law, and pleases God, as He saith, ‘The sacrifice of praise shall
glorify Me.’ Let a man ‘learn what this means, I will have mercy, and
not sacrifice <span id="fr_4466"></span>[4467](#fn_4466) ,’ and I will
not condemn the adversaries. But this wearied them, for they were not
anxious to understand, ‘for had they known, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory <span id="fr_4467"></span>[4468](#fn_4467)
.’ And what their end is, the prophet foretold, crying, ‘Woe unto their
soul, for they have devised an evil thought, saying, let us bind the
just man, because he is not pleasing to us <span
id="fr_4468"></span>[4469](#fn_4468) .’ The end of such abandonment as
this can be nothing but error, as the Lord, when reproving them, saith,
‘Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures <span
id="fr_4469"></span>[4470](#fn_4469) .’ Afterwards when, being reproved,
they should have come to their senses, they rather grew insolent,
saying, ‘We are Moses’ disciples; and we know that God spake to
Moses <span id="fr_4470"></span>[4471](#fn_4470) ;’ dealing the more
falsely by that very expression, and accusing themselves. For had they
believed him to whom they hearkened, they would not have denied the
Lord, Who spake by Moses, when He was present. Not so did the eunuch in
the Acts, for when he heard, ‘Understandest thou what thou readest <span
id="fr_4471"></span>[4472](#fn_4471) ?’ he was not ashamed to confess
his ignorance, and implored to be taught. Therefore, to him who became a
learner, the grace of the Spirit was given. But as for those <span
id="page_547">p. 547</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-Page_547"></span>Jews who persisted in their
ignorance; as the proverb saith, ‘Death came upon them. For the fool
dies in his sins <span id="fr_4472"></span>[4473](#fn_4472) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p42"></span>6. Like these too, are the
heretics, who, having fallen from true discernment, dare to invent to
themselves atheism. ‘For the fool saith in his heart, There is no God.
They are corrupt, and become abominable in their doings <span
id="fr_4473"></span>[4474](#fn_4473) .’ Of such as are fools in their
thoughts, the actions are wicked, as He saith, ‘can ye, being evil,
speak good things <span id="fr_4474"></span>[4475](#fn_4474) ;’ for they
were evil, because they thought wickedness. Or how can those do just
acts, whose minds are set upon fraud? Or how shall he love, who is
prepared beforehand to hate? How shall he be merciful, who is bent upon
the love of money? How shall he be chaste, who looks upon a woman to
lust after her? ‘For from the heart proceed evil thoughts, fornications,
adulteries, murders <span id="fr_4475"></span>[4476](#fn_4475) .’ By
them the fool is wrecked, as by the waves of the sea, being led away and
enticed by his fleshly pleasures; for this stands written, ‘All flesh of
fools is greatly tempest-tossed <span
id="fr_4476"></span>[4477](#fn_4476) .’ While he associates with folly,
he is tossed by a tempest, and perishes, as Solomon says in the
Proverbs, ‘The fool and he who lacketh understanding shall perish
together, and shall leave their wealth to strangers <span
id="fr_4477"></span>[4478](#fn_4477) .’ Now they suffer such things,
because there is not among them one sound of mind to guide them. For
where there is sagacity, there the Word, who is the Pilot of souls, is
with the vessel; ‘for he that hath understanding shall possess
guidance <span id="fr_4478"></span>[4479](#fn_4478) ;’ but they who are
without guidance fall like the leaves. Who has so completely fallen away
as Hymenæus and Philetus, who held evil opinions respecting the
resurrection, and concerning faith in it suffered shipwreck? And Judas
being a traitor, fell away from the Pilot, and perished with the
Jews <span id="fr_4479"></span>[4480](#fn_4479) . But the disciples
since they were wise, and therefore remained with the Lord, although the
sea was agitated, and the ship covered with the waves, for there was a
storm, and the wind was contrary, yet fell not away. For they awoke the
Word, Who was sailing with them <span
id="fr_4480"></span>[4481](#fn_4480) , and immediately the sea became
smooth at the command of its Lord, and they were saved. They became
preachers and teachers at the same time; relating the miracles of our
Saviour, and teaching us also to imitate their example. These things
were written on our account and for our profit, so that through these
signs we may acknowledge the Lord Who wrought them.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p51"></span>7. Let us, therefore, in the faith
of the disciples, hold frequent converse with our Master. For the world
is like the sea to us, my brethren, of which it is written, ‘This is the
great and wide sea, there go the ships; the Leviathan, which Thou hast
created to play therein <span id="fr_4481"></span>[4482](#fn_4481) .’ We
float on this sea, as with the wind, through our own free-will, for
every one directs his course according to his will, and either, under
the pilotage of the Word, he enters into rest, or, laid hold on by
pleasure, he suffers shipwreck, and is in peril by storm. For as in the
ocean there are storms and waves, so in the world there are many
afflictions and trials. The unbelieving therefore ‘when affliction or
persecution ariseth is offended <span
id="fr_4482"></span>[4483](#fn_4482) ,’ as the Lord said. For not being
confirmed in the faith, and having his regard towards temporal things,
he cannot resist the difficulties which arise from afflictions. But like
that house, built on the sand by the foolish man, so he, being without
understanding <span id="fr_4483"></span>[4484](#fn_4483) , falls before
the assault of temptations, as it were by the winds. But the saints,
having their senses exercised in self-possession <span
id="fr_4484"></span>[4485](#fn_4484) , and being strong in faith, and
understanding the word, do not faint under trials; but although, from
time to time, circumstances of greater trial are set against them, yet
they continue faithful, and awaking the Lord Who is with them, they are
delivered. So, passing through water and fire, they find relief and duly
keep the feast, offering up prayers with thanksgiving to God Who has
redeemed them. For either being tempted they are known, like Abraham, or
suffering they are approved, like Job, or being oppressed and
deceitfully treated, like Joseph, they patiently endure it, or being
persecuted, they are not overtaken; but as it is written, through God
they ‘leap over the wall <span id="fr_4485"></span>[4486](#fn_4485) ’ of
wickedness, which divides and separates between brethren, and turns them
from the truth. In this manner the blessed Paul, when he took pleasure
in infirmities, in reproach, in necessities, in persecutions, and in
distresses for Christ, rejoiced, and wished all of us to rejoice saying,
‘Rejoice always; in everything give thanks <span
id="fr_4486"></span>[4487](#fn_4486) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p58"></span>8. For what is so fitting for the
feast, a turning from wickedness, and a pure conversation, and prayer
offered without ceasing to God, with thanksgiving? Therefore let us, my
brethren, looking forward to celebrate the eternal joy in heaven, keep
the feast here also, rejoicing at all times, praying incessantly, and in
everything giving thanks to the Lord. I give thanks to God, for those
other wonders He has done, and for the various helps that <span
id="page_548">p. 548</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-Page_548"></span>have now been granted us, in that
though He hath chastened us sore, He did not deliver us over to death,
but brought us from a distance even as from the ends of the earth, and
hath united us again with you. I have been mindful while I keep the
feast, to give you also notice of the great feast of Easter, that so we
may go up together, as it were, to Jerusalem, and eat the Passover, not
separately but as in one house <span
id="fr_4487"></span>[4488](#fn_4487) ; let us not as sodden in water,
water down the word of God; neither let us, as having broken its bones,
destroy the commands of the Gospel. But as roasted with fire, with
bitterness, being fervent in spirit, in fastings and watchings, with
lying on the ground, let us keep it with penitence and thanksgiving.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p60"></span>9. We begin the fast of forty days
on the sixth day of Phamenoth ([Mar.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#000)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p60.1"></span>); and having passed through that
properly, with fasting and prayers, we may be able to attain to the holy
day. For he who neglects to observe the fast of forty days, as one who
rashly and impurely treads on holy things, cannot celebrate the Easter
festival. Further, let us put one another in remembrance, and stimulate
one another not to be negligent, and especially that we should fast
those days, so that fasts may receive us in succession, and we may
rightly bring the feast to a close.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p61"></span>10. The fast of forty days begins
then, as was already said, on the sixth of Phamenoth ([Mar.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#000)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p61.1"></span>), and the great week of the Passion on
the eleventh of Pharmuthi (Apr. 6). And let us rest from the fast on the
sixteenth of it (Apr. 11), on the seventh day, late in the evening. Let
us keep the feast when the first of the week dawns upon us, on the
seventeenth of the same month Pharmuthi (Apr. 12). Let us then add, one
after the other, the seven holy weeks of Pentecost, rejoicing and
praising God, that He hath by these things made known to us beforehand,
joy and rest everlasting, prepared in heaven for us and for those who
truly believe in Christ Jesus our Lord; through Whom, and with Whom, be
glory and dominion to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, for ever and
ever. Amen.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p62"></span>Salute one another with a holy
kiss. The brethren who are with me salute you.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p63"></span> <span
id="fr_4488"></span>[4489](#fn_4488) I have also thought it necessary to
inform you of the appointment of Bishops, which has taken place in the
stead of our blessed fellow-ministers, that ye may know to whom to
write, and from whom ye should receive letters. In Syene, therefore,
Nilammon, instead of Nilammon of the same name. In Latopolis, Masis,
instead of Ammonius. In Coptos, Psenosiris <span
id="fr_4489"></span>[4490](#fn_4489) , instead of Theodorus <span
id="fr_4490"></span>[4491](#fn_4490) . In Panopolis, because
Artemidorus <span id="fr_4491"></span>[4492](#fn_4491) desired it, on
account of his old age, and weakness of body, Arius is appointed
coadjutor. In Hypsele, Arsenius, having become reconciled to the Church.
In Lycopolis, Eudæmon <span id="fr_4492"></span>[4493](#fn_4492) in the
stead of Plusianus <span id="fr_4493"></span>[4494](#fn_4493) . In
Antinoöpolis, Arion <span id="fr_4494"></span>[4495](#fn_4494) , instead
of Ammonius and Tyrannus <span id="fr_4495"></span>[4496](#fn_4495) . In
Oxyrynchus, Theodorus, instead of Pelagius. In Nilopolis, instead of
Theon, Amatus <span id="fr_4496"></span>[4497](#fn_4496) , and Isaac,
who are reconciled to each other. In Arsenoitis, Andreas  <span
id="fr_4497"></span>[4498](#fn_4497) , instead of Silvanus <span
id="fr_4498"></span>[4499](#fn_4498) . In Prosopitis, Triadelphus,
instead of Serapammon <span id="fr_4499"></span>[4500](#fn_4499) . In
Diosphacus, on the river side, Theodorus, instead of Serapammon. In
Sais, Paphnutius, instead of Nemesion. In Xois, Theodorus, instead of
Anubion; and there is also with him Isidorus, who is reconciled to the
Church. In Sethroitis, Orion <span id="fr_4500"></span>[4501](#fn_4500)
, instead of Potammon <span id="fr_4501"></span>[4502](#fn_4501) . In
Clysma, Tithonas <span id="fr_4502"></span>[4503](#fn_4502) , instead of
Jacob; and there is with him Paulus, who has been reconciled to the
Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4438"></span>[544:4439](2040426.htm#fr_4438) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p3"></span> [Eph. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4439"></span>[544:4440](2040426.htm#fr_4439) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p4"></span> Cf. *Letter* i. 1.

<span id="fn_4440"></span>[544:4441](2040426.htm#fr_4440) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p5"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>, cf. *Letter* i.

<span id="fn_4441"></span>[544:4442](2040426.htm#fr_4441) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p6"></span> Cf. *Letter* 6, §2, and note.

<span id="fn_4442"></span>[544:4443](2040426.htm#fr_4442) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p7"></span> [Deut. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p7.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4443"></span>[545:4444](2040426.htm#fr_4443) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p8"></span> [Deut. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p8.1"></span>, LXX., cf. *Letter* 1, §9, and note.

<span id="fn_4444"></span>[545:4445](2040426.htm#fr_4444) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p9"></span> [Hos. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4445"></span>[545:4446](2040426.htm#fr_4445) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p10"></span> [Is. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4446"></span>[545:4447](2040426.htm#fr_4446) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p12"></span> [Isa.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013), [Jer.
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p12.1"></span>[Jer. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p12.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4447"></span>[545:4448](2040426.htm#fr_4447) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p12.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p13"></span>*Orat.*ii. 28, 29.

<span id="fn_4448"></span>[545:4449](2040426.htm#fr_4448) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p14"></span> [Is. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4449"></span>[545:4450](2040426.htm#fr_4449) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p15"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p15.1"></span>[Gal.
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p15.3"></span>. Athan. reads into S. Paul’s words the
thought that the Law itself, however misunderstood by the Jews, involved
the faith of Christ.

<span id="fn_4450"></span>[545:4451](2040426.htm#fr_4450) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p15.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p16"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p16.1"></span>[Ps.
18:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#045)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p16.3"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4451"></span>[545:4452](2040426.htm#fr_4451) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p16.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p17"></span> [John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4452"></span>[545:4453](2040426.htm#fr_4452) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p18"></span> [Is. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4453"></span>[545:4454](2040426.htm#fr_4453) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p19"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p19.1"></span>[Jer.
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p19.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4454"></span>[545:4455](2040426.htm#fr_4454) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p19.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p20"></span> [Jer.
7.18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4455"></span>[545:4456](2040426.htm#fr_4455) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p21"></span> [Jer.
7.34](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#034)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4456"></span>[545:4457](2040426.htm#fr_4456) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p22"></span> [Is. lxvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4457"></span>[545:4458](2040426.htm#fr_4457) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p23"></span> [Isa.
66.3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4458"></span>[546:4459](2040426.htm#fr_4458) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p25"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p25.1"></span>[Is. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p25.3"></span>; [Jer. vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p25.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4459"></span>[546:4460](2040426.htm#fr_4459) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p25.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p26"></span> [Heb. vi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4460"></span>[546:4461](2040426.htm#fr_4460) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p27"></span> [Heb.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001), [Heb.
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4461"></span>[546:4462](2040426.htm#fr_4461) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p29"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p29.1"></span>[Jer.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p29.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4462"></span>[546:4463](2040426.htm#fr_4462) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p29.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p30"></span> [Exod. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4463"></span>[546:4464](2040426.htm#fr_4463) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p31"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p31.1"></span>[Ps. civ.
34](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#034)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p31.3"></span>; cxli. 2.

<span id="fn_4464"></span>[546:4465](2040426.htm#fr_4464) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p31.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p32"></span> [Ps.
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014), [Ps.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4465"></span>[546:4466](2040426.htm#fr_4465) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p34"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
18.17](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4466"></span>[546:4467](2040426.htm#fr_4466) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p35"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p35.1"></span>[Ps. l.
23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p35.3"></span>; [Hosea vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p35.4"></span>; [Matt. ix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p35.5"></span>

<span id="fn_4467"></span>[546:4468](2040426.htm#fr_4467) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p35.6"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p36"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4468"></span>[546:4469](2040426.htm#fr_4468) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p37"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p37.1"></span>[Isa.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p37.3"></span>; [Wisd. ii.
12](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p37.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4469"></span>[546:4470](2040426.htm#fr_4469) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p37.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p38"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p38.1"></span>[Matt. xxii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p38.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4470"></span>[546:4471](2040426.htm#fr_4470) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p38.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p39"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p39.1"></span>[John
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#029)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p39.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4471"></span>[546:4472](2040426.htm#fr_4471) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p39.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p40"></span> [Acts viii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#030)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4472"></span>[547:4473](2040426.htm#fr_4472) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p41"></span> [Prov.
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#009), [Ps.
55:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p41.1"></span>[Prov. xxiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p41.3"></span>, LXX., cf. [Ps. lv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p41.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4473"></span>[547:4474](2040426.htm#fr_4473) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p43"></span> [Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4474"></span>[547:4475](2040426.htm#fr_4474) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p44"></span> [Matt. xii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4475"></span>[547:4476](2040426.htm#fr_4475) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p45"></span> [Matt.
15.19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4476"></span>[547:4477](2040426.htm#fr_4476) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p46"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p46.1"></span>[Prov. xxvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p46.3"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4477"></span>[547:4478](2040426.htm#fr_4477) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p46.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p47"></span> Not Proverbs, but <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p47.2"></span>[Ps. xlix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p47.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4478"></span>[547:4479](2040426.htm#fr_4478) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p47.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p48"></span> [Prov. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p48.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4479"></span>[547:4480](2040426.htm#fr_4479) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p49"></span>*Supr. Letter* 7, §9.

<span id="fn_4480"></span>[547:4481](2040426.htm#fr_4480) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p50"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p50.1"></span>[Mark iv.
37-41](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#037)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p50.3"></span>

<span id="fn_4481"></span>[547:4482](2040426.htm#fr_4481) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p52"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p52.1"></span>[Ps.
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#026)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p52.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4482"></span>[547:4483](2040426.htm#fr_4482) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p52.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p53"></span> [Mark iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4483"></span>[547:4484](2040426.htm#fr_4483) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p54"></span> [Luke vi.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#049)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4484"></span>[547:4485](2040426.htm#fr_4484) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p55"></span> [Heb. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4485"></span>[547:4486](2040426.htm#fr_4485) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p56"></span> [Ps. xviii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#029)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4486"></span>[547:4487](2040426.htm#fr_4486) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p57"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p57.1"></span>[1 Thess. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#018)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p57.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4487"></span>[548:4488](2040426.htm#fr_4487) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p59"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p59.1"></span>[Exod.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#009),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p59.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4488"></span>[548:4489](2040426.htm#fr_4488) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p64"></span> Vid. *Letter* 2, note.

<span id="fn_4489"></span>[548:4490](2040426.htm#fr_4489) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p65"></span>*Supr.*p. 127?

<span id="fn_4490"></span>[548:4491](2040426.htm#fr_4490) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p66"></span>*Supr.*p. 142.

<span id="fn_4491"></span>[548:4492](2040426.htm#fr_4491) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p67"></span>*Supr.*p. 136, &c.

<span id="fn_4492"></span>[548:4493](2040426.htm#fr_4492) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p68"></span> p. 127?

<span id="fn_4493"></span>[548:4494](2040426.htm#fr_4493) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p68.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p69"></span> p. 136.

<span id="fn_4494"></span>[548:4495](2040426.htm#fr_4494) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p70"></span> p. 127?

<span id="fn_4495"></span>[548:4496](2040426.htm#fr_4495) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p70.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p71"></span> p. 142.

<span id="fn_4496"></span>[548:4497](2040426.htm#fr_4496) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p72"></span> p. 127.

<span id="fn_4497"></span>[548:4498](2040426.htm#fr_4497) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p72.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p73"></span> Cf. *Tom. ad Ant.* 10.

<span id="fn_4498"></span>[548:4499](2040426.htm#fr_4498) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p74"></span>*Supr. Letter* 12.

<span id="fn_4499"></span>[548:4500](2040426.htm#fr_4499) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p75"></span> pp. 127, 273.

<span id="fn_4500"></span>[548:4501](2040426.htm#fr_4500) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p76"></span> p. 127.

<span id="fn_4501"></span>[548:4502](2040426.htm#fr_4501) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p76.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p77"></span> p. 273.

<span id="fn_4502"></span>[548:4503](2040426.htm#fr_4502) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xv-p78"></span> Tithoes, p. 127.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (For 348.) Coss. Philippus, Salia; Præfect the same Nestorius;
Indict. vi; Easter-day iii Non. Apr., viii Pharmuthi; Æra Dioclet. 64;
Moon 18.](2040427)
