[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040444)  [Next](2040446) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p1.1"></span>Letter XLVIII</span>.—*Letter to
Amun <span id="fr_4582"></span>[4583](#fn_4582) . Written before 354
<span class="c10"><span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span>*

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p3.1"></span>All</span> things made by God are
beautiful and pure, for the Word of God has made nothing useless or
impure. For ‘we are a sweet savour of Christ in them that are being
saved <span id="fr_4583"></span>[4584](#fn_4583) ,’ as the Apostle says.
But since the devil’s darts are varied and subtle, and he contrives to
trouble those who are of simpler mind, and tries to hinder the ordinary
exercises of the brethren, scattering secretly among them thoughts of
uncleanness and defilement; come let us briefly dispel the error of the
evil one by the grace of the Saviour, and confirm the mind of the
simple. For ‘to the pure all things are pure,’ but both the conscience
and all that belongs to the unclean are defiled <span
id="fr_4584"></span>[4585](#fn_4584) . I marvel also at the craft of the
devil, in that, although he is corruption and mischief itself, he
suggests thoughts under the show of purity; but with the result of a
snare rather than a test. For with the object, as I said before, of
distracting ascetics from their customary and salutary meditation, and
of appearing to overcome them, he stirs some such buzzing thoughts as
are of no profit in life, vain questions and frivolities which one ought
to put aside. For tell me, beloved and most pious friend, what sin or
uncleanness there is in any natural secretion,—as though a man were
minded to make a culpable matter of the cleanings of the nose or the
sputa from the mouth? And we may add also the secretions of the belly,
such as are a physical necessity of animal life. Moreover if we believe
man to be, as the divine Scriptures say, a work of God’s hands, how
could any defiled work proceed from a pure Power? and if, according to
the divine Acts of the Apostles <span
id="fr_4585"></span>[4586](#fn_4585) , ‘we are God’s offspring,’ we have
nothing unclean in ourselves. For then only do we incur defilement, when
we commit sin, that foulest of things. But when any bodily excretion
takes place independently of will, then we experience this, like other
things, by a necessity of nature. But since those whose only pleasure is
to gainsay what is said aright, or rather what is made by God, pervert
even a <span id="page_557">p. 557</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-Page_557"></span>saying in the Gospels, alleging that
‘not that which goeth in defileth a man, but that which goeth out <span
id="fr_4586"></span>[4587](#fn_4586) ,’ we are obliged to make plain
this unreasonableness,—for I cannot call it a question—of theirs. For
firstly, like unstable persons, they wrest the Scriptures <span
id="fr_4587"></span>[4588](#fn_4587) to their own ignorance. Now the
sense of the divine oracle is as follows. Certain persons, like these of
today, were in doubt about meats. The Lord Himself, to dispel their
ignorance, or it may be to unveil their deceitfulness, lays down that,
not what goes in defiles the man, but what goes out. Then he adds
exactly whence they go out, namely from the heart. For there, as he
knows, are the evil treasures of profane thoughts and other sins. But
the Apostle teaches the same thing more concisely, saying, ‘But meat
shall not bring us before God <span id="fr_4588"></span>[4589](#fn_4588)
.’ Moreover, one might reasonably say no natural secretion will bring us
before him for punishment. But possibly medical men (to put these people
to shame even at the hands of outsiders) will support us on this point,
telling us that there are certain necessary passages accorded to the
animal body, to provide for the dismissal of the superfluity of what is
secreted in our several parts; for example, for the superfluity of the
head, the hair and the watery discharges from the head, and the purgings
of the belly, and that superfluity again of the seminative channels.
What sin then is there in God’s name, elder most beloved of God, if the
Master who made the body willed and made these parts to have such
passages? But since we must grapple with the objections of evil persons,
as they may say, ‘If the organs have been severally fashioned by the
Creator, then there is no sin in their genuine use,’ let us stop them by
asking this question: What do you mean by use? That lawful use which God
permitted when He said, ‘Increase and multiply, and replenish the
earth <span id="fr_4589"></span>[4590](#fn_4589) ,’ and which the
Apostle approves in the words, ‘Marriage is honourable and the bed
undefiled <span id="fr_4590"></span>[4591](#fn_4590) ,’ or that use
which is public, yet carried on stealthily and in adulterous fashion?
For in other matters also which go to make up life, we shall find
differences according to circumstances. For example, it is not right to
kill, yet in war it is lawful and praiseworthy to destroy the enemy;
accordingly not only are they who have distinguished themselves in the
field held worthy of great honours, but monuments are put up proclaiming
their achievements. So that the same act is at one time and under some
circumstances unlawful, while under others, and at the right time, it is
lawful and permissible. The same reasoning applies to the relation of
the sexes. He is blessed who, being freely yoked in his youth, naturally
begets children. But if he uses nature licentiously, the punishment of
which the Apostle <span id="fr_4591"></span>[4592](#fn_4591) writes
shall await whoremongers and adulterers.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p13"></span>For there are two ways in life, as
touching these matters. The one the more moderate and ordinary, I mean
marriage; the other angelic and unsurpassed, namely virginity. Now if a
man choose the way of the world, namely marriage, he is not indeed to
blame; yet he will not receive such great gifts as the other. For he
will receive, since he too brings forth fruit, namely thirtyfold <span
id="fr_4592"></span>[4593](#fn_4592) . But if a man embrace the holy and
unearthly way, even though, as compared with the former, it be rugged
and hard to accomplish, yet it has the more wonderful gifts: for it
grows the perfect fruit, namely an hundredfold. So then their unclean
and evil objections had their proper solution long since given in the
divine Scriptures. Strengthen then, father, the flocks <span
id="fr_4593"></span>[4594](#fn_4593) under you, exhorting them from the
Apostolic writings, guiding them from the Evangelical, counselling them
from the Psalms, and saying, ‘quicken me according to Thy Word <span
id="fr_4594"></span>[4595](#fn_4594) ;’ but by ‘Thy Word,’ is meant that
we should serve Him with a pure heart. For knowing this, the Prophet
says, as if interpreting himself, ‘Make me a clean heart, O God <span
id="fr_4595"></span>[4596](#fn_4595) ,’ lest filthy thoughts trouble me.
David again, ‘And stablish me with Thy free spirit <span
id="fr_4596"></span>[4597](#fn_4596) ,’ that even if ever thoughts
disturb me, a certain strong power from Thee may stablish me, acting as
a support. Giving then this and the like advice, say with regard to
those who are slow to obey the truth, ‘I will teach Thy ways unto the
wicked,’ and, confident in the Lord that you will persuade them to
desist from such wickedness, sing ‘and sinners shall be converted unto
Thee <span id="fr_4597"></span>[4598](#fn_4597) .’ And be it granted,
that they who raise malicious questions may cease from such vain labour,
and that they who doubt in their simplicity may be strengthened with a
‘free spirit;’ while as many of you as surely know the truth, hold it
unbroken and unshaken in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom be to the
Father glory and might, together with the Holy Spirit, for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4582"></span>[556:4583](2040445.htm#fr_4582) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p2"></span> See Migne xxvi. 1169, *sqq.;*
Prolegg. ch. ii, §7. Amun, probably the Nitrian monk (*supr.* p. 212,
and D.C.B. i. 102 init.). At any rate, Athanasius addresses his
correspondent as ‘elder’ and ‘father,’ which accords well with the
language of *Vit. Ant. ubi supr.* The letter states clearly Athanasius’
opinion as to the relative value of the celibate and married state. It
also shews the healthy good sense of the great bishop in dealing with
the morbid scrupulosity which even at that early date had begun to
characterise certain circles in the Monastic world.

<span id="fn_4583"></span>[556:4584](2040445.htm#fr_4583) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p4"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4584"></span>[556:4585](2040445.htm#fr_4584) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p5"></span> [Tit. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4585"></span>[556:4586](2040445.htm#fr_4585) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p6"></span> [Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4586"></span>[557:4587](2040445.htm#fr_4586) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p7"></span> [Matt. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4587"></span>[557:4588](2040445.htm#fr_4587) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p8"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p8.1"></span>[2 Pet. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p8.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4588"></span>[557:4589](2040445.htm#fr_4588) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p9"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p9.1"></span>[1 Cor. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p9.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4589"></span>[557:4590](2040445.htm#fr_4589) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p10"></span> [Gen. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4590"></span>[557:4591](2040445.htm#fr_4590) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p11"></span> [Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4591"></span>[557:4592](2040445.htm#fr_4591) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p12"></span> [Heb. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4592"></span>[557:4593](2040445.htm#fr_4592) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p14"></span> See [Mark iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#020)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p14.1"></span>, &c.

<span id="fn_4593"></span>[557:4594](2040445.htm#fr_4593) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p15"></span> This is a clear reference to the
Monastic Societies which had now long existed in the Nitrian desert.

<span id="fn_4594"></span>[557:4595](2040445.htm#fr_4594) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p16"></span> [Ps. cxix.
107](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#107)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4595"></span>[557:4596](2040445.htm#fr_4595) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p17"></span> [Ps. li.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4596"></span>[557:4597](2040445.htm#fr_4596) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p18"></span> [Psa.
51.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4597"></span>[557:4598](2040445.htm#fr_4597) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p19"></span> [Psa.
51.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iii-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter to Dracontius. Written A.D. 354 or 355.](2040446)
