[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040334)  [Next](2040336) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c8"><span
id="xx.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Part II.</span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>First Arian Persecution under
Constantius</span>.

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p3"></span>9. Eusebius and his fellows, however,
seeing the declension of their heresy, wrote to Rome, as well as to the
Emperors Constantine and Constans, to accuse <span
id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536) Athanasius: but when the persons
who were sent by Athanasius disproved the statements which they had
written, they were put to shame by the Emperors; and Julius, Bishop of
Rome, wrote to say <span id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537) that a
Council ought to be held, wherever we should desire, in order that they
might exhibit the charges which they had to make, and might also freely
defend themselves concerning those things of which they too were
accused. The Presbyters also who were sent by <span id="page_273">p.
273</span> <span id="xx.ii.ii-Page_273"></span>them, when they saw
themselves making an exposure, requested that this might be done.
Whereupon these men, whose conduct is suspicious in all that they do,
when they see that they are not likely to get the better in an
Ecclesiastical trial, betake themselves to Constantius alone, and
thenceforth bewail themselves, as to the patron of their heresy.
‘Spare,’ they say, ‘the heresy; you see that all men have withdrawn from
us; and very few of us are now left. Begin to persecute, for we are
being deserted even of those few, and are left destitute. Those persons
whom we forced over to our side, when these men were banished, they now
by their return have persuaded again to take part against us. Write
letters therefore against them all, and send out Philagrius a second
time <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538) as Prefect of Egypt, for
he is able to carry on a persecution favourably for us, as he has
already shewn upon trial, and the more so, as he is an apostate. Send
also Gregory as Bishop to Alexandria, for he too is able to strengthen
our heresy.’

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p7"></span>10. *Violent Intrusion of Gregory.*

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p8"></span>Accordingly Constantius at once writes
letters, and commences a persecution against all, and sends Philagrius
as Prefect with one Arsacius an eunuch; he sends also Gregory with a
military force. And the same consequences followed as before <span
id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539) . For gathering together a
multitude of herdsmen and shepherds, and other dissolute youths
belonging to the town, armed with swords and clubs, they attacked in a
body the Church which is called the Church of Quirinus <span
id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) ; and some they slew, some they
trampled under foot, others they beat with stripes and cast into prison
or banished. They haled away many women also, and dragged them openly
into the court, and insulted them, dragging them by the hair. Some they
proscribed; from some they took away their bread <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541) for no other reason, but that they
might be induced to join the Arians, and receive Gregory, who had been
sent by the Emperor.

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p12"></span>11. *The Easterns decline the Council at
Rome.*

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p13"></span>Athanasius, however, before these things
happened <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542) , at the first
report of their proceedings, sailed to Rome, knowing the rage of the
heretics, and for the purpose of having the Council held as had been
determined. And Julius wrote letters to them, and sent the Presbyters
Elpidius and Philoxenus, appointing a day <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543) , that they might either come, or
consider themselves as altogether suspected persons. But as soon as
Eusebius and his fellows heard that the trial was to be an
Ecclesiastical one, at which no Count would be present, nor soldiers
stationed before the doors, and that the proceedings would not be
regulated by royal order (for they have always depended upon these
things to support them against the Bishops, and without them they have
no boldness even to speak); they were so alarmed that they detained the
Presbyters till after the appointed time, and pretended an unseemly
excuse, that they were not able to come now on account of the war which
was begun by the Persians <span id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544) .
But this was not the true cause of their delay, but the fears of their
own consciences. For what have Bishops to do with war? Or if they were
unable on account of the Persians to come to Rome, although it is at a
distance and beyond sea, why did they like lions <span
id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545) go about the parts of the East and
those which are near the Persians, seeking who was opposed to them, that
they might falsely accuse and banish them?

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p18"></span>12. At any rate, when they had dismissed
the Presbyters with this improbable excuse, they said to one another,
‘Since we are unable to get the advantage in an Ecclesiastical trial,
let us exhibit our usual audacity.’ Accordingly they write to
Philagrius, and cause him after a while to go out with Gregory into
Egypt. Whereupon the Bishops are severely scourged and cast into
chains <span id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546) . Sarapammon, for
instance, Bishop and Confessor, they drive into banishment; Potammon,
Bishop and Confessor, who had lost an eye in the persecution, they beat
with stripes on the neck so cruelly, that he appeared to be dead before
they came to an end. In which condition he was cast aside, and hardly
after some hours, being carefully attended and fanned, he revived, God
granting him his life; but a short time after he died of the sufferings
caused by the stripes, and attained in Christ to the glory of a second
martyrdom. And besides these, how many monks were scourged, while
Gregory sat by with Balacius the ‘Duke!’ how many Bishops were wounded!
how many virgins were beaten!

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p20"></span>13. *Cruelties of Gregory at Alexandria.*

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p21"></span>After this the wretched Gregory called
upon all men to have communion with him. But if thou didst demand of
them communion, they were not worthy of stripes: and if thou didst
scourge them as if evil persons, why didst thou ask it of them as if
holy? But he had no other end in view, except to fulfil the designs of
them <span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span
id="xx.ii.ii-Page_274"></span>that sent him, and to establish the
heresy. Wherefore he became in his folly a murderer and an executioner,
injurious, crafty, and profane; in one word, an enemy of Christ. He so
cruelly persecuted the Bishop’s aunt, that even when she died he would
not suffer her to be buried <span id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) .
And this would have been her lot; she would have been cast away without
burial, had not they who attended on the corpse carried her out as one
of their own kindred. Thus even in such things he shewed his profane
temper. And again when the widows and other mendicants <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) had received alms, he commanded
what had been given them to be seized, and the vessels in which they
carried their oil and wine to be broken, that he might not only shew
impiety by robbery, but in his deeds dishonour the Lord; from whom very
shortly <span id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549) he will hear those
words, ‘Inasmuch as thou hast dishonoured these, thou hast dishonoured
Me <span id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) .’

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p26"></span>14. *Profaneness of Gregory and death of
Balacius.*

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p27"></span>And many other things he did, which
exceed the power of language to describe, and which whoever should hear
would think to be incredible. And the reason why he acted thus was,
because he had not received his ordination according to ecclesiastical
rule, nor had been called to be a Bishop by apostolical tradition <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551) ; but had been sent out from court
with military power and pomp, as one entrusted with a secular
government. Wherefore he boasted rather to be the friend of Governors,
than of Bishops and Monks. Whenever, therefore, our Father Antony wrote
to him from the mountains, as godliness is an abomination to a sinner,
so he abhorred the letters of the holy man. But whenever the Emperor, or
a General, or other magistrate, sent him a letter, he was as much
overjoyed as those in the Proverbs, of whom the Word has said
indignantly, ‘Woe unto them who leave the path of uprightness who
rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked <span
id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552) .’ And so he honoured with presents
the bearers of these letters; but once when Antony wrote to him he
caused Duke Balacius to spit upon the letter, and to cast it from him.
But Divine Justice did not overlook this; for no long time after, when
the Duke was on horseback, and on his way to the first halt <span
id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553) , the horse turned his head, and
biting him on the thigh, threw him off; and within three days he died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[272:1537](2040335.htm#fr_1536) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p4"></span> *Apol. c. Ar.* 3.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[272:1538](2040335.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p5"></span> Ib. 20.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[273:1539](2040335.htm#fr_1538) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p6"></span> §7, note 1, *Encycl*. 3.

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[273:1540](2040335.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p9"></span> Upon the Commission, *Apol. Ar*. 15.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[273:1541](2040335.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p10"></span> Cyrinus.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[273:1542](2040335.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p11"></span> Vid. infr. §63.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[273:1543](2040335.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p14"></span> \[A misstatement, cf. supra pp. 91, 95,
note 1.\]

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[273:1544](2040335.htm#fr_1543) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>προθεσμίαν</span>, *Apol. Ar.* 25, note 6
\[<span class="c10"><span id="xx.ii.ii-p15.3"></span>a.d.</span> 340\].

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[273:1545](2040335.htm#fr_1544) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p16"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 25, note 8.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[273:1546](2040335.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p17"></span> [1 Pet. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span id="xx.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[273:1547](2040335.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p19"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 30 and foll.

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[274:1548](2040335.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p22"></span> Cf. *Apol. Const.* §27 fin.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[274:1549](2040335.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.ii-p23.2"></span>νεξόδων</span>, vid. infr. §60. Tillemont
translates it, prisoners. Montfaucon has been here followed; vid.
Collect. Nov. t. 2. p. xliii.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[274:1550](2040335.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.ii-p24.2"></span>σον οὐδέπω</span>, as §32. George was pulled
to pieces by the populace, <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.ii.ii-p24.4"></span>a.d.</span> 362. This was written <span
class="c10"><span id="xx.ii.ii-p24.5"></span>a.d.</span> 358, or later.
\[There is the common confusion in this note between Gregory and George.
Gregory had died June 26, 345.\]

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[274:1551](2040335.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p24.6"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p25"></span> Vid. [Matt. xxv.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#045)<span id="xx.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[274:1552](2040335.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p28"></span> \[Prolegg. ch. iv. §4.\].

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[274:1553](2040335.htm#fr_1552) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p29"></span> <span id="xx.ii.ii-p29.1"></span>[Prov.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#014)<span id="xx.ii.ii-p29.3"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[274:1554](2040335.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="xx.ii.ii-p29.5"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.ii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.ii-p30.1"></span>μονήν</span>. vid. supr. *Ap. Ar.* 29, note
2. This halt or station which lay up the Nile was called Cereu (*V.
Ant.* §86), or Chæreu, or the land or property of Chæreas, vid. *Naz.
Orat.* 21, 29, who says it was the place where the people met Athanasius
on his return from exile on Constantius’s death. \[The incident is
related differently in *Vit. Ant. ubi supra:* see note there.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Restoration of the Catholics on the Council of Sardica.](2040336)
