[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040155)  [Next](2040157.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span
id="viii.i-Page_68"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>Depositio Arii.</span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="viii.i-p3.1"></span>Introduction to the ‘Deposition of Arius’ and
Encyclical Letter of Alexander.</span>

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="viii.i-p4.1"></span>The</span> following documents form the fittest
opening to the series of Anti-Arian writings of Athanasius. They are
included in the Benedictine edition of his works, and in the Oxford
Collection of *Historical Tracts,* of which the present translation is a
revision. The possibility that the Encyclical Letter was drawn up by
Athanasius himself, now deacon and Secretary to Bishop Alexander
(Prolegg. ch. ii. §2), is a further reason for its inclusion. The
Athanasian authorship is maintained by Newman on the following grounds,
which his notes will be found to bear out. (1) Total dissimilarity of
style as compared with Alexander’s letter to his namesake of Byzantium
(given by Theodoret, *H. E.* i. 4). That piece is in an elaborate and
involved style, full of compound words, with nothing of the Athanasian
simplicity and vigour. (2) Remarkable identity of style with that of
Athanasius, extending to his most characteristic expressions. (3)
Distinctness of the ‘theological view’ and terminology of Alexander as
compared with Athanasius; the Encyclical coinciding with the latter
against the former. (4) Athanasian use of certain texts. These arguments
are of great weight, and make out at least a *prima facie* case for
Newman’s view. The latter has the weight of Böhringer’s opinion on its
side, while the counter-arguments of Kölling (vol. 1. p. 105) are
trivial. Gwatkin, *Studies*, 29, note 4, misses the points (Nos. 1 and
3) of Newman’s argument, which may fairly be said to hold the field. The
deposition of Arius at Alexandria took place (Prolegg, *ubi supra*) in
320 or 321; more likely the latter. Whether the Encyclical was drawn up
at the Synod which deposed Arius, as is generally supposed, or some two
years later, as has been inferred from the references to Eusebius of
Nicomedia (D. C. B. i. 80, cf. Prolegg. *ubi supra,* note 1), is a
question that may for our present purpose be left open. In any case it
is one of the earliest documents of the Arian controversy. It should be
noted that the ὁμοούσιον does not occur in this document, a fact of
importance in the history of the adoption of the word as a test at
Nicæa, cf. Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1) and (2) b. At this stage the
Alexandrians were content with the formulæ <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i-p4.2"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i-p4.3"></span>μοιος κατ᾽ οὐσίαν</span> (Athan.), <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i-p4.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i-p4.5"></span>παραλλακτος εἰκών,
ἀπηκριβωμένη ἐμφέρεια</span> (Alex. in Thdt.), which were afterwards
found inadequate.

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>The letter, after stating the circumstances
which call it forth, and recording the doctrine propounded by Arius, and
his deposition, points out some of the leading texts which condemn the
doctrine (§§3, 4). The Arians are then (§5) compared to other heretics,
and the bishops of the Church generally warned (§6) against the
intrigues of Eusebius of Nicomedia. The letter is signed by the sixteen
presbyters of Alexandria, and the twenty-four deacons (Athanasius signs
fourth), as well as by eighteen presbyters and twenty deacons of the
Mareotis. The scriptural argument of the Epistle is the germ of the
polemic developed in the successive Anti-Arian treatises which form the
bulk of the present volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deposition of Arius.](2040157.md)
