[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040229)  [Next](2040231.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xix-p1"></span> 54. And once being asked by the monks
to come down and visit them and their abodes after a time, he journeyed
with those who came to him. And a camel carried the loaves and the water
for them. For all that desert is dry, and there is no water at all that
is fit to drink, save in that mountain from whence they drew the water,
and in which Antony’s cell was. So when the water failed them on their
way, and the heat was very great, they all were in danger. For having
gone round the neighbourhood and finding no water, they could walk no
further, but lay on the ground and despairing of themselves, let the
camel go. But the old man seeing that they were all in jeopardy,
groaning in deep grief, departed a little way from them, and kneeling
down he stretched forth his hands and prayed. And immediately the Lord
made water to well forth where he had stood praying, and so all drank
and were revived. And having filled their bottles they sought the camel
and found her, for the rope happened to have caught in a stone and so
was held fast. Having led it and watered it they placed the bottles on
its back and finished their journey in safety. And when he came to the
outer cells all saluted him, looking on him as a father. And he too, as
though bringing supplies from the mountain, entertained them with his
words and gave them a share of help. And again there was joy in the
mountains, zeal for improvement and consolation through their mutual
faith. Antony also rejoiced when he beheld the earnestness of the monks,
and his sister grown old in virginity, and that she herself also was the
leader of other virgins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sections 55, 56](2040231.md)
