[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040102)  [Next](2040104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.vi-p1"></span> §6. *The human race then was wasting,
God’s image was being effaced, and His work ruined. Either, then, God
must forego His spoken word by which man had incurred ruin; or that
which had shared in the being of the Word must sink back again into
destruction, in which case God’s design would be defeated. What then?
was God’s goodness to suffer this? But if so, why had man been made? It
could have been weakness, not goodness on God’s part.*

<span id="vii.ii.vi-p2"></span>For this cause, then, death having gained
upon men, and corruption abiding upon them, the race of man was
perishing; the rational man made in God’s image was disappearing, and
the handiwork of God was in process of dissolution. 2. For death, as I
said above, gained from that time forth a legal <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) hold over us, and it was impossible to
evade the law, since it had been laid down by God because <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) of the transgression, and the result
was in truth at once monstrous and unseemly. 3. For it were monstrous,
firstly, that God, having spoken, should prove false—that, when once He
had ordained that man, if he transgressed the commandment, should die
the death, after the transgression man should not die, but God’s word
should be broken. For God would not be true, if, when He had said we
should die, man died not. 4. Again, it were unseemly that creatures once
made rational, and having partaken of the Word, should go to ruin, and
turn again toward non-existence by the way of corruption <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) . 5. For it were not worthy of God’s
goodness that the things He had made should waste away, because of the
deceit practised on men by the devil. 6. Especially it was unseemly to
the last degree that God’s handicraft among men should be done away,
either because of their own carelessness, or because of the
deceitfulness of evil spirits.

<span id="vii.ii.vi-p6"></span>7. So, as the rational creatures were
wasting and such works in course of ruin, what was God in His goodness
to do? Suffer corruption to prevail against them and death to hold them
fast? And where were the profit of their having been made, to begin
with? For better were they not made, than once made, left to neglect and
ruin. 8. For neglect reveals weakness, and not goodness on God’s
part—if, that is, He allows His own work to be ruined when once He had
made it—more so than if He had never made man at all. 9. For if He had
not made them, none could impute weakness; but once He had made them,
and created them out of nothing, it were most monstrous for the work to
be ruined, and that before the eyes of the Maker. 10. It was, then, out
of the question to leave men to the current of corruption; because this
would be unseemly, and unworthy of God’s goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_211"></span>[39:212](2040103.htm#fr_211) <span
id="vii.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.vi-p3"></span> [Gen. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#015)<span id="vii.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[39:213](2040103.htm#fr_212) <span
id="vii.ii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.vi-p4"></span> [Gal. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span id="vii.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>
(verbally only).

<span id="fn_213"></span>[39:214](2040103.htm#fr_213) <span
id="vii.ii.vi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.vi-p5"></span> Cf. Anselm *cur Deus Homo,* II. 4,
‘Valde alienum est ab eo, ut ullam rationalem naturam penitus perire
sinat.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the other hand there was the consistency of God's nature, not
to be sacrificed for our profit. Were men, then, to be called upon to
repent? But repentance cannot avert the execution of a law; still less
can it remedy a fallen nature. We have incurred corruption and need to
be restored to the Grace of God's Image. None could renew but He Who had
created. He alone could (1) recreate all, (2) suffer for all, (3)
represent all to the Father.](2040104)
