[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040398)  [Next](2040400) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p1"></span> <span id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span
id="xxiii.iii-Page_487"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xxiii.iii-p1.1"></span>Appendix.</span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c40"><span
id="xxiii.iii-p2.1"></span>Exile of Athanasius under Julian,
362–363.</span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxiii.iii-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxiii.iii-p4.1"></span>The</span> fragment which follows, containing
an interesting report of a story told by Athanasius to Ammonius, Bishop
of Pachnemunis, is inserted here as furnishing undesignedly important
details as to the movements of Athanasius in 363. See Prolegg. ch. v. §3
h, also ch. ii. §9. It is excerpted by Montfaucon from an account of the
Abbat Theodore, written for Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria (385–412)
by a certain Ammon (*Acta SS. Maii,* Tom. iii. Append., pp. 63–71). The
writer was at that time a bishop (see unknown): he was born about 335,
as he was seventeen years old when he embraced the monastic life a year
‘and more’ after the proclamation of Gallus as Cæsar ([Mark
15:0](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#000), Mark 351:0<span
id="xxiii.iii-p4.2"></span>). About the time of the expulsion of
Athanasius by Syrianus he retired to Nitria, where he remained many
years, and finally returned to Alexandria, where he appears (*infra*) as
one of the clergy; the date of his elevation to the Episcopate cannot be
fixed, but it obviously cannot be as early as 356–7 (so D.C.B. i. 102
(2), and probably is much later even than 362, in which year he would
still be hardly twenty-eight. (He mentions the objections to the
election of Athanasius, who was probably 30 in 328, on the ground of his
youth.) Accordingly (apart from the different form of his name) he
cannot <span id="fr_3705"></span>[3706](#fn_3705) be identified with
either of the Ammonii referred to in *Tom. ad. Ant.* 1, note 3; *Hist.
Ar.* 72, &c. The elder of the two does not concern us here: the younger
(*supr.* pp. 483, 486), is the Ammonius to whom Athanasius told the
story in the hearing of Ammon, and was now dead. Of Hermon, Bishop of
Bubastis, mentioned as present along with Ammonius, Theophilus, and
Ammon when the story was told, nothing is known (except that the date
D.C.B. iii. 4 (2) is over 25 years too early). As he is not ‘of blessed
memory,’ he was possibly still living during the Episcopate of
Theophilus and Ammon. (There is nothing to identify him with the bishop
of *Tanes* in *Tom. Ant.* 1, 10.)

<span id="xxiii.iii-p6"></span>The story itself is given at second-hand,
from Ammon’s recollection of a statement by Athanasius some 12 to 15
years (at least) before he wrote. The prophetic details about Jovian may
therefore be put down to natural accretion (*Letter* 56, note 2). But
(apart from the fact that Julian’s death must have been rumoured long
before the tardy official announcement of it, Tillem. *Emp.* iv. 449
*sqq.,* Prolegg. *ubi supr.*) that Athanasius told of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxiii.iii-p6.1"></span>φήμη</span> of Julian’s
death among the monks of the Thebaid need not be doubted. The story is
one of a very large class, many of which are fairly authenticated. To
say nothing of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxiii.iii-p6.2"></span>φήμη</span> at the battle of Mycale; we have
in recent times the authority of Mr. R. Stuart Poole, of the British
Museum, for the fact that on the night of the death of the Duke of
Cambridge (July 9, 1850), Mr. Pooles’s brother ‘suddenly took out his
watch and said, “Note the time, the Duke of Cambridge is dead,” and that
the time proved to be correct;’ also the case of Mr. Edmonds who saw at
Leicester, early in the morning of Nov. 4, 1837, an irruption of water
into the works of the Thames tunnel, by which a workman was drowned;
(other curious cases in ‘Phantasms of the Living’ vol. 2, pp. 367
*sqq.*). The letter or memoir from which this ‘Narratio’ is taken, was
published by the Bollandists from a Medicean <span class="c10"><span
id="xxiii.iii-p6.3"></span>ms.</span>, and it bears every internal mark
of genuineness. In what way it is integrally connected with the *Vita
Antonii* (Gwatkin, *Studies,* p. 101), except by the fact that it
happens to mention Antony, I fail to see. On the subject of Theodore of
Tabenne, the main subject of the memoir, see Amélineau’s *S. Pakhôme* (
*ut supra,* p. 188), also *infr. Letter* 58, note 3.

<span id="xxiii.iii-p7"></span>“As I think your holiness was present and
heard, when his blessedness Pope Athanasius, in the presence of other
clergy of Alexandria and of my insignificance, formerly related in the
Great Church something about Theodorus <span
id="fr_3706"></span>[3707](#fn_3706) , to the Ammonius of blessed
memory, bishop of Elearchia <span id="fr_3707"></span>[3708](#fn_3707) ,
and to Hermon, bishop of the city of Bumastica <span
id="fr_3708"></span>[3709](#fn_3708) ; I write only what is necessary to
put your reverence in mind of what he said. When the famous bishops were
wondering at the Blessed Antony, Pope Athanasius—for Antony was often
with him—said to them:—

<span id="xxiii.iii-p11"></span>I saw also at that season great men of
God, who are lately dead, Theodorus chief of the Tabennesian monks, and
the father of the monks around <span
id="fr_3709"></span>[3710](#fn_3709) Antinoopolis, called Abbas Pammon.
For when I was pursued by Julian, and was expecting to be slain by
him—for this news was shewn me by good friends—these two came to me on
the same day at Antinoopolis. And having planned to hide with Theodorus,
I embarked on his vessel, which was completely covered in, while Abbas
Pammon accompanied us. And when the wind was unfavourable, I was very
anxious and prayed; and the monks with Theodore got out and towed the
boat. And as Abbas Pammon was encouraging me in my anxiety, I said
‘Believe me when I say that my heart is never so trustful in time of
peace as in time of persecution. For I have good confidence that
suffering for Christ, and strengthened by His mercy, even though I am
slain, I shall find mercy with Him.’ And while I was still saying this,
Theodorus fixed his eyes on Abbas Pammon and smiled, while the other
nearly laughed. So I said to them, ‘Why have you laughed at my words, do
you convict me of cowardice?’ and Theodorus said to Abbas Pammon, ‘Tell
him why we smiled.’ At which the latter said, ‘You ought to tell him.’
So Theodorus said, ‘in this very hour Julian has been slain in Persia’
for so God had declared beforehand concerning him: ‘the haughty man, the
despiser and the boaster, shall finish nothing <span
id="fr_3710"></span>[3711](#fn_3710) . But a Christian Emperor shall
arise who shall be illustrious, but shall live only a short time <span
id="fr_3711"></span>[3712](#fn_3711) . Wherefore you ought not to harass
yourselves by departing into the Thebaid, but secretly to go to the
Court, for you will meet him by the way, and having been kindly received
by him, will return to your Church. And he soon shall be taken by God.’
And so it happened. From which cause I believe, that many who are well
pleasing to God live unnoticed, especially among the monks. For those
men unnoticed also, such as the blessed Amun and the holy
Theodorus <span id="fr_3712"></span>[3713](#fn_3712) in the mountain of
Nitria, and the servant of God, the happy old man Pammon.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3705"></span>[487:3706](2040399.htm#fr_3705) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p5"></span> The Articles in D.C.B. i. 102 (2) and
(3), combine variously data belonging to three distinct persons. (1) The
old bishop ordained by Alexander (see unknown, see *Hist. Ar*. 72
init.). Signs the synodal letter of the Sardican Council; is one of the
infirm prelates cruelly expelled by George, along with coffins to bury
them in case of the journey being fatal (see also *Apol. Fug*. 7). (2)
Another Ammonius, probably not a signatory of Sardica (cf. *Apol. Ar*.
50, with *Ep. Fest*. for 347), but a contemporary of Serapion, sent by
Athanasius with Serap. to Constantius in 353. He had been a monk, but
was then (*Dracont*. 7) bishop of Pachnemunis and part of Elearchia
(*Tom*. 10), in which capacity, along with other exiles of 356–7 (*Hist.
Ar*. 72; *Ap. Fug*. 7), he attends the Council of 362. He is the
‘Ammonius of blessed memory’ in the text. (3) Ammon, born 335, baptized
352, monk at Tabenne and Nitria 352–367 (?), then at Alexandria, and
finally (about 390) bishop of an unknown see in Egypt: wrote a short
account of S. Theodore for Pope Theophilus.

<span id="fn_3706"></span>[487:3707](2040399.htm#fr_3706) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p8"></span> Cf. *Vit. Ant*. 60, and see below,
letters 57, 58, and *Acta SS. Maii*, vol. iii. pp. 334–357, and *Appx*.;
also D.C.B. iv. 954 (53).

<span id="fn_3707"></span>[487:3708](2040399.htm#fr_3707) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p9"></span> *Tom. Ant*. 4.

<span id="fn_3708"></span>[487:3709](2040399.htm#fr_3708) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p10"></span> i.e. Bubastis.

<span id="fn_3709"></span>[487:3710](2040399.htm#fr_3709) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p12"></span> Opposite Hermupolis Magna in Upper
Egypt.

<span id="fn_3710"></span>[487:3711](2040399.htm#fr_3710) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p13"></span> [Habak. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)<span id="xxiii.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3711"></span>[487:3712](2040399.htm#fr_3711) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p14"></span> Cf. *Letter* 56, note 2.

<span id="fn_3712"></span>[487:3713](2040399.htm#fr_3712) <span
id="xxiii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p15"></span> On *this* Theodore, see D.C.B. *s.v.*
no. (67).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synodal Letter to the Bishops of Africa. (Ad Afros Epistola
Synodica.)](2040400)
