[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040406)  [Next](2040408) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c40"><span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Historia</span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p1.2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p1.3"></span>Acephala</span>.</span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p2"></span>I. 1. The Emperor Constantius also wrote
concerning the return of Athanasius, and among the Emperor’s letters
this one too is to be found.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p3"></span>2. And it came to pass after the death of
Gregory that Athanasius returned from the city of Rome and the parts of
Italy, and entered Alexandria Paophi xxiv, Coss. Constantius IV,
Constans III (October 21, 346); that is after \[vii\] years vi \[months
and iii days,\] and <span id="page_497">p. 497</span> <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-Page_497"></span>remained quiet at Alexandria ix <span
id="fr_3769"></span>[3770](#fn_3769) years iii <span
id="fr_3770"></span>[3771](#fn_3770) months \[and xix days\].

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p6"></span>II. Now after his return, Coss.
Limenius <span id="fr_3771"></span>[3772](#fn_3771) and Catulinus (349),
Theodore <span id="fr_3772"></span>[3773](#fn_3772) , Narcissus <span
id="fr_3773"></span>[3774](#fn_3773) , and George, with others, came to
Constantinople, wishing to persuade Paul to communicate with them, who
received them not even with a word, and answered their greeting with an
anathema. So they took to themselves Eusebius of Nicomedia <span
id="fr_3774"></span>[3775](#fn_3774) , and laid snares for the most
blessed Paul, and lodging a calumny against him concerning Constans and
Magnentius, expelled him from CP. that they might have room there, and
sow the Arian heresy. Now the people of CP., desiring the most blessed
Paul, raised continual riots to prevent his being taken from the city,
for they loved his sound doctrine. The Emperor, however, was angry, and
sent Count Hermogenes to cast him out; but the people, hearing this,
dragged forth Hermogenes through the midst of the town. From which
matter they obtained a pretext against the Bishop, and exiled him to
Armenia. Theodore and the rest wishing to place in the See of that Town
Eudoxius, an ally and partisan of the Arian heresy, ordained \[Bishop\]
of Germanicia, while the people were stirred to riot, and would not
allow any one to sit in the See of blessed Paul,—they took Macedonius, a
presbyter of Paul, and ordained him bishop of the town of CP., whom the
whole assembly of bishops condemned, since against his own father he had
disloyally received laying on of hands from heretics.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p11"></span>However, after Macedonius had
communicated with them and signed, they brought in pretexts of no
importance, and removing him from the Church, they instal the aforesaid
Eudoxius of Antioch <span id="fr_3775"></span>[3776](#fn_3775) , whence
\[the partakers\] in this secession are called Macedonians, making
shipwreck concerning the Holy Spirit.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p13"></span>III. 3. After this time Athanasius,
hearing that there was to be disturbance against him, the Emperor
Constantius <span id="fr_3776"></span>[3777](#fn_3776) being in
residence at Milan (353), sent to court a vessel with v Bishops,
Serapion of Thmuis, Triadelphus of Nicotas, Apollo of Upper Cynopolis,
Ammonius of Pachemmon,…and iii Presbyters of Alexandria, Peter the
Physician, Astericus, and Phileas. After their setting sail from
Alexandria, Coss. Constantius VI Augustus, and Constantius <span
id="fr_3777"></span>[3778](#fn_3777) Cæsar II, Pachom xxiv (May 19,
353), presently four days after Montanus of the Palace entered
Alexandria Pachom xxviii, and gave a letter of the same
Constantius <span id="fr_3778"></span>[3779](#fn_3778) Augustus to the
bishop Athanasius, forbidding him to come to court, on which account the
bishop was exceedingly desolate, and the whole people much
troubled <span id="fr_3779"></span>[3780](#fn_3779) . So Montanus,
accomplishing nothing, set forth, leaving the bishop at Alexandria.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p18"></span>4. Now after a while Diogenes, Imperial
Notary, came to Alexandria in the month of Mensor (August, 355) Coss.
Arbetion and Lollianus: that is ii years and v months <span
id="fr_3780"></span>[3781](#fn_3780) from when Montanus left Alexandria.
And Diogenes pressed every one urgently to compel the bishop to leave
the town, and afflicted all not a little. Now on the vi day of the month
Thoth, he made a sharp attempt to besiege the church, and he spent iv
months in his efforts, that is from the month Mensor, or from the
\[first\] day of those intercalated until the xxvi day of Choiac (Dec.
23). But as the people and the judges strongly resisted Diogenes,
Diogenes returned without success on the xxvi day of the said month
Choiac, Coss. Arbetion and Lollianus, after iv months as aforesaid.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p20"></span>IV. 5. Now Duke Syrianus, and Hilary the
Notary, came from Egypt to Alexandria on the tenth day of Tybi (Jan. 6,
356) after Coss. Arbetion and Lollianus. And sending in front all the
legions of soldiers throughout Egypt and Libya, the Duke and the Notary
entered the Church of Theonas with their whole force of soldiers by
night, on the xiii day of Mechir, during the night preceding the xiv.
And breaking the doors of the Church of Theonas, they entered with an
infinite force of soldiers. But bishop Athanasius escaped their hands,
and was saved, on the aforesaid xiv of Mechir <span
id="fr_3781"></span>[3782](#fn_3781) . Now this happened ix years iii
months and xix days from the Bishop’s return from Italy. But when the
Bishop was delivered, his presbyters and people remained in possession
of the Churches, and holding communion iv months, until there entered
Alexandria the prefect Cataphronius and Count Heraclius in the month
Pahyni xvi day, Coss. Constantius <span
id="fr_3782"></span>[3783](#fn_3782) VIII and Julianus Cæsar I (June 10,
356).

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p23"></span>V. 6. And four days after they
entered <span id="fr_3783"></span>[3784](#fn_3783) the Athanasians were
ejected from the Churches, and they were handed over to those who
belonged to George <span id="fr_3784"></span>[3785](#fn_3784) , and were
expecting him as Bishop. So they received the Churches on the xxi day of
Pahyni. Moreover George <span id="fr_3785"></span>[3786](#fn_3785)
arrived at Alexandria, Coss. Constantius <span
id="fr_3786"></span>[3787](#fn_3786) IX, and Julianus Cæsar II, Mechir
xxx (Feb. 24, 357), that is, eight months and xi days from when his
party received the Churches. So George <span
id="fr_3787"></span>[3788](#fn_3787) entered Alexandria, and kept the
Churches xviii whole months: and then the common people attacked him in
the Church of Dionysius, and he was hardly delivered with danger and a
great struggle on the i day of the month Thoth, Coss. Tatianus and
Cerealis (Aug. 29, 358). Now George <span
id="fr_3788"></span>[3789](#fn_3788) was ejected from Alexandria on the
x <span id="fr_3789"></span>[3790](#fn_3789) day after the riot, namely
v of Paophi (Oct. 2). But they who belonged to Bishop Athanasius, ix
days after the departure of George, that is on the xiv of Pa\[ophi\],
cast out the men of George <span id="fr_3790"></span>[3791](#fn_3790) ,
and held the Churches two months and xiv days; until there came Duke
Sebastian from Egypt and cast them out, and again assigned the Churches
to the party of George on the xxviii day of the month Choiac (Dec. 24).

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p32"></span>7. Now ix whole months after the
departure of George from Alexandria, Paulus the Notary arrived Pahyni
xxix, Coss. Eusebius, Hypatius (June 23, 359), and published an Imperial
Order on behalf of George, and coerced many in vengeance for him. And
\[ii years and\] v months after, George came to Alexandria Athyr xxx
(Coss. Taurus, and Florentius) from court (Nov. 26, 361), that is iii
years and two months after he had fled. And at Antioch they of the Arian
heresy, casting out the Paulinians from the Church, appointed Meletius.
When he would not consent to their evil mind, they ordained Euzoius a
presbyter of George <span id="fr_3791"></span>[3792](#fn_3791) of
Alexandria in his stead.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p34"></span>VI. 8. Now George, having entered
Alexandria as aforesaid on the xxx Athyr, remained safely in the town
iii days, that is \[till\] iii Choiac. For, on the iv day of that same
month, the prefect Gerontius announced the death of the Emperor
Constantius, and that Julianus alone held the whole Empire. Upon which
news, the citizens of Alexandria and all shouted against George, and
with one accord placed him under custody. And he was in prison bound
with iron from the aforesaid iv day of Choiac, up to the xxvii of the
same month, xxiv days. For on the xxviii day of the same month early in
the morning, nearly all the people of that town led forth George from
prison, and also the Count who was with him, the Superintendent of the
building of the <span id="page_498">p. 498</span> <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-Page_498"></span>Church which is called Cæsareum, and
killed them both, and carried their bodies round through the midst of
the town, that of George on a camel, but that of Dracontius, men
dragging it by ropes; and so having insulted them, at about the vii hour
of the day, they burnt the bodies of each.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p35"></span>VII. 9. Now in the next.…day of Mechir
the x day of the month, after Coss. Taurus and Florentius (Feb. 4, 362),
an order of the Emperor Julian was published commanding those things to
be restored to the idols and temple attendants and the public account,
which in former times had been taken away from them.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p36"></span>10. But after iii days, Mechir xiv, an
order was given of the same Emperor Julian, also of the Vicar Modestus,
to Gerontius prefect, ordering all Bishops hitherto defeated by factions
and exiled to return to their towns and provinces. Now this letter was
published on the following day Mechir xv, while subsequently an edict
also of the prefect Gerontius was published, by which the Bishop
Athanasius was ordered to return to his Church. And xii days after the
publication of this Edict Athanasius was seen at Alexandria, and entered
the Church in the same month Mechir, xxvii day, so that there is from
his flight which took place in the times of Syrianus and Hilary till his
return, when Julianus.…Mechir xxvii. He remained in the Church until
Paophi xxvi, Coss. Mamertinus and Nevitta (Oct. 23, 362), viii whole
months.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p37"></span>11. Now on the aforesaid day, Paophi
xxvii, he \[the prefect\] published an Edict of the Emperor Julianus,
that Athanasius, Bishop, should retire from Alexandria, and no sooner
was the Edict published, than the Bishop left the town and abode round
about Thereu <span id="fr_3792"></span>[3793](#fn_3792) . Soon after his
departure Olympus the prefect, in obedience to the same <span
id="fr_3793"></span>[3794](#fn_3793) Pythiodorus, and those who were
with him, most difficult persons, sent into exile Paulus and Astericius,
presbyters of Alexandria, and directed them to live at the town of
Andropolis.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p40"></span>VIII. 12. Now Olympus the same prefect,
in the month Mensor, xxvi day, Coss. Julianus Augustus IV. and
Sallustius (Aug. 20, 363), announced that Julian the Emperor was dead,
and that Jovianus a Christian was Emperor. And in the following month,
Thoth xviii, a letter of the Emperor Jovianus came to Olympus the
prefect that only the most high God should be worshipped, and Christ,
and that the peoples, holding communion in the Churches, should practise
religion. Moreover Paulus and Astericius, the aforesaid presbyters,
returned from exile at the town of Andropolis, and entered Alexandria,
on the x day of Thoth, after x months.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p41"></span>13. Now Bishop Athanasius, having
tarried as aforesaid at Thereon, went up to the higher parts of Egypt as
far as Upper Hermopolis in the Thebaid, and as far as Antinoopolis. And
while he was staying in these places, it was learned that the Emperor
Julian was dead, and that Jovian a Christian was Emperor. So the Bishop
entered Alexandria secretly, his arrival not being known to many, and
went by sea to meet the Emperor Jovian, and afterwards, Church affairs
being settled <span id="fr_3794"></span>[3795](#fn_3794) , received a
letter, and came to Alexandria and entered into the Church on the xix
day of Athyr <span id="fr_3795"></span>[3796](#fn_3795) Coss. Jovianus
and Varronianus. From his leaving Alexandria according to the order of
Julian until he arrived on the aforesaid xix day of Athyr <span
id="fr_3796"></span>[3797](#fn_3796) after one year and iii months, and
xxii days.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p45"></span>IX. Now at CP. Eudoxius of Germanicia
held the Church, and there was a division between him and Macedonius;
but by means of Eudoxius there went forth another worse heresy from the
spurious \[teaching\] of the Arians, Aetius and Patricius <span
id="fr_3797"></span>[3798](#fn_3797) of Nicæa, who communicated with
Eunomius, Heliodorus, and Stephen. And Eudoxius adopting this,
communicated with Euzoius, Bishop at Antioch, of the Arian sect, and
they deposed on a pretext Seleucius <span
id="fr_3798"></span>[3799](#fn_3798) and Macedonius, and Hypatian <span
id="fr_3799"></span>[3800](#fn_3799) , and other xv Bishops belonging to
them, since they would not receive ‘Unlike’ nor ‘Creature of the
Uncreated.’ Now their Exposition is as follows:—

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p49"></span>Exposition of Patricius <span
id="fr_3800"></span>[3801](#fn_3800) and Aetius, who communicated with
Eunomius, Heliodorus, and Stephen.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p51"></span>These are the attributes of God,
Unbegotten, without origin, Eternal, not to be commanded, Immutable,
All-seeing, Infinite, Incomparable, Almighty, knowing the future without
foresight; without beginning <span id="fr_3801"></span>[3802](#fn_3801)
. These do not belong to the Son, for He is commanded, is under command,
is made from nothing, has an end, is not compared \[with the Father\],
the Father surpasses Him…of Christ is found: as pertaining to the
Father, He is ignorant of the future. He was not God, but Son of God;
God of those who are after Him: and in this He possesses invariable
likeness with the Father, namely He sees all things because all
things…because He is not changed in goodness; \[but\] not like in the
quality of Godhead, nor in nature. But if we said that He was born of
the quality of Godhead, we say that He resembles the offspring of
serpents <span id="fr_3802"></span>[3803](#fn_3802) , and that is an
impious saying: and like as a statue produces rust from itself, and will
be consumed by the rust itself, so also the Son, if He is produced from
the nature of the Father, will consume the Father. But from the work,
and the newness of work, the Son is naturally God, and not from the
Nature, but from another nature like as the Father, but not from Him.
For He was made the image of God, and we are out of God, and from God.
Inasmuch as all things are from God, and the Son also, as if from
something \[else\]. Like as iron if it has rust will be diminished, like
as a body if it produces worms is eaten up, like as a wound if it
produce discharges will be consumed by them, so \[thinks\] he who says
that the Son is from the Nature of the Father; now let him who does not
say that the Son is like the Father be put outside the Church and be
anathema. If we shall say that the Son of God is God, we bring in Two
without beginning: we call Him Image of God; he who calls Him ‘out from
God’ Sabellianises. And he who says that he is ignorant of the nativity
of God Manicheanizes: if any one shall say that the Essence of the Son
is like the Essence of the Father unbegotten, he blasphemes. For just as
snow and white lead are similar in whiteness but dissimilar in kind, so
also the Essence of the Son is other than the Essence of the Father. But
snow has a different whiteness <span
id="fr_3803"></span>[3804](#fn_3803) …

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p55"></span>Be pleased to hear that the Son is like
the Father in His operations; like as Angels cannot comprehend the
Nature of Archangels, let them please to understand, nor Archangels the
Nature of a Cherubin, nor Cherubins the Nature of the Holy Spirit, nor
the Holy Spirit the Nature of the Only-begotten, nor the Only-begotten
the nature of the Unbegotten God.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p56"></span>14. Now when the Bishop Athanasius was
about coming from Antioch to Alexandria, the Arians Eudoxius, Theodore,
Sophronius, Euzoius and Hilary took counsel and appointed Lucius, a
presbyter of George, to seek audience of the Emperor Jovian at the
Palace, and to say what is contained in the copies <span
id="fr_3804"></span>[3805](#fn_3804) . *Now here we have omitted some
less necessary matter.*

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p58"></span><span id="page_499">p. 499</span> <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-Page_499"></span>X. 15. Now after Jovian, Valentinian and
Valens having been somewhat rapidly summoned to the throne, a decree of
theirs, circulated everywhere, which also was delivered at Alexandria on
Pachon x, Coss. Valentinian and Valens (May 5, 365), to the effect that
the Bishops deposed and expelled from their Churches under Constantius,
who had in the time of Julian’s reign reclaimed for themselves and taken
back their Bishopric, should now be cast out anew from the Churches, a
penalty being laid on the courts of a fine of ccc pounds of gold, unless
that is they should have \[ba\]nished the Bishops from the Churches and
towns. On which account at Alexandria great confusion and riot arose,
insomuch that the whole Church was troubled, since also the officials
were few in number with the prefect Flavian and his staff: and on
account of the imperial order and the fine of gold they were urgent that
the Bishops should leave the town; the Christian multitude resisting and
gainsaying the officials and the judge, and maintaining that the Bishop
Athanasius did not come under this definition nor under the Imperial
order, because neither did Constantius banish him, but even restored
him. Likewise also Julian persecuted him; he recalled all, and him for
the sake of idolatry he cast out anew, but Jovian brought him back. This
opposition and riot went on until the next month Payni, on the xiv day;
for on this day the prefect Flavian made a report, declaring that he had
consulted the Emperors on this very point which was stirred at
Alexandria, and so they all became quiet in a short time <span
id="fr_3805"></span>[3806](#fn_3805) .

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p60"></span>XI. 16. iv months and xxiv days after,
that is on Paophi viii, the Bishop Athanasius left the Church secretly
by night, and retired to a villa near the New River <span
id="fr_3806"></span>[3807](#fn_3806) . But the prefect Flavian and Duke
Victorinus not knowing that he had retired, on the same night arrived at
the Church of Dionysius with a force of soldiers: and having broken the
back door, and entered the upper parts of the house in search of the
Bishop’s apartment, they did not find him, for, not long before he had
retired, and he remained, staying at the aforesaid property from the
above day, Paophi viii, till Mechir vi, that is iv whole months (Oct.
5–Jan. 31). After this, the Imperial notary Bresidas, in the same month
Mechir came to Alexandria with an Imperial letter, ordering the said
Bishop Athanasius to return to Town, and hold the Churches as usual; and
on the vii day of the month Mechir, after Coss. Valentinian and Valens,
that is Coss. Gratian and Degalaifus, the said notary Bresidas with Duke
Victorinus and Flavian the Prefect assembled at the palace and announced
to the officers of the courts who were present, and the people, that the
Emperors had ordered the Bishop to return to town, and straightway the
said Bresidas the notary went forth with the officers of the courts, and
a multitude of the people of the Christians to the aforesaid villa, and
taking the Bishop Athanasius with the Imperial order, led him in to the
Church which is called that of Dionysius on the vii day of the mouth
Mechir.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p62"></span>XII. 17. From Coss. Gratian and
Dagalaifus (366) to the next consulships of Lupicinus and Jovinus (367)
and that of \[Valentinian II. and\] Valens II. on Payni xiv (June 8,
368) in \[this\] Consulship xl \[years of the Bishopric\] of Athanasius
are finished. Out of which \[years\] he abode at Treveri in Gaul \[ii
years iv months xi days <span id="fr_3807"></span>[3808](#fn_3807) , and
in Italy and the West\] xc months and iii days. At Alexandria \[and\] in
uncertain places in hiding, when he was being harassed by Hilary the
notary and the Duke, lxxii months and xiv days. In Egypt and Antioch
upon journeys xv months and xxii days: upon the property near the new
river iv months. The result will be exactly vi <span
id="fr_3808"></span>[3809](#fn_3808) months and xvii years and <span
id="fr_3809"></span>[3810](#fn_3809) xx days. Moreover, he remained in
quiet at Alexandria xxii years and v months x days. But also, he twice
stayed a little time outside Alexandria in his last journey and at Tyre
and at CP. Accordingly, the result will be as I have stated above, xl
years of the episcopate of Athanasius until Payni \[x\]iv, Coss.
Valentinian and Valens. And in the following consulate of Valentinian
and Victor, Payni xiv, i year, and in the following consulships of
Valentinian \[III\] and Valens III Payni xiv, and in the following
Consulships of Gratian and Probus, \[and the next of Modestus and
Arintheus\], and another consulship of Valentinian \[IV\] and Valens IV,
on Pachon viii he falls asleep (May 3, 373).

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p66"></span>XIII. 18. Now in the aforesaid
consulship of Lupicinus and Jovinus, Lucius being specially desirous to
claim for himself the episcopate of the Arians a long time after he had
left Alexandria, arrived in the aforesaid consulship, and entered the
town secretly by night on the xxvi day of the month Thoth (Sept. 24,
367): and as it is said, abode in a certain small house keeping in
hiding for that day. But next day he went to a house where his mother
was staying; and his arrival being known at once all over the town, the
whole people assembled and blamed his entry. And Duke Trajanus and the
Prefect were extremely displeased at his irrational and bold arrival,
and sent officials to cast him out of the town. So the officials came to
Lucius, and considering all of them that the people were angry and very
riotous against him they feared to bring him out of the house by
themselves, lest he should be killed by the multitude. And they reported
this to the judges. And presently the judges themselves, Duke Trajan,
and the Prefect Tatianus \[came\] to the place with many soldiers,
entered the house and brought out Lucius themselves at the vii hour of
the day, on the xxvii day of Thoth. Now while Lucius was following the
judges, and the whole people of the town after them, Christians and
Pagans, and of divers religions, all alike with one breath, and with one
mind, and of one accord, did not cease, from the house whence he was
led, through the middle of the town, as far as the house of the Duke,
from shouting, and hurling at him withal insults and criminal charges,
and from crying, ‘Let him be taken out of the town.’ However, the Duke
took him into his house, and he stayed with him for the remaining hours
of the day, and the whole night, and on the following the xxviii of the
same month, the Duke early in the morning, and taking him in charge as
far as Nicopolis <span id="fr_3810"></span>[3811](#fn_3810) , handed him
over to soldiers to be escorted from Egypt.

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p68"></span>19. Now whereas Athanasius died on the
viii of the month Pachon, the v day before he fell asleep, he ordained
Peter, one of the ancient presbyters, Bishop, who carried on the
Episcopate, following him in all things. After whom Timothy his
B\[rother\] succeeded to the Episcopate for iv years. After him
Theophilus from \[being\] deacon was ordained Bishop (385). The End.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3769"></span>[497:3770](2040407.htm#fr_3769) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p4"></span> Corrected from §§5, 17, *infr.*; text
‘xvi.’

<span id="fn_3770"></span>[497:3771](2040407.htm#fr_3770) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p5"></span> Corrected from §5; text ‘6 months.’

<span id="fn_3771"></span>[497:3772](2040407.htm#fr_3771) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p7"></span> Text ‘Hypatius.’

<span id="fn_3772"></span>[497:3773](2040407.htm#fr_3772) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p8"></span> Of Heraclea.

<span id="fn_3773"></span>[497:3774](2040407.htm#fr_3773) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p9"></span> Cf. *Apol. Fug.* 1, &c., &c.

<span id="fn_3774"></span>[497:3775](2040407.htm#fr_3774) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p10"></span> Bishop of CP. 338–341. On his death
Paul was restored, but Maccdonius appointed by the Arians. This was in
341–2. The final expulsion and death of Paul was about the date given in
the text; but the events of several years are lumped together without
clear distinction.

<span id="fn_3775"></span>[497:3776](2040407.htm#fr_3775) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p12"></span> In 360.

<span id="fn_3776"></span>[497:3777](2040407.htm#fr_3776) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p14"></span> Text ‘Constans.’ This passage (3–5), is
used by Soz. iv. 9.

<span id="fn_3777"></span>[497:3778](2040407.htm#fr_3777) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p15"></span> Text ‘Constans.’ This passage (3–5), is
used by Soz. iv. 9.

<span id="fn_3778"></span>[497:3779](2040407.htm#fr_3778) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p16"></span> Text ‘Constans.’ This passage (3–5), is
used by Soz. iv. 9.

<span id="fn_3779"></span>[497:3780](2040407.htm#fr_3779) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p17"></span> Fatigatus,’ Soz. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.ii.ii-p17.2"></span>ταράχθησαν</span>

<span id="fn_3780"></span>[497:3781](2040407.htm#fr_3780) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p19"></span> Cf. *Apol. Const.* 22; read ii years ii
months.

<span id="fn_3781"></span>[497:3782](2040407.htm#fr_3781) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p21"></span> Text throughout ‘Methir.’

<span id="fn_3782"></span>[497:3783](2040407.htm#fr_3782) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p22"></span> Text ‘Constans.’ This passage (3–5), is
used by Soz. iv. 9.

<span id="fn_3783"></span>[497:3784](2040407.htm#fr_3783) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p24"></span> *Supr.* p. 290.

<span id="fn_3784"></span>[497:3785](2040407.htm#fr_3784) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p25"></span> Text ‘Gregory;’ §§6, 7 are used by Soz.
iv. 10, §8 by Soz. v. 7.

<span id="fn_3785"></span>[497:3786](2040407.htm#fr_3785) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p26"></span> Text ‘Gregory;’ §§6, 7 are used by Soz.
iv. 10, §8 by Soz. v. 7.

<span id="fn_3786"></span>[497:3787](2040407.htm#fr_3786) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p27"></span> Text ‘Constans.’ This passage (3–5), is
used by Soz. iv. 9.

<span id="fn_3787"></span>[497:3788](2040407.htm#fr_3787) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p28"></span> Text ‘Gregory;’ §§6, 7 are used by Soz.
iv. 10, §8 by Soz. v. 7.

<span id="fn_3788"></span>[497:3789](2040407.htm#fr_3788) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p29"></span> Text ‘Gregory;’ §§6, 7 are used by Soz.
iv. 10, §8 by Soz. v. 7.

<span id="fn_3789"></span>[497:3790](2040407.htm#fr_3789) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p30"></span> Read ‘34th.’

<span id="fn_3790"></span>[497:3791](2040407.htm#fr_3790) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p31"></span> Text ‘Gregory;’ §§6, 7 are used by Soz.
iv. 10, §8 by Soz. v. 7.

<span id="fn_3791"></span>[497:3792](2040407.htm#fr_3791) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p33"></span> Text ‘Gregory;’ §§6, 7 are used by Soz.
iv. 10, §8 by Soz. v. 7.

<span id="fn_3792"></span>[498:3793](2040407.htm#fr_3792) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p38"></span> Compare ‘Chereu’ in *Vit. Ant.* 86.

<span id="fn_3793"></span>[498:3794](2040407.htm#fr_3793) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p39"></span> The previous reference to him has
dropped out; see *Fest. Ind.* xxxv.

<span id="fn_3794"></span>[498:3795](2040407.htm#fr_3794) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p42"></span> Used by Soz. vi. 5.

<span id="fn_3795"></span>[498:3796](2040407.htm#fr_3795) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p43"></span> Read Mechir, i.e. Feb. 14, 364.

<span id="fn_3796"></span>[498:3797](2040407.htm#fr_3796) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p44"></span> Read Mechir, i.e. Feb. 14, 364.

<span id="fn_3797"></span>[498:3798](2040407.htm#fr_3797) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p46"></span> Can this be the Hypatius of Philst. ix.
19? For Heliodorus and Stephen, see *Hist. Ar.* p. 294; *de Syn.* 12;
Theod. *H. E.* ii. 28 and Gwatkin, *Studies,* pp. 226, 180 note.

<span id="fn_3798"></span>[498:3799](2040407.htm#fr_3798) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p47"></span> i.e. Eleusius.

<span id="fn_3799"></span>[498:3800](2040407.htm#fr_3799) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p48"></span> i.e. Eustathius.

<span id="fn_3800"></span>[498:3801](2040407.htm#fr_3800) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p50"></span> Can this be the Hypatius of Philst. ix.
19? For Heliodorus and Stephen see *Hist. Ar.* p. 294; *de Syn.* 12;
Theod. *H. E.* ii. 28 and Gwatkin, *Studies,* pp. 226, 180 note.

<span id="fn_3801"></span>[498:3802](2040407.htm#fr_3801) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p52"></span> Lat. ‘dominio’ for <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.ii.ii-p52.2"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.ii.ii-p52.3"></span>ρχῃ</span>.

<span id="fn_3802"></span>[498:3803](2040407.htm#fr_3802) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p52.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p53"></span> Cf. [Matt. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3803"></span>[498:3804](2040407.htm#fr_3803) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p54"></span> Text imperfect, ‘Externo autem
conniventes oculos egressi.’

<span id="fn_3804"></span>[498:3805](2040407.htm#fr_3804) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p57"></span> i.e. the memoranda printed as Appendix
to *Letter* 56. §14 is used, but badly, by Soz. vi. 5.

<span id="fn_3805"></span>[499:3806](2040407.htm#fr_3805) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p59"></span> §§15, 16 are used by Soz. vi. 12.

<span id="fn_3806"></span>[499:3807](2040407.htm#fr_3806) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p61"></span> i.e. in the western suburb.

<span id="fn_3807"></span>[499:3808](2040407.htm#fr_3807) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p63"></span> i.e. July 11, 335, to Nov. 23, 337, see
above, p. 496.

<span id="fn_3808"></span>[499:3809](2040407.htm#fr_3808) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p64"></span> Migne xi. (misprint).

<span id="fn_3809"></span>[499:3810](2040407.htm#fr_3809) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p65"></span> The following 14 words are left out by
an error in Sievers.

<span id="fn_3810"></span>[499:3811](2040407.htm#fr_3810) <span
id="xxv.ii.ii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii.ii-p67"></span> A short distance east of Alexandria,
see *Dict. Gr. and Rom. Geog.* s.v.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Festal Letters, and their Index.](2040408)
