[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040018)  [Next](2040020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p1"></span> §6. *Renewal of Troubles. Second Exile.
Pistus and Gregory, Culmination of Eusebian Intrigue. Rome and Sardica.*
(337–346).

<span id="v.ii.vii-p2"></span>(1). The stay of Athanasius at Alexandria
was brief and troubled. The city was still disturbed by Arian
malcontents, who had the sympathy of Jews and Pagans, and it was
reported that the monks, and especially the famous hermit Antony, were
on their side. This <span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span> <span
id="v.ii.vii-Page_xlii"></span>impression, however, was dissipated by
the appearance of the great Ascetic himself, who, at the urgent request
of the orthodox (pp. 214 *sq*., 503), consented to shew himself for two
days in the uncongenial atmosphere of the city. The mystery and
marvellous reputation, which even then surrounded this much-talked-of
character, attracted Christians and heathen alike, in large numbers, to
hear and see him, and, if possible, to derive some physical benefit from
his touch. He denounced Arianism as the worst of heresies, and was
solemnly escorted out of town by the bishop in person. As an annalist
toward the close of the century tells us, ‘Antony, the great leader,
came to Alexandria, and though he remained there only two days, shewed
himself wonderful in many things, and healed many. He departed on the
third of Messori’ (i.e., July 27, 338).

<span id="v.ii.vii-p3"></span>Meanwhile the Eusebians were busy. In the
new Emperor Constantius, the Nicomedian found a willing patron: probably
his translation to the See of Constantinople falls at this time. It was
represented to the Emperor that the restoration of the exiled Bishops in
337, and especially that of Athanasius, was against all ecclesiastical
order. Men deposed by a Synod of the Church had presumed to return to
their sees under the sanction of the secular authority. This was
technically true, but the proceedings at Tyre were regarded by Athan. as
depriving that Synod of any title to ecclesiastical authority (pp. 104,
271). It is impossible to accept *au pied de la lettre* the protests on
either side against state interference with the Church: both parties
were willing to use it on their own side, and to protest against its use
by their opponents. Constantine had summoned <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) the Council of Nicæa, had (Soz. i. 17)
fixed the order of its proceedings, and had enforced its decisions by
civil penalties. The indignant rhetoric of *Hist. Ar.* 52 (p. 289) might
*mutatis nominibus* have been word for word the remonstrance of a
Secundus or Theonas against the great Ecumenical Synod of Christendom.
At Tyre, Jerusalem, and CP., the Eusebians had their turn, and again at
Antioch, 338–341. The Council of Sardica relied on the protection of
Constans, that of Philippopolis on Constantius. The reign of the latter
was the period of Arian triumph; that of Theodosius secured authority to
the Catholics. The only consistent opponents of civil intervention in
Church affairs were the Donatists in the West and the Eunomians or later
Arians in the East (with the obscure exception of Secundus and Theonas,
the original Arians cannot claim the compliment paid by Fialon, p. 115,
to their independence). To the Donatists is due the classical protest
against Erastianism, ‘Quid Imperatori cum ecclesia’(D.C.B. i. 652).
Believing, as the present writer does, that the Donatist protest
expresses a true principle, and that the subjection of religion to the
State is equally mischievous with that of the State to the Church, it is
impossible not to regret these consequences of the conversion of
Constantine. But allowance must be made for the sanguine expectations
with which the astonishing novelty of a Christian Emperor filled men’s
minds. It was only as men came to realise that the civil sword might be
drawn in support of heresy that they began to reflect on the impropriety
of allowing to even a Christian Emperor a voice in Church councils.
Athanasius was the first to grasp this clearly. The voice of
protest <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) sounds in the letter of the
Egyptian Synod of 338–9; throughout his exiles he steadily regarded
himself, and was regarded by his flock, as the sole rightful Bishop of
Alexandria, and continued to issue his Easter Letters from first to
last. At the same time, it must be admitted that if he was right in
returning to Alexandria in 337 without restoration by a Synod, he could
not logically object to the return of Eusebius and Theognis (p. 104),
who had not been deposed at Nicæa, but banished by the Emperor. The
*technical* rights of Chrestus and Amphion (*l. c.*) were no better than
those of Gregory or George. The spiritual elevation of Athanasius over
the head and shoulders of his opponents is plain to ourselves; we see
clearly the moral contrast between the councils of Rome and Antioch
(340–41), of Sardica and Philippopolis (343), of Alexandria (362) and
Seleucia (359). But to men like the Eastern ‘conservatives’ the
technical point of view necessarily presented itself with great force,
and in judging of their conduct we must not assume that it was either
‘meaningless diabolism’ or deliberate sympathy with Arianism that led so
many bishops of good character to see in Athanasius and the other exiles
contumacious offenders against Church order. (I am quite unable to
accept M. Fialon’s sweeping verdict upon the *majority* of Oriental
bishops as ‘weak, vicious, more devoted to their own interests than to
the Church,’ &c., p. 116. He takes as literally exact the somewhat
turgid rhetorical complaints of Greg. Naz.)

<span id="v.ii.vii-p6"></span>But the Eusebians were not limited to
technical complaints. They had stirring accounts to give of the
disorders which the return of Athanasius had excited, of the ruthless
severity with which they had been put down by the prefect, who was, it
was probably added, a mere tool in the hands of the bishop. Accordingly
in the course of 338 the subservient Theodorus was recalled, and
Philagrius the Cappadocian, who had governed with immense <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) popularity in 335–337 (*Fest. Ind.* and
p. 107 *sq.*), was sent to fill the office a second time. This was
regarded at Alexandria as an Arian triumph (see p. 527, note 2). His
arrival did not tend to allay the disorders. Old charges against
Athanasius were raked up, and a new one added, namely that of
embezzlement of the corn appropriated to the support of widows by the
imperial bounty. The Emperor appears to have sent a letter of complaint
to Athanasius (p. 273), but to have paid little attention to his
defence. The Eusebians now ventured to send a bishop of their own to
Alexandria in the person of Pistus, one of the original Arian
presbyters, who was consecrated by the implacable Secundus. The date of
this proceeding is obscure, probably it was conducted in an irregular
manner, so as to render it possible to ignore it altogether if, as
proved to be the case, a stronger candidate should be necessary. First,
however, it was necessary to try the temper of the West. A deputation
consisting of a presbyter Macarius and two deacons, Martyrius and
Hesychius, was sent to Julius, bishop of Rome, to lay before him the
enormities of Athanasius, Marcellus, Paul, Asclepas and the rest, and to
<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span> <span
id="v.ii.vii-Page_xliii"></span>urge the superior title of Pistus to the
recognition of the Church. But upon hearing of this Athanasius summoned
the Egyptian Episcopate together (winter 338–339), and composed a
circular letter (pp. 101–110) dealing fully with the charges against
him, especially with regard to the manner of his election and the
irregularity of his return a year before. Two presbyters carried the
letter in haste to Rome, and enlightened the Church there as to the
antecedents of Pistus. Next day it was announced that Macarius, ‘in
spite of a bodily ailment,’ had decamped in the night. The deacons
however remained, and requested Julius to call a council, undertaking
that if Athanasius and the Eusebians were confronted all the charges
brought by the latter should be made good. This proposal seemed
unobjectionable, and Julius wrote inviting all parties to a council at
Rome, or some other place to be agreed upon (p. 272); his messengers to
the Eusebians were the Roman presbyters Elpidius and Philoxenus <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) , (p. 111). The council was fixed for the
following summer (so it would seem); but no reply was received from the
Eusebians, who kept the presbyters in the East until the following
January, when they at length started for Rome bearing a querulous and
somewhat shifty reply (answered by Julius, p. 111, *sqq*.). But before
the invitation had reached the Eusebians they had assembled at Antioch,
where Constantius was in residence for the winter (laws dated Dec. 27;
the court thereon January ? p. 92), repeated the deposition of
Athanasius, and appointed Gregory, a Cappadocian, to succeed him. It had
become clear that Pistus was a bad candidate; perhaps no formal synod
could be induced to commit themselves to a man excommunicated at Nicæa
and consecrated by Secundus. At any rate they tried to find an
unexceptionable nominee. But their first, Eusebius, afterwards bishop of
Emesa, refused the post, and so they came to Gregory <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) , a former student of Alexandria, and
under personal obligations to its bishop (Greg. Naz. *Or*. xxi. 15).

<span id="v.ii.vii-p10"></span>All was now ready for the blow at
Athanasius. It fell in Lent (pp. 94, 503). His position since the
arrival of Philagrius had been one of unrest. ‘In this year again,’ says
our annalist, ‘there were many tumults. On the xxii Phamenoth (i.e.
Sunday, Mark 18:0, Mark 339:0<span id="v.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>) he was
sought after by his persecutors in the night. On the next morning he
fled from the Church of Theonas after he had baptized many. Then on the
fourth day (Mar. 22<span id="v.ii.vii-p10.2"></span>) Gregory the
Cappadocian entered the city as bishop’ (*Fest. Ind.* xi.). But
Athanasius (p. 95), remained quietly in the town for about four weeks
more <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) . He drew up for circulation
‘throughout the tribes’ (cf. [Judges xix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#029)<span id="v.ii.vii-p11.2"></span>) a
memorandum and appeal, describing the intrusion of Gregory and the gross
outrages which had accompanied it. This letter was written on or just
after Easter Day (April 15), and immediately after this he escaped from
Alexandria and made his way to Rome. The data as to the duration of the
periods of ‘quiet’ and exile fix the date of his departure for Easter
Monday, April 16. This absence from Alexandria was his longest, lasting
‘ninety months and three days,’ i.e. from Pharmuthi 21 (April 16) 339 to
Paophi 24 (October 21), 346.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p12"></span>(2.) The <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.vii-p12.1"></span>Second Exile</span> of Athanasius falls into
two sections, the first of four years (p. 239), to the council of
Sardica (339–343), the second of three years, to his return in Oct. 346.
The odd six months cannot be distributed with certainty unless we can
arrive at a more exact result than at present appears attainable for the
month and duration of the Sardican synod.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p13"></span>In May, 339, Athanasius, accompanied by a
few of his clergy (story of the ‘detachment’ of his monk Ammonius in
Socr. iv. 23, *sub fin.*), arrived at Rome. He was within three months
followed by Marcellus, Paul of CP., Asclepas, and other exiles who had
been restored at the end of 337 but had once more been ejected. Soon
after, Carpones, an original Arian of Alexandria, appeared as envoy of
Gregory. He confirmed all that had been alleged against Pistus, but
failed to convince Julius that his own bishop was anything but an Arian.
Meanwhile time wore on, and no reply came from the Eusebians. Athanasius
gave himself up to enforced leisure and to the services of the Church.
Instead of his usual Easter letter for the following spring, he sent a
few lines to the clergy of Alexandria and a letter to his right-hand
man, bishop Serapion of Thmuis, requesting him to make the necessary
announcement of the season. Gregory made his first attempt (apparently
also his last) to fix the Easter Festival, but in the middle of Lent, to
the amusement of the public, discovered that a mistake had been made,
the correction of which involved his adherents in an extra week of
Lenten austerities. We can well imagine that the spectacle of the
abstracted asceticism of Ammonius aroused the curiosity and veneration
of the Roman Christians, and thus gave an impulse to the ascetic life in
the West (see Jerome, cited below, p. 191). That is all we know of the
life of Athanasius during the first eighteen months of his stay at Rome.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p14"></span>In the early spring of 340 the presbyters
returned (see above) with a letter from a number of bishops, including
the Eusebian leaders, who had assembled at Antioch in January. This
letter is carefully dissected in the <span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>
<span id="v.ii.vii-Page_xliv"></span>reply of the Roman Council, and
appears to have been highly acrimonious in its tone. Julius kept it
secret for a time (p. 111), hoping against hope that after all some of
the Orientals would come for the council; but at length he gave up all
expectations of the kind, and convoked the bishops of Italy, who
examined the cases of the various exiles (p. 114). All the old charges
against Athanasius were gone into with the aid of the Mareotic report
(the *ex parte* character of which Julius strongly emphasises) and of
the account of the proceedings at Tyre. The council had no difficulty in
pronouncing Athanasius completely innocent on all points. The charge of
ignoring the proceedings of a council was disposed of by pointing out
the uncanonical character of Gregory’s appointment (p. 115), and the
infraction by the complainants of the decrees of Nicæa. With regard to
Marcellus, he responded to the request of the bishops by volunteering a
written confession of his faith (p. 116, Epiph. *Hær*. 72), which was in
fact the creed of the Roman Church itself (Caspari, *Quellen* iii. 28,
note, argues that the creed must have been tendered at an earlier visit,
336–337, but without cogent reasons). Either Julius and his bishops were
(like the fathers of Sardica) very easily satisfied, or Marcellus
exercised extreme reserve as to his peculiar tenets (Zahn, p. 71, makes
out the best case he can for his candour). The other exiles were also
pronounced innocent, and the synod ‘restored’ them all. It remained to
communicate the result to the Oriental bishops. This was done by Julius
in a letter drawn up in the name of the council, and preserved by
Athanasius in his Apology. Its subject matter has been sufficiently
indicated, but its statesmanlike logic and grave severity must be
appreciated by reference to the document itself. It has been truly
called ‘one of the ablest documents in the entire controversy.’ It is
worth observing that Julius makes no claim whatever to pass a final
judgment *as successor of S. Peter*, although the Orientals had
expressly asserted the equal authority of all bishops, however important
the cities in which they ruled (p. 113); on the contrary he merely
claims that without his own consent, proceedings against bishops would
lack the weight of *universal* consent (p. 118). At the same time he
claims to be in possession of the *traditions* of S. Paul and especially
of S. Peter, and is careful to found *upon precedent* (that of
Dionysius) a claim to be consulted in matters alleged against a bishop
of Alexandria. This claim, by its modesty, is in striking contrast with
that which Socrates (ii. 17) and Sozom. (iii. 8, 10) make for him,—that
owing to the greatness of his see, the care of all the churches
pertained to him: and this again, which represents what the Greek Church
of the early *fifth* century was accustomed to hear from Rome, is very
different from the claim to a jurisdiction of divine right which we find
formulated in Leo the Great.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p15"></span>The letter of Julius was considered at
the famous <span class="c10"><span id="v.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>Council of
the Dedication</span> (of Constantine’s ‘Golden’ Church at Antioch, see
Eus. *V. C*. iii. 50), held in the summer of 341 (between May 22 and
Sept. 1, see Gwatkin, p. 114, note). Eusebius of Constantinople was
there (he had only a few months longer to live), and most of the Arian
leaders. Cæsarea was represented by Acacius, who had succeeded Eusebius
some two years before; a man of Whom we shall hear more. But of the
ninety-odd bishops who attended, the majority must have been
conservative in feeling, such as Dianius of Cæsarea, who possibly
presided. At any rate Hilary (*de Syn*. 32) calls it ‘a synod of
saints,’ and its canons passed into the accepted body of Church Law.
Their reply to Julius is not extant, but we gather from the historians
that it was not conciliatory. (Socr. ii. 15, 17; Soz. iii. 8, 10; they
are in such hopeless confusion as to dates and the order of events that
it is difficult to use them here; Theodoret is more accurate but less
full.)

<span id="v.ii.vii-p16"></span>But the council marks an epoch in a more
important respect; with it begins the formal <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.vii-p16.1"></span>Doctrinal Reaction</span> against the Nicene
Formula. We have traces of previous confessions, such as that of Arius
and Euzoius, 330–335, and an alleged creed drawn up at CP. in 336. But
only now begins the long series of attempts to raise some other formula
to a position of equality with the Nicene, so as to eventually depose
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.vii-p16.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> from its position as an
ecumenical test.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p17"></span>The first suggestion of a new creed came
from the Arian bishops, who propounded a formula (p. 146, §22), with a
disavowal of any intention of disparaging that of Nicæa (Socr. ii. 10),
but suspiciously akin to the evasive confession of Arius, and prefaced
with a suicidally worded protest against being considered as followers
of the latter. The fate of this creed in the council is obscure; but it
would seem to have failed to commend itself to the majority, who put
forward a creed alleged to have been composed by Lucian the martyr. This
(see above, p. xxviii, and p. 461, notes 5–9), was hardly true of the
creed as it stood, but it may have been signed by Lucian as a test when
he made his peace with bishop Cyril. At any rate the creed is catholic
in asserting the *exact* Likeness of the Son to the Father’s Essence
(yet the Arians could admit this as *de facto* true, though not
originally so; only the word Essence would, if honestly taken, fairly
exclude their sense), but anti-Nicene in omitting the <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>, and in
the phrase <span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.vii-p17.2"></span>τῇ μὲν
ὑποστάσει τρία, τῇ δὲ συμφωνί& 139· ἕν</span>, an artfully chosen point
of contact between Origen on the one hand, and Asterius, Lucian, and
Paul of Samosata on the other. The anathemas, also, let in an Arian
interpretation. This creed is usually referred to as the ‘Creed of the
Dedication’ or ‘Lucianic’ Creed, and represents, on the one hand the
extreme limit of concession to which Arians were willing to go, on the
other the theological rallying point of the gradually forming body of
reasoned conservative opinion which under the nickname of
‘semi-Arianism’ (Epiph. *Hær*. 73; it was repudiated by Basil of Ancyra,
&c.) gradually worked toward the recognition of the Nicene formula.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p18"></span>A third formula was presented by
Theophronius, bishop of Tyana, as a personal statement of belief, and
was widely signed by way of approval. It insists like the Lucianic creed
on the pretemporal <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.vii-p18.1"></span>γέννησις</span>, against Marcellus, adding
two other points (hypostatic pre-existence and eternal kingdom of the
Son) in the same direction, and closing with an anathema against
Marcellus, Sabellius, Paul, and all who communicate with any of their
supporters. This was of course a direct defiance of Julius and the
Westerns (Mr. Gwatkin, by a slip, assigns this anathema to the ‘fourth’
creed).

<span id="v.ii.vii-p19"></span>Lastly, a few months after the council
(late autumn of 341) a few bishops reassembled in order to send a
deputation to Constans (since 340 sole Western Emperor). They decided to
substitute for the genuine creeds of the council a fourth formulary,
which accordingly the Arians Maris and Narcissus, and the neutrals
Theodore of Heraclea and Mark of Arethusa, conveyed to the West. The
assertion of the eternal reign of Christ <span id="page_xlv">p.
xlv</span> <span id="v.ii.vii-Page_xlv"></span>was strengthened, and the
name of Marcellus omitted, but the Nicene anathemas were skilfully
adapted so as to strike at the Marcellian and admit the Arian doctrine
of the divine Sonship. This creed became the basis on which the
subsequent Arianising confessions of 343 (Philippopolis), 344
(Macrostich), and 351 (Sirmium) were moulded by additions to and
modifications of the anathemas. This series of creeds mark ‘the
stationary period of Arianism,’ i.e. between the close of the first
generation (Arius, Asterius, Eusebius of Nicomedia) and the beginnings
of the divergence of parties under the sole reign of Constantius. At
present opposition to the school of Marcellus and to the impregnable
strength of the West under a Catholic Emperor kept the reactionary party
united.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p20"></span>It has been necessary to dwell upon the
work of this famous Council in view of its subsequent importance. It is
easy to see how the Eastern bishops were prevailed upon to take the bold
step of putting forth a Creed to rival the Nicene formula. The formal
approval of Marcellus at Rome shewed, so they felt, the inadequacy of
that formula to exclude Sabellianism, or rather the direct support which
that heresy could find in the word ‘homoüsion.’ This being so, provided
they made it clear that they were not favouring Arianism, they would be
doing no more than their duty in providing a more efficient test. But
here the Arian group saw their opportunity. Conservative willingness to
go behind Nicæa must be made to subserve the supreme end of revoking the
condemnation of Arianism. Hence the confusion of counsels reflected in
the multiplicity of creeds. The result pleased no one. The Lucianic
Creed, with its anti-Arian clauses, tempered by equivocal
qualifications, was a feeble and indirect weapon against Marcellus, who
could admit in a sense the pre-æonian <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.vii-p20.1"></span>γέννησις</span> and the ‘true’ sonship. On
the other hand, the three creeds which only succeeded in gaining
secondary ratification, while express against Marcellus, were worthless
as against Arianism. On the whole, the fourth creed, in spite of its
irregular sanction, was found the most useful for the time (341–351);
but as their doctrinal position took definite form, the Conservative
wing fell back on the ‘Lucianic’ Creed, and found in it a bridge to the
Nicene (cf. pp. 470, 472, Hil. *de Syn.* 33, and Gwatkin, p. 119, note).

<span id="v.ii.vii-p21"></span>(3.) Athanasius remained in Rome more
than three years after his departure from Alexandria (April, 339–May?
342, see p. 239). During the last of these years, the dispute connected
with him had been referred by Julius to Constans, who had requested his
brother to send some Oriental bishops with a statement of their case:
this was the reason of the deputation (see above) of the winter of 341.
They found Constans at Treveri, but owing to the warnings of good Bishop
Maximinus <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) , he refused to accept
their assurances, and sent them ignominiously away. This probably falls
in the summer of 342, the deputation on arriving in Italy having found
that Constans had already left Milan for his campaign against the Franks
(Gwatkin, p. 122, note 3). If this be so, Constans had already made up
his mind that a General Council was the only remedy, and had written to
Constantius to arrange for one. Before leaving Milan he had summoned
Athanasius from Rome, and announced to him what he had done. The young
Prince was evidently an admirer of Athanasius, who had received from him
in reply to a letter of self-defence, written from Alexandria, an order
for certain <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.vii-p22.2"></span>πύκτια</span>, or bound volumes of the
Scriptures (see Montfaucon, *Animadv.* xv., in Migne xxv., p. clxxvi.).
The volumes had been delivered before this date. Constans hurried off to
Gaul, while Athanasius remained at Milan, where he afterwards received a
summons to follow the Emperor to Treveri <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) ; here he met the venerable Hosius and
others, and learned that the Emperors had fixed upon <span
class="c10"><span id="v.ii.vii-p23.2"></span>Sardica</span> (now Sophia
in Bulgaria), on the frontier line of the dominions of Constans <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) , as the venue for the great Council,
which was to assemble in the ensuing summer. Athanasius must have kept
the Easter of 343 at Treveri: he had written his usual Easter letter
(now lost) most probably from Rome or Milan, in the previous spring. The
date of assembly and duration of the Sardican synod are, unfortunately,
obscure. But the proceedings must have been protracted by the
negotiations which ended in the departure of the Easterns, and (p. 124,
note 2) by the care with which the evidence against the incriminated
bishops was afterwards gone into <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) .

<span id="v.ii.vii-p26"></span>We shall probably be safe in supposing
that the Council occupied the whole of August <span id="page_xlvi">p.
xlvi</span> <span id="v.ii.vii-Page_xlvi"></span>and September, and that
Constans sent Bishops Euphrates and Vincent to his brother at Antioch as
soon as the worst weather of winter was over.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p27"></span>The Western bishops assembled at Sardica
to the number of about 95 (see p. 147). Athanasius, Marcellus, and
Asclepas arrived with Hosius from Treveri. Paul of Constantinople, for
some unknown reason, was absent, but was represented by Asclepas <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) . The Orientals came in a body, and with
suspicion. They had the Counts Musonianus and Hesychius, and (according
to *Fest. Ind.,* cf. p. 276) the ex-Prefect Philagrius, as advisers and
protectors: they were lodged in a body at the Palace of Sophia. The
proceedings were blocked by a question of privilege. The Easterns
demanded that the accused bishops should not be allowed to take their
seats in the Council; the majority replied that, pending the present
enquiry, all previous decisions against them must be in fairness
considered suspended. There was something to be said on both sides (see
Hefele, p. 99), but on the whole, the synod being convoked expressly to
re-hear both sides, the majority were perhaps justified in refusing to
exclude the accused. A long interchange (p. 119), of communications
followed, and at last, alleging that they were summoned home by the news
of the victory in the Persian war, the minority disappeared by night,
sending their excuse by the Sardican Presbyter Eustathius (p. 275). At
Philippopolis, within the dominions of Constantius, they halted and drew
up a long and extremely wild and angry statement of what had occurred,
deposing and condemning all concerned, from Hosius, Julius and
Athanasius downward. They added the Antiochene Confession (‘fourth’ of
341), with the addition of some anathemas directed at the system of
Marcellus. Among the signatures, which included most of the surviving
Arian leaders, along with Basil of Ancyra, and other moderate men, we
recognise that of Ischyras, ‘bishop from the Mareotis,’ who had enjoyed
the dignity without the burdens of the Episcopate since the Council of
Tyre (p. 144). The document was sent far and wide, among the rest to the
Donatists of Africa (Hef., p. 171).

<span id="v.ii.vii-p29"></span>This rupture doomed the purpose of the
council to failure: instead of leading to agreement it had made the
difference a hopeless one. But the Westerns were still a respectable
number, and might do much to forward the cause of justice and of the
Nicene Faith. Two of the Easterns had joined them, Asterius of Petra and
Arius, bishop of an unknown see in Palestine. The only other Oriental
present, Diodorus of Tenedos, appears to have come, like Asclepas, &c.,
independently of the rest. The work of the council was partly judicial,
partly legislative. The question was raised of issuing a supplement to,
or formula explanatory of, the Nicene creed, and a draft (preserved
Thdt. *H. E.* ii. 8) was actually made, but the council declined to
sanction anything which should imply that the Nicene creed was
insufficient (p. 484, correcting Thdt. *ubi supra,* and Soz. iii. 12).

<span id="v.ii.vii-p30"></span>The charges against all the exiles were
carefully examined and dismissed. This was also the case with the
complaints against the orthodoxy of Marcellus, who was allowed to evade
the very point which gave most offence (p. 125). Probably the ocular
evidence (p. 124) of the violence which many present had suffered,
indisposed the fathers to believe any accusations from such a quarter.
The synod next proceeded to legislate. Their canons were twenty in
number, the most important being canons 3–5, which permit a deposed
bishop to demand the reference of his case to ‘Julius bishop of Rome,’
‘honouring the memory of Peter the Apostle;’ the deposition to be
suspended pending such reference; the Roman bishop, if the appeal seem
reasonable, to request the rehearing of the case in its own province,
and if at the request of the accused he sends a presbyter to represent
him, such presbyter to rank as though he were his principal in person.
The whole scheme appears to be novel and to have been suggested by the
history of the case of the exiles. The canons are very important in
their subsequent history, but need not be discussed here. (Elaborate
discussions in Hefele, pp. 112–129; see also D.C.A. pp. 127 *sq*., 1658,
1671, Greenwood, *Cath. Petr.* i. 204–208, D.C.B. iii. 662 a, and
especially 529–531.) The only legislation, however, to which Athanasius
alludes is that establishing a period of 50 years during which Rome and
Alexandria should agree as to the period for Easter (*Fest. Ind.* xv.,
*infr.* p. 544, also Hefele pp. 157 *sqq.*). The arrangement averted a
dispute in 346, but differences occurred in spite of it in 349, 350,
360, and 368.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p31"></span>The synod addressed an encyclical letter
to all Christendom (p. 123), embodying their decisions and announcing
their deposition of eight or nine Oriental bishops (including Theodore
of Heraclea, Acacius, and several Arian leaders) for complicity with
Arianism. They also wrote to the Church of Alexandria and to the bishops
of Egypt with special reference to Athanasius and to the Alexandrian
Church, to Julius announcing their decisions, and to the Mareotis (Migne
xxvi. 1331 *sqq.* printed with *Letters* 46, 47. Hefele ii. 165
questions the genuineness of all three, but without reason; see p. 554,
note 1).

<span id="v.ii.vii-p32"></span>The effect of the Council was not at
first pacific. Constantius shared the indignation of the Eastern
bishops, and began severe measures against all the Nicene-minded bishops
in his dominions (pp. 275 *sqq*). Theodulus, Bishop of Trajanople, died
of his injuries before the Sardican Bishops had completed their work. At
Hadrianople savage cruelties were perpetrated (*ib.*); and a close watch
was instituted in case Athanasius should attempt to return on the
strength of his synodical acquittal. Accordingly, he passed the winter
and spring at <span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span> <span
id="v.ii.vii-Page_xlvii"></span>Naissus (now Nish, see *Fest. Ind*.
xvi.), and during the summer, in obedience to an invitation from
Constans, repaired to Aquileia, where he spent the Easter of 345.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p33"></span>Meanwhile, Constans had made the cause of
the Sardican majority his own. At the beginning of the year 344 he sent
two of its most respected members to urge upon Constantius the propriety
of restoring the exiles. Either now or later he hinted that refusal
would be regarded by him as a *casus belli*. His remonstrance gained
unexpected moral support from an episode, strange even in that age of
unprincipled intrigue. In rage and pain at the apparent success of the
envoys, Stephen, Bishop of Antioch, sought to discredit them by a truly
diabolical trick (see p. 276). Its discovery, just after Easter, 344,
roused the moral sense of Constantius. A Council was summoned, and met
during the summer <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) (p. 462, §26,
‘three years after’ the Dedication at Midsummer, 341). Stephen was
ignominiously deposed (see Gwatkin 125, note 1), and Leontius, an Arian,
but a lover of quiet and a temporiser, appointed. The Council also
re-issued the ‘fourth’ Antiochene Creed with a very long explanatory
addition, mildly condemning certain Arian phrases, fiercely
anathematising Marcellus and Photinus, and with a side-thrust at
supposed implications of the Nicene formula. A deputation was sent to
Italy, consisting of Eudoxius of Germanicia and three others. They
reached Milan at the Synod of 345, and were able to procure a
condemnation of Photinus (not Marcellus), but on being asked to
anathematise Arianism refused, and retired in anger. At the same Synod
of Milan, however, Valens and Ursacius, whose deposition at Sardica was
in imminent danger of being enforced by Constans, followed the former
example of Eusebius of Nicomedia, Maris, Theognis, and Arius himself, by
making their submission, which was followed up two years later by a
letter in abject terms addressed to Julius, and another in a tone of
veiled insolence to Athanasius (p. 131). In return, they were able to
beat up a Synod at Sirmium against Photinus (Hil. *Frag.* ii. 19), but
without success in the attempt to dislodge him.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p35"></span>Meanwhile, Constantius had followed up
the Council at Antioch by cancelling his severe measures against the
Nicene party. He restored to Alexandria certain Presbyters whom he had
expelled, and in the course of the summer wrote a public letter to
forbid any further persecution of the Athanasians in that city. This
must have been in August, 344, and ‘about ten months later’ (p. 277),
i.e., on June 26, 345 (*F. I.* xviii.), Gregory, who had been in bad
health for fully four years, died <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) .
Constantius, according to his own statement (pp. 127, 277), had already
before the death of Gregory written twice to Athanasius (from Edessa; he
was at Nisibis on May 12, 345), and had sent a Presbyter to request him
urgently to come and see him with a view to his eventual restoration. As
Gregory was known to be in a dying state, this is quite intelligible,
but the language of *Hist. Ar.* 21, which seems to put *all three*
letters *after* Gregory’s death, cannot stand if we are to accept the
assurance of Constantius. Athanasius, at any rate, hesitated to obey,
and stayed on at Aquileia (344 till early in 346), where he received a
third and still more pressing invitation, promising him immediate
restoration. He at once went to Rome to bid farewell to Julius, who
wrote (p. 128 *sq*.) a most cordial and nobly-worded letter of
congratulation for Athanasius to take home to his Church. Thence he
proceeded to Trier to take leave of Constans (p. 239), and rapidly
travelled by way of Hadrianople (p. 276) to Antioch (p. 240), where he
was cordially received <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) by
Constantius. His visit was short but remarkable. Constantius gave him
the strongest assurances (pp. 277, 285) of goodwill for the future, but
begged that Athanasius would allow the Arians at Alexandria the use of a
single Church. He replied that he would do so if the Eustathians of
Antioch (with whom alone he communicated during this visit) might have
the same privilege. But this Leontius would not sanction, so the
proposal came to nothing (Soc. ii. 23, Soz. iii. 20), and Athanasius
hastened on his way. At Jerusalem he was detained by the welcome of a
Council, which Bishop Maximus had summoned to greet him (p. 130), but on
the twenty-first of October his reception by his flock took place; ‘the
people, and those in authority, met him a hundred miles distant’ (*Fest.
Ind.* xviii.), and amid splendid rejoicings (cf. p. xlii., note 3), he
entered Alexandria, to remain there in ‘quiet’ ‘nine years, three months
and nineteen days’ (*Hist. Aceph.* iv., cf. p. 496), viz., from Paophi
24 (Oct. 21), 346, to Mechir 13 (Feb. 8), 356. This period was his
longest undisturbed residence in his see; he entered upon it in the very
<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span> <span
id="v.ii.vii-Page_xlviii"></span>prime of life (he was 48 years old),
and its internal happiness earns it the title of a golden decade.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[xlii:53](2040019.htm#fr_52) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p4"></span> As he had previously referred the
Donatist schism to the commission of Rome and the Council of Arles.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[xlii:54](2040019.htm#fr_53) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p5"></span> But they complain, p. 104, §8, of
*coercion* not of Erastianism.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[xlii:55](2040019.htm#fr_54) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p7"></span> The ordinary time for the entry of the
Prefect upon his duties seems to have been about the end of the Egyptian
Year (end of August). Accordingly the prefectures and years in *Fest.
Ind.* roughly correspond: Philagrius was already Prefect when the
Mareotic Commission arrived (Aug. 335). According to the headings to the
Festal Letters vi., vii., he had superseded Paternus in 334: either the
Index or the headings are mistaken. For the popularity of Philagrius,
see Greg. Naz. *Orat.* xxi. 28, who mentions that his reappointment was
due to the request of a deputation from Alex. (this must have come from
the Arians!) and that the rejoicings which welcomed his return exceeded
any that could have greeted the Emperor, and *nearly* equalled those
which had welcomed the return of Athanasius himself. But Gregory is a
rhetorician; see p. 138, and Tillem. viii. 664.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[xliii:56](2040019.htm#fr_55) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p8"></span> It is *possible,* however, that these
carried a *second* letter, after the arrival of Ath. See pp. 110, 273.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[xliii:57](2040019.htm#fr_56) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p9"></span> Gregory shewed his Arianism by employing
Ammon as his secretary, see p. 96. The curious parallelism between
Gregory and George (*infr.* §8),—the names differing (in Latin) by a
single letter only, both Arians, both Cappadocians, both intruded
bishops of Alexandria, both arriving from court, both arriving in Lent,
both exercising violence, both charged by Ath. with the storming of
churches, with similar scenes of desecration, maltreatment of virgins,
&c., in either case,—is one of the strangest examples of history
repeating itself within a few years. What wonder that the fifth-century
historians confuse the two still further together, and that they still
find followers? The most important point of confusion is the alleged
murder of Gregory (due to Theodoret), who really died a natural death.
It is none too soon for this time-honoured blunder to do the like. On
the inveterate tendency of Georges and Gregories to coalesce, and
exchange names in transcription (to say nothing of modern typography),
see D.C.B. ii. pp. 640–650, 778 *sq.,* 798 *sq., passim.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[xliii:58](2040019.htm#fr_57) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p11"></span> In some church other than ‘Theonas,’
probably ‘Quirinus,’ which latter, however, was stormed on Easter Day,
pp. 273, 95, note 3. The statement, *Hist. Ar.* 10, that he *sailed* for
Rome before Gregory’s arrival is in any case verbally inexact, but it
may refer to his flight from ‘Theonas.’

<span id="fn_58"></span>[xlv:59](2040019.htm#fr_58) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p22"></span> Bitter complaint in Hil. *Fragm.* iii.
27; cf. *infr.* p. 462, Soz. iii. 10, who wrongly gives ‘Italy’ as the
place.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[xlv:60](2040019.htm#fr_59) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p23"></span> This may have been in the autumn, after
the close of the campaign, but see *infr.* ch. v. §3, c, d.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xlv:61](2040019.htm#fr_60) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p24"></span> Hefele i. 91, is singular in placing it
in the empire of Constantius. The Ichtiman range between Sophia and
Philippopolis was the natural boundary between Thrace and Mœsia, or
‘Dacia Media.’

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xlv:62](2040019.htm#fr_61) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p25"></span> On the one hand the deputation after the
council reached Constantius at Antioch about Easter (April 15), 344.
They were, however sent not directly by the Council, but by Constans
after its close (Thdt. ii. 8). We may be certain that their arrival at
Antioch was at the very least two months after the close of the council;
but in all probability the interval was much longer. Again, the course
of events described above forbids us to put the council earlier than the
early summer of 343. But according to the *Festal Index* xv. the council
*at any rate began* before the end of August in that year. If the
bishops left their churches after Easter (a very natural and usual
arrangement, compare Nicæa, the Dedication, &c.), they could easily
assemble by the end of June. The Orientals came somewhat later. The
beginning of July is accordingly our *terminus a quo,* the end of
January our *terminus ad quem.* What exact part of the interval the
council occupied we cannot decide.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xlvi:63](2040019.htm#fr_62) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p28"></span> The statement in the synodal letter of
Philippolis that Asclepas had been deposed ‘seventeen’ years before is
clearly corrupt. The true reading may be ‘seven’ (council of CP. in 336)
or xiii, which might easily be changed to xvii. (Cf. Hefele, pp. 89,
90).

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xlvii:64](2040019.htm#fr_63) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p34"></span> The ‘ten months’ of *Hist. Ar.* 21, p.
277, are to be reckoned, not from *Easter* 344, but from the letters of
Const. to Alexandria some months after.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xlvii:65](2040019.htm#fr_64) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p36"></span> It must be observed that the Index is
loose in its statement here: see Gwatkin, p. 105, Sievers, p. 108. The
statement of Thdt., &c., that he was murdered is simply due to the usual
confusion of Gregory with George (cf. p. xliii. note 5).

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xlvii:66](2040019.htm#fr_65) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p37"></span> This visit cannot have been between May
7 and Aug. 27, when Const. was at CP. Nor can it well have been before
May 7. We must, therefore, with Sievers, p. 110, put it in September.
Yet see Gwatkin, p. 127, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Golden Decade, 346-356.](2040020)
