[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040033)  [Next](2040035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi-p1"></span> §6. *Derivative Doctrines. Grace and the
Means of Grace; The Christian Life; The Last Things.*

<span id="v.iv.vi-p2"></span>The idea of Grace is important to the
theological system of Athanasius, in view of the central place occupied
in that system by the idea of restoration and new creation as the
specific work of Christ upon His fellow-men (*supra,* §2, cf. *Orat.*
ii. 56, *Exp. in Pss.* xxxiii. 2, cxviii. 5, LXX.). But, in common with
the Greek Fathers generally, he does not analyse its operation, nor
endeavour to fix its relation to free will (cf. *Orat.* i. 37 *fin*.,
iii. 25 *sub fin.*). The divine predestination relates (for anything
that Ath. says) not to individuals so much as to the Purpose of God,
before all ages, to repair the foreseen evil of man’s fall by the
Incarnation (*Orat.* ii. 75, *sq.*). On the general subject of
Sacraments and their efficacy, he says little or nothing. The initiatory
rite of Baptism makes us sons of God (*de Decr.* 31, cf. *Orat.* i. 37
*ut supra*), and is the only complete renewal to be looked for in this
life, *Serap.* iv. 13). It is accompanied (*de Trin. et Sp. S. 7*) by
confession of faith in the Trinity, and the baptism administered by
Arians who do not really hold this faith is therefore in peril of losing
its value (*Orat*. ii. 42, *fin*.). The grace of the Spirit conferred at
baptism will be finally withdrawn from the wicked at the last judgment
(*Exp. in Ps.* lxxv. 13, LXX.). In the *de Trin. et Sp. S.* 21 baptism
is coupled with the imposition of hands as one rite. On the Eucharist
there is an important passage (*ad Serap.* iv. 19), which must be given
in full. He has been speaking of sin against the Holy Spirit, which
latter name he applies \[see above, ch. iii. §1 (22)\] to the Saviour’s
Divine Personality. He proceeds to illustrate this by [John vi.
62-64](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#062.md)<span id="v.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p3"></span>‘For here also He has used both terms of
Himself, flesh and spirit; and He distinguished the spirit from what is
of the flesh in order that they might believe not only in what was
visible in Him, but in what was invisible, and so understand that what
He says is not fleshly, but spiritual. For for how many would the body
suffice as food, for it to become meat even for the whole world? But
this is why He mentioned the ascending of the Son of Man into heaven;
namely, to draw them off from their corporeal idea, and that from
thenceforth they might understand that the aforesaid flesh was heavenly
from above, and spiritual meat, to be given at His hands. For ‘what I
have said unto you,’ says He, ‘is spirit and life;’ as much as to say,
‘what is manifested, and to be given for the salvation of the world, is
the flesh which I wear. But this, and the blood from it, shall be given
to you spiritually at My hands as meat, so as to be imparted spiritually
in each one, and to become for all a preservative to resurrection of
life eternal.’

<span id="v.iv.vi-p4"></span>Beyond this he does not define the relation
of the outward and visible in the Eucharist to the spiritual and inward.
The *reality* of the Eucharistic gift is insisted on as strongly as its
spirituality in such passages as *ad Max*. (*Letter* 61) 2 *sub fin*.,
and the comment on [Matt. vii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006.md)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p4.1"></span> (Migne xxvii. 1380), ‘See to it, therefore,
Deacon, that thou do not administer to the unworthy the purple of the
sinless body,’ and the protest of the Egyptian bishops (*Apol. c. Ar*.
5) that their churches ‘are adorned only by the blood of Christ and by
the pious worship of Him.’ The Holy Table is expressly stated to have
been made of wood (*Hist. Ar*. 56), and was situated (*Apol. Fug*.) in a
space called the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi-p4.2"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi-p4.3"></span>ερατεῖον</span>. The Eucharist was celebrated
in most places every Sunday, but not on week-days (*Apol. c. Ar*. 11).
But in Alexandria we hear of it being celebrated on a Friday on one
occasion, and this was apparently a normal one (*Apol. Fug*. 24, *Apol.
Const*. 25). To celebrate the Eucharist was the office of the bishop or
presbyter (*Apol. c. Ar*. 11). Ischyras (*supr*. p. xxxviii.) was held
by Athanasius to be a layman only, and therefore incapable of offering
the Eucharist. The sacrificial aspect of the Eucharist is not touched
upon, except in the somewhat strange fragment (Migne xxvi. 1259) from an
*Oratio de defunctis*, which contains the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi-p4.4"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi-p4.5"></span>δέ γε ἀναίμακτος θυσία
ἐξιλασμός</span>. He insists on the finality of the sacrifice of the
Cross, *Orat*. ii. 9, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.vi-p4.6"></span>αἱ μὲν γὰρ κατὰ νόμον</span>…<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi-p4.7"></span>οὐκ εἶχον τὸ πιστόν, καθ᾽
ἡμέραν παρερχόμεναι· & 211· δὲ τοῦ Σωτῆρος θυσία ἅπαξ γενομένη
τετελείωκε τὸ πᾶν</span>. On repentance and the confession of sins there
is little to quote. He strongly asserts the efficacy of repentance, and
explains [Heb. vi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.iv.vi-p4.8"></span>, of the *unique* cleansing and restoring power
of baptism (*Serap*. iv. 13, as cited above.) A catena on Jeremiah
preserves a fragment \[*supra*, ch. iii. §1 (38)\], which compares the
ministry of the priest in baptism to that in confession: <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi-p4.9"></span>οὕτως καὶ ὁ</span> <span
id="page_lxxx">p. lxxx</span> <span id="v.iv.vi-Page_lxxx"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi-p4.10"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi-p4.11"></span>ξομολογούμενος ἐν μετανόιᾳ
δία τοῦ ἱ& 153·ρεως λαμβάνει τὴν ἄφεσιν χάριτι Χριστοῦ</span>. Of
compulsory confession, or even of this ordinance as an ordinary element
of the Christian life, we read nothing.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p5"></span>On the Christian ministry again there is
little direct teaching. The ordinations by the presbyter Colluthus
(*Apol. Ar*. 11, 12) are treated as null. The letter (49) to Dracontius
contains vigorous and beautiful passages on the responsibility of the
Ministry. On the principles of Christian conduct there is much to be
gathered from *obiter dicta* in the writings of Athanasius. His
description (cf. *supra*, p. xlviii.) of the revival of religious life
at Alexandria in 346, and the exhortations in the Easter letters, are
the most conspicuous passages for this purpose. In particular, he
insists (e.g., p. 67) on the necessity of a holy life and pure mind for
the apprehension of divine things, and especially for the study of the
Scriptures. He strongly recommends the discipline of fasting, in which,
as compared with other churches (Rome especially), the Alexandrian
Christians were lax (*Letter* 12), but he warns them in his first Easter
letter to fast ‘not only with the body, but also with the soul.’ He also
dwells (*Letter* 6) on the essential difference of spirit between
Christian festivals and Jewish observance of days. Christ is the true
Festival, embracing the whole of the Christian life (*Letters* 5, 14).
He lays stress on love to our neighbour, and especially on kindness to
the poor (*Letter* i. 11, *Hist. Ar*. 61, *Vit. Ant*. 17, 30). On one
important practical point he is very emphatic: ‘Persecution is a device
of the devil’ (*Hist. Ar*. 33). This summary judgment was unfortunately
less in accordance with the spirit of the times than with the Spirit of
Christ.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p6"></span>The ascetic teaching of Athanasius must be
reserved for the introduction to the *Vita Antoni* (cf. *Letters* 48,
49, also above, p. xlviii.). His eschatology calls for discussion in
connection with the language of the *de Incarnatione*, and will be
briefly noticed in the introduction to that tract. With regard to
prayers for the departed, he distinguishes (on [Luke xiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#021.md)<span id="v.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>,
&c., Migne xxvii. 1404) the careless, whose friends God will move to
assist them with their prayers, from the utterly wicked who are beyond
the help of prayer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](2040035.md)
