[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040419)  [Next](2040421) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>Letter XI</span>.—*For 339. Coss.
Constantius Augustus II, Constans I; Præfect, Philagrius the
Cappadocian, for the second time; Indict. xii; Easter-day xvii Kal. Mai,
xx Pharmuthi; Æra Dioclet. 55.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p2.1"></span>The</span> blessed Paul, being girt
about with every virtue <span id="fr_4259"></span>[4260](#fn_4259) , and
called faithful of the Lord—for he was conscious of nothing in himself
but what was a virtue and a praise <span
id="fr_4260"></span>[4261](#fn_4260) , or what was in harmony with love
and godliness—clave to these things more and more, and was carried up
even to heavenly places, and was borne to Paradise <span
id="fr_4261"></span>[4262](#fn_4261) ; to the end that, as he surpassed
the conversation of men, he should be exalted above men. And when he
descended, he preached to every man; ‘We know in part, and we prophesy
in part; here I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am
known <span id="fr_4262"></span>[4263](#fn_4262) .’ For, in truth, he
was known to those saints who are in heaven, as their
fellow-citizen <span id="fr_4263"></span>[4264](#fn_4263) . And in
relation to all that is future and perfect, the things known by him here
were in part; but with respect to those things which were committed and
entrusted to him by the Lord, he was perfect; as he said, ‘We who are
perfect, should be thus minded <span
id="fr_4264"></span>[4265](#fn_4264) .’ For as the Gospel of Christ is
the fulfilment and accomplishment of the ministration which was supplied
by the law of Israel, so future things will be the accomplishment of
such as now exist, the Gospel being then fulfilled, and the faithful
receiving those things which, not seeing now, they yet hope for, as Paul
saith; ‘For what a man seeth, why doth he also hope for? But if we hope
for those things we see \[not\], we then by patience wait for them <span
id="fr_4265"></span>[4266](#fn_4265) .’ Since then that blessed man was
of such a character, and apostolic grace was committed to him, he wrote,
wishing ‘that all men should be as he was <span
id="fr_4266"></span>[4267](#fn_4266) .’ For virtue is
philanthropic <span id="fr_4267"></span>[4268](#fn_4267) , and great is
the company of the kingdom of heaven, for thousands of thousands and
myriads of myriads there serve the Lord. And though a man enters it
through a strait and narrow way, yet having entered, he beholds
immeasurable space, and a place greater than any other, as they declare,
who were eye-witnesses and heirs of these things. ‘Thou didst place
afflictions before us.’ But afterwards, having related their
afflictions, they say, ‘Thou broughtest us forth into a wide place;’ and
again, ‘In affliction Thou hast enlarged us <span
id="fr_4268"></span>[4269](#fn_4268) .’ For truly, my brethren, the
course of the saints here is straitened; since they either toil
painfully through longing for those things which are to come, as he who
said, ‘Woe is me that my pilgrimage is prolonged <span
id="fr_4269"></span>[4270](#fn_4269) ;’ or they are distressed and spent
for the salvation of other men, as Paul wrote to the Corinthians,
saying, ‘Lest, when I come to you, God should humble me, and I should
bewail many of those who have sinned already, and not repented for the
uncleanness and for<span id="page_533">p. 533</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-Page_533"></span>nication and lasciviousness which
they have committed <span id="fr_4270"></span>[4271](#fn_4270) .’ As
Samuel bewailed the destruction of Saul, and Jeremiah wept for the
captivity of the people. But after this affliction, and sorrow, and
sighing, when they depart from this world, a certain divine gladness,
and pleasure, and exultation receives them, from which misery and
sorrow, and sighing, flee away.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p15"></span>2. Since we are thus circumstanced,
my brethren, let us never loiter in the path of virtue; for hereto he
counsels us, saying, ‘Be ye followers of me, as I also am of
Christ <span id="fr_4271"></span>[4272](#fn_4271) .’ For he gave this
advice not to the Corinthians only, since he was not their Apostle only,
but being ‘a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity <span
id="fr_4272"></span>[4273](#fn_4272) ,’ he admonished us all through
them; and in short, the things he wrote to each particular person are
commandments common to all men <span
id="fr_4273"></span>[4274](#fn_4273) . On this account in writing to
different people, some he exhorted as, for instance, in the Epistles to
the Romans, and the Ephesians, and Philemon. Some he reproved, and was
indignant with them, as in the case of the Corinthians and Galatians. To
some he gave advice, as to the Colossians and Thessalonians. The
Philippians he approved of, and rejoiced in them. The Hebrews he taught
that the law was a shadow to them <span
id="fr_4274"></span>[4275](#fn_4274) . But to his elect sons, Timothy
and Titus, when they were near, he gave instruction; when far away, he
put them in remembrance. For he was all things to all men; and being
himself a perfect man, he adapted his teaching to the need of every one,
so that by all means he might rescue some of them. Therefore his word
was not without fruit; but in every place it is planted and productive
even to this day.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p20"></span>3. And wherefore, my beloved? For
it is right that we should search into the apostolic mind. Not only in
the beginning of the Epistles, but towards their close, and in the
middle of them, he used persuasions and admonitions. I hope therefore
that, by your prayers, I shall in no respect falsely represent the plan
of that holy man. As he was well skilled in these divine matters, and
knew the power of the divine teaching, he deemed it necessary, in the
first place, to make known the word concerning Christ, and the mystery
regarding Him; and then afterwards to point to the correction of habits,
so that when they had learned to know the Lord, they might earnestly
desire to do those things which He commanded. For when the Guide to the
laws is unknown, one does not readily pass on to the observance of them.
Faithful Moses, the minister of God, adopted this method; for when he
promulgated the words of the divine dispensation of laws, he first
proclaimed the matters relating to the knowledge of God: ‘Hear, O
Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord <span
id="fr_4275"></span>[4276](#fn_4275) .’ Afterwards, having shadowed Him
forth to the people, and taught of Him in Whom they ought to believe,
and informed their minds of Him Who is truly God, he proceeds to lay
down the law relating to those things whereby a man may be well-pleasing
to Him, saying, ‘Thou shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt not steal;’
together with the other commandments. For also, according to the
Apostolic teaching, ‘He that draweth near to God must believe that He
is, and that He is a rewarder of them that seek Him <span
id="fr_4276"></span>[4277](#fn_4276) .’ Now He is sought by means of
virtuous deeds, as the prophet saith; ‘Seek ye the Lord, and when ye
have found Him, call upon Him; when He is near to you, let the wicked
forsake his ways, and the lawless man his thoughts <span
id="fr_4277"></span>[4278](#fn_4277) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p24"></span>4. It will also be well if a man is
not offended at the testimony of the Shepherd, saying in the beginning
of his book, ‘Before all things believe that there is one God, Who
created and established all these things, and from non-existence called
them into being <span id="fr_4278"></span>[4279](#fn_4278) .’ And,
further, the blessed Evangelists—who recorded the words of the Lord—in
the beginning of the Gospels, wrote the things concerning our Saviour;
so that, having first made known the Lord, the Creator, they might be
believed when narrating the events that took place. For how could they
have been believed, when writing respecting him who \[was blind\] from
his mother’s womb, and those other blind men who recovered their sight,
and those who rose from the dead, and the changing of water into wine,
and those lepers who were cleansed; if they had not taught of Him as the
Creator, writing, ‘In the beginning was the Word <span
id="fr_4279"></span>[4280](#fn_4279) ?’ Or, according to Matthew, that
He Who was born of the seed of David, was Emmanuel, and the Son of the
living God? He from Whom the Jews, with the Arians, turn away their
faces, but Whom we acknowledge and worship. The Apostle therefore, as
was meet, sent to different people, but his own son he especially
reminded, ‘that he should not despise the things in which he had been
instructed by him,’ and enjoined on him, ‘Remember Jesus Christ, who
rose from the dead, of the seed of David, according to my Gospel <span
id="fr_4280"></span>[4281](#fn_4280) .’ And speaking of these things
being delivered to him, to be always had in remembrance, he immediately
writes to him, saying, ‘Meditate on these things: be engaged <span
id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-Page_534"></span>in
them. <span id="fr_4281"></span>[4282](#fn_4281) ’ For constant
meditation, and the remembrance of divine words, strengthens piety
towards God, and produces a love to Him inseparable and not merely
formal <span id="fr_4282"></span>[4283](#fn_4282) ; as he, being of this
mind, speaks about himself and others like-minded, saying boldly, ‘Who
shall separate us from the love of God <span
id="fr_4283"></span>[4284](#fn_4283) ?’ For <span
id="fr_4284"></span>[4285](#fn_4284) such men, being confirmed in the
Lord, and possessing an unshaken disposition towards Him, and being one
in spirit (for <span id="fr_4285"></span>[4286](#fn_4285) ‘he who is
joined to the Spirit is one spirit’), are sure ‘as the mount Sion;’ and
although ten thousand trials may rage against them, they are founded
upon a rock, which is Christ <span id="fr_4286"></span>[4287](#fn_4286)
. In Him the careless take no delight; and having no continuous purpose
of good, they are sullied by temporal attacks, and esteem nothing more
highly than present things, being unstable and deserving reproof as
regards the faith. For ‘either the care of this world, or the
deceitfulness of riches, chokes them <span
id="fr_4287"></span>[4288](#fn_4287) ;’ or, as Jesus said in that
parable which had reference to them, since they have not established the
faith that has been preached to them, but continue only for a time,
immediately, in time of persecution, or when affliction ariseth through
the word, they are offended. Now those who meditate evil we say,
\[think\] not truth, but falsehood and not righteousness, but iniquity,
for their tongue learns to speak lies. They have done evil, and have not
ceased that they might repent. For, persevering with delight in wicked
actions, they hasten thereto without turning back, even treading under
foot the commandment with regard to neighbours, and, instead of loving
them, devise evil against them, as the saint testifies, saying, ‘And
those who seek me evil have spoken vanity, and imagined deceit all the
day <span id="fr_4288"></span>[4289](#fn_4288) .’ But that the cause of
such meditation is none other than the want of instruction, the divine
proverb has already declared; ‘The son that forsaketh the commandment of
his father meditateth evil words <span
id="fr_4289"></span>[4290](#fn_4289) .’ But such meditation, because it
is evil, the Holy Spirit blames in these words, and reproves too in
other terms, saying, ‘Your hands are polluted with blood, your fingers
with sins; your lips have spoken lawlessness, and your tongue imagineth
iniquity: no man speaketh right things, nor is there true judgment <span
id="fr_4290"></span>[4291](#fn_4290) .’ But what the end is of such
perverse imagining, He immediately declares, saying, ‘They trust in
vanities and speak falsehood; for they conceive mischief, and bring
forth lawlessness. They have hatched the eggs of an asp, and woven a
spider’s web; and he who is prepared to eat of their eggs, when he
breaks them finds gall, and a basilisk therein <span
id="fr_4291"></span>[4292](#fn_4291) .’ Again, what the hope of such is,
He has already announced. ‘Because righteousness does not overtake them,
when they waited for light, they had darkness; when they waited for
brightness, they walked in a thick cloud. They shall grope for the wall
like the blind, and as those who have no eyes shall they grope; they
shall fall at noon-day as at midnight; when dead, they shall groan. They
shall roar together as a bear, or as a dove <span
id="fr_4292"></span>[4293](#fn_4292) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p40"></span>This is the fruit of wickedness,
these rewards are given to its familiars, for perverseness does not
deliver its own. But in truth, against them it sets itself, and it tears
them first, and on them especially it summons ruin. Woe to them against
whom these are brought; for ‘it is sharper than a two-edged sword <span
id="fr_4293"></span>[4294](#fn_4293) ,’ slaying beforehand and very
swiftly those who will lay hold of it. For their tongue, according to
the testimony of the Psalmist, is a ‘sharp sword, and their teeth spears
and arrows <span id="fr_4294"></span>[4295](#fn_4294) .’ But the
wonderful part is that while often he against whom men imagine \[harm\]
suffers nothing, they are pierced by their own spears: for they possess,
even in themselves, before they reach others, anger, wrath, malice,
guile, hatred, bitterness. Although they may not be able to bring these
upon others, they forthwith return upon and against themselves, as he
prays, saying, ‘Let their sword enter into their own heart.’ There is
also such a proverb as this: ‘The wicked is held fast by the chain of
his sins <span id="fr_4295"></span>[4296](#fn_4295) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p44"></span>5. The Jews in their imaginings,
and in their agreeing to act unjustly against the Lord, forgot that they
were bringing wrath upon themselves. Therefore does the Word lament for
them, saying, ‘Why do the people exalt themselves, and the nations
imagine vain things <span id="fr_4296"></span>[4297](#fn_4296) ?’ For
vain indeed was the imagination of the Jews, meditating death against
the Life <span id="fr_4297"></span>[4298](#fn_4297) , and devising
unreasonable things against the ‘Word of the Father <span
id="fr_4298"></span>[4299](#fn_4298) .’ For who that looks upon their
dispersion, and the desolation of their city, may not aptly say, ‘Woe
unto them, <span id="page_535">p. 535</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-Page_535"></span>for they have imagined an evil
imagination, saying against their own soul, let us bind the righteous
man, because he is not pleasing to us <span
id="fr_4299"></span>[4300](#fn_4299) .’ And full well is it so, my
brethren; for when they erred concerning the Scriptures, they knew not
that ‘he who diggeth a pit for his neighbour falleth therein; and he who
destroyeth a hedge, a serpent shall bite him <span
id="fr_4300"></span>[4301](#fn_4300) .’ And if they had not turned their
faces from the Lord, they would have feared what was written before in
the divine Psalms: ‘The heathen are caught in the pit which they made;
in the snare which they hid is their own foot taken. The Lord is known
when executing judgments: by the works of his hands is the sinner
taken <span id="fr_4301"></span>[4302](#fn_4301) .’ Let them observe
this, and how that ‘the snare they know not shall come upon them, and
the net they hid take them <span id="fr_4302"></span>[4303](#fn_4302) .’
But they understood not these things, for had they done so, ‘they would
not have crucified the Lord of glory <span
id="fr_4303"></span>[4304](#fn_4303) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p53"></span>6. Therefore the righteous and
faithful servants of the Lord, who ‘are made disciples for the kingdom
of heaven, and bring forth from it things new and old;’ and who
‘meditate on the words of the Lord, when sitting in the house, when
lying down or rising up, and when walking by the way <span
id="fr_4304"></span>[4305](#fn_4304) ;’—since they are of good hope
because of the promise of the Spirit which said, ‘Blessed is the man
that hath not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stood in the way
of sinners, nor sat in the seat of corrupters; but his delight is in the
law of the Lord, and in His law doth he meditate day and night <span
id="fr_4305"></span>[4306](#fn_4305) ;’—being grounded in faith,
rejoicing in hope, fervent in spirit, they have boldness to say, ‘My
mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of
understanding.’ And again, ‘I have meditated on all Thy works, and on
the work of Thy hands has been my meditation.’ And, ‘If I have
remembered Thee on my bed, and in the morning have meditated on
Thee <span id="fr_4306"></span>[4307](#fn_4306) .’ Afterwards, advancing
in boldness, they say, ‘The meditation of my heart is before Thee at all
times <span id="fr_4307"></span>[4308](#fn_4307) .’ And what is the end
of such an one? He cites immediately; ‘The Lord is my Helper and my
Redeemer <span id="fr_4308"></span>[4309](#fn_4308) .’ For to those who
thus examine themselves, and conform their hearts to the Lord, nothing
adverse shall happen; for indeed, their heart is strengthened by
confidence in the Lord, as it is written, ‘They who trust in the Lord
are as mount Sion: he who dwelleth in Jerusalem shall not be moved for
ever <span id="fr_4309"></span>[4310](#fn_4309) .’ For if at any time,
the crafty one shall be presumptuously bold against them, chiefly that
he may break the rank of the saints, and cause a division among
brethren; even in this the Lord is with them, not only as an avenger on
their behalf, but also when they have already been beaten, as a
deliverer for them. For this is the divine promise; ‘The Lord shall
fight for you <span id="fr_4310"></span>[4311](#fn_4310) .’ Henceforth,
although afflictions and trials from without overtake them, yet, being
fashioned after the apostolic words, and ‘being stedfast in
tribulations, and persevering in prayers <span
id="fr_4311"></span>[4312](#fn_4311) ’ and in meditation on the law,
they stand against those things which befall them, are well-pleasing to
God, and give utterance to the words which are written, ‘Afflictions and
distresses are come upon me; but Thy commandments are my
meditation <span id="fr_4312"></span>[4313](#fn_4312) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p63"></span>7. And whereas, not only in action,
but also in the thoughts of the mind, men are moved to deeds of virtue,
he afterwards adds, saying, ‘Mine eyes prevent the dawn, that I might
meditate on Thy words <span id="fr_4313"></span>[4314](#fn_4313) .’ For
it is meet that the spiritual meditations of those who are whole should
precede their bodily actions. And does not our Saviour, when intending
to teach this very thing begin with the thoughts of the mind? saying,
‘Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath already committed
adultery:’ and, ‘Whosoever shall be angry with his brother, is guilty of
murder <span id="fr_4314"></span>[4315](#fn_4314) .’ For where there is
no wrath, murder is prevented; and where lust is first removed, there
can be no accusation of adultery. Hence meditation on the law is
necessary, my beloved, and uninterrupted converse with virtue, ‘that the
saint may lack nothing, but be perfect to every good work <span
id="fr_4315"></span>[4316](#fn_4315) .’ For by these things is the
promise of eternal life, as Paul wrote to Timothy, calling constant
meditation exercise, and saying, ‘Exercise thyself unto godliness; for
bodily exercise profiteth little; but godliness is profitable for all
things, since it has the promise of the present life, and of that which
is eternal <span id="fr_4316"></span>[4317](#fn_4316) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p68"></span>8. Worthy of admiration is the
virtue of that man, my brethren! for through Timothy he enjoins upon
all <span id="fr_4317"></span>[4318](#fn_4317) , that they should have
regard to nothing more than to godliness, but above everything to
adjudge the chief place to faith in God. For what grace has the
unrighteous man, though he may feign to keep the commandments? Nay
rather, the unrighteous man is unable even to keep a portion of the law,
for as is his mind, such of necessity must be his actions; as the Spirit
says, reproving such; ‘The fool hath said in his heart, <span
id="page_536">p. 536</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-Page_536"></span>there is no God.’ After this the
Word, shewing that actions correspond with thoughts, says, ‘They are
corrupt; they are profane in their machinations <span
id="fr_4318"></span>[4319](#fn_4318) .’ The unrighteous man then, in
every respect corrupts his body; stealing, committing adultery, cursing,
being drunken, and doing such like things. Even as Jeremiah, the
prophet, convicts Israel of these things, crying out and saying, ‘Oh,
that I had a lodge far off in the wilderness! then would I leave my
people and depart from them: for they are all adulterers, an assembly of
oppressors, who draw out their tongue as a bow; lying and not truth has
prevailed upon the earth, and they proceed from iniquities to
iniquities; but Me they have not known <span
id="fr_4319"></span>[4320](#fn_4319) .’ Thus, for wickedness and
falsehood, and for deeds, in which they \[proceed\] from iniquity to
iniquity, he reproves their practices; but, because they knew not the
Lord, and were faithless, he charges them with unrighteousness.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p72"></span>9. For faith and godliness are
allied to each other, and sisters; and he who believes in Him is godly,
and he also who is godly, believes the more <span
id="fr_4320"></span>[4321](#fn_4320) . He therefore who is in a state of
wickedness, undoubtedly also wanders from the faith; and he who falls
from godliness, falls from the true faith. Paul, for instance, bearing
testimony to the same point, advises his disciple, saying, ‘Avoid
profane conversations; for they increase unto more ungodliness, and
their word takes hold as doth a canker, of whom are Hymenæus and
Philetus <span id="fr_4321"></span>[4322](#fn_4321) .’ In what their
wickedness consisted he declares, saying, ‘Who have erred from the
faith, saying that the resurrection is already past <span
id="fr_4322"></span>[4323](#fn_4322) .’ But again, desirous of shewing
that faith is yoked with godliness, the Apostle says, ‘And all those who
will live godly in Jesus Christ shall suffer persecution <span
id="fr_4323"></span>[4324](#fn_4323) .’ Afterwards, that no man should
renounce godliness through persecution, he counsels them to preserve the
faith, adding, ‘Thou, therefore, continue in the things thou hast
learned, and hast been assured of <span
id="fr_4324"></span>[4325](#fn_4324) .’ And as when brother is helped by
brother, they become as a wall to each other; so faith and godliness,
being of like growth, hang together, and he who is practised in the one,
of necessity is strengthened by the other. Therefore, wishing the
disciple to be exercised in godliness unto the end, and to contend for
the faith, he counsels them, saying, ‘Fight the good fight of faith, and
lay hold on eternal life <span id="fr_4325"></span>[4326](#fn_4325) .’
For if a man first put away the wickedness of idols, and rightly
confesses Him Who is truly God, he next fights by faith with those who
war against Him.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p79"></span>10. For of these two things we
speak of—faith and godliness—the hope is the same, even everlasting
life; for he saith, ‘Fight the good fight of faith; lay hold on eternal
life.’ And, ‘exercise thyself unto godliness, for it hath the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come <span
id="fr_4326"></span>[4327](#fn_4326) .’ For this cause, the
Ario-maniacs, who now have gone out from the Church, being opponents of
Christ, have digged a pit of unbelief, into which they themselves have
been thrust; and, since they have advanced in ungodliness, they
‘overthrow the faith of the simple <span
id="fr_4327"></span>[4328](#fn_4327) ;’ blaspheming the Son of God, and
saying that He is a creature, and has His being from things which are
not. But as then against the adherents of Philetus and Hymenæus, so now
the Apostle forewarns all men against ungodliness like theirs, saying,
‘The foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth
them that are His; and, Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord
depart from iniquity <span id="fr_4328"></span>[4329](#fn_4328) .’ For
it is well that a man should depart from wickedness and deeds of
iniquity, that he may be able properly to celebrate the feast; for he
who is defiled with the pollutions of the wicked is not able to
sacrifice the Passover to the Lord our God. Hence, the people who were
then in Egypt said, ‘We cannot sacrifice the Passover in Egypt to the
Lord our God <span id="fr_4329"></span>[4330](#fn_4329) .’ For God, Who
is over all, willed that they should go far away from the servants of
Pharaoh, and from the furnace of iron; so that being set free from
wickedness, and having carefully put away from them all strange notions,
they might receive the knowledge of God and of virtuous actions. For He
saith, ‘Go far from them: depart from the midst of them, and touch not
the unclean things <span id="fr_4330"></span>[4331](#fn_4330) .’ For a
man will not otherwise depart from sin, and lay hold on virtuous deeds,
than by meditation on his acts; and when he has been practised by
exercise in godliness, he will lay hold on the confession of faith <span
id="fr_4331"></span>[4332](#fn_4331) , which also Paul, after he had
fought the fight, possessed, namely, the crown of righteousness which
was laid up; which the righteous Judge will give, not to him alone, but
to all who are like him.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p86"></span>11. For such meditation and
exercise in godliness, being at all times the habit of the saints, is
urgent on us at the present time, when the divine word desires us to
keep the feast with them if we are in this disposition. For what else is
the feast, but the constant <span id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-Page_537"></span>worship of God, and the recognition
of godliness, and unceasing prayers from the whole heart with agreement?
So Paul wishing us to be ever in this disposition, commands, saying,
‘Rejoice evermore; pray without ceasing; in everything give thanks <span
id="fr_4332"></span>[4333](#fn_4332) .’ Not therefore separately, but
unitedly and collectively, let us all keep the feast together, as the
prophet exhorts, saying, ‘O come, let us rejoice in the Lord; let us
make a joyful noise unto God our Saviour <span
id="fr_4333"></span>[4334](#fn_4333) .’ Who then is so negligent, or who
so disobedient to the divine voice, as not to leave everything, and run
to the general and common assembly of the feast? which is not in one
place only, for not one place alone keeps the feast; but ‘into all the
earth their song has gone forth, and to the ends of the world their
words.’ And the sacrifice is not offered in one place, but ‘in every
nation, incense and a pure sacrifice is offered unto God <span
id="fr_4334"></span>[4335](#fn_4334) .’ So when in like manner from all
in every place, praise and prayer shall ascend to the gracious and good
Father, when the whole Catholic Church which is in every place, with
gladness and rejoicing, celebrates together the same worship to God,
when all men in common send up a song of praise and say, Amen <span
id="fr_4335"></span>[4336](#fn_4335) ; how blessed will it not be, my
brethren! who will not, at that time, be engaged, praying rightly? For
the walls of every adverse power, yea even of Jericho especially,
falling down, and the gift <span id="fr_4336"></span>[4337](#fn_4336) of
the Holy Spirit being then richly poured upon all men, every man
perceiving the coming of the Spirit shall say, ‘We are all filled in the
morning with Thy favour, and we rejoice and are made glad in our
days <span id="fr_4337"></span>[4338](#fn_4337) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p93"></span>12. Since this is so, let us make a
joyful noise with the saints, and let no one of us fail of his duty in
these things; counting as nothing the affliction or the trials which,
especially at this time, have been enviously directed against us by the
party of Eusebius. Even now they wish to injure us, and by their
accusations to compass our death, because of that godliness, whose
helper is the Lord. But, as faithful servants of God, knowing that He is
our salvation in the time of trouble:—for our Lord promised beforehand,
saying, ‘Blessed are ye when men revile you and persecute you, and say
all manner of evil against you falsely, for My sake. Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad, for your reward is great in heaven <span
id="fr_4338"></span>[4339](#fn_4338) .’ Again, it is the Redeemer’s own
word, that affliction shall not befall every man in this world, but only
those who have a holy fear of Him:—on this account, the more the enemies
hem us in, the more let us be at liberty; although they revile us, let
us come together; and the more they would turn us aside from godliness,
let us the more boldly preach it saying, ‘All these things are come upon
us, yet have we not forgotten Thee <span
id="fr_4339"></span>[4340](#fn_4339) ,’ and we have not done evil with
the Ario-maniacs, who say that Thou hast existence from those things
that exist not. The Word which is eternally with the Father, is also
from Him.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p96"></span>13. Let us therefore keep the
feast, my brethren, celebrating it not at all as an occasion of distress
and mourning, neither let us mingle with heretics through temporal
trials brought upon us by godliness. But if anything that would promote
joy and gladness should offer, let us attend to it; so that our heart
may not be sad, like that of Cain; but that, like faithful and good
servants of the Lord, we may hear the words, ‘Enter into the joy of thy
Lord <span id="fr_4340"></span>[4341](#fn_4340) .’ For we do not
institute days of mourning and sorrow, as some may consider these of
Easter to be, but we keep the feast, being filled with joy and gladness.
We keep it then, not regarding it after the deceitful error of the Jews,
nor according to the teaching of the Arians, which takes away the Son
from the Godhead, and numbers Him among creatures; but we look to the
correct doctrine we derive from the Lord. For the guile of the Jews, and
the unbounded impiety of the Arians, cause nothing but sad reflections,
for the former at the beginning slew the Lord; but these latter take
away His position of having conquered that death to which the Jews
brought Him, in that they say He is not the Creator, but a creature. For
if He were a creature, He would have been holden by death; but if He was
not holden by death, according to the Scriptures, He is not a creature,
but the Lord of the creatures, and the subject <span
id="fr_4341"></span>[4342](#fn_4341) of this immortal feast.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p99"></span>14. For the Lord of death would
abolish death, and being Lord, what He would was accomplished; for we
have all passed from death unto life. But the imagination of the Jews,
and of those who are like them, was vain, since the result was not such
as they contemplated, but turned out adverse to themselves; and ‘at both
of them He that sitteth in the heaven shall laugh: the Lord shall have
them in derision <span id="fr_4342"></span>[4343](#fn_4342) .’ Hence,
when our Saviour was led to death, He restrained the women who followed
Him weeping, saying, ‘Weep not for Me <span
id="fr_4343"></span>[4344](#fn_4343) ;’ meaning to shew that the Lord’s
death is an event, not of sorrow but of joy, and that He Who dies for us
is alive. For He does not derive His being from those <span
id="page_538">p. 538</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-Page_538"></span>things which are not, but from the
Father. It is truly a subject of joy, that we can see the signs of
victory against death, even our own incorruptibility, through the body
of the Lord. For since He rose gloriously, it is clear that the
resurrection of all of us will take place; and since His body remained
without corruption, there can be no doubt regarding our
incorruption <span id="fr_4344"></span>[4345](#fn_4344) . For as by one
man <span id="fr_4345"></span>[4346](#fn_4345) , as saith Paul (and it
is the truth), sin passed upon all men, so by the resurrection of our
Lord Jesus Christ, we shall all rise. ‘For,’ he says, ‘this corruptible
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality <span
id="fr_4346"></span>[4347](#fn_4346) .’ Now this came to pass in the
time of the Passion, in which our Lord died for us, for ‘our Passover,
Christ, is sacrificed <span id="fr_4347"></span>[4348](#fn_4347) .’
Therefore, because He was sacrificed, let each of us feed upon Him, and
with alacrity and diligence partake of His sustenance; since He is given
to all without grudging, and is in every one ‘a well of water flowing to
everlasting life <span id="fr_4348"></span>[4349](#fn_4348) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p107"></span>15. We begin the fast of forty
days on the ninth of the month Phamenoth ([Mar.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#000)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p107.1"></span>); and having, in these days, served
the Lord with abstinence, and first purified ourselves <span
id="fr_4349"></span>[4350](#fn_4349) , we commence also the holy Easter
on the fourteenth of the month Pharmuthi (April 9). Afterwards,
extending the fast to the seventh day, on the seventeenth <span
id="fr_4350"></span>[4351](#fn_4350) of the month, let us rest late in
the evening. And the light of the Lord having first dawned upon us, and
the holy Sunday on which our Lord rose shining upon us, we should
rejoice and be glad with the joy which arises from good works, during
the seven weeks which remain—to Pentecost—giving glory to the Father,
and saying, ‘This is the day which the Lord hath made: we will rejoice
and be glad in it, <span id="fr_4351"></span>[4352](#fn_4351) ’ through
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, through Whom to the same, and to His
Father, be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Salute one
another with a holy kiss. All the brethren who are with me salute you.
That ye may have health in the Lord, I pray, brethren beloved.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p111"></span>Here endeth the eleventh Letter of
holy Athanasius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4259"></span>[532:4260](2040420.htm#fr_4259) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p3"></span> Cf. [Eph. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4260"></span>[532:4261](2040420.htm#fr_4260) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p4"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4261"></span>[532:4262](2040420.htm#fr_4261) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p5"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4262"></span>[532:4263](2040420.htm#fr_4262) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p6"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p6.1"></span>[1 Cor.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p6.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4263"></span>[532:4264](2040420.htm#fr_4263) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p6.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p7"></span> Cf. [Eph. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4264"></span>[532:4265](2040420.htm#fr_4264) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p8"></span> [Phil. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4265"></span>[532:4266](2040420.htm#fr_4265) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p9"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p9.1"></span>[Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p9.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4266"></span>[532:4267](2040420.htm#fr_4266) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p10"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4267"></span>[532:4268](2040420.htm#fr_4267) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p11"></span> Cf. *Letter* 10, §4.

<span id="fn_4268"></span>[532:4269](2040420.htm#fr_4268) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p12"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p12.1"></span>[Ps.
66:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p12.3"></span>; iv. 1.

<span id="fn_4269"></span>[532:4270](2040420.htm#fr_4269) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p12.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p13"></span> [Psa.
120.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p13.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4270"></span>[533:4271](2040420.htm#fr_4270) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p14"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p14.1"></span>[2 Cor. xii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p14.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4271"></span>[533:4272](2040420.htm#fr_4271) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4272"></span>[533:4273](2040420.htm#fr_4272) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p17"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4273"></span>[533:4274](2040420.htm#fr_4273) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p18"></span> Cf. *Letter* ii. §1, and *Letter*
iii. §5.

<span id="fn_4274"></span>[533:4275](2040420.htm#fr_4274) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p19"></span> Vid. *Letter* vii. 8, note 17.

<span id="fn_4275"></span>[533:4276](2040420.htm#fr_4275) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p21"></span> [Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4276"></span>[533:4277](2040420.htm#fr_4276) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p22"></span> [Heb. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4277"></span>[533:4278](2040420.htm#fr_4277) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p23"></span> [Isa.
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4278"></span>[533:4279](2040420.htm#fr_4278) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p25"></span> Herm. *Mand*. 1.

<span id="fn_4279"></span>[533:4280](2040420.htm#fr_4279) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p26"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4280"></span>[533:4281](2040420.htm#fr_4280) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p27"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p27.1"></span>[2 Tim. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p27.3"></span>; ii. 8.

<span id="fn_4281"></span>[534:4282](2040420.htm#fr_4281) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p27.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p28"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4282"></span>[534:4283](2040420.htm#fr_4282) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p29"></span> The Syriac word here rendered not
merely formal is one which stems to take no other meaning than
‘inexpiable’—a sense scarcely admissible in this place. The Greek was
probably <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p29.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p29.3"></span>γαπὴν πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀχώριστον καὶ οὐκ
ἀφοσιουμένην</span>. This supposition would account for the Syriac
misapprehension of the word.

<span id="fn_4283"></span>[534:4284](2040420.htm#fr_4283) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p29.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p30"></span> [Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4284"></span>[534:4285](2040420.htm#fr_4284) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p31"></span> The Syriac text from here to the
words, ‘There is also such a proverb as this’ (end of §), was discovered
after Cureton’s edition of the Syriac, and is absent in Larsow.

<span id="fn_4285"></span>[534:4286](2040420.htm#fr_4285) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p32"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4286"></span>[534:4287](2040420.htm#fr_4286) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p33"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p33.1"></span>[Ps. cxxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p33.3"></span>; [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p33.4"></span>; [Matt. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#025)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p33.5"></span>

<span id="fn_4287"></span>[534:4288](2040420.htm#fr_4287) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p33.6"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p34"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p34.1"></span>[Matt. xiii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p34.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4288"></span>[534:4289](2040420.htm#fr_4288) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p34.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p35"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p35.1"></span>[Ps. xxxviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p35.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4289"></span>[534:4290](2040420.htm#fr_4289) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p35.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p36"></span> [Prov. xix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#027)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p36.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4290"></span>[534:4291](2040420.htm#fr_4290) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p37"></span> [Isa.
59:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4291"></span>[534:4292](2040420.htm#fr_4291) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p38"></span> [Isa.
59:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4292"></span>[534:4293](2040420.htm#fr_4292) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p39"></span> [Isa.
59.9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4293"></span>[534:4294](2040420.htm#fr_4293) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p41"></span> [Heb. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4294"></span>[534:4295](2040420.htm#fr_4294) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p42"></span> [Ps. lvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4295"></span>[534:4296](2040420.htm#fr_4295) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p43"></span> [Ps.
37:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#015), [Prov.
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p43.1"></span>[Prov. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p43.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4296"></span>[534:4297](2040420.htm#fr_4296) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p45"></span> [Ps. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4297"></span>[534:4298](2040420.htm#fr_4297) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p46"></span> The parallel clause of this
sentence would seem to determine that by ‘Life’ here we must understand
Christ.

<span id="fn_4298"></span>[534:4299](2040420.htm#fr_4298) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p47.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p47.2"></span>λογα κατὰ τοῦ Λόγου τοῦ Πατρός.</span>
Cf. Suicer. *Thes. s.v.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p47.4"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p47.5"></span>Αλογος</span> tom. i. p. 199.

<span id="fn_4299"></span>[535:4300](2040420.htm#fr_4299) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p47.7"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p48"></span> [Isa.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010), [Wis.
2:12](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p48.1"></span>[Isa.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p48.3"></span>, LXX.; cf. [Wisd. ii.
12](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p48.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4300"></span>[535:4301](2040420.htm#fr_4300) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p48.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p49"></span> [Eccl. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4301"></span>[535:4302](2040420.htm#fr_4301) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p50"></span> [Ps. ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4302"></span>[535:4303](2040420.htm#fr_4302) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p51"></span> [Psa.
35.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4303"></span>[535:4304](2040420.htm#fr_4303) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p52"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4304"></span>[535:4305](2040420.htm#fr_4304) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p54"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p54.1"></span>[Matt. xiii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p54.3"></span>; [Deut. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p54.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4305"></span>[535:4306](2040420.htm#fr_4305) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p54.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p55"></span> [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4306"></span>[535:4307](2040420.htm#fr_4306) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p56"></span> [Ps.
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#003), [Ps.
143:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#005), [Ps.
63:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4307"></span>[535:4308](2040420.htm#fr_4307) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p57"></span> [Psa.
19.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4308"></span>[535:4309](2040420.htm#fr_4308) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p58"></span> [Psa.
19.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p58.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4309"></span>[535:4310](2040420.htm#fr_4309) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p59"></span> [Psa.
125.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p59.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4310"></span>[535:4311](2040420.htm#fr_4310) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p60"></span> [Exod. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4311"></span>[535:4312](2040420.htm#fr_4311) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p61"></span> [Rom. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4312"></span>[535:4313](2040420.htm#fr_4312) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p62"></span> [Ps. cxix.
143](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#143)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4313"></span>[535:4314](2040420.htm#fr_4313) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p64"></span> [Psa.
119.148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4314"></span>[535:4315](2040420.htm#fr_4314) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p65"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p65.1"></span>[Matt.
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p65.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4315"></span>[535:4316](2040420.htm#fr_4315) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p65.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p66"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p66.1"></span>[2 Tim. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p66.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4316"></span>[535:4317](2040420.htm#fr_4316) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p66.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p67"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p67.1"></span>[1 Tim.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p67.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4317"></span>[535:4318](2040420.htm#fr_4317) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p69"></span> Cf. *Letter* 3, §3, note 17;
*Apol. Const.* 26.

<span id="fn_4318"></span>[536:4319](2040420.htm#fr_4318) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p70"></span> [Ps.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4319"></span>[536:4320](2040420.htm#fr_4319) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p70.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p71"></span> [Jer. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4320"></span>[536:4321](2040420.htm#fr_4320) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p73"></span> Cf. [John vii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p73.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4321"></span>[536:4322](2040420.htm#fr_4321) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p74"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p74.1"></span>[2 Tim.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p74.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4322"></span>[536:4323](2040420.htm#fr_4322) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p74.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p75"></span> [2 Tim.
2.18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4323"></span>[536:4324](2040420.htm#fr_4323) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p76"></span> [2 Tim.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4324"></span>[536:4325](2040420.htm#fr_4324) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p76.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p77"></span> [2 Tim.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4325"></span>[536:4326](2040420.htm#fr_4325) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p78"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4326"></span>[536:4327](2040420.htm#fr_4326) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p80"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p80.1"></span>[1 Tim.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p80.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4327"></span>[536:4328](2040420.htm#fr_4327) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p80.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p81"></span> [Rom. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4328"></span>[536:4329](2040420.htm#fr_4328) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p81.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p82"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4329"></span>[536:4330](2040420.htm#fr_4329) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p82.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p83"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p83.1"></span>[Exod. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#026)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p83.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4330"></span>[536:4331](2040420.htm#fr_4330) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p83.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p84"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4331"></span>[536:4332](2040420.htm#fr_4331) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p84.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p85"></span> The Syriac appears to be a
translation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p85.2"></span>κρατήσει τῆς ὁμολογίας τῆς
πίστεως</span> (cf. [Heb. iv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p85.3"></span>).

<span id="fn_4332"></span>[537:4333](2040420.htm#fr_4332) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p87"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p87.1"></span>[1 Thess. v.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#016)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p87.3"></span>

<span id="fn_4333"></span>[537:4334](2040420.htm#fr_4333) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p87.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p88"></span> [Ps. xcv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4334"></span>[537:4335](2040420.htm#fr_4334) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p88.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p89"></span> [Ps.
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004), [Mal.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p89.1"></span>[Mal. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p89.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4335"></span>[537:4336](2040420.htm#fr_4335) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p89.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p90"></span> For a parallel passage to this,
vid. *Letter* x. 2.

<span id="fn_4336"></span>[537:4337](2040420.htm#fr_4336) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p90.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p91"></span> Cf. *Letter* x. 2, note 9. Vid.
also <span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p91.2"></span>[John vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p91.4"></span>; [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p91.5"></span>; [John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p91.6"></span>

<span id="fn_4337"></span>[537:4338](2040420.htm#fr_4337) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p91.7"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p92"></span> [Ps. xc.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p92.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4338"></span>[537:4339](2040420.htm#fr_4338) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p94"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p94.1"></span>[Matt.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p94.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4339"></span>[537:4340](2040420.htm#fr_4339) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p94.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p95"></span> [Ps. xliv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4340"></span>[537:4341](2040420.htm#fr_4340) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p97"></span> [Matt. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4341"></span>[537:4342](2040420.htm#fr_4341) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p97.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p98"></span> Syr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p98.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p98.2"></span>πόθεσις</span>. Cf. *Letter* x. 2, note
8.

<span id="fn_4342"></span>[537:4343](2040420.htm#fr_4342) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p99.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p100"></span> [Ps. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4343"></span>[537:4344](2040420.htm#fr_4343) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p100.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p101"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p101.1"></span>[Luke xxiii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#028)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p101.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4344"></span>[538:4345](2040420.htm#fr_4344) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p101.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p102"></span> Cf. *de Incarn.* §50.

<span id="fn_4345"></span>[538:4346](2040420.htm#fr_4345) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p102.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p103"></span> [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4346"></span>[538:4347](2040420.htm#fr_4346) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p103.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p104"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4347"></span>[538:4348](2040420.htm#fr_4347) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p104.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p105"></span> [1 Cor.
5.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4348"></span>[538:4349](2040420.htm#fr_4348) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p105.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p106"></span> [John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4349"></span>[538:4350](2040420.htm#fr_4349) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p107.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p108"></span> Cf. *Letter* vi. 11.

<span id="fn_4350"></span>[538:4351](2040420.htm#fr_4350) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p108.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p109"></span> Read ‘nineteenth.

<span id="fn_4351"></span>[538:4352](2040420.htm#fr_4351) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p109.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p110"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p110.1"></span>[Ps. cxviii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#024)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ix-p110.3"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (Probably for 340 A.D.) To the Beloved Brother, and our fellow
Minister Serapion.](2040421)
