[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040342)  [Next](2040344.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span
id="xxi.i-Page_303"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to Four Discourses Against the
Arians.</span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.i-p3.1"></span>Written Between</span> 356 <span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.i-p3.2"></span>And</span> 360.

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.i-p4.1"></span>There</span> is no absolutely conclusive evidence
as to the date of these Discourses, in fact they would appear from the
language of ii. 1 to have been issued at intervals. The best judges,
however, are agreed in assigning them to the fruitful period of the
‘third exile.’ The Discourses cannot indeed be identified with the lost
account of the Arian heresy addressed to certain Egyptian monks (see
Introd. to Arian Hist. *supra*); but the demand for such a treatise may
have set Athanasius upon the composition of a more comprehensive
refutation of the heresy. It was only at this period (‘Blasphemy’ of
Sirmium, 357) that the doctrinal controversy began to emerge from the
mass of personalities and intrigues which had encumbered it for the
first generation after the great Council; only now that the various
parties were beginning to formulate their position; only now that the
great mass of Eastern ‘Conservatism’ was beginning to see the nature of
the issue as between the Nicene doctrine and the essential Arianism of
its more resolute opponents. The situation seemed to clear, the time had
come for gathering up the issues of the combat and striking a decisive
blow. To this situation of affairs the treatise before us exactly
corresponds. Characteristic of this period is the anxiety to conciliate
and win over the so-called semi-Arians (of the type of Basil of Ancyra)
who stumbled at the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.i-p4.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>, but whose fundamental agreement
with Athanasius was daily becoming more clear. Accordingly we find that
Athanasius pointedly avoids the famous test word in these
Discourses <span id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819.md) (with the
exception of the fourth: see *Orat.* i. 20, note 5, 58, note 10: it only
occurs i. 9, note 12, but see *Orat.* iv. 9, 12), and even adopts (not
as fully adequate *de Syn.* 53, but as true so far as it goes), the
‘semi-Arian’ formula ‘like in essence’ (*Or*. i. 21, note 8, 20, 26,
iii. 26, he does not use the single compound word <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.i-p5.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.i-p5.3"></span>μοιούσιος</span>: see
further, Introd. to *de Synodis*). Although, therefore, demonstrative
proof is lacking, there is tolerable certainty as to the date of our
Discourses. And their purpose is no less manifest: they are a decisive
blow of the kind described above, aimed at the very centre of the
question, and calculated to sever the abnormal alliance between
conservatives who really thought with Athanasius and men like Valens or
Eudoxius, whose real convictions, so far as they had any, were Arian.
Moreover they gather up all the threads of controversy against Arianism
proper, refute its appeal to Scripture, and leave on record for all time
the issues of the great doctrinal contest of the fourth century. They
have naturally become, as Montfaucon observes, the mine whence
subsequent defenders of the Divinity of our Redeemer have drawn their
material. There are doubtless arguments which a modern writer would
scarcely adopt (e.g. ii. 63, iii. 65 *init.,* &c.), and the repeated
labelling of the Arians as madmen (‘fanatics’ in this translation),
enemies of Christ, disciples of Satan, &c., &c., is at once tedious and
by its very frequency unimpressive (see ii. 43 note 8 for Newman’s
famous list of animal nicknames). But the serious reader will pass
*sicco pede* over such features, and will appreciate ‘the richness,
fulness, and versatility’ of the use of Scripture, ‘the steady grasp of
certain primary truths, especially of the Divine Unity and of Christ’s
real or genuine natural and Divine Sonship (i. 15, ii. 2–5, 22, 23, 73,
iii. 62), the keen penetration with which Arian objections are analysed
(i. 14, 27, 29, ii. 26, iii. 59), Arian imputations disclaimed, Arian
statements old and new, the bolder and the more cautious, compared,
Arian evasions pointed out, Arian logic traced to its conclusions, and
Arianism shewn to be inconsistent, irreverent’ (Bright, Introd. p.
lxviii.). Above all, we see in <span id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span
id="xxi.i-Page_304"></span>these Discourses what strikes us in all the
writings of Athanasius from the *de Incarnatione* to the end, his firm
hold of the Soteriological aspect of the question at issue, of its vital
importance to the reality of Redemption and Grace, to the reality of the
knowledge of God vouchsafed to sinful man in Christ (ii. 69, 70, cf. i.
35, 49, 50, ii. 67, &c., &c). The Theology and Christology of Athanasius
is rooted in the idea of Redemption: our fellowship with God, our
adoption as sons of God, would be unaccomplished, had not Christ
imparted to us what was <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.i-p5.4"></span>His Own</span> to give (i. 12, 16, cf. Harnack,
*Dogmengesch.,* 2. 205). Among other points of interest we may observe
the anticipatory rejection of the later heresies of Macedonius (i. 48,
iii. 24), Nestorius (ii. 8 note 3, &c., and the frequent application of
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.i-p5.5"></span>θεοτόκος</span> to the
B.M.V. iii. 14, 29, &c.), and Eutyches (ii. 10 note 6, &c.), the
emphatic vindication of worship as the exclusive prerogative of Divinity
(ii. 23, iii. 32, ‘we *invoke* no creature’) and of the *unique* sinless
conception of Christ (iii. 33), lastly the cautious and reasonable
discussion (iii. 42 *sqq.*) of our Saviour’s human knowledge.

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span>Although apparently composed at different
times (see above) the four ‘Discourses’ form a single work. The fourth
alone ends with the usual doxology, thus announcing itself as the
conclusion of the four-fold treatise. At the same time, the relation of
the fourth Discourse to the others is by no means clear. It is largely
occupied with a polemic against a heresy at the opposite extreme from
Arianism, Monarchianism in one or other of its forms. Newman, in his
introductory excursus, expresses the opinion that it consists of a
series of fragmentary notes against several heresies, which for some
unknown reason came to be incorporated, possibly by Athanasius himself
or by his secretaries, in the great anti-Arian Manifesto. Zahn
*Marcell.* pp. 198–208 shews convincingly that the system of Marcellus,
either in itself or in its supposed logical consequences, is the main
object of criticism all along. If we trace throughout the Discourses the
purpose of conciliating the ‘Conservative’ and Semi-Arian party, we can
well understand that Athanasius may have appended to them a section
directed against Monarchianism, which, in the persons of Marcellus and
Photinus (whose names, however, are characteristically absent), must
have been felt by him to be a legitimate stumbling-block in their path
toward peace. At any rate the fourth oration has always been associated
with the others as forming part of one work.

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span>There is, however, some confusion in early
citations, in <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.i-p7.1"></span>mss.</span>, and in early editions as to the
number of ‘Orations’ against the Arians. The confusion is due to the
frequent practice of reckoning the *Ep. Æg.* as the first (or in one or
two cases as the fourth; the Basel <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.i-p7.2"></span>ms.</span> counts *de Incar. c. Ar.* as the
fifth, and our fourth as the sixth). Montfaucon (*Monitum* Migne xxvi.
p. 10) ascribes this to the arrangement in many <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.i-p7.3"></span>mss.</span> by which the *Ep. Æg.* comes
immediately before the ‘Orations.’ Being itself directed against the
Arians it has come to be labelled <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.i-p7.4"></span>λόγος πρῶτος</span>

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>The title ‘Orations’ is consecrated by long
use, and cannot be displaced, but it is unfortunate as implying, to our
ears, oratorical delivery, for which the Discourses were never meant.
The original Greek term (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.i-p8.1"></span>λόγος</span>) is common to these Discourses with
the *c. Gentes, de Incarnatione, &c., &c.*

<span id="xxi.i-p9"></span>A full analysis of these Discourses is given
by Bishop Kaye (*Council of Nicæa,* in ‘Works,’ vol. v.); his strictures
on Newman’s notes are occasionally very just. The Discourses are more
concisely analysed by Ceillier (vol. v., pp. 218, *sqq.*) See also
Dorner, *Doctr. of Person of Christ,* Part I., Div. 3, i. 3. The
headings of Newman, prefixed to the ‘chapters,’ will supply the place of
an analysis for readers of this volume.

<span id="xxi.i-p10"></span>The translation which follows is that of
Cardinal Newman, published in 1844 (the year before his secession), in
the Oxford ‘Library of the Fathers.’ The copious and elaborate notes and
discussions which accompany it have always been acknowledged to be a
masterpiece of their illustrious author. The modern reader sits down to
study Athanasius, and rises from his task filled with Newman. Like all
the work of Newman included in this volume, translation and notes alike
have been touched by the present editor with a reverent and a sparing
hand. The translation, which shews great care and fidelity, coupled with
remarkable ingenuity and close study of characteristic phrases and
idioms, has been, with two main exceptions, but little altered. These
exceptions are (1) the substitution throughout of ‘essence’ for
‘substance,’ (2) an attempt to remedy the most unfortunate, though not
unconsidered, confusion of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.i-p10.1"></span>γεννητός</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.i-p10.2"></span>γενητός</span> under the single rendering
‘generate.’ A good rendering for the latter word and its cognates is
indeed not easy to find (see above, p. 149); but it was felt impossible,
even in deference to so great a name, after the note in Lightfoot’s
*Ignatius,* to leave the matter as it stood.

<span id="xxi.i-p11"></span>With regard to the notes, the historical
matter and the abundant cross references have <span id="page_305">p.
305</span> <span id="xxi.i-Page_305"></span>been thoroughly overhauled
and in some cases modified without indication of the change. Moreover,
some theological notes of minor importance have been expunged to
economise space, while for the same reason, mere references have in many
cases been reluctantly substituted for the extensive patristic
quotations. The notes to *Orat.* iv., which are less important
theologically, have been very much curtailed. With these exceptions, all
doctrinal notes proper have been left exactly as they first appeared,
even where they maintain views which appear untenable: any additions or
explanations by the present editor are enclosed in square brackets,
which also in a very few cases denote additional or corrected references
made under Dr. Pusey’s authority in the reprint of 1877.

<span id="xxi.i-p12"></span>It is necessary to apologise to the reader
for the hesitation which has been felt in touching, even to this slight
extent, the work of John Henry Newman. The only apology which the editor
of this volume cares to offer is for having done the little that seemed
absolutely needed.

<span id="xxi.i-p13"></span>It may be added that the Cardinal published
in 1881 (4th ed., 1888) a ‘free translation’ of the first three
Discourses, based upon the Oxford translation, but of a totally
different kind, amounting to a somewhat highly condensed paraphrase of
the original in the luminous English of the Cardinal himself, rather
than bound, as the older translation is, to the style of Athanasius. The
new rendering includes the *de Decretis* and the *de Synodis;* almost
all the notes are in a second volume.

<span id="xxi.i-p14"></span>The most convenient edition of the Greek
text is that of Dr. Bright (Oxford, 1872), with an Introduction on the
Life and Writings of Athanasius (rewritten for D.C.B., vol. i., pp. 179
*sqq.*).

<span id="xxi.i-p15"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.i-p15.1"></span>Table of Contents of the Four Discourses</span>.

<span id="xxi.i-p16"></span>The following Table of Contents of *Orat.*
i–iii. (the contents of *Orat.* iv. will be tabulated at the end of
*Exc. C.*) must be supplemented by the fuller headings prefixed to
Newman’s ‘chapters.’

<span id="xxi.i-p17"></span>Orat. i. 1–4. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.i-p17.1"></span>Introductory</span>.

<span id="xxi.i-p18"></span>i. 5–7. a. The Arian doctrine as represented
in the ‘Thalia.’

<span id="xxi.i-p19"></span>i. 8–10. b. Significance of the Controversy.

<span id="xxi.i-p20"></span>General Subject of the Discourses: <span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.i-p20.1"></span>The Sonship of Christ</span>.

<span id="xxi.i-p21"></span>i. 11–13. The Divine Sonship: (1) <span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.i-p21.1"></span>Eternal</span>

<span id="xxi.i-p22"></span>i. 14–16. (2) Though real, not like earthly
Sonship.

<span id="xxi.i-p23"></span>i. 17–21. (3) The true Sonship.

<span id="xxi.i-p24"></span>i. 22–29. Objections to the above discussed.

<span id="xxi.i-p25"></span>i. 30–34. (4) On the term <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.i-p25.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.i-p25.2"></span>γένητος</span>

<span id="xxi.i-p26"></span>i. 35, 36. (5) On the unchangeableness of
the Son.

<span id="xxi.i-p27"></span>Orat. i. 37–iii. 58. (6) Discussion of
controverted texts.

<span id="xxi.i-p28"></span>i. 37–64. Texts bearing on the exaltation of
the Son (viz. [Phil. 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md), [Ps.
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008.md), [Heb.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span id="xxi.i-p28.1"></span>.md).

<span id="xxi.i-p29"></span>(*Excursus B*. On the Arian formula πρὶν
γεννηθῆναι οὐκ ἦν.)

<span id="xxi.i-p30"></span>ii. 1–82. b. Texts bearing on the ‘creation’
of the Son (viz. [Heb. 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002.md), [Acts
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md), [Prov.
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022.md)<span id="xxi.i-p30.1"></span>;
the latter occupying §§18–82).

<span id="xxi.i-p31"></span>iii. 1–25. g. Texts from the Fourth Gospel
on the relation of the Son to the Father.

<span id="xxi.i-p32"></span>iii. 26–58. d. Texts bearing more directly
on the Incarnation ([Matt. 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018.md),
[John 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035.md), [Mark
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032.md), [Luke
2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052.md)<span id="xxi.i-p32.1"></span>,
human knowledge, &c., of Christ, §§42–53; [Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039.md)<span id="xxi.i-p32.2"></span>,
&c.).

<span id="xxi.i-p33"></span>iii. 58–67. (7) The Divine Sonship in
relation to the Divine Will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[303:1820](2040343.htm#fr_1819.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span> Not that he was willing to suppress the term
and surrender the Nicene cause, far from it; but he sees the relative
importance of things and words. This shews the absurdity of the taunt,
that the Nicene theologians fought ferociously over a single ‘iota.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against the Arians. (Orationes contra Arianos IV.)](2040344.md)
