[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040000)  [Next](2040002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span> <span id="page_iii">p. iii</span> <span
id="ii-Page_iii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="ii-p1.1"></span>Editorial Preface.</span>

<span id="ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="ii-p3.1"></span>It</span> is with a sense of deep obligation to Mr.
Robertson, the special editor, that this volume of the Post-Nicene
series of the Fathers is presented to the subscribers and the public. It
will furnish, as is believed, a more comprehensive and thorough
introduction to the study of Athanasius than is elsewhere accessible,
and the labour and devotion bestowed upon it are beyond all
acknowledgment. Thanks must also be expressed to the publishers, by
whose liberality the ordinary limits of the volumes of this series have
been extended, in order that so important a Father as Athanasius might
be represented with as much fulness as possible.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>Mr. Robertson’s Preface explains the care and
respect with which the translation and notes of Cardinal Newman have
been treated, in reprinting them for the purpose of this edition. But
there appeared in some parts of the translation inaccuracies which could
not be reproduced consistently with a faithful representation of the
original; and so far, therefore, and so far only, it has been corrected.
Where any correction has been made in the Cardinal’s notes, it is of
course distinctly specified.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>I must add an expression of particular gratitude
to my friend, the Rev. J. H. Lupton, Surmaster of St. Paul’s School, for
his generous help in reading the translations throughout, and for
various valuable suggestions. The assistance of his scholarly learning
gives me additional confidence in presenting this volume to the public.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>I must take the opportunity of expressing my
great regret that there has been so considerable an interruption in the
issue of the series. But by the sudden failure, partly from illness, and
partly from other unforeseen causes, of two important contributions at
the very moment when they were needed, the editor and the publishers
were exposed to difficulties which were for the time insuperable. But
other volumes of the series are now steadily progressing, and it is
believed there will be no further interruptions in the publication.

<span id="ii-p7"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="ii-p7.1"></span>Henry</span> <span class="c10"><span
id="ii-p7.2"></span>Wace</span>.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>King’s College, London,

<span id="ii-p9"></span>21 *Nov.* 1891.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Title Page.](2040002.md)
