[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040288)  [Next](2040290) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> 24. *Why Athanasius did not obey the
Imperial Order.*

<span id="xviii.ii.xxiv-p2"></span>On the subject of this letter, my
opponents conferred with the magistrates. And was it not reasonable that
I, having received it, should demand their letters, and refuse to give
heed to mere pretences? And were they not acting in direct contradiction
to the tenor of your instructions to me, while they failed to shew me
the commands of your Piety? I therefore, seeing they produced no letters
from you, considered it improbable that a mere verbal communication
should be made to them, especially as the letter of your Grace had
charged me not to give ear to such persons. I acted rightly then, most
religious Augustus, that as I had returned to my country under the
authority of your letters, so I should only leave it by your command;
and might not render myself liable hereafter to a charge of having
deserted the Church, but as receiving your order might have a reason for
my retiring. This was demanded for me by all my people, who went to
Syrianus together with the Presbyters, and the greatest part, to say the
least, of the city with them. Maximus, the Prefect of Egypt, was also
there: and their request was that either he would send me a declaration
of your wishes in writing, or would forbear to disturb the Churches,
while the people themselves were sending a deputation to you respecting
the matter. When they persisted in their demand, Syrianus at last
perceived the reasonableness of it, and consented, protesting by your
safety (Hilary was present and witnessed this) that he would put an end
to the disturbance, and refer the case to your Piety. The guards of the
Duke, as well as those of the Prefect of Egypt, know that this is true;
the Prytanis <span id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355) of the city also
remembers the words; so that you will perceive that neither I, nor any
one else, resisted your commands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[247:1356](2040289.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="xviii.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> The Mayor, Tillem. vol. viii. p.
152.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The irruption of Syrianus.](2040290)
