[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040031)  [Next](2040033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p1"></span> §4. *Vehicles of Revelation; Scripture,
the Church, Tradition.*

<span id="v.iv.iv-p2"></span>(*a*) The supreme and unique revelation of
God to man is in the Person of the Incarnate Son. But though unique the
Incarnation is not solitary. Before it there was the divine institution
of the Law and the Prophets, the former a typical anticipation (*de
Incarn.* 40. 2) of the destined reality, and along with the latter
(*ib.* 12. 2 and 5) ‘for all the world a holy school of the knowledge of
God and the conduct of the soul.’ After it there is the history of the
life and teaching of Christ and the writings of His first Disciples,
left on record for the instruction of all ages. Athanasius again and
again applies to the Scriptures the terms <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>θεία</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p2.2"></span>θεόπνευστα</span> (e.g. *de Decr.* 15, *de
Incarn.* 33. 3, &c.; the latter word, which he also applies to his own
martyr teachers, is, of course, from [2 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.iv-p2.3"></span>).
The implications of this as bearing on the literal exactness of
Scripture he nowhere draws out. His strongest language (*de Decr. ubi
supra*) is incidental to a controversial point: on [Ps.
lii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#000)<span id="v.iv.iv-p2.4"></span>
(liii.) 2, he maintains that ‘there is no hyperbola in Scripture; all is
strictly true,’ but he proceeds on the strength of that principle to
allegorise the verse he is discussing. In *c. Gent.* 2, 3, he treats the
account of Eden and the Fall as figurative. But in his later writings
there is, so far as I know, nothing to match this. In fact, although he
always employs the allegorical method, sometimes rather strangely (e.g.
[Deut. xxviii. 66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#066)<span
id="v.iv.iv-p2.5"></span>, in *de Incarn.* 35, *Orat.* ii. 19, after
Irenæus, Origen, &c.), we discern, especially in his later writings, a
tendency toward a more literal exegesis than was usual in the
Alexandrian school. His discussion, e.g., of the sinlessness of Christ
(c. *Apol.* i. 7, 17, ii. 9, 10) contrasts in this respect with that of
his master Alexander, who appeals, following Origen’s somewhat startling
allegorical application, to [Prov. xxx.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#019)<span id="v.iv.iv-p2.6"></span>, a
text nowhere used by Ath. in this way (Thdt. *H. E*. i. 4). This is
doubtless largely due to the pressure of the controversy with the
Arians, who certainly had more to gain than their opponents from the
prevalent unhistorical methods of exegesis, as we see from the use made
by them of [2 Cor. iv. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#011)<span
id="v.iv.iv-p2.7"></span> at Nicæa, and of [Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="v.iv.iv-p2.8"></span>
throughout <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) . Accordingly Athanasius
complains loudly of their exegesis (*Ep. Æg.* 3–4, cf. *Orat.* i. 8,
52), and insists (id. i. 54, cf. already *de Decr.* 14) on the primary
necessity of always conscientiously studying the circumstances of time
and place, the person addressed, the subject matter, and purpose of the
writer, in order not to miss the true sense. This rule is the same as
applies (*de Sent. Dion.* 4) to the interpretation of any writings
whatever, and carries with it the strict subordination of the
allegorical to the historical sense, contended for by the later school
of Antioch, and now accepted by all reasonable Christians (see Kihn in
Wetzer-Hergenröther’s *Kirchen-Lex.* vol. i. pp. 955–959, who calls the
Antiochene exegesis ‘certainly a providential phenomenon;’ also *supra,*
p. xxviii., note 1).

<span id="v.iv.iv-p4"></span>(*b*) The Canon of Scripture accepted by
Athanasius has long been known from the fragments of the thirty-ninth
*Festal Letter* (Easter, 367). The New Testament Canon comprises all the
books received at the present day, but in the older order, viz.,
Gospels, Acts, Catholic Epistles, Pauline Epistles (Hebrews expressly
included as S. Paul’s between Thess. and Tim.), Apocalypse. The Old
Testament canon is remarkable in several ways. The number of books is
22, corresponding to the Alexandrian Jewish reckoning, not to the
(probably) older Jewish or Talmudic reckoning of 24 (the rolls of Ruth
and Lam. counted separately, and with the Hagiographa). This at once
excludes from the Canon proper the so-called ‘Apocrypha,’ with the
exception of the additions to Daniel, and of Baruch and ‘the Epistle,’
which are counted as one book with Jeremiah. The latter is also the case
with Lamentations, while on the other hand the number of 22 is preserved
by the reckoning of Ruth as a separate book from Judges to make up for
the exclusion of Esther. This last point is archaic, and brings
Athanasius into connection with Melito (171 <span class="c10"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>), who gives (Eus. *H. E.* iv. 26.
14, see also vol. 1, p. 144, note 1, in this series) a Canon which he
has obtained by careful enquiry in Palestine. This Canon agrees with
that of Athanasius except with regard to the order assigned to ‘Esdras’
(i.e. Ezra and Nehemiah, <span id="page_lxxiv">p. lxxiv</span> <span
id="v.iv.iv-Page_lxxiv"></span>placed by M. at the end), to ‘the twelve
in one book’ (placed by M. after Jer.), and Daniel (placed by M. before
Ezekiel). Now, Esther is nowhere mentioned in the N.T., and the
Rabbinical discussions as to whether Esther ‘defiled the hands’ (i.e.
was ‘canonical’) went on to the time of R. Akiba (†135), an older, and
even of R. Juda ‘the holy’ (150–210), a younger, contemporary of Melito
(see Wildeboer, *Ontstaan van den Kanon,* pp. 58, *sq.,* 65, &c.). The
latter, therefore, may represent the penultimate stage in the history of
the Hebrew canon before its close in the second century, (doubted by
Bleek, *Einl.*5, §242, but not unlikely). Here, then, Ath. represents an
earlier stage of opinion than Origen (Eus. *H. E*. vi. 25), who gives
the finally fixed Hebrew Canon of his own time, but puts Esther at the
end. As to the *number* of books, Athan. agrees with Josephus, Melito,
Origen, and with Jerome, who, however, knows of the other reckoning of
24 (‘nonnulli’ in *Prol. Gal.*). Athanasius enumerates, as ‘outside the
Canon, but appointed by the Fathers to be read by those who newly join
us,’ Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Esther, Judith, and Tobit, as well as what
is called the Teaching of the Apostles and the Shepherd. In practice,
however, he quotes several of the latter as ‘Scripture’ (Wisdom
repeatedly so, see index to this vol.); ‘The Shepherd’ is ‘most
profitable,’ and quoted for the Unity of the Creator (and cf. *de Decr.*
4), but not as ‘Scripture;’ the ‘Didache’ is not used by him unless the
*Syntagma* (*vide supra,* p. lix.) be his genuine work. He also quotes 1
Esdras for the praise of Truth, and 2 Esdras once, as a ‘prophet.’
‘Daniel’ includes Susanna and Bel and the Dragon.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p5"></span>(*c*) On the sufficiency of Scripture for
the establishment of all necessary doctrine Athanasius insists
repeatedly and emphatically (*c. Gent.* 1, *de Incarn.* 5, *de Decr.*
32, *Vit. Ant.* 16, &c., &c.); and he follows up precept by example.
‘His works are a continuous appeal to Scripture.’ There is no passage in
his writings which recognises tradition as *supplementing* Scripture,
i.e., as sanctioning articles of faith not contained in Scripture.
Tradition is recognised as authoritative in two ways: (1) Negatively, in
the sense that doctrines which are novel are *prima facie* condemned by
the very fact (*de Decr.* 7, note 2, *ib.* 18, *Orat.* i. 8, 10, ii. 34,
40, *de Syn.* 3, 6, 7, and *Letter* 59, §3); and (2) positively, as
furnishing a guide to the sense of Scripture (see references in note on
*Orat.* iii. 58, end of ch. xxix.). In other words, tradition with
Athanasius is a formal, not a material, source of doctrine. His language
exemplifies the necessity of distinguishing, in the case of strong
patristic utterances on the authority of tradition, between different
senses of the word. Often it means simply truth conveyed *in Scripture,*
and in that sense ‘handed down’ from the first, as for example *c.
Apol.* i. 22, ‘the Gospel tradition,’ and *Letter* 60. 6 (cf. Cypr.
*Ep.* 74. 10, where Scripture is ‘divinæ traditionis caput et origo.’).
Moreover, tradition as distinct from Scripture is with Athanasius not a
secret unwritten body of teaching handed down orally <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) , but is to be found in the *documents*
of antiquity and the writings of the Fathers, such as those to whom he
appeals in *de Decr.,* &c. That ‘the appeal of Athanasius was to
Scripture, that of the Arians to tradition’ (Gwatkin) is an
overstatement, in part supported by the pre-Nicene history of the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.iv-p6.4"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>
(*supra,* p. xxxi. *sq.*). The rejection of this word by the Antiochene
Council (in 268–9) is met by Athanasius, *de Synod.* 43, *sqq.,* partly
by an appeal to still older witnesses in its favour, partly by the
observation (§45) that ‘writing in simplicity \[the Fathers\] arrived
not at accuracy concerning the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p6.5"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>, but spoke of the word as they
understood it,’ an argument strangely like that of the Homœans (Creed of
Niké, *ib.* §30) that the Fathers \[of *Nicæa*\] *adopted* the word ‘in
simplicity.’

<span id="v.iv.iv-p7"></span>(*d*) Connected with the function and
authority of tradition is that of the Church. On the essential idea of
the Church there is little or nothing of definite statement. The term
‘Catholic Church’ is of course commonly used, both of the Church as a
whole, and of the orthodox body in this or that place. The unity of the
Church is emphatically dwelt on in the opening of the encyclical written
in the name of Alexander (*infr.,* p. 69 and *supr.,* p. xvi.) as the
reason for communicating the deposition of Arius at Alexandria to the
Church at large. ‘The joyful mother of children’ (*Exp. in Ps.* cxiii.
9) is interpreted of the Gentile Church, ‘made to keep house,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>ἅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.iv-p7.2"></span>τε τὸν Κύριον ἔνοικον
ἔχουσα</span>, joyful ‘because her children are saved through faith in
Christ,’ whereas those of the ‘synagogue’ are ἀπωλεί& 139· παραδεδομένα:
the ‘strong city’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p7.3"></span>πόλις περιοχῆς</span> and ‘Edom’ of [Ps. lx.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.iv-p7.4"></span> are
likewise interpreted of the Church as gathered from all nations;
similarly the Ethiopians of [Ps. lxxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.iv-p7.5"></span>
(where the *de Tit. pss.* gives a quite different and more allegorical
sense, referring the verse to baptism). The full perfection of the
Church is referred by Athanasius not to the (even ideal) Church on earth
but to the Church in heaven. The kingdom of God’ ([Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033)<span id="v.iv.iv-p7.6"></span>) is
explained as ‘the enjoyment of the good things of the <span
id="page_lxxv">p. lxxv</span> <span
id="v.iv.iv-Page_lxxv"></span>future, namely the contemplation and
knowledge of God so far as man’s soul is capable of it,’ while the city
of [Ps. lxxxvii. 1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.iv-p7.7"></span> is <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p7.8"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p7.9"></span>ἄνω ῾Ιερουσαλήμ</span> in the *de Titulis,* but
in the *Expositio* the Church glorified by ‘the indwelling of the
Only-begotten.’ In all this we miss any decisive utterance as to the
doctrinal authority of the Church except in so far as the recognition of
such authority is involved in what has been cited above in favour of
tradition. It may be said that the conditions which lead the mind to
throw upon the Church the weight of responsibility for what is believed
were absent in the case of Athanasius as indeed in the earlier Greek
Church generally.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p8"></span>But Athanasius was far from undervaluing
the evidence of the Church’s tradition. The organ by which the tradition
of the Church does its work is the teaching function of her officers,
especially of the Episcopate (*de Syn.* 3, &c.). But to provide against
erroneous teaching on the part of bishops, as well as to provide for the
due administration of matters affecting the Church generally, and for
ecclesiastical legislation, some authority beyond that of the individual
bishop is necessary. This necessity is met, in the Church as conceived
by Athanasius, in two ways, firstly by Councils, secondly in the
pre-eminent authority of certain sees which exercise some sort of
jurisdiction over their neighbours. Neither of these resources of Church
organisation meets us, in Athanasius, in a completely organised shape. A
word must be said about each separately, then about their correlation.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p9"></span>(<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p9.1"></span>α</span>) *Synods.* Synods as a part of the
machinery of the Church grew up spontaneously. The meeting of the
‘Apostles and Elders’ at Jerusalem ([Acts
xv](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#000)<span id="v.iv.iv-p9.2"></span>.)
exemplifies the only way in which a practical resolution on a matter
affecting a number of persons with independent rights can possibly be
arrived at, viz., by mutual discussion and agreement. Long before the
age of Athanasius it had been recognised in the Church that the bishops
were the persons exclusively entitled to represent their flocks for such
a purpose; in other words, Councils of bishops had come to constitute
the legislative and judicial body in the Church (Eus. *V. C.* i. 51).
Both of these functions, and especially the latter, involved the further
prerogative of judging of doctrine, as in the case of Paul of Samosata.
But the whole system had grown up out of occasional emergencies, and no
recognised laws existed to define the extent of conciliar authority, or
the relations between one Council and another should their decisions
conflict. Not even the area covered by the jurisdiction of a given
Council was defined (*Can. Nic.* 5). We see a Synod at Arles deciding a
case affecting Africa, and reviewing the decision of a previous Synod at
Rome; a Council at Tyre trying the case of a bishop of Alexandria; a
Council at Sardica in the West deposing bishops in the East, and
restoring those whom Eastern Synods had deposed; we find Acacius and his
fellows deposed at Seleucia, then in a few weeks deposing their deposers
at Constantinople; Meletius appointed and deposed by the same Synod at
Antioch in 361, and in the following year resuming his see without
question. All is chaos. The extent to which a Synod succeeds in
enforcing its decisions depends on the extent to which it obtains *de
facto* recognition. The canons of the Council of Antioch (341) are
accepted as Church law, while its creeds are condemned as Arian (*de
Syn.* 22–25).

<span id="v.iv.iv-p10"></span>We look in vain for any statement of
principle on the part of Athanasius to reduce this confusion to order.
The classical passage in his writings is the letter he has preserved
from Julius of Rome to the Eastern bishops (*Apol. c. Ar.* 20–35). The
Easterns insist strongly on the authority of Councils, in the interests
of their deposition of Athanasius, &c., at Tyre. Julius can only reply
by invoking an old-established custom of the Church, ratified, he says,
at Nicæa (*Can.* 5?), that the decisions of one Council may be revised
by another; a process which leads to no finality. The Sardican canons of
three years later drew up, for judicial purposes only, a system of
procedure, devolving on Julius (or possibly on the Roman bishop for the
time being) the duty of deciding, upon the initiative of the parties
concerned, whether in the case of a deposed bishop a new trial of the
case was desirable, and permitting him to take part in such new trial by
his deputies. But Athanasius never alludes to any such procedure, nor to
the canons in question. (Compare above, pp. xlii., xlvi.).

<span id="v.iv.iv-p11"></span>The absence of any *a priori* law relating
to the authority of Synods applies to general as well as to local
Councils. The conception of a general Council did not give rise to
Nicæa, but *vice versa* (see above, p. xvii.). The precedent for great
Councils had already been set at Antioch (268–9) and Arles (314); the
latter in fact seems to be indirectly called by S. Augustine *plenarium
universæ ecclesiæ concilium;* but the widely representative character of
the Nicene Council, and the impressive circumstances under which it met,
stamped upon it from the first a recognised character of its own. Again
and again (*de Decr.* 4, 27, *Orat.* i. 7, *Ep. Æg*. 5, &c., &c.)
Athanasius presses the Arians with their rejection of the decision of a
‘world-wide’ Council, contrasting it (e.g. *de Syn*. 21) with the
numerous and indecisive Coun<span id="page_lxxvi">p. lxxvi</span> <span
id="v.iv.iv-Page_lxxvi"></span>cils held by them. He protests (*Ep. Æg.*
5, *Tom. ad Ant.,* &c.) against the idea that any new creed is necessary
or to be desired in addition to the Nicene. But in doing so, he does not
suggest by a syllable that the Council was formally and *a priori*
infallible, independently of the character of its decision as faithfully
corresponding to the tradition of the Apostles. Its authority is
secondary to that of Scripture (*de Syn.* 6, *sub. fin.*), and its
scriptural character is its justification (*ib.*). In short, Mr. Gwatkin
speaks within the mark when he disclaims for Athan. any mechanical
theory <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) of conciliar infallibility.
To admit this candidly is not to depreciate, but to acknowledge, the
value of the great Synod of Nicæa; and to acknowledge it, not on the
technical grounds of later ecclesiastical law, but on grounds which are
those of Athanasius himself. (On the general subject see D.C.A. 475–484,
and Hatch, *B.L.* vii.)

<span id="v.iv.iv-p13"></span>(<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>β</span>) *Jurisdiction of bishops over
bishops.* The fully-developed and organised ‘patriarchal’ system does
not meet us in the Nicene age. The bishops of important towns, however,
exercise a very real, though not definable authority over their
neighbours. This is especially true of Imperial residences. The
migration of Eusebius to Nicomedia and afterwards to Constantinople
broke through the time-honoured rule of the Church, but set the
precedent commonly followed ever afterwards. In Egypt, although the name
‘patriarch’ was as yet unheard, the authority of the Bishop of
Alexandria was almost absolute. The name ‘archbishop’ is here used for
the first time. It is first applied apparently to Meletius (*Apol. Ar.*
71) in his list of clergy, but at a later date (about 358) to Athanasius
in a contemporary inscription (see p. 564a, note 1). At the beginning of
his episcopate (*supra,* p. xxxvii.) we find him requested to ordain in
a diocese of Upper Egypt by its bishop. He sends bishops on deputations
(*Fest. Ind.* xxv., &c.), and exercises ordinary jurisdiction over
bishops and people of Libya and Pentapolis (cf. reference to Synesius,
*supr.,* p. lxii.). This was a condition of things dating at least from
the time of Dionysius (p. 178, note 2). In particular he had practically
the appointment of bishops for all Egypt, so that in the course of his
long episcopate all the Egyptian sees were manned by his faithful
adherents (cf. p. 493). The mention of Dionysius suggests the question
of the relation of the see of Alexandria to that of Rome, and of the
latter to the Church generally. On the former point, what is necessary
will be said in the Introd. to the *de Sent. Dion.* With regard to the
wider question, Athanasius expresses reverence for that bishopric
‘because it is *an* Apostolic throne,’ and ‘for Rome, because it is the
metropolis of Romania’ (p. 282). That is his only utterance on the
subject. Such reverence ought, he says, to have secured Liberius from
the treatment to which he had been subjected. The language cited
excludes the idea of any divinely-given headship of the Church vested in
the Roman bishop, for his object is to magnify the outrageous conduct of
Constantius and the Arians. Still less can anything be elicited from the
account given by Ath. of the case of the Dionysii, or of his own
relations to successive Roman bishops. He speaks of them as his beloved
brothers and fellow-ministers (e.g., p. 489) and cordially. welcomes
their sympathy and powerful support, without any thought of
jurisdiction. But he furnishes us with materials, in the letter of
Julius, for estimating not his own view of the Roman see, but that held
by its occupant. The origin of the proceedings was the endeavour of the
Easterns to procure recognition at Rome and in the West for their own
nominee to the bishopric of Alexandria. They had requested Julius to
hold a Council, ‘and to be himself the judge if he so pleased’ (*Apol.
c. Ar.* 20). This was intended to frighten Athanasius, but not in the
least, as the sequel shews, to submit the decisions of a Council to
revision by a single bishop. Julius summoned a Council as described
above (p. xliii.), and at the end of a long period of delay and
controversy sent a letter expressing his view of the case to the
Orientals. This document has been already discussed (p. xliv.). It forms
an important landmark in the history of papal claims, standing at least
as significantly in contrast with those of the successors of Julius, as
with those of his predecessors.

<span id="v.iv.iv-p14"></span>(<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>γ</span>) *Bishops and Councils.* The
superiority of councils to single bishops (including those <span
id="page_lxxvii">p. lxxvii</span> <span
id="v.iv.iv-Page_lxxvii"></span>of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch) was
questioned by no one in this age. Julius claims the support, not of
authority inherent in his see, but of *canons,* and on the basis of them
claims a voice in matters affecting the Church at large, not in his own
name, but in that of ‘us *all,* that so a just sentence might proceed
from *all*’ (*Apol. c. Ar.* 35). Again, just as the judgment of his
predecessor Melchiades and his council was revised at Arles in 314
(Augustin. *Ep.* 105. 8), so the case of Athanasius and Marcellus was
reheard at the Council of Sardica three years after the decision of
Julius and his council. The council was the supreme organ of the Church
for legislative, judicial, and doctrinal purposes; had any other of
superior or even equal rank been recognised, or had the authority of
councils themselves been defined *a priori* by a system of Church law,
the confusion of the fourth century would not have arisen. Whether or no
the age would have gained, we at least should have been the losers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[lxxiii:93](2040032.htm#fr_92) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p2.9"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p3"></span> Athanasius is not always innocent of the
method of which he complains; e.g. when he uses [Isa. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.iv-p3.2"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.iv-p3.3"></span>πλήρης εἰμί</span>,
as a proof of the Divine Perfection.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[lxxiv:94](2040032.htm#fr_93) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p6"></span> The idea of a mysterious unwritten
tradition is a legacy of Gnosticism to the Church. Irenæus, in order to
meet the Gnostic appeal to a supposed unwritten Apostolic tradition,
confronts it with the consistency of the public and normal teaching of
the Churches everywhere, of which the Roman Church is a convenient
microcosm or compendium. The idea of a <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.iv-p6.2"></span>παράδοσις ἄγραφος</span> is adopted by Clement
and Origen, and passes from the latter to Eusebius, and to the
Cappadocian Fathers (Basil *de Sp. S.* 27, applies it only to
*practical* details), Epiphanius, and later writers. Details in Harnack
ii. 90, note, cf. Salmon, *Infallibility,* Lect. ix. On the somewhat
different subject of the ‘Disciplina Arcani,’ see Herzog-Plitt. *s.v.*
‘Arkan-Disciplia’

<span id="fn_94"></span>[lxxvi:95](2040032.htm#fr_94) <span
id="v.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.iv-p12"></span> What is conspicuously true of the Second
General Council is in reality not less true of the First. Its high
authority to later ages is due not to its formal character as a council,
but to the character of its work; the consent of the Church, and that
not readily given, but as the result of a long process of searching and
sifting, has given to it its ‘irreformable’ authority. Its authority *is
expressly put on a par with that of the Antiochene Synod* of *c.* 269,
by Ath. *de Syn.* 43 (consult the whole discussion, pp. 473, 475, &c.).
Short of a council which should include every bishop of the entire
Church, in unanimous agreement,—an impossible contingency,—the claims of
any given council to be truly ecumenical are relative, not absolute; and
no consistent theory is possible of the conditions under which a council
could *by virtue of its constitution* claim infallibility for its
decisions. The supposed infallibility of general councils lies in
reality outside them, in the authority which sanctions and consecrates
their decisions. According to the precedent of Nicæa this is the Church
‘diffusive’ (cf. p. 489, and Pusey, *Councils,* p. 225, *sq.*), and such
consent, again, must necessarily be partial and relative. If a more
tangible and expeditious theory is wanted, we have it in the Roman
system, according to which a council is infallible if ratified by the
Pope. This at once puts all such councils, whether local or general, on
one level, and affords a ready criterion. In other words, the only
consistent (mechanical) theory of the infallibility of councils is one
which makes councils superfluous. If such a theory had been known to the
Church in the age of councils, the councils would not have been held.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Content of Revelation. God Three in One and the
Incarnation.](2040033)
