[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040207)  [Next](2040209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span
id="xv.ii-Page_176"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>On the Opinion of Dionysius.</span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xv.ii-p3.1"></span>Letter</span> of Athanasius concerning Dionysius,
Bishop of Alexandria, shewing that he too was against the Arian heresy,
like the Synod of Nicæa, and that the Arians in vain libel him in
claiming him as on their side.

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span>1. *The Arian appeal to Dionysius a slander
against him.*

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span>You have been tardy in informing me of the
present argument between yourself and the enemies of Christ; for even
before your courtesy wrote to me, I had made diligent enquiry, and
learnt about the matter, of which I heard with pleasure. I approved of
the right opinion entertained by your piety concerning our blessed
fathers, while on the present occasion I once more recognise the
unreasonableness of the Arian madmen. For whereas their heresy has no
ground in reason, nor express proof from holy writ, they were always
resorting to shameless subterfuges and plausible fallacies. But they
have now also ventured to slander the fathers: and this is not
inconsistent, but fully of a piece with their perversity. For what
marvel is it if men who have presumed to ‘take counsel against the Lord
and against His Christ,’ are also vilifying the blessed Dionysius,
Bishop of Alexandria, as a partisan and accomplice of their own? For if
they are pleased to extol a man, for the support of their own heresy,
even if they call him blessed, they cast upon him no slight affront, but
a great one indeed; just like robbers or men of evil life who, when
branded for their own practices, claim sober persons as being of their
number, and thus defame their sober character.

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span>2. *The Arian position inconsistent with Holy
Scripture.*

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span>If then they have confidence in their
opinions and statements, let them broach their heresy nakedly, and shew
from it if they think they have any religious argument whether from
Scripture, or from human reason, in their defence. But if they have
nothing of the kind, let them hold their peace. For they will find
nothing from any quarter except the greater condemnation of themselves.
Firstly from the Scriptures, in that John says, ‘In the beginning was
the Word;’ whereas they say, ‘he was not before he was begotten:’ while
David sings, in the character of the Father, ‘my heart uttered a good
Word’ ([Ps. xlv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span
id="xv.ii-p7.1"></span>, LXX), whom they allege to be in thought only,
and originated from nothing. Further, whereas John once more says in the
Gospel ([John 1.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="xv.ii-p7.2"></span>), ‘all things were made by Him, and without Him
was not anything made,’ while Paul writes, ‘there is one Lord Jesus
Christ by whom are all things’ ([1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="xv.ii-p7.3"></span>), and
elsewhere, ‘all things were created in Him’ ([Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="xv.ii-p7.4"></span>), how
will they have the boldness (or rather how will they escape disgrace) to
oppose the sayings of the saints, by saying that the artificer of all
things is a creature, and that He is a created thing in whom all things
created have come into being and subsist? Nor, secondly, is any
religious argument from human reason left them in their defence. For
what man, Greek or barbarian, presumes to call one, whom he confesses to
be God, a created thing, or to say that he was not before he was made?
or what man, when he has heard Him whom he believes to be God alone say,
‘This is My beloved Son’ ([Mat. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="xv.ii-p7.5"></span>), and
‘my heart uttered a good Word,’ will venture even to say that the Word
out of the heart of God has come to being out of nothing? or that the
Son is a created thing and not the very offspring of Him that speaks? or
again, who that hears Him whom he believes to be Lord and Saviour say,
‘I am in the Father and the Father in Me,’ and ‘I and the Father are
one’ ([John 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010), [John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="xv.ii-p7.6"></span>),
will presume to put asunder what He has made one and maintained
indivisible?

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>3. *The Arians appeal to Dionysius as the
Jews did to Abraham: but with equally little reason.*

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span>Seeing this themselves, accordingly, and
having no confidence in their own position, <span id="page_177">p.
177</span> <span id="xv.ii-Page_177"></span>they utter falsehoods
against religious men. But it would be better for them, when isolated,
and perceiving that under examination they were at a loss and put to
silence on all sides, rather to have turned back from the way of error
and not to claim men whom they do not know, lest being confuted by them
also they should carry off all the more disgrace. But perhaps they do
not wish ever to depart from this wickedness of theirs; for they emulate
this characteristic of Caiaphas and his party, just as they have learned
from them to deny Christ. For they too, when the Lord had done so so
many works, by which He shewed Himself to be the Christ the Son of the
Living God, and being convicted by him, from thenceforth in all things
thinking and speaking against the Scripture, and unable for a moment to
face the proofs against themselves, betook themselves to the patriarch
with the words, ‘We have Abraham to our father’ ([Matt. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)<span id="xv.ii-p9.1"></span>), thus
thinking to cloke their own unreasonableness. But neither did they gain
anything by these words, nor will these men, by speaking of Dionysius,
be able to escape the guilt of the others. For the Lord convicted the
latter of their wicked deeds by the words, ‘This did not Abraham’ ([John
viii. 40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040)<span
id="xv.ii-p9.2"></span>), while the same truth again shall convict these
men of their impiety and falsehood. For the Bishop Dionysius did not
hold with Arius, nor was he ignorant of the truth. On the contrary, both
the Jews of that day, and the new Jews of the present day inherited
their mad enmity against Christ from their father the devil. Well then,
a strong proof that here once more these men are saying what is not
true, but are maligning the man, is the fact that neither was he
condemned and expelled from the church for impiety by other bishops, as
these men have been from the clergy, nor did he of his own accord leave
the church as the partisan of a heresy, but died honourably within it,
and his memory is retained and registered along with the fathers to the
present day. For if he had held with these men, or not vindicated what
he had written, without doubt he too would have been treated as these
men have been.

<span id="xv.ii-p10"></span>4. *The Arian appeal to Dionysius based upon
an isolated fragment of his teaching to the neglect of the rest.*

<span id="xv.ii-p11"></span>And indeed this would suffice for the entire
refutation of the new Jews, who both deny the Lord and slander the
fathers and attempt to deceive all Christians. But since they think they
have, in certain parts of the bishop’s letter, pretexts for their
slander of him, come let us look at these also, so that even from them
the futility of the reasoning may be exposed, and they may at length
cease from their blasphemy against the Lord, and at any rate with the
soldiers ([Mat. xxvii. 54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054)<span
id="xv.ii-p11.1"></span>), when they see creation witnessing, confess
that truly He is the Son of God, and not one of created things. They say
then that in a letter the blessed Dionysius has said, ‘that the Son of
God is a creature and made, and not His own by nature, but in essence
alien from the Father, just as the husbandman is from the vine, or the
ship-builder from the boat, for that being a creature He was not before
He came to be.’ Yes, he wrote it, and we too admit that his letter runs
thus. But just as he wrote this, he also wrote very many other letters,
and they ought to consult those also; in order that the faith of the man
may be made clear from them all, and not from this alone. For the art of
a ship-builder who has constructed many triremes is judged of not from
one, but from all. If therefore he simply wrote this letter of which
they speak as an exposition of his faith, or if this was his only
letter, let them accuse him to their hearts’ content,—for this
suggestion really amounts to an accusation,—but if he was led to write
as he did by the occasion and the person <span
id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965) concerned, while he also wrote other
letters, defending himself where he had been suspected, in that case
they ought not to have neglected the reasons, and hastily cast a slur
upon the man, lest they should appear to be hunting merely stray
expressions, while passing over the truth to be found in his other
letters. For a husbandman also treats trees of the same sort now in one
way now in another, according to the character of the soil he has to do
with: nor would any one blame him because he cuts one, grafts another,
plants another, and another again takes up. On the contrary, upon
learning the reason, he all the more admires the versatility of his
skill. Well then, unless they have consulted the writing superficially
let them state the main subject of the letter; for so the malignity and
unscrupulous character of their design will come out. But since they do
not know, or are ashamed to state it, we must state it ourselves.

<span id="xv.ii-p13"></span>5. *The occasion of Dionysius’ writing
against the Sabellians.*

<span id="xv.ii-p14"></span>At that date certain of the Bishops in
Pentapolis, Upper Libya, held with Sabellius. And they were so
successful with their opinions that the Son of God was scarcely any
longer preached in the churches. Dionysius <span id="page_178">p.
178</span> <span id="xv.ii-Page_178"></span>having heard of this, as he
had the charge <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) of those
churches, sends men to counsel the guilty ones to cease from their
error, but as they did not cease, but waxed more shameless in their
impiety, he was compelled to meet their shameless conduct by writing the
said letter, and to expound from the Gospels the human nature of the
Saviour, in order that since those men waxed bolder in denying the Son,
and in ascribing His human actions to the Father, he accordingly by
demonstrating that it was the Son and not the Father that was made man
for us, might persuade the ignorant persons that the Father is not a
Son, and so by degrees lead them up to the true Godhead of the Son and
the knowledge of the Father. This is the main subject of the letter, and
this is the reason why he wrote it, by reason of those who so
shamelessly had chosen to alter the true faith.

<span id="xv.ii-p16"></span>6. *Dionysius did not express his full
opinion in the passages alleged.*

<span id="xv.ii-p17"></span>Well then, what is there in common between
the heresy of Arius and the opinion of Dionysius: or why is Dionysius to
be called like Arius, when they differ widely? For the one is a teacher
of the Catholic Church, while the other has been the inventor of a new
heresy. And while Arius to expound his own error wrote a Thaleia in an
effeminate and ridiculous style like Sotades the Egyptian, Dionysius not
only wrote other letters also, but composed a defence of himself upon
the suspicious points, and came out clearly as of right opinions. If
then his writings are inconsistent, let them not draw him to their side,
for on this assumption he is not worthy of credit. But if, when he had
written his letter to Ammonius, and fallen under suspicion, he made his
defence so as to better <span id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) what he
had previously said, but did so without changing, it must be evident
that he wrote the suspected passages in a qualified sense <span
id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968) . But what is written or done in such
a sense men have no business to construe maliciously, or wrest each one
to a meaning of his own. For even a physician frequently in accordance
with his knowledge applies to the wounds he has to deal with, remedies
which to some seem unsuitable with a view to nothing but health. In like
manner it is the practice of a wise teacher to arrange and deliver his
lessons with reference to the characters of his pupils, until he has
brought them over to the way of perfection.

<span id="xv.ii-p20"></span>7. *The language of the Apostles needs
similar caution in particular passages.*

<span id="xv.ii-p21"></span>But if they accuse the blessed man (for the
arguments of the Arians about him are in fact accusations against him)
simply for writing thus, what will they do when they hear even the great
and blessed Apostles in the Acts, firstly Peter saying ([Acts ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)<span id="xv.ii-p21.1"></span>), ‘Ye
men of Israel hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God
unto us by mighty works and wonders and signs which God did by Him in
the midst of you, as ye yourselves know: Him, being delivered up by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye by the hand of lawless
men did crucify and slay;’ and again (ib. [Acts
4.10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010)<span id="xv.ii-p21.2"></span>),
‘In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Whom ye crucified, Whom God
raised from the dead, even in Him doth this man stand here before you
whole;’ and Paul, relating (ib. [Acts
13.22](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#022)<span id="xv.ii-p21.3"></span>)
in Antioch of Pisidia how God, ‘when He had removed Saul, raised up
David to be king; to whom also He bare witness and said, I have found
David the Son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who shall do My will. Of
this man’s seed hath God according to promise brought unto Israel a
Saviour, Jesus;’ and again at Athens (ib. [Acts
17.30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030)<span id="xv.ii-p21.4"></span>),
‘The times of ignorance therefore God overlooked; but now He commandeth
men that they should all everywhere repent: inasmuch as He hath
appointed a day in the which He will judge the world in righteousness by
means of the man whom He hath ordained, whereof He hath given assurance
unto all men, in that He hath raised Him from the dead;’ or Stephen, the
great martyr, when he says, ‘Behold I see the heavens opened and the Son
of man standing on the right hand of God.’ Why, it is high time for them
to brazen it out (for there is nothing too <span id="page_179">p.
179</span> <span id="xv.ii-Page_179"></span>daring for them) and claim
that the very apostles held with Arius: for they declare Christ to have
been a man from Nazareth, and passible.

<span id="xv.ii-p22"></span>8. *The Apostles spoke of Christ as man, but
also as God.*

<span id="xv.ii-p23"></span>Well then, such being the imaginations of
these men, did the Apostles, since they used the above language, regard
Christ as only a man and nothing more? God forbid. The very idea is out
of the question. But here too they have acted as wise master-builders
and stewards of the mysteries of God. And they have good reason for it.
For inasmuch as the Jews of that day, in error themselves and misleading
the Gentiles, thought that the Christ was coming as a mere man of the
seed of David, after the likeness of the rest of the children of David’s
descent, and would neither believe that He was God nor that the Word was
made flesh; for this reason it was with much wisdom that the blessed
Apostles began by proclaiming to the Jews the human characteristics of
the Saviour, in order that by fully persuading them from visible facts,
and from miracles which were done, that the Christ was come, they might
go on to lead them up to faith in His Godhead, by shewing that the works
He had done were not those of a man but of God. Why, Peter, who calls
Christ a man capable of suffering, at once went on ([Acts iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015)<span id="xv.ii-p23.1"></span>) to
add, ‘He is Prince of Life,’ while in the Gospel he confesses, ‘Thou art
the Christ, the Son of the living God.’ But in his Epistle he calls Him
Bishop of souls and Lord both of himself and of angels and Powers. Paul,
again, who calls Christ a man of the seed of David, wrote thus to the
Hebrews ([Heb. 1.3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="xv.ii-p23.2"></span>), ‘Who being the brightness of His glory and
the very image of His subsistence,’ and to the Philippians ([Philipp.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="xv.ii-p23.3"></span>),
‘Who being in the form of God counted it not a prize to be on an
equality with God.’ But what can it mean to call him Prince of Life, Son
of God, brightness, express image, on an equality with God, Lord, and
Bishop of souls, if not that in the body He was Word of God, by whom all
things were made and is as indivisible from the Father as is the
brightness from the light?

<span id="xv.ii-p24"></span>9. *Dionysius must be interpreted like the
Apostles.*

<span id="xv.ii-p25"></span>And Dionysius accordingly acted as he
learned from the Apostles. For as the heresy of Sabellius was creeping
on, he was compelled, as I said before, to write the aforesaid letter,
and to hurl at them what is said of the Saviour in reference to His
manhood and His humiliation, so as to bar them by reason of His human
attributes from saying that the Father was a son, and so render easier
for them the teaching concerning the Godhead of the Son, when in his
other letters he calls Him from the Scriptures the word, wisdom, power,
breath ([Wisd. vii. 25](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025)<span
id="xv.ii-p25.1"></span>), and brightness of the Father. For example, in
the letters written in his defence, speaking as I have described, he
waxes bold in the faith, and in piety towards Christ. As then the
Apostles are not to be accused by reason of their human language about
the Lord,—because the Lord has been made man,—but are all the more
worthy of admiration for their wise reserve and seasonable teaching, so
Dionysius is no Arian on account of his letter to Euphranor and Ammonius
against Sabellius. For even if he did use humble phrases and examples,
yet they too are from the Gospels, and his justification for them is the
Saviour’s coming in the flesh, on account of which not only these
things, but others like them are written. For just as He is Word of God,
so afterwards ‘the Word was made flesh;’ and while ‘in the beginning was
the Word; the Virgin at the consummation of the ages conceived, and the
Lord has become man. And He who is indicated by both statements is one
Person, for ‘the Word was made flesh.’ But the expressions used about
His Godhead, and His becoming man, are to be interpreted with
discrimination and suitably to the particular context. And he that
writes of the human attributes of the Word knows also what concerns His
Godhead: and he who expounds concerning His Godhead is not ignorant of
what belongs to His coming in the flesh: but discerning each as a
skilled and ‘approved money-changer <span
id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969) ,’ he will walk in the straight way of
piety; when therefore he speaks of His weeping, he knows that the Lord,
having become man, while he exhibits his human character in weeping, as
God raises up Lazarus; and He knows that He used to hunger and thirst
physically, while divinely He fed five thousand persons from five
loaves; and knows that while a human body lay in the tomb, it was raised
as God’s body by the Word Himself.

<span id="xv.ii-p27"></span>10. *The expressions of Dionysius claimed by
the Arians refer to Christ as Man.*

<span id="xv.ii-p28"></span>Dionysius, teaching exactly thus, in his
letter to Euphranor and Ammonius wrote in view of Sabellius concerning
the human pre<span id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span
id="xv.ii-Page_180"></span>dicates of the Saviour. For to the latter
class belong the sayings, ‘I am the Vine and My Father the Husbandman’
([Joh. xv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span
id="xv.ii-p28.1"></span>), and ‘faithful to Him that made Him’ ([Heb.
iii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)<span id="xv.ii-p28.2"></span>),
and ‘He created me’ ([Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="xv.ii-p28.3"></span>), and
‘made so much better than the angels’ ([Heb. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span id="xv.ii-p28.4"></span>). But
He was not ignorant of the passages, ‘I am in the Father and the Father
in Me’ ([Joh. xiv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="xv.ii-p28.5"></span>), and ‘He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father.’ For we know that he mentioned them in his other Epistles. For
while mentioning them there, he made mention also of the human
attributes of the Lord. For just as ‘being in the form of God He counted
it not a prize to be on an equality with God, but emptied Himself,
taking the form of a slave’ ([Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="xv.ii-p28.6"></span>), and
‘though He was rich, yet for our sakes He became poor,’ so while there
are high and rich descriptions of His Deity, there are also those which
relate to His coming in the flesh, humble expressions and poor. But that
these are used of the Saviour as man is apparent on the following
grounds. The husbandman is different in essence from the vine, while the
branches are of one essence and akin to it, and are in fact undivided
from the vine, it and they having one and the same origin. But, as the
Lord said, He is the vine, we are the branches. If then the Son is of
one essence with ourselves, and has the same origin as we, let us grant
that in this respect the Son is diverse in essence from the Father, like
as the vine is from the husbandman. But if the Son is different from
what we are, and He is the Word of the Father while we are made of
earth, and are descendants of Adam, then the above expression ought not
to be referred to the deity of the Word, but to His human coming. Since
thus also has the Saviour said: ‘I am the vine, ye are the branches, My
Father is the husbandman.’ For we are akin to the Lord according to the
body, and for that reason he said ([Heb.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#012), [Ps.
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)<span id="xv.ii-p28.7"></span>),
‘I will declare thy name unto my brethren.’ And just as the branches are
of one essence with the vine, and are from it, so we also having our
bodies homogeneous with the Lord’s body, receive of His fulness ([Joh.
i. 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span id="xv.ii-p28.8"></span>),
and have that body as our root <span id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970)
for our resurrection and our salvation. But the Father is called the
husbandman, for He it was who by His Word cultivated the Vine, namely
the manhood of the Saviour, and who by His own Word prepared for us a
way to a kingdom; and none cometh to the Lord except the Father draw him
to Him ([Joh. vi. 44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span
id="xv.ii-p29.2"></span>).

<span id="xv.ii-p30"></span>11. *The same is true of the analogous
language of the Apostles.*

<span id="xv.ii-p31"></span>This then being the sense of the expression,
it follows that it is of the vine, so understood, that it is written:
‘Who was faithful to Him that had created Him’ ([Heb. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)<span id="xv.ii-p31.1"></span>), and
‘made so much better than the angels’ (ib. [Heb.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span id="xv.ii-p31.2"></span>),
and ‘He created me’ ([Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="xv.ii-p31.3"></span>). For
when He had taken that which He had to offer on our behalf, namely His
body of the Virgin Mary, then it is written of Him that He had been
created, and formed, and made: for such phrases are applicable to men.
Moreover not after (His taking) the body has He been made better than
the angels, lest He should appear to have been previously less than or
equal to them. But writing to Jews, and comparing the human ministry of
the Lord to Moses, he said, ‘having been made so much better than the
angels,’ for by means of angels the law was spoken, because ‘the law was
given by Moses, but grace came by Jesus Christ’ ([Joh. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span id="xv.ii-p31.4"></span>), and
the gift of the Spirit. And whereas in those days the law was preached
from Dan to Beersheba, now ‘their sound is gone out into all lands’
([Rom. 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018), [Ps.
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#003)<span id="xv.ii-p31.5"></span>),
and the Gentiles worship Christ, and through Him know the Father. The
above things then are written of the Saviour as man, and not otherwise.

<span id="xv.ii-p32"></span>12. *The passages alleged from Dionysius
are, when rightly understood, strictly orthodox.*

<span id="xv.ii-p33"></span>Well then, did Dionysius, as the adversaries
of Christ reiterate, when writing of the human characteristics of the
Son, and so calling Him a creature, mean that he was one man among
others? Or when he said that the Word was not proper to the essence of
the Father, did he hold that He was of one essence with us men?
Certainly he did not write thus in his other epistles. but in them not
only manifests a correct opinion, but as good as cries out by them
against these people, saying as it were: I am not of the same opinion as
you, you adversaries of God, nor did my writings furnish Arius with a
pretext for impiety. But writing to Ammon and Euphranor on account of
the Sabellianisers, I made mention of the vine and the husbandman and
used other like expressions, in order that, by pointing out the human
characteristics of the Lord, I might persuade those men not to say that
it is the Father who was made man. For like as the husbandman is not the
vine, so He that came in the body was not the Father but the Word; and
the Word having come to be in the Vine was called the Vine, because of
His bodily kinship with the branches, namely <span id="page_181">p.
181</span> <span id="xv.ii-Page_181"></span>ourselves. In this sense,
then, I wrote as I did to Euphranor and Ammonius, but your shamelessness
I confront with the other letters written by me, so that men of sound
mind may know the defence they contain, and my right mind in the faith
of Christ. The Arians then ought, if their intelligence were sound, thus
to have thought and held concerning the Bishop: ‘for all things are
manifest to them that understand, and right to them that find knowledge’
([Prov. viii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#009)<span
id="xv.ii-p33.1"></span>). But since, not having understood the faith of
the Catholic Church, they have fallen into impiety, and consequently,
maimed in their intelligence, think that even straight things are
crooked and call light darkness, while they think that darkness is
light, it is necessary to quote also from the other letters of
Dionysius, and state why they were written, to the greater condemnation
of the heretic. For it was from them that we ourselves have learned to
think and write as we are doing about the man.

<span id="xv.ii-p34"></span>13. *But other writings of Dionysius have to
be considered also. Their history.*

<span id="xv.ii-p35"></span>The following is the occasion of his writing
the other letters. The Bishop Dionysius having heard of the affairs in
Pentapolis and having written, in zeal for religion, as I said above,
his letter to Euphranor and Ammonius against the heresy of Sabellius,
some of the brethren belonging to the Church, of right opinions, but
without asking him, so as to learn from himself how he had written, went
up to Rome; and they spoke against him in the presence of his namesake
Dionysius the Bishop of Rome. And he, upon hearing it, wrote
simultaneously against the partisans of Sabellius and against those who
held the very opinions for uttering which Arius was cast out of the
Church; calling it an equal and opposite impiety to hold with Sabellius,
or with those who say that the Word of God is a thing made and formed
and originated. And he wrote also to Dionysius to inform him of what
they had said about him. And the latter straightway wrote back, and
inscribed his books ‘a Refutation and a Defence.’ Here mark the
detestable gang of the adversaries of Christ, and how they themselves
have stirred up their disgrace against themselves. For Dionysius, Bishop
of Rome, having written also against those who said that the Son of God
was a creature and a created thing, it is manifest that not now for the
first time but from of old the heresy of the Arian adversaries of Christ
has been anathematised by all. And Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria,
making his defence concerning the letter he had written, appears in his
turn as neither thinking as they allege, nor having held the Arian error
at all.

<span id="xv.ii-p36"></span>14. *Object and general method of Dionysius
in his ‘Refutation and Defence.’*

<span id="xv.ii-p37"></span>And the mere fact of Dionysius having made
his defence about the matters on which these people harp suffices
completely to condemn the Arians, and to demonstrate their malignity.
For he wrote, not in angry controversy, but to defend himself on the
points where he was under suspicion. But in defending himself against
charges, what does he do if not, while disposing of every charge of
which he was suspected, by this very fact convict the Arian madmen of
malignity? But, to complete their confusions by means of what he wrote
in his defence, come, let me set before you his actual words. For from
them you will learn firstly that the Arians are malicious, secondly that
Dionysius has nothing to do with their error. To begin with, then, he
wrote his letter as in Refutation and in Defence. But this means,
surely, that he aims at refuting false statements, and defends himself
for what he has written; shewing that he wrote not as Arius supposed,
but that in mentioning what is said concerning the Lord in His human
aspect, he was not ignorant that He was the Word and Wisdom undivided
from the Father. Then he blames those who spoke against him for not
quoting his language as a whole, but garbling it, and speaking not in
good faith but disingenously and arbitrarily. And he compares them to
those who used to impeach the letters of the blessed Apostle. But this
complaint of his entirely clears him from sinister suspicion. For if he
considers the detractors of Paul to be like his own, he shews precisely
this, that he wrote as he did in Paul’s sense. At any rate, in meeting
severally the charges of his opponents, he explains all the passages
cited by them: and, whereas in these latter he upsets Sabellius, in his
subsequent letters he shews how sound and pious is his own faith.
Accordingly whereas they would have it that Dionysius held that ‘God was
not always a Father, the Son did not always exist, but God existed apart
from the Word, while the Son Himself was not before He was begotten: on
the contrary, there was a time when He was not, for He is not eternal
but has come later into being,’—see how he replies! Most of what he
said, whether in the form of investigations, or collective inferences,
or interrogatory refutations, or charges against his accusers, I omit
because of the length of his discourses, inserting only what is strictly
relevant to the charges against him. In answer to these, he writes after
certain prefatory matter, in the first book <span id="page_182">p.
182</span> <span id="xv.ii-Page_182"></span>inscribed ‘Refutation and
Defence’ in the following terms.

<span id="xv.ii-p38"></span>15. *Extracts from the ‘Refutation and
Defence.’*

<span id="xv.ii-p39"></span>‘For never was there a time when God was not
a father.’ And this he acknowledges in what follows, ‘that Christ is for
ever, being Word and Wisdom and Power. For it is not to be supposed that
God, having at first no such issue, afterwards begat a Son, but that the
Son has His being not of Himself but of the Father.’ And a little way on
he adds on the same subject, ‘But being the brightness of light eternal,
certainly He is Himself eternal; for as the light exists always, it is
evident that the brightness must exist always as well. For it is by the
fact of its shining that the existence of light is perceived, and there
cannot be light that does not give light. For let us come back to our
examples. If there is sun, there is sunlight, there is day. If there is
none of these things, it is quite impossible for there to be sun. If
then the sun were eternal, the day also would be unceasing. But in fact,
as that is not so, the day begins and ceases with the sun. But God is
light eternal, never beginning nor ceasing. The brightness then lies
before Him eternally, and is with Him without beginning and
ever-begotten, shining in His Presence, being that Wisdom which said, “I
was that wherein he rejoiced, and daily I was glad in his presence at
all times” ([Prov. viii. 30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030)<span
id="xv.ii-p39.1"></span>).’ And again after a little he resumes the same
subject with the words, ‘The Father then being eternal, the Son is
eternal, being Light of Light: for if there is a parent there is also a
child. But if there were not a child, how and of whom can there be a
parent? But there are both, and that eternally.’ Then again he adds,
‘God then being light, Christ is brightness; and being Spirit, for “God
is a Spirit” ([John iv. 24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="xv.ii-p39.2"></span>),—in like manner Christ is called the breath,
for He is the “breath of the power of God” ([Wisd. vii.
25](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025)<span id="xv.ii-p39.3"></span>).’
And again, to quote the second book, he says, ‘But only the Son, who
always is with the Father and is filled of Him that IS, Himself also IS
from the Father.’

<span id="xv.ii-p40"></span>16. *Contrast of the language of Dionysius
with that of Arius.*

<span id="xv.ii-p41"></span>Now if the sense of the above statements
were doubtful, there would be need of an interpreter. But since he wrote
plainly and repeatedly on the same subject, let Arius gnash his teeth
when he sees his own heresy subverted by Dionysius, and hears him say
what he does not wish to hear: ‘God was always Father, and the Son is
not absolutely eternal, but His eternity flows from the eternity of the
Father, and He coexists with Him as brightness with the light.’ But let
these, who have so much as imagined that Dionysius held with Arius, lay
aside such a slander against him. For what have they in common, when
Arius says, ‘The Son was not before He was begotten, but there was once
a time when He was not,’ whereas Dionysius teaches, ‘Now God is Light
eternal, neither beginning, nor ever to end: accordingly the brightness
lies before Him eternally, and coexists with Him, shining before Him
without beginning and ever-begotten.’ For in fact to meet the suspicion
of others who allege that Dionysius in speaking of the Father does not
name the Son, and again in speaking of the Son does not name the Father,
but divides, removes, and separates the Son from the Father, he replies
and puts them to shame in the second book, as follows.

<span id="xv.ii-p42"></span>17. *Dionysius did not separate the Persons
of the Holy Trinity.*

<span id="xv.ii-p43"></span>‘Each of the names I have mentioned is
inseparable and indivisible <span id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971) from
that next to it. I spoke of the Father, and before referring to the Son
I designated Him too in the Father. I referred to the Son,—and even if I
did not also expressly mention the Father, certainly He was to be
understood beforehand in the Son. I added the Holy Spirit, but at the
same time I further added both whence and through whom He proceeded. But
they are ignorant that neither is the Father, *qua* Father, separated
from the Son,—for the name carries that relationship with it,—nor is the
Son expatriated from the Father. For the title Father denotes the common
bond. But in their hands is the Spirit, who cannot be parted either from
Him that sent or from Him that conveyed Him: How then can I, who use
these names, imagine that they are sundered and utterly <span
id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972) separated from one another?’ And after
a little he goes on, ‘Thus then we extend the Monad <span
id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973) indivisibly into the Triad, and
conversely gather together the Triad without diminution into the Monad.’

<span id="xv.ii-p47"></span><span id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span
id="xv.ii-Page_183"></span>18. *Dionysius did not hold that the Son was
not of one essence with the Father.*

<span id="xv.ii-p48"></span>Next he confutes them upon their charge that
he called the Son one of the things originated, and not of one essence
with the Father (once more in the first book) as follows: ‘Only in
saying that certain things were perceived to be originated and created,
I gave them as examples cursorily, as being less adequate, saying that
neither was the plant \[of one essence\] with the husbandman, nor the
boat with its builder. Then I dwelt more upon more apposite and suitable
comparisons, and went at greater length into those nearer the truth,
making out various proofs, which I wrote to you <span
id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974) in another letter, by means of which
proofs I shewed also that the charge they allege against me is untrue,
namely, that I denied Christ to be of one essence with God. For even if
I argue that I have not found this word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p49.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>) nor read it anywhere in the
Holy Scriptures, yet my subsequent reasonings, which they have
suppressed, do not discord with its meaning. For I gave the example of
human birth evidently as being homogeneous, and saying that certainly
the parents only differed from their children in not being themselves
the children, else it would follow that there was no such thing as
parents or children. And the letter, as I said before, I am prevented by
circumstances from producing, else I would have sent you the exact words
I then used, or rather a copy of all the letter: which I will do if I
have an opportunity. But I know, and recollect, that I added several
similitudes from kindred relations. For I said that a plant, sprung from
a seed or root, was different from that whence it sprung, and at the
same time entirely of one nature with it: and that a stream flowing from
a well receives another form and name,—for the well is not called a
river, nor the river a well,—and that both existed, and that the well
was as it were a father, while the river was water from the well. But
they pretend not to see these and the like written statements, but to be
as it were blind, while they try to pelt me with two unconnected
expressions like stones, from a distance, not knowing that in matters
beyond our knowledge, and which require training to apprehend,
frequently not only foreign, but even contrary examples serve to
illustrate the problem in hand.’ And in the third book he says, ‘Life
was begotten of Life, and flowed as a river from a well, and from Light
unquenchable bright Light was kindled.’

<span id="xv.ii-p50"></span>19. *Inconsistency of the Arian appeal to
Dionysius.*

<span id="xv.ii-p51"></span>Who that hears this will not set down as mad
those who suspect Dionysius of holding with Arius? For lo! in these
words, by arguments based on truth, he tramples upon his entire heresy.
For by the simile of the Brightness he destroys the statements that ‘He
was not before He was begotten,’ and ‘There was a time when He was not,’
as also by saying that His Father was never without issue. But their
allegation that He was made ‘of nothing’ he destroys by saying that the
Word was like a river from a well, and a shoot from a stock, and a child
from a parent, and Light from Light, and Life from Life. And their
barring off and separating the Word from God, he overthrows by saying
that the Triad is without division and without diminution gathered
together into the Monad. While their statement that the Son has no part
in the Father’s essence, he unequivocally tramples down by saying that
the Son is of one essence with the Father. Wherein one must wonder at
the impudence of the irreligious persons. How can they, when Dionysius
whom they claim as their partisan says that the Son is of one
essence <span id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975) , themselves go about
buzzing like gnats with the complaint that the Synod was wrong in
writing ‘of one essence?’ For if Dionysius is a friend of theirs, let
them not deny what their partisan holds. But if they think that the
expression was wrongly used, how can they reiterate that Dionysius, who
used it, held with them? the more so as he does not appear to have
written these things merely by the way, but having previously written
other letters <span id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976) , he convicts of
falsehood those who had charged him with not saying that the Son was of
one Essence with the Father, while he refutes those who thought that he
said that the Word was originated, shewing that he did not hold what
they supposed, but even if he had used the expressions, he had done so
merely in order to shew that it was the Son, not the Father, who had put
on the originated, formed, created body; for which reason the Son also
is said to have been originated, created, and formed.

<span id="xv.ii-p54"></span>20. *Dionysius must be fairly interpreted,
and allowed the benefit of his own explanatory statements.*

<span id="xv.ii-p55"></span>Clearly since he had previously used such
<span id="page_184">p. 184</span> <span
id="xv.ii-Page_184"></span>expressions, while bidding a long farewell to
the Arians, he demands a good conscience from his hearers,—being
entitled to plead the difficulty, or perhaps one may say the
incomprehensibleness of the problems concerned,—namely that they may
judge not of the words but of the meaning of the writer, and the more so
as there is very much to shew his intention. For instance he says
himself: ‘I used the examples of such relations cursorily, as being less
adequate, the plant and the husbandman for instance; while I dwelt upon
the more pertinent examples, and went at greater length into those
nearer the truth.’ But a man who says this shews that it is nearer the
truth to say that the Son is eternal and of the Father, than to say that
He is originated. For by the latter the bodily nature of the Lord is
denoted, but by the former, the eternity of His Godhead. In the
following words, for instance, he maintains, and not only so, but
deliberately and with genuine demonstrative force, that they are refuted
who charged him with not saying that the Son is of one essence with the
Father: ‘even if I did not find this expression in the Scriptures, yet
collecting from the actual Scriptures their general sense, I knew that,
being Son and Word, He could not be outside the Essence of the Father.’
For that he does not hold the Son to be a thing created or formed,—for
on this point also they have quoted him repeatedly—he says in the second
book as follows: ‘But if any one of my traducers, because I called God
the Creator the maker of all things, thinks that I mean that He is Maker
of Christ also, let him mark that I previously called Him Father, in
which term the Son also is implied. For after I said that the Father is
Maker, I added neither is He Father of the things He created, if He that
begat is to be called Father in the strict sense. For the wider sense of
the term Father we will work out in what follows. Neither is the Father
a maker, if by maker is meant simply the artificer. For among the
Greeks, philosophers are called “makers” of their own discourses. And
the Apostle speaks of a “doer” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p55.1"></span>ποιητής</span>) “of the law” ([Rom. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013)<span id="xv.ii-p55.2"></span>), for
men are called “doers” of inward qualities, such as virtue and vice; as
God said, “I looked for one to do justice, but he did wickedness ”’
([Isa. v. 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007)<span
id="xv.ii-p55.3"></span>, LXX).

<span id="xv.ii-p56"></span>21. *In what sense Dionysius said that the
Son was ‘made.’*

<span id="xv.ii-p57"></span>Of a truth one that hears this is reminded
of the divine oracle which says, ‘whithersoever the impious turns, he is
destroyed’ ([Prov. xii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#007)<span
id="xv.ii-p57.1"></span>, LXX). For lo! turning subtly in each direction
these impious men are destroyed, having even here no excuse as touching
Dionysius. For he teaches openly that the Son is not a thing made or
created, while he taxes and corrects those who accuse him of having said
that God was the creator (of Christ), in that they failed to notice that
he had previously spoken of God as Father, in which expression the Son
also is implied. But in saying thus, he shews that the Son is not one of
the creatures, and that God is not the maker but the Father of His own
Word. And since certain had ignorantly objected to him that he called
God the maker of Christ, he defends himself in various ways, shewing
that not even here is what he said open to blame. For he had said that
God was the maker of Christ in regard to His flesh, which the Word took,
and which was in itself created. But if any one were to suspect that
this referred to the Word, here too they were bound to give him a fair
hearing. ‘For as I do not hold that the Word is a creature, and call God
not His maker but His Father, even if I in passing, while referring to
the Son, call God a creator, yet even here I am able to defend myself.
For the Greek philosophers call themselves makers (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p57.2"></span>ποιηταί</span>) of their own
discourses (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p57.3"></span>λόγοι</span>), although they are their fathers;
while the Divine Scripture describes us as makers (doers) even of the
motions of our hearts, speaking of “doers” of the law and of judgment
and justice.’ So that on all sides he demonstrates not only that the Son
is not a thing made or created, but also that he himself has nothing to
do with Arian error.

<span id="xv.ii-p58"></span>22. *The relation of the Son to the Father
is essential, according to Dionysius.*

<span id="xv.ii-p59"></span>For let not any Arian suppose that he says
even anything of the following kind: The Son coexists with the Father,
so that while the names are correlated, the things are widely removed;
and whereas the Son did not always coexist with the Father, since the
Son came into being, God received from that fact the additional name of
Father, and His coexistence with Him dates from that time as happens in
the case of men. On the contrary, let him observe and bear in mind what
we have said before, and he will see that the faith of Dionysius is
correct. For in saying, ‘For there was no time when God was not Father,’
and again, ‘God at any rate is light eternal without beginning nor ever
to end, accordingly the brightness is eternally before Him and coexists
with Him, without beginning and ever-begotten, shining in His presence,’
he should make it impossible for any one to entertain any such suspicion
against <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="xv.ii-Page_185"></span>him. Moreover the examples of the well and
the river, and the root and the branch, and the breath and the vapour,
put to shame the adversaries of Christ when they reiterate the contrary
against him.

<span id="xv.ii-p60"></span>23. *Dionysius did not hold that there are
two Words.*

<span id="xv.ii-p61"></span>But since in addition to all his own
iniquities Arius has raked up this expression also as if from a
dunghill, adding that, ‘The Word is not the Father’s own, but the Word
that is in God is different, while this one, the Lord, is outside of and
has nothing to do with the Essence of the Father, and is only called
“Word” conceptually <span id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977) , and is not
by nature and of a truth Son of God, but is called Son, He too, by
adoption, as a creature;’—and since saying thus he boasts among the
ignorant as though here too he has Dionysius as his partisan;—look at
the faith of Dionysius on these points also, how he contradicts these
perversities of Arius. For in the first book he writes as follows: ‘Now
I have said that God is the well of all that is good: while the Son has
been described as the river which proceeds from Him. For word is an
efflux of intelligence, and, to borrow language applicable to men, the
intelligence that issues by the tongue is derived from the heart through
the mouth, coming out different from the word in the heart. For the
latter remains, after sending forth the other, as it was. But the other
is sent forth and flies forth, and is borne in every direction. And so
each is in the other, and each distinct from the other: and they are one
and at the same time two. Likewise the Father and the Son were said to
be one, and the One in the other.’ And in the fourth book he says: ‘For
as our intelligence utters the word from itself, as the prophet says, My
heart uttered a good word ([Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span id="xv.ii-p62.2"></span>), and,
while either is distinct from the other, occupying a place of its own
distinct from the other, the one dwelling and stirring in the heart, the
other upon the tongue,—yet they are not separated, not for a moment lost
to one another, nor is the intelligence without utterance (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p62.3"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p62.4"></span>λογος</span>), nor the word
without intelligence, but the intelligence creates the Word being
manifested in it, and the Word shews forth the intelligence having
originated in it, and the intelligence is as it were an internal word,
and the word an issuing intelligence; the intelligence passing over into
the word, while the word circulates the intelligence among the hearers:
and so the intelligence through the word gains a lodgment in the souls
of the hearers, entering in along with the word; and the intelligence is
as it were the father of the word, existing in itself, while the word is
as it were the son of the intelligence, having its origin, not of course
before the latter, nor yet concurrently with it from some external
source, but by springing out of it;—so the mighty Father and universal
Intelligence has the Son before all things as His Word, Interpreter and
Messenger.’

<span id="xv.ii-p63"></span>24. *If the Arians agree with Dionysius let
them use his language.*

<span id="xv.ii-p64"></span>These things Arius either never heard, or
heard and in his ignorance did not understand. For otherwise, had he
understood, he would not have so grossly libelled the Bishop, but
certainly would revile him also, as he did ourselves, because of his
hatred of the truth. For being an adversary of Christ, he will not
hesitate to persecute also those who hold the doctrine of Christ, as the
Lord Himself has said beforehand: ‘If they persecuted Me, they will also
persecute you’ ([Joh. xv. 20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#020)<span
id="xv.ii-p64.1"></span>). Or, if the leaders of impiety think Dionysius
was a partisan of theirs, let them write and confess what he did. Let
them write about the vine and the husbandman, the boat and the
shipbuilder; and let them at the same time confess, as he did in his
defence, the Unity of Essence, and that the Son is of the Father’s
Substance, and eternal; and the relation of intelligence and word, and
the well and the river, and the rest; in order that they may see from
the very contrast that he used the former class of language for a
special purpose, but the latter as expressing the full meaning of the
Christian Faith. And consequently let them, by adopting this language,
revoke what they have held inconsistently with it. For in what way does
the faith of Dionysius even approximate to the mischief of Arius? Does
not Arius restrict the term Word to a conceptual sense, while Dionysius
calls Him the true Word of God by nature? and while the one banishes the
Word from the Father, the other teaches that He is the Father’s own, and
inseparable from His Essence, as the word is to the intelligence and the
river to the well. If then any one is able to separate and banish the
word from the intelligence, or to put asunder the river and the well,
and wall them off, or to say that the river is of another essence than
the well, and to shew that the water is from elsewhere, or ventures to
divide the brightness from the light and to say that the brightness is
from another essence, then let him join Arius in his madness. For such
an one will cease to have the semblance even of human intelligence. But
if Nature knows <span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span
id="xv.ii-Page_186"></span>that these are indivisible, and that the
offspring of those objects is their very own, then let no one any longer
hold with Arius or slander Dionysius, but rather on these grounds admire
the plainness of his language and the correctness of his faith.

<span id="xv.ii-p65"></span>25. *The teaching of Dionysius on the Word
(continued).*

<span id="xv.ii-p66"></span>For with reference to the madness of Arius
when he says that the Word which is in God is distinct from that one of
which John said, ‘In the beginning was the Word’ ([Joh. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="xv.ii-p66.1"></span>), and
that God’s own wisdom within Himself is not the same as that to which
the Apostle refers as ‘Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God’
([1 Cor. i. 24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="xv.ii-p66.2"></span>), Dionysius resists and denounces any such
error, as you may see in the second book where he writes on the subject
as follows: ‘“In the beginning was the Word;” but it was not Word that
sent forth the Word, for “the Word was with God.” The Lord has been made
wisdom (cf. [1 Cor. i. 30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span
id="xv.ii-p66.3"></span>): He then that sent out Wisdom was not Wisdom,
for “I was she,” saith Wisdom, “in whom He delighted.” Christ is truth:
but “Blessed,” saith He, “be the God of truth”’ ([1 Esdr. iv.
40](../../../bib/apo/es1004.htm#040)<span id="xv.ii-p66.4"></span>).
There He overthrows both Sabellius and Arius, and shews both heresies to
be equal in impiety. For neither is the Father of the Word Himself Word,
nor is the offspring of the Father a creature, but the Own-begotten of
His essence. And again the Word that proceeded forth is not Father, nor
again is He one word out of many; but He alone is the Father’s Son, the
true and genuine Son by nature, Who both now is in Him, and is eternally
and indivisibly from within Him. Thus the Lord is both Wisdom and Truth,
and is not in the second place after another wisdom; but He alone it is
through whom the Father made all things, and in Him He made the manifold
essences of created things, and through Him He is made known to whom He
will, and in Him He carries on and effects His universal providence. For
Him alone does Dionysius recognise as Word of God. This is the faith of
Dionysius: for I have collected and copied a few statements from his
letters, enough to induce you to add to their number, but to put the
Arians to utter shame on account of their libel upon the Bishop. For in
all, even the details, of what he wrote, he exposed their error and
branded their heresy.

<span id="xv.ii-p67"></span>26. *How Dionysius dealt with the
Sabellians.*

<span id="xv.ii-p68"></span>Hence too it is manifest that even the
letter to Euphranor and Ammonius was written by him in a different sense
and for a special purpose. For this his defence makes plain. And in
truth this is an effective form of argument for the subversion of the
madness of Sabellius, for him that wishes for a short way with those
heretics, not to start from expressions applicable to the deity of the
Word, such as that the Son is God’s Word and Wisdom and Power, and that
‘I and the Father are one’ ([John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="xv.ii-p68.1"></span>),
lest they, perverting what is well said should use such expressions as a
pretext for their unblushing contentiousness, when they hear the texts,
‘I and the Father are one,’ and ‘he that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father.’ ([John 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="xv.ii-p68.2"></span>);
but to emphasize what is said of the Saviour as Man, as He Himself has
done, such as His hungering and thirsting, and being weary, and how He
is the Vine, and how He prayed and has suffered. For in so far as these
are lowly expressions, it becomes all the clearer that it was not the
Father that was made man. For it follows, when the Lord is called the
Vine, that there must also be a husbandman: and when He prayed, that
there was one to hear, and when He asked, that there was one to give.
Now such things shew far more readily the madness of the Sabellians,
because He that prayed was one, He that heard another, one the Vine and
another the Husbandman. For whatever expressions are cited to
distinguish between the Son and the Father are used of Him by reason of
the flesh which He bore for our sake. For created things are distinct in
nature from God. Accordingly since, the flesh being a created thing,
‘the Word,’ as John says, ‘was made flesh’ ([John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="xv.ii-p68.3"></span>),
although He is by nature the Father’s own and inseparable from Him, yet
by reason of the flesh the Father is widely distinguished from Him. For
He Himself permits that what is appropriate to the flesh should be said
of him, that it may be made plain that the body was His own and not that
of any other. But this being the sense of these sayings, Sabellius will
be the more quickly confuted, it being proved that it was not the Father
that was made flesh, but His Word, who also redeemed the flesh and
offered it to the Father. But thus having confuted and persuaded him, he
will next be able more readily to teach him concerning the deity of the
Word, how that He is the Word and Wisdom, Son and Power, Brightness and
Express Image. For it is here again a necessary inference that as the
Word exists, there must also exist the Father of the Word, and as Wisdom
exists, there exists also its Parent, and as Brightness exists so also
does the Light; and that in this manner the Son and the Father are one.

<span id="xv.ii-p69"></span><span id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span
id="xv.ii-Page_187"></span>27. *Conclusion*.

<span id="xv.ii-p70"></span>Dionysius knew this when he wrote. And by
his first letters he silenced Sabellius, and in his others he overcame
the heresy of Arius. For just as the human attributes of the Saviour
overthrew Sabellius, so against the Arian madmen one must use proofs
drawn not from the human attributes but from what betokens the deity of
the Word, lest they pervert what is said of the Lord by reason of His
Body, and think that the Word is of like nature with us men, and so
abide still in their madness. But if they also are taught about His
deity they will condemn their own error; and when they understand that
the Word was made flesh, they too will the more easily distinguish in
future the human characteristics from those which fit His deity. But
this being so, and the Bishop Dionysius having been shewn by his
writings to be pious, what will the Arian madmen do next? Convicted on
this evidence, whom will they again venture to malign? For they needs
must, since they have fallen from the foundation of the Apostles and
have no settled mind of their own, seek some support, and if they can
find none, then malign the fathers. But no one will believe them any
more even if they make efforts to libel them, for the heresy is
condemned on all hands. Unless perchance they will henceforth speak of
the devil, for he is their only partisan, or rather he it is who
suggested their heresy to them. Who then can any longer call men
‘Christians’ whose leader is the devil, and not rather ‘Diabolici,’ so
that they may bear the name not merely of adversaries of Christ, but of
partisans of the devil? Unless indeed they change round, and, rejecting
the impiety they have contrived, come to know the truth. For this will
at once be for their own good, and it is thus that it beseems us to pray
for all those that are in error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_965"></span>[177:966](2040208.htm#fr_965) <span
id="xv.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p12.1"></span>προσώπου</span>: but see also Newman’s note 2 on
*de Decr.* §14.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[178:967](2040208.htm#fr_966) <span
id="xv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p15"></span> See Epiphanius, *Hær.* lxviii. 1. The
arrangement is recognised as one of old standing in the sixth canon of
Nicæa, ‘Let the old customs which exist in Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis
remain in force, namely that the Bishop of Alexandria should have
authority over all these regions; since this is also customary for the
Bishop of Rome. Likewise also at Antioch and in the other prefectures
(it is decreed) that their prerogatives should be maintained to those
churches.’ The canon points to the natural explanation of the
arrangement: the bishops of the capitals began from a very early date to
exercise a loosely defined but gradually strengthening supervision over
those of the rest of the province. In particular, they came to exercise
a veto (and latterly more than a veto) upon the appointments to the
provincial sees (<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p15.2"></span>εἴ
τις χωρὶς γνώμης</span>, ib.). The bishops of Alexandria as well as Rome
had even at this date acquired something of the rank of secular
potentates (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p15.4"></span>δυναστεία</span>, *Socr.* vii. 11, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p15.6"></span>ἤ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p15.7"></span>δη πάλαι</span>), but not to
the extent to which it went later on (ib. 7. and supr. *Apol. Ar.* §9).

<span id="fn_967"></span>[178:968](2040208.htm#fr_967) <span
id="xv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p18.1"></span>θεραπεύειν</span>. For the word, cf. Hatch,
*Hibb. Lect.* p. 80 note.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[178:969](2040208.htm#fr_968) <span
id="xv.ii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p19.1"></span>κατ᾽ οἰκονομίαν</span>, as below §24. Cf. *de
Decr.* §25, note 5. The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p19.3"></span>οἰκονομία</span> has two main senses in
Athanasius, both derived from the classical sense of *management* or
*dispensation,* the adapting of means toward an end. (1) As in the
present passage (cf. Origen in *Migne* XI. p. 77 b, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p19.5"></span>οἰκονομικῶς</span>): a use
which is the lineal ancestor of the ill-sounding word ‘economy’ as a
term in casuistry; (2) as applied to the Incarnation of our Lord,
regarded as *the* Dispensation, the Divine Method for the salvation of
mankind. This use is very frequent in St. Athanasius (compare *Ep. Æg.*
2. and *Orat.* ii. 11), and in earlier Fathers from Ignatius (*Eph*. 18
<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p19.7"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p19.8"></span>κυοφορήθη ὑπὸ Μαρίας κατ᾽
οἰκονομίαν</span>, where Lightfoot refers to a more detailed history of
the word in his unpublished note on [Eph. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)<span id="xv.ii-p19.10"></span>)
downwards (references in Soph. *Lex. s.v.*).

<span id="fn_969"></span>[179:970](2040208.htm#fr_969) <span
id="xv.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p26"></span> See Westcott, *Introduction to the
Gospels,* Appendix C, 5.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[180:971](2040208.htm#fr_970) <span
id="xv.ii-p28.9"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p29"></span> Cf. *Orat.* i. 48, note 7, and ii. 56, note
5.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[182:972](2040208.htm#fr_971) <span
id="xv.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p44"></span> This passage is somewhat differently
rendered by Dr. Pusey in his letter on the Filioque (1876), p. 112.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[182:973](2040208.htm#fr_972) <span
id="xv.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p45"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p45.1"></span>παντελῶς</span> somewhat qualifies the
repudiation. Dionysius expressly maintained *three* Hypostases in the
Holy Trinity, in contrast to the language of Rome (*de Decr.* 26 note
7a) and the later use of Athanasius himself. But see the *Tom. ad
Antioch.* of 362, below, and *supra* p. 90, note 2. Dionysius of Rome
repudiates <span class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p45.3"></span>τρεῖς
μεμερισμένας ὑποστάσεις</span>, while Dionysius of Alexandria (in Bas.
*de Sp. S.*) maintains that unless three Hypostases be recognised, the
divine Triad is denied.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[182:974](2040208.htm#fr_973) <span
id="xv.ii-p45.5"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p46"></span> As pointed out by Newman on *De Decr.* 25,
note 9, <span class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p46.2"></span>Τριάς</span>
and <span class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p46.3"></span>Μονάς</span> are
concrete, Trinitas and Unitas abstract terms; so that while Trinitas
(and <span class="Greek"><span id="xv.ii-p46.5"></span>Μονάς</span>)
lend themselves to a Sabellian, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.ii-p46.7"></span>Τριὰς</span> and Unitas may be pressed into an
Arian sense: but each pair of terms (Greek and Latin) holds the balance
evenly between the opposite misinterpretations.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[183:975](2040208.htm#fr_974) <span
id="xv.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p49"></span> ‘To you’ is omitted in the extract *de
Decr.* 25.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[183:976](2040208.htm#fr_975) <span
id="xv.ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p52"></span> It should be noted that Dionysius while
assenting to this word, does not use it as his own.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[183:977](2040208.htm#fr_976) <span
id="xv.ii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p53"></span> Possibly to other bishops who had
questioned his teaching (Routh, *Rell.* iii. p. 380).

<span id="fn_977"></span>[185:978](2040208.htm#fr_977) <span
id="xv.ii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p62"></span> See *Orat.* ii. 37. note 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Life of Antony. (Vita Antoni.)](2040209)
