[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040172)  [Next](2040174.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.vi-p1"></span> §6. *The Trisagion wrongly explained by
Arians. Its true significance.*

<span id="xi.ii.vi-p2"></span>And how do the impious men venture to
speak folly, as they ought not, being men and unable to find out how to
describe even what is on the earth? But why do I say ‘what is on the
earth?’ Let them tell us their own nature, if they can discover how to
investigate their own nature? Rash they are indeed, and self-willed, not
trembling to form opinions of things which angels desire to look into
([1 Pet. i. 12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012.md)<span
id="xi.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>), who are so far above them, both in nature
and in rank. For what is nearer \[God\] than the Cherubim or the
Seraphim? And yet they, not even seeing Him, nor standing on their feet,
nor even with bare, but as it were with veiled faces, offer their
praises, with untiring lips doing nought else but glorify the divine and
ineffable nature with the Trisagion. And nowhere has any one of the
divinely speaking prophets, men specially selected for such vision,
reported to us that in the first utterance of the word Holy the voice is
raised aloud, while in the second it is lower, but in the third, quite
low,—and that consequently the first utterance denotes lordship, the
second subordination, and the third marks a yet lower degree. But away
with the folly of these haters of God and senseless men. For the Triad,
praised, reverenced, and adored, is one and indivisible and without
degrees (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.vi-p2.3"></span>σχηματιστός</span>). It is united without
confusion, just as the Monad also is distinguished without separation.
For the fact of those venerable living creatures ([Isa.
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#000.md), [Rev.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008)<span id="xi.ii.vi-p2.4"></span>.md)
offering their praises three times, saying ‘Holy, Holy, Holy,’ proves
that the Three Subsistences <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442.md) are
perfect, just as in saying ‘Lord,’ they declare the One Essence. They
then that depreciate the Only-begotten Son of God blaspheme God,
defaming His perfection and accusing Him of imperfection, and render
themselves liable to the severest chastisement. For he that blasphemes
any one of the Subsistences shall have remission neither in this world
nor in that which is to come. But God is able to open the eyes of their
heart to contemplate the Sun of Righteousness, in order that coming to
know Him whom they formerly set at nought, they may with unswerving
piety of mind together with us glorify Him, because to Him belongs the
kingdom, even to the Father Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_442"></span>[90:443](2040173.htm#fr_442.md) <span
id="xi.ii.vi-p2.5"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.vi-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις</span>. This expression is a
link between this tract and the *Expositio* (§2), and is one of the
indications it bears of an early date. At this time we see that
Athanasius speaks of Three ‘Hypostases,’ but qualifies his language by
the caveat (*Expos.* 2) that they are not <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.vi-p3.3"></span>μεμερισμέναι</span>. In this he follows his
Origenist predecessor Dionysius, and the language of the present passage
is that of Basil or the Gregories. But it is not the language of Athan.
himself in his later years. See above, Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) b, and
Introd. to *Tom. ad Ant.* and to *Ad Afr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Encyclical Letter. (Epistola Encyclica.)](2040174.md)
