[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040128)  [Next](2040130.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxxii-p1"></span> §32. *But who is to see Him risen, so
as to believe? Nay, God is ever invisible and known by His works only:
and here the works cry out in proof. If you do not believe, look at
those who do, and perceive the Godhead of Christ. The demons see this,
though men be blind. Summary of the argument so far.*

<span id="vii.ii.xxxii-p2"></span>But if, because He is not seen, His
having risen at all is disbelieved, it is high time for those who refuse
belief to deny the very course of Nature. For it is God’s peculiar
property at once to be invisible and yet to be known from His works, as
has been already stated above. 2. If, then, the works are not there,
they do well to disbelieve what does not appear. But if the works cry
aloud and shew it clearly, why do they choose to deny the life so
manifestly due to the Resurrection? For even if they be maimed in their
intelligence, yet even with the external senses men may see the
unimpeachable power and Godhead of Christ. 3. For even a blind man, if
he see not the sun, yet if he but take hold of the warmth the sun gives
out, knows that there is a sun above the earth. Thus let our opponents
also, even if they believe not as yet, being still blind to the truth,
yet at least knowing His power by others who believe, not deny the
Godhead of Christ and the Resurrection accomplished by Him. 4. For it is
plain that if Christ be dead, He could not be expelling demons and
spoiling idols; for a dead man the spirits would not have obeyed. But if
they be manifestly expelled by the naming of His name, it must be
evident that He is not dead; especially as spirits, seeing even what is
unseen by men, could tell if Christ were dead and refuse Him any
obedience at all. 5. But as it is, what irreligious men believe not, the
spirits see—that He is God,—and hence they fly and fall at His feet,
saying just what they uttered when He was in the body: “We <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) know Thee Who Thou art, the Holy One
of God;” and, “Ah, what have we to do with Thee, Thou Son of God? I pray
Thee, torment me not.” 6. As then demons confess Him, and His works bear
Him witness day by day, it must be evident, and let none brazen it out
against the truth, both that the Saviour raised His own body, and that
He is the true Son of God, being from Him, as from His Father, His own
Word, and Wisdom, and Power, Who in ages later took a body for the
salvation of all, and taught the world concerning the Father, and
brought death to nought, and bestowed incorruption upon all by the
promise of the Resurrection, having raised His own body as a
first-fruits of this, and having displayed it by the sign of the Cross
as a monument of victory over death and its corruption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_280"></span>[53:281](2040129.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxxii-p3"></span> Cf. Luc. iv. 34, and Marc. v. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Unbelief of Jews and scoffing of Greeks. The former confounded by
their own Scriptures. Prophecies of His coming as God and as
Man.](2040130.md)
