[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040137)  [Next](2040139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xli"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xli-p1"></span> §41. *Answer to the Greeks. Do they
recognise the Logos? If He manifests Himself in the organism of the
Universe, why not in one Body? for a human body is a part of the same
whole.*

<span id="vii.ii.xli-p2"></span>But one cannot but be utterly astonished
at the Gentiles, who, while they laugh at what is no matter for jesting,
are themselves insensible to their own disgrace, which they do not see
that they have set up in the shape of stocks and stones. 2. Only, as our
argument is not lacking in demonstrative proof, come let us put them
also to shame on reasonable grounds,—mainly from what we ourselves also
see. For what is there on our side that is absurd, or worthy of
derision? Is it merely our saying that the Word has been made manifest
in the body? But this even they will join in owning to have happened
without any absurdity, if they show themselves friends of truth. 3. If
then they deny that there is a Word of God at all, they do so
gratuitously <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) , jesting at what
they know not. 4. But if they confess that there is a Word of God, and
He ruler of the universe, and that in Him the Father has produced the
creation, and that by His Providence the whole receives light and life
and being, and that He reigns over all, so that from the works of His
providence He is known, and through Him the Father,—consider, I pray
you, whether they be not unwittingly raising the jest against
themselves. 5. The philosophers of the Greeks say that the universe is a
great body <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) ; and rightly so. For
we see it and its parts as objects of our senses. If, then, the Word of
God is in the Universe, which is a body, and has united Himself with the
whole and with all its parts, what is there surprising or absurd if we
say that He has united Himself <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311)
with man also. 6. For if it were absurd for Him to have been in a body
at all, it would be absurd for Him to be united with the whole either,
and to be giving light and movement to all things by His providence. For
the whole also is a body. 7. But if it beseems Him to unite Himself with
the universe, and to be made known in the whole, it must beseem Him also
to appear in a human body, and that by Him it should be illumined and
work. For mankind is part of the whole as well as the rest. And if it be
un<span id="page_59">p. 59</span> <span
id="vii.ii.xli-Page_59"></span>seemly for a part to have been adopted as
His instrument to teach men of His Godhead, it must be most absurd that
He should be made known even by the whole universe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_309"></span>[58:310](2040138.htm#fr_309) <span
id="vii.ii.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xli-p3"></span> Athan. here assumes, for the purpose of
his argument, the principles of the Neo-platonist schools. They were
influenced, in regard to the Logos, by Philo, but even on this subject
the germ of their teaching may be traced in Plato, especially in the
*Timæus,* (See Drummond’s *Philo,* i. 65–88, Bigg’s *Bamp. Lect.* 14,
18, 248–253, and St. Aug. *Confess.* in ‘Nicene Fathers,’ Series 1, vol.
1, p. 107 and notes.)

<span id="fn_310"></span>[58:311](2040138.htm#fr_310) <span
id="vii.ii.xli-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xli-p4"></span> Especially Plato, *Tim.* 30, &c.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[58:312](2040138.htm#fr_311) <span
id="vii.ii.xli-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xli-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.xli-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.xli-p5.2"></span>πιβεβηκέναι</span>, cf. above, 20. 4, 6. The
Union of God and Man in Christ is of course ‘hypostatic’ or personal,
and thus (*supra* 17. 1), different in kind from the union of the Word
with Creation. His argument is *ad homines.* It was not for thinkers who
identified the Universe with God to take exception to the idea of
Incarnation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His union with the body is based upon His relation to Creation as
a whole. He used a human body, since to man it was that He wished to
reveal Himself.](2040139)
