[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040136)  [Next](2040138.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xl"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xl-p1"></span> §40. *Argument (1) from the withdrawal
of prophecy and destruction of Jerusalem, (2) from the conversion of the
Gentiles, and that to the God of Moses. What more remains for the
Messiah to do, that Christ has not done?*

<span id="vii.ii.xl-p2"></span>So the Jews are trifling, and the time in
question, which they refer to the future, is actually come. For when did
prophet and vision cease from Israel, save when Christ came, the Holy of
Holies? For it is a sign, and an important proof, of the coming of the
Word of God, that Jerusalem no longer stands, nor is any prophet raised
up nor vision revealed to them,—and that very naturally. 2. For when He
that was signified was come, what need was there any longer of any to
signify Him? When the truth was there, what need any more of the shadow?
For this was the reason of their prophesying at all,—namely, till the
true Righteousness should come, and He that was to ransom the sins of
all. And this was why Jerusalem stood till then—namely, that there they
might be exercised in the types as a preparation for the reality. 3. So
when the Holy of Holies was come, naturally vision and prophecy were
sealed and the kingdom of Jerusalem ceased. For kings were to be
anointed among them only until the Holy of Holies should have been
anointed; and Jacob prophesies that the kingdom of the Jews should be
established until Him, as follows:—“The ruler <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304.md) shall not fail from Juda, nor the
Prince from his loins, until that which is laid up for him shall come;
and he is the expectation of the nations.” 4. Whence the Saviour also
Himself cried aloud and said: “The <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305.md) law and the prophets prophesied until
John.” If then there is now among the Jews <span id="page_58">p.
58</span> <span id="vii.ii.xl-Page_58"></span>king or prophet or vision,
they do well to deny the Christ that is come. But if there is neither
king nor vision, but from that time forth all prophecy is sealed and the
city and temple taken, why are they so irreligious and so perverse as to
see what has happened, and yet to deny Christ, Who has brought it all to
pass? Or why, when they see even heathens deserting their idols, and
placing their hope, through Christ, on the God of Israel, do they deny
Christ, Who was born of the root of Jesse after the flesh and henceforth
is King? For if the nations were worshipping some other God, and not
confessing the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and Moses, then, once
more, they would be doing well in alleging that God had not come. 5. But
if the Gentiles are honouring the same God that gave the law to Moses
and made the promise to Abraham, and Whose word the Jews
dishonoured,—why are they ignorant, or rather why do they choose to
ignore, that the Lord foretold by the Scriptures has shone forth upon
the world, and appeared to it in bodily form, as the Scripture said:
“The <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306.md) Lord God hath shined upon
us;” and again: “He <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307.md) sent His
Word and healed them;” and again: “Not <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308.md) a messenger, not an angel, but the
Lord Himself saved them?” 6. Their state may be compared to that of one
out of his right mind, who sees the earth illumined by the sun, but
denies the sun that illumines it. For what more is there for him whom
they expect to do, when he is come? To call the heathen? But they are
called already. To make prophecy, and king, and vision to cease? This
too has already come to pass. To expose the godlessness of idolatry? It
is already exposed and condemned. Or to destroy death? He is already
destroyed. 7. What then has not come to pass, that the Christ must do?
What is left unfulfilled, that the Jews should now disbelieve with
impunity? For if, I say,—which is just what we actually see,—there is no
longer king nor prophet nor Jerusalem nor sacrifice nor vision among
them, but even the whole earth is filled with the knowledge of God, and
Gentiles, leaving their godlessness, are now taking refuge with the God
of Abraham, through the Word, even our Lord Jesus Christ, then it must
be plain, even to those who are exceedingly obstinate, that the Christ
is come, and that He has illumined absolutely all with His light, and
given them the true and divine teaching concerning His Father. 8. So one
can fairly refute the Jews by these and by other arguments from the
Divine Scriptures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_304"></span>[57:305](2040137.htm#fr_304.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xl-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xl-p3"></span> [Gen. xlix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.ii.xl-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[57:306](2040137.htm#fr_305.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xl-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xl-p4"></span> [Matt. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.ii.xl-p4.1"></span>.
cf. Luc. xvi. 16.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[58:307](2040137.htm#fr_306.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xl-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xl-p5"></span> Cf. [Ps. cxviii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027.md)<span id="vii.ii.xl-p5.1"></span>,
and for the literal sense, [Num. vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.ii.xl-p5.3"></span>

<span id="fn_307"></span>[58:308](2040137.htm#fr_307.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xl-p5.4"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xl-p6"></span> [Ps. cvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.ii.xl-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[58:309](2040137.htm#fr_308.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xl-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xl-p7"></span> [Isa. lxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.ii.xl-p7.1"></span>
(LXX.), and the note in the (Queen’s Printers’) ‘Variorum’ Bible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Answer to the Greeks. Do they recognise the Logos? If He
manifests Himself in the organism of the Universe, why not in one Body?
for a human body is a part of the same whole.](2040138.md)
