[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040114)  [Next](2040116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xviii-p1"></span> §*18. How the Word and Power of God
works in His human actions: by casting out devils, by Miracles, by His
Birth of the Virgin.*

<span id="vii.ii.xviii-p2"></span>Accordingly, when inspired writers on
this matter speak of Him as eating and being born, understand <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) that the body, as body, was born, and
sustained with food corresponding to its nature, while God, the Word
Himself, Who <span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="vii.ii.xviii-Page_46"></span>was united with the body, while
ordering all things, also by the works He did in the body shewed Himself
to be not man, but God the Word. But these things are said of Him,
because the actual body which ate, was born, and suffered, belonged to
none other but to the Lord: and because, having become man, it was
proper for these things to be predicated of Him as man, to shew Him to
have a body in truth, and not in seeming. 2. But just as from these
things He was known to be bodily present, so from the works He did in
the body He made Himself known to be Son of God. Whence also He cried to
the unbelieving Jews; “If <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) I do
not the works of My Father, believe Me not. But if I do them, though ye
believe not Me, believe My works; that ye may know and understand that
the Father is in Me, and I in the Father.” 3. For just as, though
invisible, He is known through the works of creation; so, having become
man, and being in the body unseen, it may be known from His works that
He Who can do these is not man, but the Power and Word of God. 4. For
His charging evil spirits, and their being driven forth, this deed is
not of man, but of God. Or who that saw Him healing the diseases to
which the human race is subject, can still think Him man and not God?
For He cleansed lepers, made lame men to walk, opened the hearing of
deaf men, made blind men to see again, and in a word drove away from men
all diseases and infirmities: from which acts it was possible even for
the most ordinary observer to see His Godhead. For who that saw Him give
back <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) what was deficient to men
born lacking, and open the eyes of the man blind from his birth, would
have failed to perceive that the nature of men was subject to Him, and
that He was its Artificer and Maker? For He that gave back that which
the man from his birth had not, must be, it is surely evident, the Lord
also of men’s natural birth. 5. Therefore, even to begin with, when He
was descending to us, He fashioned His body for Himself from a Virgin,
thus to afford to all no small proof of His Godhead, in that He Who
formed this is also Maker of everything else as well. For who, seeing a
body proceeding forth from a Virgin alone without man, can fail to infer
that He Who appears in it is Maker and Lord of other bodies also? 6. Or
who, seeing the substance of water changed and transformed into wine,
fails to perceive that He Who did this is Lord and Creator of the
substance of all waters? For to this end He went upon the sea also as
its Master, and walked as on dry land, to afford evidence to them that
saw it of His lordship over all things. And in feeding so vast a
multitude on little, and of His own self yielding abundance where none
was, so that from five loaves five thousand had enough, and left so much
again over, did He shew Himself to be any other than the very Lord Whose
Providence is over all things?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_249"></span>[45:250](2040115.htm#fr_249) <span
id="vii.ii.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xviii-p3"></span> Compare *Orat.* iii. 31, note 11.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[46:251](2040115.htm#fr_250) <span
id="vii.ii.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xviii-p4"></span> [John x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037)<span
id="vii.ii.xviii-p4.1"></span>, *sq.*

<span id="fn_251"></span>[46:252](2040115.htm#fr_251) <span
id="vii.ii.xviii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xviii-p5"></span> Cf. 49. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Man, unmoved by nature, was to be taught to know God by that
sacred Manhood, Whose deity all nature confessed, especially in His
Death.](2040116)
