[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040105)  [Next](2040107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ix-p1"></span> §9. *The Word, since death alone could
stay the plague, took a mortal body which, united with Him, should avail
for all, and by partaking of His immortality stay the corruption of the
Race. By being above all, He made His Flesh an offering for our souls;
by being one with us all, he clothed us with immortality. Simile to
illustrate this.*

<span id="vii.ii.ix-p2"></span>For the Word, perceiving that no
otherwise could the corruption of men be undone save by death as a
necessary condition, while it was impossible for the Word to suffer
death, being immortal, and Son of the Father; to this end He takes to
Himself a body capable of death, that it, by partaking of the Word Who
is above all, might be worthy to die in the stead of all, and might,
because of the Word which was come <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span
id="vii.ii.ix-Page_41"></span>to dwell in it, remain incorruptible, and
that thenceforth corruption might be stayed from all by the Grace of the
Resurrection. Whence, by offering unto death the body He Himself had
taken, as an offering and sacrifice free from any stain, straightway He
put away death from all His peers by the offering of an equivalent. 2.
For being over all, the Word of God naturally by offering His own temple
and corporeal instrument for the life <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md) of all satisfied the debt by His
death. And thus He, the incorruptible Son of God, being conjoined with
all by a like nature, naturally clothed all with incorruption, by the
promise of the resurrection. For the actual corruption in death has no
longer holding-ground against men, by reason of the Word, which by His
one body has come to dwell among them. 3. And like as <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md) when a great king has entered into
some large city and taken up his abode in one of the houses there, such
city is at all events held worthy of high honour, nor does any enemy or
bandit any longer descend upon it and subject it; but, on the contrary,
it is thought entitled to all care, because of the king’s having taken
up his residence in a single house there: so, too, has it been with the
Monarch of all. 4. For now that He has come to our realm, and taken up
his abode in one body among His peers, henceforth the whole conspiracy
of the enemy against mankind is checked, and the corruption of death
which before was prevailing against them is done away. For the race of
men had gone to ruin, had not the Lord and Saviour of all, the Son of
God, come among us to meet the end of death <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_223"></span>[41:224](2040106.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="vii.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ix-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.ix-p3.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.ix-p3.2"></span>ντίψυχον</span>.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[41:225](2040106.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="vii.ii.ix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ix-p4"></span> Possibly suggested by the practice of
the emperors. Constantinople was thus dignified a few years later (326).
For this simile compare *Sermo Major de Fide,* c. 6.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[41:226](2040106.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="vii.ii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.ix-p5"></span> Or, “to put an end to death.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: By a like simile, the reasonableness of the work of redemption is
shewn. How Christ wiped away our ruin, and provided its antidote by His
own teaching. Scripture proofs of the Incarnation of the Word, and of
the Sacrifice He wrought.](2040107.md)
