[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040201)  [Next](2040203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p1.2"></span>Proof of the Catholic Sense of the Word
Son</span>. *Power, Word or Reason, and Wisdom, the names of the Son,
imply eternity; as well as the Father’s title of Fountain. The Arians
reply, that these do not formally belong to the essence of the Son, but
are names given Him; that God has many words, powers, &c. Why there is
but one Son and Word, &c. All the titles of the Son coincide in Him.*

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p2"></span>15. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>This</span> then is quite enough to expose
the infamy of the Arian heresy; for, as the Lord has granted, out of
their own words is irreligion brought home to them <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) . But come now and let us on our part
act on the offensive, and call on them for an answer; for now is fair
time, when their own ground has failed them, to question them on ours;
perhaps it may abash the perverse, and disclose to them whence they have
fallen. We have learned from divine Scripture, that the Son of God, as
was said above, is the very Word and Wisdom of the Father. For the
Apostle says, ‘Christ the power of God and the Wisdom of God <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) ;’ and John after saying, ‘And the
Word was made flesh,’ at once adds, ‘And we saw His glory, the glory as
of the Only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) ,’ so that, the Word being the
Only-begotten Son, in this Word and in Wisdom heaven and earth and all
that is therein were made. And of this Wisdom that God is Fountain we
have learned from <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850) Baruch, by
Israel’s being charged with having forsaken the Fountain of Wisdom. If
then they deny Scripture, they are at once aliens to their name, and may
fitly be called of all men atheists <span
id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) , and Christ’s enemies, for they have
brought upon themselves these names. But if they agree with us that the
sayings of Scripture are divinely inspired, let them dare to say openly
what they think in secret that God was once wordless and
wisdomless <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) ; and <span
id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span id="xiv.ii.iv-Page_160"></span>let
them in their madness <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) say,
‘There was once when He was not,’ and, ‘before His generation, Christ
was not <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854) ;’ and again let them
declare that the Fountain begat not Wisdom from itself, but acquired it
from without, till they have the daring to say, ‘The Son came of
nothing;’ whence it will follow that there is no longer a Fountain, but
a sort of pool, as if receiving water from without, and usurping the
name of Fountain <span id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855) .

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p12"></span>16. How full of irreligion this is, I
consider none can doubt who has ever so little understanding. But since
they mutter something about Word and Wisdom being only names of the
Son <span id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856) , we must ask then, If these
are only names of the Son, He must be something else beside them. And if
He is higher than the names, it is not lawful from the lesser to denote
the higher; but if He be less than the names, yet He surely must have in
Him the principle of this more honourable appellation; and this implies
his advance, which is an irreligion equal to anything that has gone
before. For He who is in the Father, and in whom also the Father is, who
says, ‘I and the Father are one <span id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857)
,’ whom he that hath seen, hath seen the Father, to say that He has been
exalted <span id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) by anything external, is
the extreme of madness. However, when they are beaten hence, and like
Eusebius and his fellows, are in these great straits, then they have
this remaining plea, which Arius too in ballads, and in his own
Thalia <span id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859) , fabled, as a new
difficulty: ‘Many words speaketh God; which then of these are we to call
Son and Word, Only-begotten of the Father <span
id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860) ?’ Insensate, and anything but
Christians <span id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861) ! for first, on using
such language about God, they conceive of Him almost as a man, speaking
and reversing His first words by His second, just as if one Word from
God were not sufficient for the framing of all things at the Father’s
will, and for His providential care of all. For His speaking many words
would argue a feebleness in them all, each needing the service of the
other. But that God should have one Word, which is the true doctrine,
both shews the power of God, and the perfection of the Word that is from
Him, and the religious understanding of them who thus believe.

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p19"></span>17. O that they would consent to confess
the truth from this their own statement! for if they once grant that God
produces words, they plainly know Him to be a Father; and acknowledging
this, let them consider that, while they are loth to ascribe one Word to
God, they are imagining that He is Father of many; and while they are
loth to say that there is no Word of God at all, yet they do not confess
that He is the Son of God,—which is ignorance of the truth, and
inexperience in divine Scripture. For if God is Father of a word at all,
wherefore is not He that is begotten a Son? And again, who should be Son
of God, but His Word? For there are not many words, or each would be
imperfect, but one is the Word, that He only may be perfect, and
because, God being one, His Image too must be one, which is the Son. For
the Son of God, as may be learnt from the divine oracles themselves, is
Himself the Word of God, and the Wisdom, and the Image, and the Hand,
and the Power; for God’s offspring is one, and of the generation from
the Father these titles are tokens <span
id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862) . For if you say the Son, you have
declared what is from the Father by nature; and if you think of the
Word, you are thinking again of what is <span id="page_161">p.
161</span> <span id="xiv.ii.iv-Page_161"></span>from Him, and what is
inseparable; and, speaking of Wisdom, again you mean just as much, what
is not from without, but from Him and in Him; and if you name the Power
and the Hand, again you speak of what is proper to essence; and,
speaking of the Image, you signify the Son; for what else is like God
but the offspring from Him? Doubtless the things, which came to be
through the Word, these are ‘founded in Wisdom’ and what are ‘founded in
Wisdom,’ these are all made by the Hand, and came to be through the Son.
And we have proof of this, not from external sources, but from the
Scriptures; for God Himself says by Isaiah the Prophet; ‘My hand also
hath laid the foundation of the earth, and My right hand hath spanned
the heavens <span id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863) .’ And again, ‘And I
will cover thee in the shadow of My Hand, by which I planted the
heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth <span
id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864) .’ And David being taught this, and
knowing that the Lord’s Hand was nothing else than Wisdom, says in the
Psalm, ‘In wisdom hast Thou made them all; the earth is full of Thy
creation <span id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865) .’ Solomon also
received the same from God, and said, ‘The Lord by wisdom founded the
earth <span id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866) ,’ and John, knowing that
the Word was the Hand and the Wisdom, thus preached, ‘In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same
was in the beginning with God: all things were made by Him, and without
Him was not anything made <span id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867) .’ And
the Apostle, seeing that the Hand and the Wisdom and the Word was
nothing else than the Son, says, ‘God, who at sundry times and in divers
manners spake in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, hath in
these last days spoken unto us by His Son, whom He hath appointed Heir
of all things, by whom also He made the ages <span
id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868) .’ And again, ‘There is one Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom are all things, and we through Him <span
id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869) .’ And knowing also that the Word, the
Wisdom, the Son Himself was the Image of the Father, he says in the
Epistle to the Colossians, ‘Giving thanks to God and the Father, which
hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light, who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath
translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son; in whom we have
redemption, even the remission of sins; who is the Image of the
Invisible God, the First-born of every creature; for by Him were all
things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions or principalities or
powers; all things were created by Him and for Him; and He is before all
things, and in Him all things consist <span
id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) .’ For as all things are created by
the Word, so, because He is the Image, are they also created in
Him <span id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) . And thus anyone who
directs his thoughts to the Lord, will avoid stumbling upon the stone of
offence, but rather will go forward to the brightness in the light of
truth; for this is really the doctrine of truth, though these
contentious men burst with spite <span id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872)
, neither religious toward God, nor abashed at their confutation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_847"></span>[159:848](2040202.htm#fr_847) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p3"></span> The main argument of the Arians was that
our lord was a Son, and *therefore* was not eternal, but of a substance
which had a beginning. \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) a.\] Accordingly
Athanasius says, ‘Having argued with them as to the meaning of their own
selected term “Son,” let us go on to others, which on the very face make
for us, such as Word, Wisdom, &c.’

<span id="fn_848"></span>[159:849](2040202.htm#fr_848) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p4"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[159:850](2040202.htm#fr_849) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p5"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[159:851](2040202.htm#fr_850) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p6"></span> Vid. supr. §12.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[159:852](2040202.htm#fr_851) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p7"></span> Vid. supr. §1. note 2, bis.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[159:853](2040202.htm#fr_852) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p8.2"></span>λογος, ἄσοφος</span>. Vid. infr., §26. This
is a frequent argument in the controversy, viz. that to deprive the
Father of His Son or substantial Word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p8.4"></span>λόγος</span>), is as great a sacrilege as to
deny His Reason, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p8.5"></span>λόγος</span>, from which the Son receives His
name. Thus *Orat.* i. §14. fin. Athan. says, ‘imputing to God’s nature
an absence of His Word (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p8.7"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p8.8"></span>λογίαν</span> or irrationality), they are
most irreligious.’ Vid. §19. fin. 24. Elsewhere, he says, ‘Is a man not
mad himself, who even entertains the thought that God is word-less and
wisdom-less? for such illustrations and such images Scripture hath
proposed, that, considering the inability of human nature to comprehend
concerning God, we might even from these, however poorly and dimly,
discern as far as is attainable.’ *Orat.* ii. 32. vid. also iii. 63. iv.
12. *Serap.* ii. 2.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[160:854](2040202.htm#fr_853) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p8.10"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p9"></span> Vid. above, §1, note 6.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[160:855](2040202.htm#fr_854) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p10"></span> These were among the original positions
of the Arians; for the former, see above, note 1; the latter is one of
those specified in the Nicene Anathema.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[160:856](2040202.htm#fr_855) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p11"></span> And so <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>πηγὴ ξηρά</span>. *Serap.* ii. 2. *Orat.* i.
§14 fin. also ii. §2, where Athanasius speaks as if those who deny that
Almighty God is Father, cannot really believe in Him as a Creator. If
the divine substance be not fruitful (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p11.4"></span>καρπογόνος</span>), but barren, as they say,
as a light which enlightens not, and a dry fountain, are they not
ashamed to maintain that He possesses the creative energy?’ Vid. also
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iv-p11.6"></span>πηγὴ
θεότητος</span>, Pseudo-Dion. *Div. Nom.* c. 2. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iv-p11.8"></span>πηγὴ ἐκ πηγῆς</span>, of
the Son, Epiphan. *Ancor.* 19. And Cyril, ‘If thou take from God His
being Father, thou wilt deny the generative power (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iv-p11.10"></span>καρπογόνον</span>) of
the divine nature so that It no longer is *perfect.* This then is a
token of its perfection, and the Son who went forth from Him apart from
time, is a pledge (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p11.12"></span>σφραγίς</span>) to the Father that He is
perfect.’ *Thesaur.* p. 37.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[160:857](2040202.htm#fr_856) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p13"></span> Arius said, as the Eunomians after him,
that the Son was not really, but only called, Word and Wisdom, which
were simply attributes of God, and the prototypes of the Son. Vid. Socr.
i. 6. Theod. *H. E.* i. 3, and *infr. Orat.* ii. 37, 38.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[160:858](2040202.htm#fr_857) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p14"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[160:859](2040202.htm#fr_858) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p15.1"></span>βελτιοῦσθαι</span>

<span id="fn_859"></span>[160:860](2040202.htm#fr_859) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p16"></span> Vid. *de Syn.* §15.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[160:861](2040202.htm#fr_860) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p17"></span> As the Arians took the title Son in
that part of its earthly sense in which it did not apply to our Lord, so
they misinterpreted the title Word also; which denoted the Son’s
immateriality and indivisible presence in the Father, but did not
express His perfection. Vid. *Orat.* ii. §34–36. *contr. Gent.* 41. *ad
Ep. Æg.* 16. Epiph. *Hær.* 65. 3. Nyss. in *Eun.* xii. p. 349. Origen
(in a passage, however, of questionable doctrine), says, ‘As there are
gods many, but to us one God the Father, and many lords, but to us one
Lord Jesus Christ, so there are many words, but we pray that in us may
exist the Word that was in the beginning, with God, and was God.’ In
*Joan.* tom. ii. 3. ‘Many things, it is acknowledged, does the Father
speak to the Son,’ say the Semiarians at Ancyra, ‘but the words which
God speaks to the Son, are not sons. They are not substances of God, but
vocal energies; but the Son, though a Word, is not such, but, being a
Son, is a substance.’ Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 12. The Semiarians are speaking
against Sabellianism, which took the same ground here as Arianism; so
did the heresy of the Samosatene, who according to Epiphanius,
considered our Lord as the internal Word, or thought. *Hær.* 65. The
term word in this inferior sense is often in Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iv-p17.2"></span>ῥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iv-p17.3"></span>ῆ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iv-p17.4"></span>μα</span>. Epiph. supr.
and Cyril, *de Incarn. Unig.* init. t. v. i. p. 679.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[160:862](2040202.htm#fr_861) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p17.6"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p18"></span> ‘If they understood and acknowledged
the characteristic idea (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p18.2"></span>χαρακτῆρα</span>) of Christianity, they
would not have said that the Lord of glory was a creature.’ *Ad Serap.*
ii. 7. In *Orat.* i. §2, he says, Arians are not Christians *because*
they are Arians, for Christians are called, not from Arius, but from
Christ, who is their only Master. Vid. also *de Syn.* §38. init. *Sent.
D.* fin. *Ad Afros.* 4. Their cruelty and cooperation with the heathen
populace was another reason. Greg. Naz. *Orat.* 25. 12.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[160:863](2040202.htm#fr_862) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p20"></span> All the titles of the Son of God are
consistent with each other, and variously represent one and the same
Person. ‘Son’ and ‘Word,’ denote His derivation; ‘Word’ and ‘Image,’ His
Similitude; ‘Word’ and ‘Wisdom,’ His immateriality; ‘Wisdom’ and ‘Hand,’
His coexistence. ‘If He is not Son, neither is He Image’ *Orat.* ii. §2.
‘How is there Word and Wisdom, unless He be a proper offspring of His
substance? ii. §22. Vid. also *Orat.* i. §20. 21. and at great length
*Orat.* iv. §20, &c. vid. also Naz. *Orat.* 30. n. 20. Basil. *contr.
Eunom.* i. 18. Hilar. *de Trin.* vii. 11. August. in *Joan.* xlviii. 6.
and *in Psalm.* xliv. (xlv.) 5.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[161:864](2040202.htm#fr_863) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p21"></span> <span id="xiv.ii.iv-p21.1"></span>[Is.
xlviii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#013)<span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p21.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[161:865](2040202.htm#fr_864) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p21.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p22"></span> [Is. li.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#016)<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[161:866](2040202.htm#fr_865) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p23"></span> [Ps. civ.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#024)<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[161:867](2040202.htm#fr_866) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p24"></span> [Prov. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#019)<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[161:868](2040202.htm#fr_867) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p25"></span> <span id="xiv.ii.iv-p25.1"></span>[John
i. 1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p25.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[161:869](2040202.htm#fr_868) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p25.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p26"></span> [Heb.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[161:870](2040202.htm#fr_869) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p27"></span> <span id="xiv.ii.iv-p27.1"></span>[1
Cor. viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p27.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[161:871](2040202.htm#fr_870) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p27.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p28"></span> <span id="xiv.ii.iv-p28.1"></span>[Col.
i. 12-17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012)<span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="fn_871"></span>[161:872](2040202.htm#fr_871) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p28.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p29"></span> Vid. a beautiful passage, *contr.
Gent.* 42, &c. Again, of men, *de Incarn.* 3. 3; also *Orat.* ii. 78.
where he speaks of Wisdom as being infused into the world on its
creation, that it might possess ‘a type and semblance of its Image.’

<span id="fn_872"></span>[161:873](2040202.htm#fr_872) <span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p30.1"></span>διαῤ& 191·αγῶσιν</span>, and so *Serap.* ii.
fin. <span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iv-p30.3"></span>διαῤ&
191·ηγνύωνται</span>. *de Syn.* 34. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p30.5"></span>διαῤ& 191·ηγύωσιν ἑαυτούς</span>. *Orat.*
ii. §23. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iv-p30.7"></span>σπαραττέτωσαν ἑαυτούς</span>. *Orat.* ii.
§64. <span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iv-p30.9"></span>τριζέτω τοὺς
ὀδόντας</span>. *Sent. D.* 16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Defence of the Council's Phrases, “from the essence,” And “one in
essence.” Objection that the phrases are not scriptural; we ought to
look at the sense more than the wording; evasion of the Arians as to the
phrase “of God” which is in Scripture; their evasion of all explanations
but those which the Council selected, which were intended to negative
the Arian formulæ; protest against their conveying any material
sense.](2040203)
