[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040174)  [Next](2040176) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="xii.i-Page_91"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to the Encyclical Epistle to the
Bishops Throughout the World.</span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>Athanasius</span> wrote the following Epistle in
the year 339. In the winter at the beginning of that year the Eusebians
held a Council at Antioch. Here they appointed Gregory to the see of
Alexandria in the place of Athanasius (see Prolegg. ch. ii. 6). ‘Gregory
was by birth a Cappadocian, and (if Nazianzen speaks of the same
Gregory, which some critics doubt) studied at Alexandria, where S.
Athanasius had treated him with great kindness and familiarity, though
Gregory afterwards took part in propagating the calumny against him of
having murdered Arsenius. Gregory was on his appointment dispatched to
Alexandria’ (Newman). The proceedings on his arrival, Lent, 339, are
related in the following Encyclical Epistle, which Athanasius forwarded
immediately before his departure for Rome to all the Bishops of the
Catholic Church. ‘It is less correct in style, as Tillemont observes,
than other of his works, as if composed in haste. In the Editions
previous to the Benedictine, it was called an “Epistle to the Orthodox
everywhere;” but Montfaucon has been able to restore the true title. He
has been also able from his <span class="c10"><span
id="xii.i-p3.2"></span>mss.</span> to make a far more important
correction, which has cleared up some very perplexing difficulties in
the history. All the Editions previous to the Benedictine read “George”
throughout for “Gregory,” and “Gregory” in the place where “Pistus”
occurs. Baronius, Tillemont, &c., had already made the alterations from
the necessity of the case’ (Newman). After comparing the violence done
to the Church with the outrage upon the Levite’s wife in [Judges
19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#000)<span id="xii.i-p3.3"></span>., he
appeals to the bishops of the universal Church to regard his cause as
their own (§1). He then recounts the details of what has happened; the
announcement by the Prefect Philagrius of the supersession of Ath. by
Gregory, the popular indignation, and its grounds (§2); the instigation
of the heathen mob by Philagrius to commit outrages upon the sacred
persons and buildings (§3); the violent intrusion of Gregory (§4); the
proceedings against himself (§5). He warns them against Gregory as an
Arian, and asks their sympathy for himself (§6), and that they will
refuse to receive any of Gregory’s letters (§7). The ‘Encyclical’ was
written just before his departure from Alexandria, where he must have
been in retirement for three weeks (Index to Festal Letter, 339)
previously, as he appears (§5) to have remained in the town till after
Easter-day. Dr. Bright (p. xv. note) sees here a proof of the inaccuracy
of the ‘Index:’ but there are other grounds for regarding it as correct
(see Prolegg. ch. v. §3, c, and Introd. to *Letters*): its chronology is
therefore adopted by the present editor. The events which led up to the
scenes described in the letter are more fully dealt with in Prolegg. ch.
ii. §6 (I), *sub fin.* and (2). It may be added that Sozomen, iii. 6 in
describing this escape of Athan., inserts the scene in the Church which
really took place in Feb. 356, while Socrates ii. 11 confuses the two
occasions even more completely. Internal evidence shews that Soz.
partially corrected Socr. by the aid of the *Hist. Aceph.* The confusion
of Gregory with George (especially easy in Latin), to which almost every
historian from Socrates and Theodoret to Neander and Newman has fallen
an occasional victim, appears to have vitiated the transcription of this
encyclical from very early times. But Sievers (p. 104) goes too far in
ascribing to that cause the insertion of a great part of §§3–5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistola Encyclica. (Encyclical Letter.)](2040176)
