[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040189)  [Next](2040191.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>.—*Letters of the
Council of Sardica to the Churches of Egypt and of Alexandria, and to
all Churches.*

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p2"></span>But when, notwithstanding, Eusebius
and his fellows proceeded without shame, disturbing the Churches, and
plotting the ruin of many, the most religious Emperors Constantius and
Constans being informed of this, commanded the Bishops from both the
West and East to meet together in the city of Sardica. In the meantime
Eusebius <span id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587.md) died: but a great
number assembled from all parts, and we challenged the associates of
Eusebius and his fellows to submit to a trial. But they, having before
their eyes the things that they had done, and perceiving that their
accusers had come up to the Council, were afraid to do this; but, while
all besides met with honest intentions, they again brought with them the
Counts <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588.md) Musonianus <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589.md) and Hesychius the Castrensian <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590.md) , that, as their custom was, they
might effect their own aims by their authority. But when the Council met
without Counts, and no soldiers were permitted to be present, they were
confounded, and conscience-stricken, because they could no longer obtain
the judgment they wished, but such only as reason and truth required.
We, however, frequently repeated our challenge, and the Council of
Bishops called upon them to come forward, saying, “You have come for the
purpose of undergoing a trial; why then do you now withdraw yourselves?
Either you ought not to have come, or having come, not to conceal
yourselves. Such conduct will prove your greatest condemnation. Behold,
Athanasius and his fellows are here, whom you accused while absent; if
therefore you think that you have any thing against them, you may
convict them face to face. But if you pretend to be unwilling to do so,
while in truth you are unable, you plainly shew yourselves to be
calumniators, and this is the decision the Council will give you.” When
they heard this they were self-condemned (for they were conscious of
their machinations and fabrications against us), and were ashamed to
appear, thereby proving themselves to have been guilty of many base
calumnies.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p7"></span>The holy Council therefore denounced
their indecent and suspicious flight <span
id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591.md) , and admitted us to make our defence;
and when we had related their conduct towards us, and proved the truth
of our statements by witnesses and other evidence, they were filled with
astonishment, and all acknowledged that our opponents had good reason to
be afraid to meet the Council, lest their guilt should be proved before
their faces. They said also, that probably they had come from the East,
supposing that Athanasius and his fellows would not appear, but that,
when they saw them confident in their cause, and challenging a trial,
they fled. They accordingly received us as injured persons who had been
falsely accused, and confirmed yet more towards us their fellowship and
love. But they deposed Eusebius’s associates in wickedness, who had
become even more shameless than himself, viz., Theodorus <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592.md) of Heraclea, Narcissus of Neronias,
Acacius <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593.md) of Cæsarea,
Stephanus <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594.md) of Antioch, Ursacius
and Valens of Pannonia, Menophantus of Ephesus, and George <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595.md) of Laodicaea; and they wrote to the
Bishops in all parts of the world, and to the diocese of each of the
injured persons, in the following terms.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p13"></span>Letter of the Council of Sardica to
the Church of Alexandria.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p14"></span>The Holy Council, by the grace of
God assembled at Sardica, from <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596.md)
Rome, Spain, Gaul, Italy, Campania, Calabria, Apulia, Africa, Sardinia,
Pannonia, Mœsia, Dacia, Noricum, Siscia, Dardania, the other Dacia,
Macedonia, Thessaly, Achaia, Epirus, Thrace, Rhodope, Palestine, Arabia,
Crete, and Egypt, to their beloved brothers, the Presbyters and Deacons,
and to all the Holy Church of God abiding at Alexandria, sends health in
the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p16"></span>37. We were not ignorant, but the
fact was <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-Page_120"></span>well known to us, even before we
received the letters of your piety, that the supporters of the
abominated heresy of the Arians were practising many dangerous
machinations, rather to the destruction of their own souls, than to the
injury of the Church. For this has ever been the object of their
unprincipled craft; this is the deadly design in which they have been
continually engaged; viz. how they may best expel from their places and
persecute all who are to be found anywhere of orthodox sentiments, and
maintaining the doctrine of the Catholic Church, which was delivered to
them from the Fathers. Against some they have laid false accusations;
others they have driven into banishment; others they have destroyed by
the punishments inflicted on them. At any rate they endeavoured by
violence and tyranny to surprise the innocence of our brother and
fellow-Bishop Athanasius, and therefore conducted their enquiry into his
case without any care, without any faith, without any sort of justice.
Accordingly having no confidence in the part they had played on that
occasion, nor yet in the reports they had circulated against him, but
perceiving that they were unable to produce any certain evidence
respecting the case, when they came to the city of Sardica, they were
unwilling to meet the Council of all the holy Bishops. From this it
became evident that the decision of our brother and fellow-Bishop Julius
was a just one <span id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597.md) ; for after
cautious deliberation and care he had determined, that we ought not to
hesitate at all about communion with our brother Athanasius. For he had
the credible testimony of eighty Bishops, and was also able to advance
this fair argument in his support that by the mere means of our dearly
beloved brethren his own Presbyters, and by correspondence, he had
defeated the design of Eusebius and his fellows, who relied more upon
violence than upon a judicial enquiry.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p18"></span>Wherefore all the Bishops from all
parts determined upon holding communion with Athanasius on the ground
that he was innocent. And let your charity also observe, that when he
came to the holy Council assembled at Sardica, the Bishops of the East
were informed of the circumstance, as we said before, both by letter,
and by injunctions conveyed by word of mouth, and were invited by us to
be present. But, being condemned by their own conscience, they had
recourse to unbecoming excuses, and set themselves to avoid the enquiry.
They demanded that an innocent man should be rejected from our
communion, as a culprit, not considering how unbecoming, or rather how
impossible, such a proceeding was. And as for the Reports which were
framed in the Mareotis by certain most wicked and most abandoned
youths <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598.md) , to whose hands one
would not commit the very lowest office of the ministry, it is certain
that they were *ex parte* statements. For neither was our brother the
Bishop Athanasius present on the occasion, nor the Presbyter Macarius
who was accused by them. And besides, their enquiry, or rather their
falsification of facts, was attended by the most disgraceful
circumstances. Sometimes heathens, sometimes Catechumens, were examined,
not that they might declare what they knew, but that they might assert
those falsehoods which they had been taught by others. And when you
Presbyters, who were in charge in the absence of your Bishop, desired to
be present at the enquiry, in order that you might shew the truth, and
disprove the falsehoods, no regard was paid to you; they would not
permit you to be present, but drove you away with insult.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p20"></span>Now although their calumnies have
been most plainly exposed before all men by these circumstances; yet we
found also, on reading the Reports, that the most iniquitous Ischyras,
who has obtained from them the empty title of Bishop as his reward for
the false accusation, had convicted himself of calumny. He declares in
the Reports that at the very time when, according to his positive
assertions, Macarius entered his cell, he lay there sick; whereas
Eusebius and his fellows had the boldness to write that Ischyras was
standing up and offering when Macarius came in.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p21"></span>38. The base and slanderous charge
which they next alleged against him, has become well-known to all men.
They raised a great outcry, affirming that Athanasius had committed
murder, and had made away with one Arsenius a Meletian Bishop, whose
loss they pretended to deplore with feigned lamentations and fictitious
tears, and demanded that the body of a living man, as if a dead one,
should be given up to them. But their fraud was not undetected; one and
all knew that the person was alive, and was numbered among the living.
And when these men, who are ready upon any opportunity, perceived their
falsehoods detected (for Arsenius shewed himself alive, and so proved
that he had not been made away with, and was not dead), yet they would
not rest, but proceeded to add other to their former calumnies <span
id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599.md) , and to slander the man by a fresh
expedient. Well; our brother Athanasius, dearly beloved, was not
confounded, but again in the <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-Page_121"></span>present case also with great boldness
challenged them to the proof, and we too prayed and exhorted them to
come to the trial, and if they were able, to establish their charge
against him. O great arrogance! O dreadful pride! or rather, if one must
say the truth, O evil and accusing conscience! for this is the view
which all men take of it.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p23"></span>Wherefore, beloved brethren, we
admonish and exhort you, above all things to maintain the right faith of
the Catholic Church. You have undergone many severe and grievous trials;
many are the insults and injuries which the Catholic Church has
suffered, but ‘he that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved <span id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600.md) .’ Wherefore even though
they still recklessly assail you, let your tribulation be unto you for
joy. For such afflictions are a sort of martyrdom, and such confessions
and tortures as yours will not be without their reward, but ye shall
receive the prize from God. Therefore strive above all things in support
of the sound faith, and of the innocence of your Bishop and our
fellow-minister Athanasius. We also have not held our peace, nor been
negligent of what concerns your comfort, but have deliberated and done
whatsoever the claims of charity demand. We sympathize with our
suffering brethren, and their affliction we consider as our own.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p25"></span>39. Accordingly we have written to
beseech our most religious and godly Emperors, that their kindness would
give orders for the release of those who are still suffering from
affliction and oppression, and would command that none of the
magistrates, whose duty it is to attend only to civil causes, give
judgment upon Clergy <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601.md) , nor
henceforward in any way, on pretence of providing for the Churches,
attempt anything against the brethren; but that every one may live, as
he prays and desires to do, free from persecution, from violence and
fraud, and in quietness and peace may follow the Catholic and Apostolic
Faith. As for Gregory, who has the reputation of being illegally
appointed by the heretics, and has been sent by them to your city, we
wish your unanimity to understand, that he has been deposed by a
judgment of the whole sacred Council, although indeed he has never at
any time been considered to be a Bishop at all. Wherefore receive gladly
your Bishop Athanasius, for to this end we have dismissed him in peace.
And we exhort all those who either through fear, or through the
intrigues of certain persons, have held communion with Gregory, that now
being admonished, exhorted, and persuaded by us, they withdraw from that
his detestable communion, and straightway unite themselves to the
Catholic Church.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p27"></span>40. But forasmuch as we have learnt
that Aphthonius, Athanasius the son of Capito, Paul, and Plutio, our
fellow Presbyters <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602.md) , have also
suffered from the machinations of Eusebius and his fellows, so that some
of them have had trial of exile, and others have fled on peril of their
lives, we have in consequence thought it necessary to make this known
unto you, that you may understand that we have received and acquitted
them also, being aware that whatever has been done by Eusebius and his
fellows against the orthodox has tended to the glory and commendation of
those who have been attacked by them. It were fitting that your Bishop
and our brother Athanasius should make this known to you respecting
them, to his own respecting his own; but as for more abundant testimony
he wished the holy Council also to write to you, we deferred not to do
so, but hastened to signify this unto you, that you may receive them as
we have done, for they also are deserving of praise, because through
their piety towards Christ they have been thought worthy to endure
violence at the hands of the heretics.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p29"></span>What decrees have been passed by the
holy Council against those who are at the head of the Arian heresy, and
have offended against you, and the rest of the Churches, you will learn
from the subjoined documents <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603.md) .
We have sent them to you, that you may understand from them that the
Catholic Church will not overlook those who offend against her.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p31"></span>Letter of the Council of Sardica to
the Bishops of Egypt and Libya.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p32"></span>The holy Council, by the grace of
God assembled at Sardica, to the Bishops of Egypt and Libya, their
fellow-ministers and dearly beloved brethren, sends health in the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p33"></span>41. We were not ignorant <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604.md) , but the fact was well known to us,
even before we received the letters of your piety, that the supporters
of the abominated heresy of the Arians were practising many dangerous
machinations, rather to the destruction of their own souls, than to the
injury of the Church. For this has ever been the object of their craft
and villainy: this is the deadly design in which they have been
continually engaged, viz. how they may best expel from their places and
persecute all who are to be found anywhere of orthodox sentiments, and
maintaining the doctrine of the <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-Page_122"></span>Catholic Church, which was delivered
to them from the Fathers. Against some they have laid false accusations;
others they have driven into banishment; others they have destroyed by
the punishments inflicted on them. At any rate they endeavoured by
violence and tyranny to surprise the innocence of our brother and
fellow-Bishop Athanasius, and therefore conducted their enquiry into his
case without any faith, without any sort of justice. Accordingly having
no confidence in the part they had played on that occasion, nor yet in
the reports they had circulated against him, but perceiving that they
were unable to produce any certain evidence respecting the case, when
they came to the city of Sardica, they were unwilling to meet the
Council of all the holy Bishops. From this it became evident that the
decision of our brother and fellow-Bishop Julius was a just one; for
after cautious deliberation and care he had decided, that we ought not
to hesitate at all about communion with our brother Athanasius. For he
had the credible testimony of eighty Bishops, and was also able to
advance this fair argument in his support, that by the mere means of our
dearly beloved brethren his own Presbyters, and by correspondence, he
had defeated the designs of Eusebius and his fellows, who relied more
upon violence than upon a judicial inquiry.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p35"></span>Wherefore all the Bishops from all
parts determined upon holding communion with Athanasius on the ground
that he was innocent. And let your charity also observe, that when he
came to the holy Council assembled at Sardica, the Bishops of the East
were informed of the circumstance, as we said before, both by letter,
and by injunctions conveyed by word of mouth, and were invited by us to
be present. But, being condemned by their own conscience, they had
recourse to unbecoming excuses, and began to avoid the enquiry. They
demanded that an innocent man should be rejected from our communion, as
a culprit, not considering how unbecoming, or rather how impossible,
such a proceeding was. And as for the reports which were framed in the
Mareotis by certain most wicked and abandoned youths, to whose hands one
would not commit the very lowest office of the ministry, it is certain
that they were *ex parte* statements. For neither was our brother the
Bishop Athanasius present on the occasion, nor the Presbyter Macarius,
who was accused by them. And besides, their enquiry, or rather their
falsification of facts, was attended by the most disgraceful
circumstances. Sometimes Heathens, sometimes Catechumens, were examined,
not that they might declare what they knew, but that they might assert
those falsehoods which they had been taught by others. And when you
Presbyters, who were in charge in the absence of your Bishop, desired to
be present at the enquiry, in order that you might shew the truth, and
disprove falsehood, no regard was paid to you; they would not permit you
to be present, but drove you away with insult.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p36"></span>Now although their calumnies have
been most plainly exposed before all men by these circumstances; yet we
found also, on reading the Reports, that the most iniquitous Ischyras,
who has obtained from them the empty title of Bishop as his reward for
the false accusation, had convicted himself of calumny. He declares in
the Reports, that at the very time when, according to his positive
assertions, Macarius entered his cell, he lay there sick; whereas
Eusebius and his fellows had the boldness to write that Ischyras was
standing offering when Macarius came in.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p37"></span>42. The base and slanderous charge
which they next alleged against him has become well known unto all men.
They raised a great outcry, affirming that Athanasius had committed
murder, and made away with one Arsenius a Meletian Bishop, whose loss
they pretended to deplore with feigned lamentations, and fictitious
tears, and demanded that the body of a living man, as if a dead one,
should be given up to them. But their fraud was not undetected; one and
all knew that the person was alive, and was numbered among the living.
And when these men, who are ready upon any opportunity, perceived their
falsehood detected (for Arsenius shewed himself alive, and so proved
that he had not been made away with, and was not dead), yet they would
not rest, but proceeded to add other to their former calumnies, and to
slander the man by a fresh expedient. Well: our brother Athanasius,
dearly beloved, was not confounded, but again in the present case also
with great boldness challenged them to the proof, and we too prayed and
exhorted them to come to the trial, and if they were able, to establish
their charge against him. O great arrogance! O dreadful pride! or
rather, if one must say the truth, O evil and accusing conscience! for
this is the view which all men take of it.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p38"></span>Wherefore, beloved brethren, we
admonish and exhort you, above all things, to maintain the right faith
of the Catholic Church. You have undergone many severe and grievous
trials; many are the insults and injuries which the Catholic Church has
suffered, but ‘he that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605.md) .’ Wherefore, even though
they <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-Page_123"></span>shall still recklessly assail you,
let your tribulation be unto you for joy. For such afflictions are a
sort of martyrdom, and such confessions and tortures as yours will not
be without their reward, but ye shall receive the prize from God.
Therefore strive above all things in support of the sound Faith, and of
the innocence of your Bishop and our brother Athanasius. We also have
not held our peace, nor been negligent of what concerns your comfort,
but have deliberated and done whatsoever the claims of charity demand.
We sympathize with our suffering brethren, and their afflictions we
consider as our own, and have mingled our tears with yours. And you,
brethren, are not the only persons who have suffered: many others also
of our brethren in ministry have come hither, bitterly lamenting these
things.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p40"></span>43. Accordingly, we have written to
beseech our most religious and godly Emperors, that their kindness would
give orders for the release of those who are still suffering from
affliction and oppression, and would command that none of the
magistrates, whose duty it is to attend only to civil causes, give
judgment upon Clergy, nor henceforward in any way, on pretence of
providing for the Churches, attempt anything against the brethren, but
that every one may live, as he prays and desires to do, free from
persecution, from violence and fraud, and in quietness and peace may
follow the Catholic and Apostolic Faith. As for Gregory, who has the
reputation of being illegally appointed by the heretics, and who has
been sent by them to your city, we wish your unanimity to understand,
that he has been deposed by the judgment of the whole sacred Council,
although indeed he has never at any time been considered to be a Bishop
at all. Wherefore receive gladly your Bishop Athanasius; for to this end
we have dismissed him in peace. And we exhort all those, who either
through fear, or through intrigues of certain persons, have held
communion with Gregory, that being now admonished, exhorted, and
persuaded by us, they withdraw from his detestable communion, and
straightway unite themselves to the Catholic Church.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p41"></span>What decrees have been passed by the
holy Council against Theodorus, Narcissus, Stephanus, Acacius,
Menophantus, Ursacius, Valens, and George <span
id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606.md) , who are the heads of the Arian
heresy, and have offended against you and the rest of the Churches, you
will learn from the subjoined documents. We have sent them to you, that
your piety may assent to our decisions, and that you may understand from
them, that the Catholic Church will not overlook those who offend
against her.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p43"></span>Encyclical Letter of the Council of
Sardica.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p44"></span>The holy Council <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607.md) , by the grace of God, assembled at
Sardica, to their dearly beloved brethren, the Bishops and
fellow-Ministers of the Catholic Church every where, sends health in the
Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p46"></span>44. The Arian madmen have dared
repeatedly to attack the servants of God, who maintain the right faith;
they attempted to substitute a spurious doctrine, and to drive out the
orthodox; and at last they made so violent an assault against the Faith,
that it became known even to the piety of our most religious Emperors.
Accordingly, the grace of God assisting them, our most religious
Emperors have themselves assembled us together out of different
provinces and cities, and have permitted this holy Council to be held in
the city of Sardica; to the end that all dissension may be done away,
and all false doctrine being driven from us, Christian godliness may
alone be maintained by all men. The Bishops of the East also attended,
being exhorted to do so by the most religious Emperors, chiefly on
account of the reports they have so often circulated concerning our
dearly beloved brethren and fellow-ministers Athanasius, Bishop of
Alexandria, and Marcellus, Bishop of Ancyro-Galatia. Their calumnies
have probably already reached you, and perhaps they have attempted to
disturb your ears, that you may be induced to believe their charges
against the innocent, and that they may obliterate from your minds any
suspicions respecting their own wicked heresy. But they have not been
permitted to effect this to any great extent; for the Lord is the
Defender of His Churches, Who endured death for their sakes and for us
all, and provided access to heaven for us all through Himself. When
therefore Eusebius and his fellows wrote long ago to Julius our brother
and Bishop of the Church of the Romans, against our forementioned
brethren, that is to say, Athanasius, Marcellus, and Asclepas <span
id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608.md) , the Bishops from the other parts
wrote also, testifying to the innocence of our fellow-minister
Athana<span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-Page_124"></span>sius, and declaring that the
representations of Eusebius and his fellows were nothing else but mere
falsehood and calumny.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p48"></span>And indeed their calumnies were
clearly proved by the fact that, when they were invited to a Council by
our dearly beloved fellow-minister Julius, they would not come, and also
by what was written to them by Julius himself. For had they had
confidence in the measures and the acts in which they were engaged
against our brethren, they would have come. And besides, they gave a
still more evident proof of their conspiracy by their conduct in this
great and holy Council. For when they arrived at the city of Sardica,
and saw our brethren Athanasius, Marcellus, Asclepas, and the rest, they
were afraid to come to a trial and though they were repeatedly invited
to attend, they would not obey the summons. Although all we Bishops met
together, and above all that man of most happy old age, Hosius, one who
on account of his age, his confession, and the many labours he has
undergone, is worthy of all reverence; and although we waited and urged
them to come to the trial, that in the presence of our fellow-ministers
they might establish the truth of those charges which they had
circulated and written against them in their absence; yet they would not
come, when they were thus invited, as we said before, thus giving proof
of their calumnies, and almost proclaiming to the world by this their
refusal, the plot and conspiracy in which they have been engaged. They
who are confident of the truth of their assertions are able to make them
good against their opponents face to face. But as they would not meet
us, we think that no one can now doubt, however they may again have
recourse to their bad practices, that they possess no proof against our
fellow-ministers, but calumniate them in their absence, while they avoid
their presence.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p49"></span>45. They fled, beloved brethren, not
only on account of the calumnies they had uttered, but because they saw
that those had come who had various charges to advance against them. For
chains and irons were brought forward which they had used; persons
appeared who had returned from banishment; there came also our brethren,
kinsmen of those who were still detained in exile, and friends of such
as had perished through their means. And what was the most weighty
ground of accusation, Bishops were present, one <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609.md) of whom brought forward the irons and
chains which they had caused him to wear, and others appealed to the
death which had been brought about by their calumnies. For they had
proceeded to such a pitch of madness, as even to attempt to destroy
Bishops; and would have destroyed them, had they not escaped their
hands. Our fellow-ministers, Theodulus of blessed memory <span
id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610.md) , died during his flight from their
false accusations, orders having been given in consequence of these to
put him to death. Others also exhibited sword-wounds; and others
complained that they had been exposed to the pains of hunger through
their means. Nor were they ordinary persons who testified to these
things, but whole Churches, in whose behalf legates appeared <span
id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611.md) , and told us of soldiers sword in
hand, of multitudes armed with clubs, of the threats of judges, of the
forgery of false letters. For there were read certain false letters of
Theognius and his fellows against our fellow-ministers Athanasius,
Marcellus, and Asclepas, written with the design of exasperating the
Emperors against them; and those who had then been Deacons of Theognius
proved the fact. From these men, we heard of virgins stripped naked,
churches burnt, ministers in custody, and all for no other end, but only
for the sake of the accursed heresy of the Arian madmen, whose communion
whoso refused was forced to suffer these things.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p53"></span>When they perceived then how matters
lay, they were in a strait what course to choose. They were ashamed to
confess what they had done, but were unable to conceal it any longer.
They therefore came to the city of Sardica, that by their arrival they
might seem to remove suspicion from themselves of such offences. But
when they saw those whom they had calumniated, and those who had
suffered at their hands; when they had before their eyes their accusers
and the proofs of their guilt, they were unwilling to come forward,
though invited by our fellow-ministers Athanasius, Marcellus, and
Asclepas, who with great freedom complained of their conduct, and urged
and challenged them to the trial, promising not only to refute their
calumnies, but also to bring proof of the offences which they had
committed against <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-Page_125"></span>their Churches. But they were seized
with such terrors of conscience, that they fled; and in doing so they
exposed their own calumnies and confessed by running away the offences
of which they had been guilty.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p54"></span>46. But although their malice and
their calumnies have been plainly manifested on this as well as on
former occasions, yet that they may not devise means of practising a
further mischief in consequence of their flight, we have considered it
advisable to examine the part they have played according to the
principles of truth; this has been our purpose, and we have found them
calumniators by their acts, and authors of nothing else than a plot
against our brethren in ministry. For Arsenius, who they said had been
murdered by Athanasius, is still alive, and is numbered among the
living; from which we may infer that the reports they have spread abroad
on other subjects are fabrications also. And whereas they spread abroad
a rumour concerning a cup, which they said had been broken by Macarius
the Presbyter of Athanasius, those who came from Alexandria, the
Mareotis, and the other parts, testified that nothing of the kind had
taken place. And the Egyptian Bishops <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612.md) who wrote to Julius our
fellow-minister, positively affirmed that there had not arisen among
them even any suspicion whatever of such a thing.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p56"></span>Moreover, the Reports, which they
say they have to produce against him, are, as is notorious, *ex parte*
statements; and even in the formation of these very Reports, Heathens
and Catechumens were examined; one of whom, a Catechumen, said <span
id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613.md) in his examination that he was present
in the room when Macarius broke in upon them; and another declared, that
Ischyras of whom they speak so much, lay sick in his cell at the time;
from which it appears that the Mysteries were never celebrated at all,
because Catechumens were present, and also that Ischyras was not
present, but was lying sick on his bed. Besides, this most worthless
Ischyras, who has falsely asserted, as he was convicted of doing, that
Athanasius had burnt some of the sacred books, has himself confessed
that he was sick, and was lying in his bed when Macarius came; from
which it is plain that he is a slanderer. Nevertheless, as a reward for
these his calumnies, they have given to this very Ischyras the title of
Bishop, although he is not even a Presbyter. For two Presbyters, who
were once associated with Meletius, but were afterwards received by the
blessed Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, and are now with Athanasius,
appeared before the Council, and testified that he was not even a
Presbyter of Meletius, and that Meletius never had either Church or
Minister in the Mareotis. And yet this man, who has never been even a
Presbyter, they have now brought forward as a Bishop, that by this name
they may have the means of overpowering those who are within hearing of
his calumnies.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p58"></span>47. The book of our fellow-minister
Marcellus was also read, by which the fraud of Eusebius and his fellows
was plainly discovered. For what Marcellus had advanced by way of
enquiry <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614.md) , they falsely
represented as his professed opinion; but when the subsequent parts of
the book were read, and the parts preceding the queries themselves, his
faith was found to be correct. He had never pretended, as they
positively affirmed <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615.md) , that the
Word of God had His beginning from holy Mary, nor that His kingdom had
an end; on the contrary he had written that His kingdom was both without
beginning and without end. Our fellow-minister Asclepas also produced
Reports which had been drawn up at Antioch in the presence of his
accusers and Eusebius of Cæsarea, and proved that he was innocent by the
declarations of the Bishops who judged his cause <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616.md) . They had good reason therefore,
dearly beloved brethren, for not hearkening to our frequent summons, and
for deserting the Council. They were driven to this by their own
consciences; but their flight only confirmed the proof of their own
calumnies, and caused those things to be believed against them, which
their accusers, who were present, were asserting and arguing. But
besides all these things, they had not only received those who were
formerly degraded and ejected on account of the heresy of Arius, but had
even promoted them to a higher station, advancing Deacons to the
Presbytery, and of Presbyters making Bishops, for no other end, but that
they might disseminate and spread abroad impiety, and corrupt the
orthodox faith.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p62"></span>48. Their leaders are now, after
Eusebius and his fellows, Theodorus of Heraclea, Narcissus of Neronias
in Cilicia, Stephanus of Antioch, George of Laodicea, Acacius of Cæsarea
in Palestine, Menophantus of Ephesus in Asia, Ursacius of Singidunum in
Mœsia, and Valens of Mursa in Pannonia <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617.md) . These men would not permit those who
came with them from the East to meet the holy Council, nor even to
approach the Church of God; but as they were coming to Sardica, they
held Councils in <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-Page_126"></span>various places by themselves, and
made an engagement under threats, that when they came to Sardica, they
would not so much as appear at the trial, nor attend the assembling of
the holy Council, but simply coming and making known their arrival as a
matter of form, would speedily take to flight. This we have been able to
ascertain from our fellow-ministers, Macarius of Palestine and Asterius
of Arabia <span id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618.md) , who after coming in
their company, separated themselves from their unbelief. These came to
the holy Council, and complained of the violence they had suffered, and
said that no right act was being done by them; adding that there were
many among them who adhered to orthodoxy, but were prevented by those
men from coming hither, by means of the threats and promises which they
held out to those who wished to separate from them. On this account it
was that they were so anxious that all should abide in one dwelling, and
would not suffer them to be by themselves even for the shortest space of
time.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p65"></span>49. Since then it became us not to
hold our peace, nor to pass over unnoticed their calumnies,
imprisonments, murders, wounds, conspiracies by means of false letters,
outrages, stripping of the virgins, banishments, destruction of the
Churches, burnings, translations from small cities to larger dioceses,
and above all, the rising of the ill-named Arian heresy by their means
against the orthodox faith; we have therefore pronounced our dearly
beloved brethren and fellow-ministers Athanasius, Marcellus, and
Asclepas, and those who minister to the Lord with them, to be innocent
and clear of offence, and have written to the diocese of each, that the
people of each Church may know the innocence of their own Bishop, and
may esteem him as their Bishop and expect his coming.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p66"></span>And as for those who like
wolves <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619.md) have invaded their
Churches, Gregory at Alexandria, Basil at Ancyra, and Quintianus at
Gaza, let them neither give them the title of Bishop, nor hold any
communion at all with them, nor receive letters <span
id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620.md) from them, nor write to them. And for
Theodorus, Narcissus, Acacius, Stephanus, Ursacius, Valens, Menophantus,
and George, although the last from fear did not come from the East, yet
because he was deposed by the blessed Alexander, and because both he and
the others were connected with the Arian madness, as well as on account
of the charges which lie against them, the holy Council has unanimously
deposed them from the Episcopate, and we have decided that they not only
are not Bishops, but that they are unworthy of holding communion with
the faithful.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p69"></span>For they who separate the Son and
alienate the Word from the Father, ought themselves to be separated from
the Catholic Church and to be alien from the Christian name. Let them
therefore be anathema to you, because they have ‘corrupted the word of
truth <span id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621.md) .’ It is an Apostolic
injunction <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622.md) , ‘If any man preach
any other Gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be
accursed.’ Charge your people that no one hold communion with them, for
there is no communion of light with darkness; put away from you all
these, for there is no concord of Christ in Belial <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623.md) . And take heed, dearly beloved, that
ye neither write to them, nor receive letters from them; but desire
rather, brethren and fellow-ministers, as being present in spirit <span
id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624.md) with our Council, to assent to our
judgments by your subscriptions <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625.md)
, to the end that concord may be preserved by all our fellow-ministers
everywhere. May Divine Providence protect and keep you, dearly beloved
brethren, in sanctification and joy.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p75"></span>I, Hosius, Bishop, have subscribed
this, and all the rest likewise.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p76"></span>This is the letter which the Council
of Sardica sent to those who were unable to attend, and they on the
other hand gave their judgment in accordance; and the following are the
names both of those Bishops who subscribed in the Council, and of the
others also.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p77"></span>50. Hosius of Spain <span
id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626.md) , Julius of Rome by his Presbyters
Archidamus and Philoxenus, Protogenes of Sardica, Gaudentius,
Macedonius, Severus, Prætextatus, Ursicius, Lucillus, Eugenius,
Vitalius, Calepodius, Florentius, Bassus, Vincentius, Stercorius,
Palladius, Domitianus, Chalbis, Gerontius, Protasius, Eulogus,
Porphyrius, Dioscorus, Zosimus, Januarius, Zosimus, Alexander,
Eutychius, Socrates, Diodorus, Martyrius, Eutherius, Eucarpus,
Athenodorus, Irenæus, <span id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-Page_127"></span>Julianus, Alypius, Jonas, Aetius,
Restitutus, Marcellinus, Aprianus, Vitalius, Valens, Hermogenes, Castus,
Domitianus, Fortunatius, Marcus, Annianus, Heliodorus, Musæus, Asterius,
Paregorius, Plutarchus, Hymenæus, Athanasius, Lucius, Amantius, Arius,
Asclepius, Dionysius, Maximus, Tryphon, Alexander, Antigonus, Ælianus,
Petrus, Symphorus, Musonius, Eutychus, Philologius, Spudasius, Zosimus,
Patricius, Adolius, Sapricius <span id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p80"></span>From Gaul the following;
Maximianus <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628.md) , Verissimus <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629.md) , Victurus, Valentinus <span
id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630.md) , Desiderius, Eulogius, Sarbatius,
Dyscolius <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631.md) , Superior, Mercurius,
Declopetus, Eusebius, Severinus <span id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632.md)
, Satyrus, Martinus, Paulus, Optatianus, Nicasius, Victor <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633.md) , Sempronius, Valerinus, Pacatus,
Jesses, Ariston, Simplicius, Metianus, Amantus <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634.md) , Amillianus, Justinianus,
Victorinus <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635.md) , Satornilus,
Abundantius, Donatianus, Maximus.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p89"></span>From Africa; Nessus, Gratus <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636.md) , Megasius, Coldæus, Rogatianus,
Consortius, Rufinus, Manninus, Cessilianus, Herennianus, Marianus,
Valerius, Dynamius, Mizonius, Justus, Celestinus, Cyprianus, Victor,
Honoratus, Marinus, Pantagathus, Felix, Baudius, Liber, Capito,
Minervalis, Cosmus, Victor, Hesperio, Felix, Severianus, Optantius,
Hesperus, Fidentius, Salustius, Paschasius.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p91"></span>From Egypt; Liburnius, Amantius,
Felix, Ischyrammon, Romulus, Tiberinus, Consortius, Heraclides,
Fortunatius, Dioscorus, Fortunatianus, Bastamon, Datyllus, Andreas,
Serenus, Arius, Theodorus, Evagoras, Helias, Timotheus, Orion,
Andronicus, Paphnutius, Hermias, Arabion, Psenosiris, Apollonius, Muis,
Sarapampon <span id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637.md) , Philo, Philippus,
Apollonius, Paphnutius, Paulus, Dioscorus, Nilammon, Serenus, Aquila,
Aotas, Harpocration, Isac, Theodorus, Apollos, Ammonianus, Nilus,
Heraclius, Arion, Athas, Arsenius, Agathammon, Theon, Apollonius,
Helias, Paninuthius, Andragathius, Nemesion, Sarapion, Ammonius,
Ammonius, Xenon, Gerontius, Quintus, Leonides, Sempronianus, Philo,
Heraclides, Hieracys, Rufus, Pasophius, Macedonius, Apollodorus,
Flavianus, Psaes, Syrus, Apphus, Sarapion, Esaias, Paphnutius,
Timotheus, Elurion, Gaius, Musæus, Pistus, Heraclammon, Heron, Helias,
Anagamphus, Apollonius, Gaius, Philotas, Paulus, Tithoes, Eudæmon,
Julius.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p93"></span>Those on the road <span
id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638.md) of Italy are Probatius, Viator,
Facundinus, Joseph, Numedius, Sperantius, Severus, Heraclianus,
Faustinus, Antoninus, Heraclius, Vitalius, Felix, Crispinus, Paulianus.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p95"></span>From Cyprus; Auxibius, Photius,
Gerasius, Aphrodisius, Irenicus, Nunechius, Athanasius, Macedonius,
Triphyllius, Spyridon, Norbanus, Sosicrates.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p96"></span>From Palestine; Maximus, Aetius,
Arius, Theodosius, Germanus, Silvanus, Paulus, Claudius, Patricius,
Elpidius, Germanus, Eusebius, Zenobius, Paulus, Petrus.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p97"></span>These are the names of those who
subscribed to the acts of the Council; but there are very many beside,
out of Asia, Phrygia, and Isauria <span
id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639.md) , who wrote in my behalf before this
Council was held, and whose names, nearly sixty-three in number, may be
found in their own letters. They amount altogether to three hundred and
forty-four <span id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640.md) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_587"></span>[119:588](2040190.htm#fr_587.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p3"></span> Of Nicodemia.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[119:589](2040190.htm#fr_588.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p4"></span> *Hist. Ar.* 15.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[119:590](2040190.htm#fr_589.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p5"></span> Musonian was originally of Antioch,
and his name Strategius; he had been promoted and honoured with a new
name by Constantine, for whom he had collected information about the
Manichees. Amm. Marc. xv. 13, §1. In 354, he was Prætorian Prefect of
the East. (vid. *de Syn.* 1, note 1.) Libanius praises him.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[119:591](2040190.htm#fr_590.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p6"></span> The Castrensians were the officers
of the palace; castra, as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p6.2"></span>στρατόπεδον</span>, infr. §86. being at
this time used for the Imperial Court. vid. Gothofred in Cod. Theod. vi.
30. p. 218. Du Cange *in voc.*

<span id="fn_591"></span>[119:592](2040190.htm#fr_591.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p8"></span> To Philippopolis.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[119:593](2040190.htm#fr_592.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p9"></span> p. 111, note 2.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[119:594](2040190.htm#fr_593.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p10"></span> \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §8 (2) b.\]

<span id="fn_594"></span>[119:595](2040190.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p11"></span> *Hist. Arian.* §20.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[119:596](2040190.htm#fr_595.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p12"></span> \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) c. 1. and
§8 (2) c.\]

<span id="fn_596"></span>[119:597](2040190.htm#fr_596.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p15"></span> Vid. supr. p. 100, where Isauria,
Thessaly, Sicily, Britain, &c., added. Also Theod. *H. E.* ii. 6. vid.
p. 120 note 9 a.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[120:598](2040190.htm#fr_597.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p17"></span> Vid. infr. §51, note.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[120:599](2040190.htm#fr_598.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p19"></span> Supr. p. 107, note 9.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[120:600](2040190.htm#fr_599.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p22"></span> Vid. *supr.* §36. *infr.* §87.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[121:601](2040190.htm#fr_600.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p24"></span> [Matt. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[121:602](2040190.htm#fr_601.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p26"></span> Vid. Bingham. Antiqu. V. ii. 5. &c.
Gieseler *Eccl. Hist.* vol. I. p. 242. Bassi. *Biblioth. Jur.* t. l. p.
276. Bellarm. *de C eric.* 28.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[121:603](2040190.htm#fr_602.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p28"></span> Supr. p. 109.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[121:604](2040190.htm#fr_603.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p30"></span> Vid. Encycl. Letter, *infr.* §46.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[121:605](2040190.htm#fr_604.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p34"></span> It will be observed that this
Letter is nearly a transcript of the foregoing. It was first printed in
the Benedictine Edition.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[122:606](2040190.htm#fr_605.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p39"></span> [Matt. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[123:607](2040190.htm#fr_606.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p42"></span> §36.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[123:608](2040190.htm#fr_607.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p45"></span> Vid. Theod. *Hist.* ii. 6. Hil.
*Fragm.* ii.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[123:609](2040190.htm#fr_608.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p47"></span> Asclepas, or Asclepius of Gaza,
Epiph. *Hær.* 69. 4. was one of the Nicene Fathers, and according to
Theod. *Hist.* i. 27. was at the Council of Tyre, which Athan. also
attended, but only by compulsion. According to the Eusebians at
Philippopolis, they had deposed him \[17 years previously, but the
number must be corrupt, or the statement incorrect\]. They state,
however, at the same time, that he had been condemned by Athanasius and
Marcellus, vid. Hilar. *Fragm.* iii. 13. Sozomen, *Hist.* iii. 8. says
that they deposed him on the charge of having overturned an altar; and,
after Athan. *infr.* §47, that he was acquitted at Sardica on the ground
that Eusebius of Cæsarea and others had reinstated him in his see
(before 339). There is mention of a Church built by him in Gaza ap.
Bolland. Febr. 26. Vit. L. Porphyr. n. 20. p. 648.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[124:610](2040190.htm#fr_609.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p50"></span> Perhaps Lucius of Hadrianople, says
Montfaucon, referring to Apol. *de Fug.* §3. vid. also *Hist. Arian.*
19.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[124:611](2040190.htm#fr_610.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p51"></span> Theodulus, Bishop of Trajanopolis
in Thrace, who is here spoken of as deceased, seems to have suffered
this persecution from the Eusebians upon their retreat from Sardica,
vid. Athan. *Hist. Arian.* §19. We must suppose then with Montfaucon,
that the Council, from whom this letter proceeds, sat some considerable
time after that retreat, and that the proceedings spoken of took place
in the interval. Socrates, however, makes Theodulus survive Constans,
who died 350. *H. E.* ii. 26.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[124:612](2040190.htm#fr_611.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p52"></span> The usual proceeding of the Arians
was to retort upon the Catholics the charges which they brought against
them, supr. §33, note 4. Accordingly, in their Encyclical from
Philippopolis, they say that “a vast multitude had congregated at
Sardica, of wicked and abandoned persons, from Constantinople and
Alexandria; who lay under charges of murder, blood, slaughter, robbery,
plunder, spoiling, and all nameless sacrileges and crimes; who had
broken altars, burnt Churches, ransacked private houses,” &c. &c. Hil.
*Fragm.* iii. 19.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[125:613](2040190.htm#fr_612.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p55"></span> p. 101.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[125:614](2040190.htm#fr_613.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p57"></span> Cf. §28.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[125:615](2040190.htm#fr_614.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p59"></span> Cf. *de Decr*. §25, note

<span id="fn_615"></span>[125:616](2040190.htm#fr_615.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p60"></span> *De Syn*. §25, note.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[125:617](2040190.htm#fr_616.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p61"></span> §44, note 9.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[125:618](2040190.htm#fr_617.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p63"></span> Vid. supr. §§13, note, and 36.
About Stephanus, vid. infr. *Hist. Arian.* §20.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[126:619](2040190.htm#fr_618.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p64"></span> \[For Macarius, read Arius.\] These
two Bishops were soon after the Council banished by Eusebian influence
into upper Libya, where they suffered extreme ill usage. vid. *Hist.
Arian.* §18.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[126:620](2040190.htm#fr_619.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p67"></span> Vid. [Acts xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="fn_620"></span>[126:621](2040190.htm#fr_620.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p68"></span> p. 95, note 4.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[126:622](2040190.htm#fr_621.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p70"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[126:623](2040190.htm#fr_622.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p71"></span> [Gal. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[126:624](2040190.htm#fr_623.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p72"></span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p72.1"></span>[2 Cor.
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p72.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[126:625](2040190.htm#fr_624.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p72.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p73"></span> [1 Cor. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[126:626](2040190.htm#fr_625.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p74"></span> In like manner the Council of
Chalcedon was confirmed by as many as 470 subscriptions, according to
Ephrem (*Phot. Bibl.* p. 801) by 1600 according to Eulogius (ibid. p.
877), i.e. of Bishops, Archimandrites. &c.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[126:627](2040190.htm#fr_626.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p78"></span> Hosius is called by Athan, the
father and the president of the Council. *Hist. Arian.* 15, 16. Roman
controversialists here explain why Hosius does not sign himself as the
Pope’s legate, De Marc. *Concord.* v. 4. Alber. *Dissert.* ix. and
Protestants why his legates rank before all the other Bishops, even
before Protogenes, Bishop of the place. Basnage, *Ann.* 347. 5.
Febronius considers that Hosius signed here and at Nicæa, as a sort of
representative of the civil, and the Legates of ecclesiastical
supremacy. *de Stat. Eccl.* vi. 4. And so Thomassin, “Imperator velut
exterior Episcopus: præfuit autem summus Pontifex, ut Episcopus
interior.” Dissert. in Conc. x. 14. The popes never attended in person
the Eastern Councils. St. Leo excuses himself on the plea of its being
against usage. Epp. 37. and 93. \[Silvester’s absence from Nicæa was due
solely to extreme old age. But Sardica was a *Western* council.\]

<span id="fn_627"></span>[127:628](2040190.htm#fr_627.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p79"></span> \[The above names, with a few
exceptions, comprise those present at the Council. See additional Note
at the end of this Apology, where a list is given in alphabetical order
of all bishops present, with their Sees.\]

<span id="fn_628"></span>[127:629](2040190.htm#fr_628.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p81"></span> Of Treveri.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[127:630](2040190.htm#fr_629.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p82"></span> Of Lyons.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[127:631](2040190.htm#fr_630.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p83"></span> Of Arles.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[127:632](2040190.htm#fr_631.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p84"></span> Of Rheims.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[127:633](2040190.htm#fr_632.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p85"></span> Of Sens.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[127:634](2040190.htm#fr_633.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p86"></span> Of Worms.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[127:635](2040190.htm#fr_634.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p86.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p87"></span> Of Strassburg.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[127:636](2040190.htm#fr_635.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p88"></span> Of Paris.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[127:637](2040190.htm#fr_636.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p90"></span> Of Carthage.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[127:638](2040190.htm#fr_637.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p92"></span> §§33, note 3a, and 78.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[127:639](2040190.htm#fr_638.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p94"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p94.1"></span>οἱ ἐν τῷ καναλί& 251· τῆς
᾽Ιταλίας</span>. “Canalis est, non via regia aut militaris, verum via
tranversa, quæ in regiam seu basilicam influit, quasi aquæ canalis in
alveum.” Gothofred. in Cod. Theod. vi. *de Curiosis*, p. 196. who
illustrates the word at length. Du Cange on the contrary, *in voc.*
explains it of “the high road.” Tillemont professes himself unable to
give a satisfactory sense to it. vol. viii. p. 685. \[The word occurs in
the XIth. Sardican canon, where the Greek version (Can. XX. in Bruns)
glosses it <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p94.3"></span>καναλί& 251· ἤτοι παρόδῳ</span>.\]

<span id="fn_639"></span>[127:640](2040190.htm#fr_639.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p98"></span> Cf. §36.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[127:641](2040190.htm#fr_640.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p98.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iii-p99"></span> Athan. says, supr. §1. that the
Letter of the Council was signed in all by more than 300. It will be
observed, that Athan.’s numbers in the text do not accurately agree with
each other. The subscriptions enumerated are 284, to which 63 being
added, made a total of 347, not 344. \[The enumeration of Ath. includes
many who signed long afterwards. Those ‘from Palestine’ are simply the
signatories of the synodal letter of 346, below §57. The number, 170
mentioned by Ath. *Hist. Ar.* 15 gives an orthodox majority of 20. See
additional Note at end of this Apology, and Gwatkin, *Studies*, p. 121,
note.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Imperial and Ecclesiastical Acts in Consequence of the Decision
of the Council of Sardica.](2040191.md)
