[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040021)  [Next](2040023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.x"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p1"></span> §9. *Athanasius under Julian and his
successors; Fourth and Fifth Exiles.* Feb. 21, 362, to Feb. 1, 366.

<span id="v.ii.x-p2"></span>(a) *The Council of Alexandria in* 362. The
eight months of undisturbed residence enjoyed by Athanasius under Julian
were well employed. One of his first acts was to convoke a Synod at
Alexandria to deal with the questions which stood in the way of the
peace of the Church. The Synod was one ‘of saints and confessors,’
including as it did many of the Egyptian bishops who had suffered under
George (p. 483, note 3, again we miss the name of the trusted Serapion),
Asterius of Petra and Eusebius of Vercellae, with legates from Lucifer
of Calaris, Apollinarius of Laodicea, and Paulinus the Presbyter who
ruled the Eustathian community of Antioch. Our knowledge of the
proceedings of the Synod (with an exception to be referred to later on)
is derived entirely from its ‘Tome’ or Synodal letter addressed to the
latter community and to the exiles who were its guests. Rufinus, from
whom or from the Tome itself Socrates appears to derive his knowledge,
follows the Tome closely, with perhaps a faint trace of knowledge from
some other <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) source. Sozomen gives a
short and inadequate report (v. 12). But the importance of the Council
is out of all proportion either to the number of bishops who took part
in it or to the scale of its documentary records. Jerome goes so far as
to say that by its judicious conciliation it ‘snatched the whole world
from the jaws of Satan’ (*Adv. Lucif.* 20). If this is in any measure
true, if it undid both in East and West the humiliating results of the
twin Synods of 359, the honour of the achievement is due to Athanasius
alone. He saw that victory was not to be won by smiting men who were
ready for peace, that the cause of Christ was not to be furthered by
breaking the bruised reed and quenching the smoking flax. (Best accounts
of the Council, Newman, *Arians* V. i., Krüger, *Lucif.* 41–52, Gwatkin,
p. 205, *sqq.*) The details may be reserved for the Introduction to the
Tome, p. 481. But in the strong calm moderation of that document we feel
that Athanasius is no longer a combatant arduously contending for
victory, but a conqueror surveying the field of his triumph and
resolving upon the terms of peace. The Council is the ripe first-fruits
of the *de Synodis,* the decisive step by which he placed himself at the
head of the reuniting forces of Eastern Christendom; forces which under
the recognised headship of the ‘Father of Orthodoxy’ were able
successfully to withstand the revived political supremacy of Arianism
under Valens, and after his death to cast it out of the Church. The
Council then is justly recognised as the crown of the career of
Athanasius, for its resolutions and its Letter unmistakably proceed from
him alone, and none but he could have tempered the fiery zeal of the
confessors and taught them to distinguish friend from foe.

<span id="v.ii.x-p4"></span>It would have been well had Lucifer been
there in person and not by deputy only. As it was he had gone to Antioch
in fiery haste, with a promise extorted by Eusebius to do nothing
rashly. Fanatical in his orthodoxy, quite unable to grasp the
theological differences between the various parties (his remonstrances
with Hilary upon the conciliatory efforts of the latter shew his total
lack of theology: see also Krüger, pp. 36, *sq.*), and concentrating all
his indignation upon persons rather than principles, Lucifer found
Antioch without a bishop; for Euzoius was an Arian, and Meletius, whose
return to the church of the Palæa was (so it seems) daily expected, was
to Lucifer little better. What to such a man could seem a quicker way to
the extinction of the schism than the immediate ordination of a bishop
whom all would respect, and whose record was one of the most
uncompromising resistance to heresy? Lucifer accordingly, with the aid
we may suppose of Kymatius and Anatolius, ordained Paulinus, the
widely-esteemed head of the irreconcileable or (to adopt Newman’s word)
protestant minority, who had never owned any Bishop of Antioch save the
deposed and banished Eustathius. The act of Lucifer had momentous
consequences (see D.C.B. on <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.x-p4.1"></span>Meletius</span> and <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.x-p4.2"></span>Flavian</span>, &c.); it perpetuated the
existing tendency to schism between East and West; and but for the
forbearance of Athanasius it would perhaps have wrecked the alliance of
Conservative Asia with Nicene orthodoxy which his later years cemented.
Even as it was, the relations between Athanasius and Basil were sorely
tried by the schism of Antioch. The Tome however was signed by
Paulinus <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) , who added a short
statement of his own faith, which, by recognising the legitimacy of the
theological language of the other catholic party at Antioch, implicitly
conceded the falseness of his own position.

<span id="v.ii.x-p6"></span><span id="page_lix">p. lix</span> <span
id="v.ii.x-Page_lix"></span>Eusebius and Asterius of Petra carried the
letter to Antioch, where they found the mischief already done. In deep
pain at the headstrong action of his fellow-countryman, Eusebius gave
practical assurance to both parties of his full sympathy and
recognition, and made his way home through Asia and Illyria, doing his
best in the cause of concord wherever he came. Lucifer renounced
communion with all the parties to what he considered a guilty
compromise, and journeyed home to Sardinia, making mischief everywhere
(terribly so at Naples, according to the grotesque tale in the *Lib.
Prec.;* see D.C.B. iv. 1221 under Zosimus (2)), and ended his days in
the twofold reputation of saint and schismatic (Krüger, pp. 55, 116
*sq.*).

<span id="v.ii.x-p7"></span>It may be well to add a few words upon the
supposed Coptic acts of this council, and upon their connection with the
very ancient *Syntagma Doctrinæ,* wrongly so named, and wrongly ascribed
to Athanasius. These ‘acts’ are in reality a series of documents
consisting of (1) The Nicene Creed, Canons, and Signatures; (2) A Coptic
recension of the *Syntagma Doctrinæ;* (3) the letter of Paulinus from
*Tom. Ant.,* sub fin., a letter of Epiphanius, and a fragmentary letter
of ‘Rufinus,’ i.e. Rufinianus (see *infr.* p. 566, note 1). Revillout,
who published these texts from a Turin and a Roman (Borgia) manuscript
in 1881 (*Le Concile de Nicée d’apres les textes Coptes*) jumped
(*Archives des missions scientifiques et littéraires,* 1879) at the
conclusion that the whole series emanated from the council of 362, from
whose labours all our copies of the Nicene canons and signatures are
supposed by him to emanate. His theory cannot be discussed at length in
this place. It is worked out with ingenuity, but with insufficient
knowledge of general Church history. It appears to be adopted wholesale
by Eichhorn in his otherwise critical and excellent *Athanasii de vita
ascetica testimonia* (see below, p. 189); but even those whose
scepticism has not been awaked by the hypothesis itself must I think be
satisfied by the careful study of M. Batiffol (*Studia Patristica,*
fasc. ii.) that Revillout has erected a castle in the air. Of any ‘acts’
of the Council of 362 the documents contain no trace at all. It is
therefore out of place to do more than allude here to the great interest
of the *Syntagma* in its three or four extant recensions in connection
at once with the history of Egyptian Monasticism and with the literature
of the <span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p7.1"></span>Διδαχὴ τῶν ιβ'
ἀποστόλων</span> (see Harnack in *Theol. Litzg.* 1887, pp. 32, *sqq.,*
Eichhorn, *ib.* p. 569, Warfield in *Andover Review,* 1886, p. 81,
*sqq.,* and other American literature referred to by Harnack a.a.O).

<span id="v.ii.x-p8"></span>All over the Empire the exiles were
returning, and councils were held (p. 489), repudiating the Homœan
formula of union, and affirming that of Nicæa. In dealing with the
question of those who had formerly compromised themselves with Arianism,
these councils followed the lead of that of Alexandria, which
accordingly is justly said by Jerome (*adv. Lucif.* 20) to have snatched
the world from the jaws of Satan, by obviating countless schisms and
attaching to the Church many who might otherwise have been driven back
into Arianism.

<span id="v.ii.x-p9"></span>Such were the more enduring results of the
recall of the exiled bishops by Julian; results very different from what
he contemplated in recalling them. Apparently before the date of the
council he had written to the Alexandrians (*Ep.* 26), explaining that
he had recalled the exiles to their countries, not to their sees, and
directing that Athanasius, who ought after so many sentences against him
to have asked special permission to return, should leave the City at
once on pain of severer punishment. An appeal seems to have been made
against this order by the people of Alexandria, but without effect.
Pending the appeal Athanasius apparently felt safe in remaining in the
town, and carrying out the measures described above. In October (it
would seem) Julian wrote an indignant letter to the Prefect Ecdikius
Olympus (Sievers, p. 124), threatening a heavy fine if Athanasius, ‘the
enemy of the gods,’ did not leave not only Alexandria, but Egypt, at
once. He adds an angry comment on his having dared to baptize ‘in my
reign’ Greek ladies of rank (*Ep.* 6). Another letter (*Ep.* 51) to the
people of Alexandria, along with arguments in favour of Serapis and the
gods, and against Christ, reiterates the order for Athanasius to leave
Egypt by Dec. 1. Julian’s somewhat petulant reference to the bishop as a
‘contemptible little fellow’ ill conceals his evident feeling that
Athanasius, who had ‘coped with Constantius like a king battling with a
king’ (Greg. Naz.), was in Egypt a power greater than himself. But no
man has ever wielded such political power as Athanasius with so little
disposition to use it. He bowed his head to the storm and prepared to
leave Alexandria once more (Oct. 23). His friends stood round lamenting
their loss. ‘Be of good heart,’ he replied, ‘it is only a cloud, and
will soon pass away’ (Soz. v. 14). He took a Nile boat, and set off
toward Upper Egypt, but finding that he was tracked by the government
officers he directed the boat’s course to be reversed. Presently they
met that of the pursuers, who suspecting nothing asked for news of
Athanasius. ‘He is not far off’ was the answer, given according to one
account by Athanasius himself (Thdt. iii. 9, Socr. iii. 14). He returned
to Chæreu, the first station on the road eastward from Alexandria (as is
inferred from the Thereu or Thereon of *Hist. Aceph.* vii., viii.; but
the identification is merely conjectural; for Chæreu cf. *Itin.* and
*Vit. Ant.* 86), and after danger of pursuit was over, ‘ascended to the
upper parts of Egypt as far as Upper Hermupolis in the Thebaid and as
far as Antinoupolis; and while he abode in these places it was learned
that Julian the Emperor was dead, and that Jovian, a Christian, was
Emperor’ (*Hist. Aceph.*). Of his stay in the Thebaid (cf. *Fest. Ind.*
xxxv.) some picturesque details are preserved in the life of Pachomius
and the letter of Ammon (on which see below, p. 487). As he approached
Hermupolis, the bishops, clergy, and monks (‘about 100 in number’) of
the Thebaid lined both banks of the river to welcome him. ‘Who are
these,’ he exclaimed, ‘that fly as a cloud and as doves with their <span
id="page_lx">p. lx</span> <span id="v.ii.x-Page_lx"></span>young ones’
([Isa. lx. 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#008)<span
id="v.ii.x-p9.1"></span>, LXX). Then he saluted the Abbat Theodore, and
asked after the brethren. ‘By thy holy prayers, Father, we are well.’ He
was mounted on an ass and escorted to the monastery with burning torches
(they ‘almost set fire to him’), the abbat walking before him on foot.
He inspected the monasteries, and expressed his high approval of all he
heard and saw, and when Theodore, upon departing for his Easter (363)
visitation <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) of the brethren, asked
‘the Pope’ to remember him in his prayers, the answer was
characteristic: ‘If we forget thee, O Jerusalem’ (*Vit. Pachom.* 92, see
p. 569). About midsummer he was near Antinoupolis, and trusted
messengers warned him that the pursuers were again upon his track.
Theodore brought his covered boat to escort him up to Tabenne, and in
company with an ‘abbat’ called Pammon they made their way slowly against
wind and stream. Athanasius became much alarmed and prayed earnestly to
himself, while Theodore’s monks towed the boat from the shore.
Athanasius, in reply to an encouraging remark of Pammon, spoke of the
peace of mind he felt when under persecution, and of the consolation of
suffering and even death for Christ’s sake. Pammon looked at Theodore,
and they smiled, barely restraining a laugh. ‘You think me a coward,’
said Athanasius. ‘Tell him,’ said Theodore to Pammon. ‘No, *you* must
tell him.’ Theodore then announced to the astonished archbishop that at
that very hour Julian had been killed in Persia, and that he should lose
no time in making his way to the new Christian Emperor, who would
restore him to the Church. The story (below, p. 487) implies rather than
expressly states that the day and hour tallied exactly with the death of
Julian, June 26, 363. This story is, on the whole, the best attested of
the many legends of the kind which surround the mysterious end of the
unfortunate prince. (Cf. Thdt. *H. E*. iii. 23, Soz. vi. 2. For the
religious policy of Julian and his relation to Church history, see
Rendall’s *Julian* and the full and excellent article by Wordsworth in
*D.C.B.* iii. 484–525.)

<span id="v.ii.x-p11"></span>Athanasius entered Alexandria secretly and
made his way by way of Hierapolis (Sept. 6, *Fest. Ind.*) to Jovian at
Edessa, and returned with him (apparently) to Antioch. On Feb. 14 (or
20, *Fest. Index*) he returned to Alexandria with imperial letters and
took possession of the churches, his fourth exile having lasted ‘fifteen
months and twenty-two days’ (*Hist. Aceph.*). The visit to Antioch was
important.

<span id="v.ii.x-p12"></span>Firstly, it is clear from the combined and
circumstantial testimony of the *Festal Index,* the *Hist. Aceph.,* and
the narrative of Ammon, that Athanasius hurried to meet Jovian on his
march from Persia to Antioch, and visited Alexandria only in passing and
in private. He appears to have taken the precaution (see below) of
taking certain bishops and others, representing the majority (<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p12.1"></span>πλῆθος</span>) of the
Egyptian Church, along with him. Accordingly the tale of Theodoret (iv.
2), that he assembled a council (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.x-p12.2"></span>τοὺς λογιμωτέρους τῶν ἐπισκόπων
ἐγείρας</span>), and wrote a synodal letter to Jovian, in reply to a
request from the latter to furnish him with an accurate statement of
doctrine (followed by Montf., Hefele, &c.) must be set aside as a hasty
conjecture from the heading of the *Letter to Jovian* (see below, ch. v.
§3 (h), and cf. Vales. on Thdt. iv. 3, who suspected the truth).

<span id="v.ii.x-p13"></span>Athanasius, secondly, had good reason for
hurrying. The Arians had also sent a large deputation to petition
against the restoration of Athanasius, and to ask for a bishop. Lucius,
their candidate for the post, accompanied the deputation. But the energy
of Athanasius was a match for their schemes. He obtained a short but
emphatic letter from Jovian, bidding him return to his see, and placed
in the Emperor’s hands a letter (below, *Letter* 56, p. 567), insisting
on the integrity of the Nicene creed, which it recites, and especially
on the Godhead of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="v.ii.x-p14"></span>Meanwhile at Antioch, where the winter was
spent (Jovian was mostly there till Dec. 21), there was much to be
attended to. Least important of all were the efforts of the Arian
deputation to secure a hearing for their demands. Jovian’s replies to
them on the repeated occasions on which they waylaid him are perhaps
undignified (Gwatkin) but yet shew a rough soldier-like common sense.
‘Any one you please except Athanasius’ they urged. ‘I told you, the case
of Athanasius is settled already:’ then, to the body-guard ‘Feri, feri’
(i.e. use your sticks!) Some of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.x-p14.1"></span>πλῆθος</span> of Antioch seized Lucius and
brought him to Jovian, saying, ‘Look, your Majesty, at the man they
wanted to make a bishop!’ (See p. 568 *sq.*)

<span id="v.ii.x-p15"></span>Athanasius appears to have attempted to
bring about some settlement of the disputes which distracted the Church
of Antioch. The *Hist. Aceph.* makes him ‘arrange the affairs’ of that
Church, but Sozom. (vi. 5), who copies the phrase, significantly adds
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p15.1"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p15.2"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p15.3"></span>οἷ& 231·ν τε ἦν</span>—‘as
far as it was feasible.’ The vacillations (Philost. viii. 2, 7, ix. 3,
&c.) of Euzoius between Eudoxius on the one hand, and the consistent
Anomœans on the other, and the formation of a definite Anomœan sect,
represented in Egypt by Heliodorus, Stephen, and other nominees of the
bitter Arian Secundus (who appears to be dead at last) probably
concerned Athanasius but little. But the breach <span id="page_lxi">p.
lxi</span> <span id="v.ii.x-Page_lxi"></span>among the Antiochene
Catholics was more hopeless than ever. The action of Paulinus in
ordaining a bishop for Tyre, Diodorus by name (p. 580 note), shews that
he had caught something of the spirit of Lucifer, while on the other
hand we can well imagine that it was with mixed feelings that Athanasius
saw a number of bishops assemble under Meletius to sign the Nicene
Creed. To begin with, they explained the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.x-p15.4"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> to be equivalent to <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p15.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p15.6"></span>κ τῆς οὐσίας</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p15.7"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p15.8"></span>μοιον κατ᾽ οὐσίαν</span>.
Now this was no more than taking Athanasius literally at his word (*de
Syn.* 41 exactly; the confession, Socr. iii. 25, appears to meet Ath.
*de Syn.* half way: cf. the reference to ᾽Ε<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.x-p15.9"></span>λληνικὴ χρῆσις</span> with *de Syn.* 51), and
there is no reason to doubt that the majority <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) of those who signed did so in all
sincerity, merely guarding the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.x-p16.2"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> against its Sabellian sense
(which Hilary *de Syn.* 71, had admitted as possible), and in fact,
meaning by the term exactly what Basil the Great and his school meant by
it. This is confirmed by the express denunciation of Arianism and
Anomœanism. But Athanasius may have suspected an intention on the part
of some signatories to evade the full sense of the creed, especially as
touching the Holy Spirit, and this suspicion would not be lessened by
the fact that Acacius signed with the rest. It must remain possible,
therefore, that a clause in the letter to Jovian referred to above,
expresses his displeasure <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) at the
wording of the document. (On the significance of the confession in
question, see Gwatkin, pp. 226 *sq.,* 244, note 1.) We gather from
language used by St. Basil at a later date (Bas. *Epp.* 89, 258) that
Athanasius endeavoured to conciliate Meletius, and to bring about some
understanding between the two parties in the Church. Meletius appears to
have considered such efforts premature: Basil writes to him that he
understands that Athanasius is much disappointed that no renewal of
friendly overtures has taken place, and that if Meletius desires the
good offices of the Bishop of Alexandria the first word must come from
him (probably seven or eight years later than this date). In justice to
Meletius it must be allowed that Paulinus did his best to embitter the
schism by ordaining bishops at Tyre and elsewhere, ordinations which
Meletius naturally resented, and appears to have ignored (D.C.B. iv.
<span class="c10"><span id="v.ii.x-p17.2"></span>Zeno</span> (3),—where
observe that the breach of canons began with the appointment of Paulinus
himself). Athanasius returned to Alexandria on Feb. 14 (*Hist. Aceph.*)
or 20 (*Fest. Ind.*), and Jovian died, by inhaling the fumes of a
charcoal fire in the bedroom of a wayside inn, on Feb. 17.

<span id="v.ii.x-p18"></span>Valentinian, an officer of Pannonian birth,
was elected Emperor by the army, and shortly co-opted his brother Valens
to a share in the Empire. Valens was allotted the Eastern, Valentinian
choosing the Western half of the Empire. Valentinian was a convinced but
tolerant Catholic, and under his reign Arianism practically died away in
the Latin West (*infra,* p. 488). Valens, a weak, parsimonious, but
respectable and well-intentioned ruler, at first took no decided line,
but eventually (from the end of 364) fell more and more into the hands
of Eudoxius (from whom he received baptism in 367) and the Arian
hangers-on of the Court (a suggestive, if in some details disputable,
sketch of the general condition of the Eastern Church under Valens in
Gwatkin, pp. 228–236, 247 sq.). The semi-Arians of Asia were continuing
their advance toward the Nicene position, but the question of the Holy
Spirit was already beginning to cleave them into two sections. At their
council of Lampsacus (autumn of 364) they reasserted their formula of
‘essential likeness’ against the Homœans, but appear to have left the
other and more difficult question undecided. After Valens had declared
strongly on the side of the enemy, they were driven to seek Western aid.
They set out to seek Valentinian at Milan, but finding him departed on
his Gallic campaign (Gwatkin, 236, note) they contented themselves with
laying before Liberius, on behalf of the Synod of Lampsacus and other
Asiatic Councils, a letter accepting the Nicene Creed. After some
hesitation (Soc. iv. 12) they were cordially received by Liberius, who
gave them a letter to take home with them, in which the controverted
question of the Holy Spirit is passed over in silence. (Letter of the
Asiatics in Socr. iv. 12, that of Liberius in Hard. *Conc.* i. 743–5,
the names include Cyril of Jerusalem, Macedonius, Silvanus of Tarsus,
Athanasius of Ancyra, &c., and the Pope’s letter is addressed to them
‘et universis orientalibus orthodoxis’). On their return, the disunion
of the party manifested itself by the refusal of several bishops to
attend the synod convoked to receive the deputies at Tyana, and by their
assembling a rival meeting in Caria to reaffirm the ‘Lucianic’ Creed
(Hefele, ii. 287 E. Tr.). Further efforts at reunion were frustrated by
the Imperial prohibition of an intended Synod at Tarsus, possibly in
367.

<span id="v.ii.x-p19"></span>Athanasius remained in peace in his see
until the spring of 365, when on May 5 a rescript was published at
Alexandria, ordering that all bishops expelled under Constantius who had
returned to their sees under Julian should be at once expelled by the
civil authorities under pain of a heavy fine. The announcement was
received with great popular displeasure. The officials were anxious to
escape the fine, but the Church-people argued that the order could not
apply to Athanasius, who had been restored by Constantius, expelled by
Julian in the interest of idolatry, and restored by order of Jovian.
Their remonstrances were backed up by popular riots: when these had
lasted a month, the Prefect quieted the people by the assurance that the
matter was referred back to Augustus (*Hist. Aceph.* x., followed by
Soz. vi. 12). But on Oct. 5 an imperative answer seems to have come. The
Prefect and the Commandant broke into the Church of Dionysius at night
and searched the apartments of the clergy to seize the bishop. But
Athanasius, warned in time, had escaped from the town that very night
and retired to a country house which belonged to him near the ‘New
River’ <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) . This was the shortest and
mildest of the five exiles of Athanasius. In the autumn the dangerous
revolt of Procopius threw the Eastern Empire into a panic. It was no
time to allow popular discontent to smoulder at Alexandria, and on Feb.
1, 366, the notary Brasidas publicly announced the recall of <span
id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span> <span
id="v.ii.x-Page_lxii"></span>Athanasius to Imperial order. The notary
and ‘curiales’ went out to the suburb in person and escorted Athanasius
in state to the Church of Dionysius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[lviii:80](2040022.htm#fr_79) <span
id="v.ii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p3"></span> He states (1) That a rigorist party in the
council were at first opposed to all conciliatory measures; this is
highly probable, see Hieron. *adv. Lucif.* 20; (2) that former active
Arians were to be admitted to lay communion only; this is not unlikely;
(3) by implication, that Eusebius and Lucifer went first to Antioch, and
agreed to take no step till after the Council which Eus. was to attend
in person, and Luc. by deputy, at Alxa., but that Luc. broke his
promise. This may contain a grain of truth, i.e. that Lucifer promised
to do nothing before he heard from Alxa., but Eusebius can scarcely have
gone to Antioch. I owe these notices to the excellent analysis of our
sources of information in Krüger, *Lucif.* p. 46 *sq.;* but he makes an
odd slip, p. 48, in saying that Soz. ‘schweigt von der Synode zu Alex.
uberhaupt.’

<span id="fn_80"></span>[lviii:81](2040022.htm#fr_80) <span
id="v.ii.x-p4.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p5"></span> This is placed later in 363 by Dr. Bright,
D.C.B. i. 199, on the ground of a statement of Epiphanius, *Hær.* 77.
20, which, however, is not quite decisive on the point.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[lx:82](2040022.htm#fr_81) <span
id="v.ii.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p10"></span> Krüger, in *Theol. Litzg.* 1890, p. 620
*sqq.,* fixes the death of Theodore for Easter 363, on the ground, as I
venture to think, of a date (345) for the death of Pachomius too early
by one year. The question is too intricate to discuss here, but with all
deference to so competent a critic, I am confident that Theodore lived
till at any rate the following Easter. See *infr.* p. 569, note 3.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[lxi:83](2040022.htm#fr_82) <span
id="v.ii.x-p15.10"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p16"></span> This is certainly true of men like
Athanasius of Ancyra, Eusebius of Samosata, Pelagius of Laodicea, Titus
of Bostra, &c.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[lxi:84](2040022.htm#fr_83) <span
id="v.ii.x-p16.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p17"></span> The tract *de Hypocrisi Meletii et
Eusebii* printed among the ‘dubious’ works of Athanasius may well
express the sentiments of some of his friends of the party of Paulinus
on this occasion. (Tillem. viii. 708.)

<span id="fn_84"></span>[lxi:85](2040022.htm#fr_84) <span
id="v.ii.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p20"></span> So *Hist. Aceph., Fest. Ind.* Socrates iv.
13 says he hid four months ‘in his Father’s tomb.’ Soz. vi. 12, mentions
the story, but finding it contradicted by the *Hist. Aceph.,* adopts the
vague compromise <span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.x-p20.2"></span>εἴς
τι χώριον ἐκρύπτετο</span>. The ‘New River’ divided Alexandria from its
Western suburbs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Last Years, Feb. 1, 366-May 2, 373.](2040023)
