[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040088)  [Next](2040090.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.viii-p1"></span> §42. *This function of the Word
described at length*.

<span id="vi.ii.iii.viii-p2"></span>The holy Word of the Father, then,
almighty and all-perfect, uniting with the universe and having
everywhere unfolded His own powers, and having illumined all, both
things seen and things invisible, holds them together and binds them to
Himself, having left nothing void of His own power, but on the contrary
quickening and sustaining all things everywhere, each severally and all
collectively; while He mingles in one the principles of all sensible
existence, heat namely and cold and wet and dry, and causes them not to
conflict, but to make up one concordant harmony. 2. By reason of Him and
His power, fire does not fight with cold nor wet with dry, but
principles mutually opposed, as if friendly and brotherly combine
together, and give life to the things we see, and form the principles by
which bodies exist. Obeying Him, even God the Word, things on earth have
life and things in the heaven have their order. By reason of Him all the
sea, and the great ocean, move within their proper bounds, while, as we
said above, the dry land grows grasses and is clothed with all manner of
diverse plants. And, not to spend time in the enumeration of
particulars, where the truth is obvious, there is nothing that is and
takes place but has been made and stands by Him and through Him, as also
the Divine <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) says, “In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God;
all things were made by Him, and without Him was not anything made.” 3.
For just as though some musician, having tuned a lyre, and by his art
adjusted the high notes to the low, and the intermediate notes to the
rest, were to produce a single tune as the result, so also the Wisdom of
God, handling the Universe as a lyre, and adjusting things in the air to
things on the <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="vi.ii.iii.viii-Page_27"></span>earth, and things in the heaven to
things in the air, and combining parts into wholes and moving them all
by His beck and will, produces well and fittingly, as the result, the
unity of the universe and of its order, Himself remaining unmoved with
the Father while He moves all things by His organising action, as seems
good for each to His own Father. 4. For what is surprising in His
godhead is this, that by one and the same act of will He moves all
things simultaneously, and not at intervals, but all collectively, both
straight and curved, things above and beneath and intermediate, wet,
cold, warm, seen and invisible, and orders them according to their
several nature. For simultaneously at His single nod what is straight
moves as straight, what is curved also, and what is intermediate,
follows its own movement; what is warm receives warmth, what is dry
dryness, and all things according to their several nature are quickened
and organised by Him, and He produces as the result a marvellous and
truly divine harmony.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[26:171](2040089.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="vi.ii.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.viii-p3"></span> [Joh. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span
id="vi.ii.iii.viii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Three similes to illustrate the Word's relation to the
Universe.](2040090.md)
