[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040017)  [Next](2040019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p1"></span> §5. *The Council of Tyre and First Exile
of Athanasius,* 335–337.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p2"></span>Many of the bishops who were making their
way to the great festival met at Tyre. The Arian element was very
strong. Eusebius of Nicomedia, Narcissus, Maris, Theognis, Patrophilus,
George, now bishop of Laodicea, are all familiar names. Ursacius and
Valens, ‘young <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) both in years and in
mind’ make their first entrance on the stage of ecclesiastical intrigue;
Eusebius of Cæsarea headed a large body of ‘conservative’ malcontents:
in the total number of perhaps 150, the friends of Athanasius were
outnumbered by nearly two to one. (See Gwatkin’s note, p. 85, Hefele ii.
17, *Eng Tra.*) Eusebius of Cæsarea took the chair (yet see D.C.B. ii.
316b). The proceedings of the Council were heated and disorderly;
promiscuous accusations were flung from side to side; the president
himself was charged by an excited Egyptian Confessor with having
sacrificed to idols (p. 104, n. 2), while against Athanasius every
possible charge was raked up. The principal one was that of harshness
and violence. Callinicus, bishop of Pelusium, according to a later
story <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) , had taken up the cause of
Ischyras, and been deposed by Athanasius in consequence. A certain Mark
had been appointed to supersede him, and he had been subjected to
military force. Certain Meletian bishops who had refused to communicate
with Athanasius on account of his irregular election, had been beaten
and imprisoned. A document from Alexandria testified that the Churches
were emptied on account of the strong popular feeling against these
proceedings. The number of witnesses, and the evident readiness of the
majority of bishops to believe the worst against him, inspired
Athanasius with profound misgivings as to his chance of obtaining
justice. He had in vain objected to certain bishops as biassed judges;
when it was decided to investigate the case of Ischyras on the spot, the
commission of six was chosen from among the very persons challenged (p.
138). Equally unsuccessful was the protest of the Egyptian bishops
against the credit of the Meletian witnesses (p. 140). But on one point
the accusers walked into a trap. The ‘hand of Arsenius’ was produced,
and naturally made a deep impression (Thdt. *H. E*. i. 30). But
Athanasius was ready. ‘Did you know Arsenius personally?’ ‘Yes’ is the
eager reply from many sides. Promptly Arsenius is ushered in alive,
wrapped up in a cloak. The Synod expected an explanation of the way he
had lost his hand. Athanasius <span id="page_xl">p. xl</span> <span
id="v.ii.vi-Page_xl"></span>turned up his cloak and shewed that one hand
at least was there. There was a moment of suspense, artfully managed by
Athanasius. Then the other hand was exposed, and the accusers were
requested to point out whence the third had been cut off (Socr. i. 29).
This was too much for John Arcaph, who precipitately fled (so Socr., he
seems to have gone to Egypt with the couriers mentioned below, cf. p.
142). But the Eusebians were made of sterner stuff: the whole affair was
a piece of magic; or there had been an attempt to murder Arsenius, who
had hid himself from fear. At any rate Athanasius must not be allowed to
clear himself so easily. Accordingly, in order partly to gain time and
partly to get up a more satisfactory case, they prevailed on Count
Dionysius, in the face of strong remonstrances from Athanasius (p. 138),
to despatch a commission of enquiry to the Mareotis in order to
ascertain the real facts about Ischyras. The nature of the commission
may be inferred, firstly, from its composition, four strong Arians and
two (Theodore of Heraclea, and Macedonius of Mopsuestia) reactionaries;
secondly, from the fact that they took Ischyras with them, but left
Macarius behind in custody; thirdly, from the fact that couriers were
sent to Egypt with four days’ start, and with an urgent message to the
Meletians to collect at once in as large numbers as possible at Irene,
so as to impress the commissioners with the importance of the Meletian
community at that place. The Egyptian bishops present at Tyre handed in
strongly-worded protests to the Council, and to Count Dionysius, who
received also a weighty remonstrance from the respected Alexander,
Bishop of Thessalonica. This drew forth from him an energetic protest to
the Eusebians (p. 142 *sq.*) against the composition of the commission.
His protest was not, however, enforced in any practical way, and the
Egyptians thereupon appealed to the Emperor (*ib.*). Athanasius himself
escaped in an open boat with four of his bishops, and found his way to
Constantinople, where he arrived on October 30. The Emperor was out
riding when he was accosted by one of a group of pedestrians. He could
scarcely credit his eyes and the assurance of his attendants that the
stranger was none other than the culprit of Tyre. Much annoyed at his
appearance, he refused all communication; but the persistency of
Athanasius and the reasonableness of his demand prevailed. The Emperor
wrote to Jerusalem to summon to his presence all who had been at the
Council of Tyre (pp. 105, 145).

<span id="v.ii.vi-p5"></span>Meanwhile the <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>Mareotic Commission</span> had proceeded with
its task. Their report was kept secret, but eventually sent to Julius of
Rome, who handed it over to Athanasius in 339 (p. 143). Their enquiry
was carried on with the aid of Philagrius the prefect, a strong Arian
sympathiser, whose guard pricked the witnesses if they failed to respond
to the hints of the commissioners and the threats of the prefect
himself. The clergy of Alexandria and the Mareotis were excluded from
the court, and catechumens, Jews and heathen, none of whom could
properly have been present on the occasion, were examined as to the
interruption of the eucharistic service by Macarius (p. 119). Even with
these precautions the evidence was not all that could be wished. To
begin with, it had all taken place on an ordinary week-day, when there
would be no Communion (pp. 115, 125, 143); secondly, when Macarius came
in Ischyras was in bed; thirdly, certain witnesses whom Athanasius had
been accused of secreting came forward in evidence of the contrary (p.
107). The prefect consoled himself by letting loose the violence of the
heathen mob (p. 108) against the ‘virgins’ of the Church. The catholic
party were helpless; all they could do was to protest in writing to the
commission, the council, and the prefect (pp. 138–140. The latter
protest is dated 10th of Thoth, i.e. Sep. 8, 335, Diocletian leap-year).

<span id="v.ii.vi-p6"></span>The commission returned to Tyre, where the
council passed a resolution (Soz. ii. 25) deposing Athanasius. They then
proceeded to Jerusalem for the Dedication <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Here
Arius with certain others (probably including Euzoius) was received to
communion on the strength of the confession of faith he had presented to
Constantine a few years before, and the assembled bishops drew up a
synodal letter announcing the fact to Egypt and the Church at large (pp.
144, 460). At this juncture the summons from Constantine arrived. The
terms of it shewed that the Emperor was not disposed to hear more of the
broken chalice or the murdered Arsenius: but the Eusebians were not at a
loss. They advised the bishops to go quietly to their homes, while five
of the inner circle, accompanied by Eusebius of Cæsarea, who had a
panegyric to deliver in the imperial presence, responded to the summons
of royalty. They made short work of Athanasius. The whole farrago of
charges examined at Tyre was thrown aside. He had threatened to starve
the <span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.vi-p7.2"></span>πανευδαίμων
πατρίς</span>, the chosen capital of Constantine, by stopping the grain
ships which regularly left Alexandria every autumn. It was in vain for
Athanasius to protest that he had neither the means nor the power to do
anything of the kind. ‘You are a rich man,’ replied Eusebius of
Nicomedia, ‘and can do whatever you like.’ The Emperor was touched in a
sore place <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) . He promptly ordered
the banishment of Athanasius to Treveri, whither he started, as it would
seem, on Feb. 5, 336 (pp. 105, 146, 503, note 11). The friends of
Athanasius professed to regard the banishment as an act of imperial
clemency, in view of what might have been treated as a capital matter,
involving as it did the charge of treason (p. 105); and Constantine II.,
immediately after his father’s death, stated (pp. 146, 272, 288) in a
letter (written before he became Augustus in Sept. 337) that he had been
sent to Treveri merely to keep him out of danger, and that Constantine
had been prevented only by death from carrying out his intention of
restoring him. These charitable constructions need not be rudely
ignored; but in all probability the anxiety to be rid of a cause of
disturbance was at least one motive with the peace-loving Emperor. At
<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span> <span id="v.ii.vi-Page_xli"></span>any
rate the Eusebians could not obtain the imperial sanction to their
proposed election of a successor (Pistus?) to Athanasius. On his return
after the death of Constantine he found his see waiting for him
unoccupied (*Apol. c. Ar.* 29, p. 115).

<span id="v.ii.vi-p9"></span>The close of the Tricennalia was made the
occasion of a council at Constantinople (winter 335–336). Marcellus was
deposed for heresy and Basil nominated to the see of Ancyra, Eusebius of
Cæsarea undertaking to refute the ‘new Samosatene.’ Other minor
depositions were apparently carried out at the same time, and several
Western bishops, including Protogenes of Sardica, had reason later on to
repent of their signatures to the proceedings (Hil. *Fragm.* iii.).

<span id="v.ii.vi-p10"></span>*Death of Arius.* From Jerusalem Arius had
gone to Alexandria, but (Soz. ii. 29) had not succeeded in obtaining
admission to the Communion of the Church there. Accordingly he repaired
to the capital about the time of the Council just mentioned. The
Eusebians resolved that here at any rate he should not be repelled.
Arius appeared before the Emperor and satisfied him by a sworn
profession of orthodoxy, and a day was fixed for his reception to
communion. The story of the distress caused to the aged bishop Alexander
is well known. He was heard to pray in the church that either Arius or
himself might be taken away before such an outrage to the faith should
be permitted. As a matter of fact Arius died suddenly the day before his
intended reception. His friends ascribed his death to magic, those of
Alexander to the judgment of God, the public generally to the effect of
excitement on a diseased heart (Soz. l. c.). Athanasius, while taking
the second view, describes the occurrence with becoming sobriety and
reserve (pp. 233, 565). Alexander himself died very soon after, and Paul
was elected in his place (D.C.B. art. <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>Macedonius</span> (2)), but was soon banished
on some unknown charge, whereupon Eusebius of Nicomedia was translated
to the capital see (between 336 and 340; date uncertain. Cf. D.C.B. ii.
367a).

<span id="v.ii.vi-p11"></span>Of the sojourn of Athanasius at Treveri,
the noble home of the Emperors on the banks of the Mosel, we know few
details, but his presence there appeals to the historic imagination.
(See D.C.B. i. 186a.) He cannot have been there much above a year. He
kept the Easter festival, probably of 336, certainly of 337, in the
still unfinished Church (p. 244: the present Cathedral is said to occupy
the site of what was then an Imperial palace: but the main palace is
apparently represented by the ‘Roman baths).’ He was not suffered to
want (p. 146): he had certain Egyptian brethren with him; and found a
sympathetic friend in the good Bishop Maximinus (cf. p. 239). The tenth
festal letter, §1, preserves a short extract from a letter written from
Trier to his clergy.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p12"></span>Constantine died at Nicomedia, having
previously received baptism from the hands of Eusebius, on Whit-Sunday,
May 22, 337. None of his sons were present, and the will is said to have
been entrusted to the Arian chaplain mentioned above (p. xxxiv).
Couriers carried the news to the three Cæsars, and at a very
moderate <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) rate of reckoning, it may
have been known at Trier by about June 4. Constantine, as the eldest
son, probably expected more from his father’s will than he actually
obtained. At any rate, on June 17 he wrote a letter to the people and
clergy of Alexandria, announcing the restoration of their bishop in
pursuance of an intention of his father’s, which only death had cut
short. Constantius meanwhile hastened (from the East, probably Antioch)
to Constantinople (D.C.B. i. 651): he too had expectations, for he was
his father’s favourite. The brothers met at Sirmium, and agreed upon a
division of the Empire, Constantius taking the East, Constans Italy and
Illyricum, and Constantine the Gauls and Africa. On Sep. 9 they formally
assumed the title Augustus <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) .
Athanasius had apparently accompanied Constantine to Sirmium, and on his
way eastward met Constantius at Viminacium (p. 240), his first interview
with his future persecutor. He presently reached Constantinople (p.
272), and on his way southward, at Cæsarea in Cappadocia, again met
Constantius, who was hurrying to the Persian frontier. On Nov. 23 he
reached Alexandria amid great rejoicings (pp. 104, 503, *Fest. Ind.*
x.), the clergy especially ‘esteeming that the happiest day of their
lives.’ But the happiness was marred by tumults (Soz. ii. 2, 5, Hil.
*Fragm*. iii. 8, *Fest. Ind*. xi., next year ‘again’), which were,
however, checked by the civil power, the prefect Theodorus being,
apparently, favourable to Athanasius (pp. 102, 527, note 2). The festal
letter for 338 would seem to have been finished at Alexandria, but the
point is not absolutely clear. Here begins his second period of ‘quiet,’
of one year, four months and twenty-four days, i.e., from Athyr 27 (Nov.
23), 337, to Pharmuthi 21 (April 16), 339.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[xxxix:47](2040018.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p3"></span> p. 107: Euseb. *V. C.* iv. 43, calls them
‘the fairest of God’s youthful flock.’ The Council of Sardica in 343
describes them as ‘ungodly and foolish youths,’ Hil. *Frag.* ii., cf.
pp. 120, 122.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[xxxix:48](2040018.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p4"></span> Soz. ii. 25. But Callinicus was a Meletian
all along: pp. 132, 137, 517.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[xl:49](2040018.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p7"></span> The Greek Church still commemorates this
Festival on Sep. 13; the *Chron. Pasch.* gives Sep. 17 for the
Dedication. But if the Mareotic Commissioners returned to Tyre, as they
certainly did (Soz. l.c.), these dates are untrustworthy.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[xl:50](2040018.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p8"></span> The philosopher Sopater had been put to
death on a similar charge a few years before, D.C.B. i. 631.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[xli:51](2040018.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p13"></span> The courier Palladius, who was considered
a marvel, could carry a message from Nisibis to CP. on horseback in
three days, about 250 miles a day, Socr. vii. 19. At 100 miles a day,
i.e. eight miles an hour for 12½ hours out of the 24, the 1,300 miles
from Nicomedia to Treveri would be easily covered by a horseman in the
time specified; see Gibbon quoted p. 115, note 1, and for other
examples, Gwatkin, p. 137.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[xli:52](2040018.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p14"></span> This date is certain (Gwatk., 108, note),
but the meeting at Sirmium may possibly fall in the following summer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Renewal of Troubles. Second Exile. Pistus and Gregory,
Culmination of Eusebian Intrigue. Rome and Sardica. (337-346).](2040019.md)
