[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040190)  [Next](2040192.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV</span>.—*Imperial and
Ecclesiastical Acts in Consequence of the Decision of the Council of
Sardica.*

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p2"></span>51. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p2.1"></span>When</span> the most religious Emperor
Constantius heard of these things, he sent for me, having written
privately to his brother Constans of blessed memory, and to me three
several times in the following terms.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p3"></span>Constantius Victor Augustus to
Athanasius <span id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641.md) . Our benignant
clemency will not suffer you to be any longer tempest-tossed by the wild
waves of the sea; for our unwearied piety has not lost sight of you,
while you have been bereft of your native home, deprived of your goods,
and have been wandering in savage wildernesses. And although I have for
a long time deferred expressing by letter the purpose of my mind
concerning you, principally because I expected that you would appear
before us of your own accord, and would seek a relief of your
sufferings; yet forasmuch as fear, it may be, has prevented you from
fulfilling your intentions, we have therefore addressed to your
fortitude letters full of our bounty, to the end that you may use all
speed and without fear present yourself in our presence, thereby to
obtain the enjoyment of your wishes, and that, having experience of our
kindness, you may be <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-Page_128"></span>restored again to your own. For this
purpose I have besought my lord and brother Constans Victor Augustus, in
your behalf, that he would give you permission to come, in order that
you may be restored to your country with the consent of us both,
receiving this as a pledge of our favour.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p5"></span>The Second Letter.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p6"></span>Although we made it very plain to you
in a former letter that you may without hesitation come to our Court,
because we greatly wished to send you home, yet, we have further sent
this present letter to your fortitude to exhort you without any distrust
or apprehension, to place yourself in the public conveyances <span
id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642.md) , and to hasten to us, that you may
enjoy the fulfilment of your wishes.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p8"></span>The Third Letter.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p9"></span>Our pleasure was, while we abode at
Edessa, and your Presbyters were there, that, on one of them being sent
to you, you should make haste to come to our Court, in order that you
might see our face, and straightway proceed to Alexandria. But as a very
long period has elapsed since you received letters from us, and you have
not yet come, we therefore hasten to remind you again, that you may
endeavour even now to present yourself before us with speed, and so may
be restored to your country, and obtain the accomplishment of your
prayers. And for your fuller information we have sent Achitas the
Deacon, from whom you will be able to learn the purpose of our soul,
that you may now secure the objects of your prayers.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p10"></span>Such was the tenor of the Emperor’s
letters; on receiving which I went up to Rome to bid farewell to the
Church and the Bishop: for I was at Aquileia <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643.md) when the above was written. The Church
was filled with all joy, and the Bishop Julius rejoiced with me in my
return and wrote to the Church <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644.md) ;
and as we passed along, the Bishops of every place sent us on our way in
peace. The letter of Julius was as follows.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p13"></span>52. Julius to the Presbyters,
Deacons, and people residing at Alexandria <span
id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p15"></span>I congratulate you, beloved brethren,
that you now behold the fruit of your faith before your eyes; for any
one may see that such indeed is the case with respect to my brother and
fellow-Bishop Athanasius, whom for the innocency of his life, and by
reason of your prayers, God is restoring to you again. Wherefore it is
easy to perceive, that you have continually offered up to God pure
prayers and full of love. Being mindful of the heavenly promises, and of
the conversation that leads to them, which you have learnt from the
teaching of my brother aforesaid, you knew certainly and understood by
the right faith that is in you, that he, whom you always had as present
in your most pious minds, would not be separated from you for ever.
Wherefore there is no need that I should use many words in writing to
you; for your faith has already anticipated whatever I could say to you,
and has by the grace of God procured the accomplishment of the common
prayers of you all. Therefore, I repeat again, I congratulate you,
because you have preserved your souls unconquered in the faith; and I
also congratulate no less my brother Athanasius, in that, though he is
enduring many afflictions, he has at no time been forgetful of your love
and earnest desires towards him. For although for a season he seemed to
be withdrawn from you in body, yet he has continued to live as always
present with you in spirit <span id="fr_646"></span>[647](#fn_646.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p17"></span>53. Wherefore he returns to you now
more illustrious than when he went away from you. Fire tries and
purifies the precious materials, gold and silver: but how can one
describe the worth of such a man, who, having passed victorious through
the perils of so many tribulations, is now restored to you, being
pronounced innocent not by our voice only, but by the voice of the whole
Council <span id="fr_647"></span>[648](#fn_647.md) ? Receive therefore,
beloved brethren, with all godly honour and rejoicing, your Bishop
Athanasius, together with those who have been partners with him in so
many labours. And rejoice that you now obtain the fulfilment of your
prayers, after that in your salutary letter you have given meat and
drink to your Pastor, who, so to speak, longed and thirsted after your
godliness. For while he sojourned in a foreign land, you were his
consolation; and you refreshed him during his persecutions by your most
faithful minds and spirits. And it delights me now to conceive <span
id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-Page_129"></span>and
figure to my mind the joy of every one of you at his return, and the
pious greetings of the concourse, and the glorious festivity of those
that run to meet him. What a day will that be to you, when my brother
comes back again, and your former sufferings terminate, and his
much-prized and desired return inspires you all with an exhilaration of
perfect joy! The like joy it is ours to feel in a very great degree,
since it has been granted us by God, to be able to make the acquaintance
of so eminent a man. It is fitting therefore that I should conclude my
letter with a prayer. May Almighty God, and His Son our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, afford you continual grace, giving you a reward for the
admirable faith which you displayed in your noble confession in behalf
of your Bishop, that He may impart unto you and unto them that are with
you, both here and hereafter, those better things, which ‘the eye hath
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath entered into the heart of man, the
things which God hath prepared for them that love Him <span
id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648.md) ,’ through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through Whom to Almighty God be glory for ever and ever. Amen. I pray,
dearly beloved brethren, for your health and strength in the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p20"></span>54. The Emperor, when I came to
him <span id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649.md) with these letters, received
me kindly, and sent me forth to my country and Church addressing the
following to the Bishops, Presbyters, and People.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p22"></span>Constantius, Victor, Maximus,
Augustus, to the Bishops and Presbyters of the Catholic Church.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p23"></span>The most reverend Athanasius has not
been deserted by the grace of God, but although for a brief season he
was subjected to trial to which human nature is liable, he has obtained
from the all-surveying Providence such an answer to his prayers as was
meet, and is restored by the will of the Most High, and by our sentence,
at once to his country and to the Church, over which by divine
permission he presided. Wherefore, in accordance with this, it is
fitting that it should be provided by our clemency, that all the decrees
which have heretofore been passed against those who held communion with
him, be now consigned to oblivion, and that all suspicions respecting
them be henceforward set at rest, and that immunity, such as the Clergy
who are associated with him formerly enjoyed, be duly confirmed to them.
Moreover to our other acts of favour towards him we have thought good to
add the following, that all persons of the sacred catalogue <span
id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650.md) should understand, that an assurance
of safety is given to all who adhere to him, whether Bishops, or other
Clergy. And union with him will be a sufficient guarantee, in the case
of any person, of an upright intention. For whoever, acting according to
a better judgment and part, shall choose to hold communion with him, we
order, in imitation of that Providence which has already gone before,
that all such should have the advantage of the grace which by the will
of the Most High is now offered to them from us. May God preserve you.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p25"></span>The Second Letter.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p26"></span>Constantius, Victor, Maximus,
Augustus, to the people of the Catholic Church at Alexandria.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p27"></span>55. Having in view your welfare in
all respects, and knowing that you have for a long time been deprived of
episcopal superintendence, we have thought good to send back to you your
Bishop Athanasius, a man known to all men for the uprightness that is in
him, and for the good disposition of his personal character. Receive
him, as you are wont to receive every one, in a suitable manner, and,
using his advocacy as your succour in your prayers to God, endeavour to
preserve continually that unanimity and peace according to the order of
the Church which is at the same time becoming in you, and most
advantageous for us. For it is not becoming that any dissension or
faction should be raised among you, contrary to the prosperity of our
times. We desire that this offence may be altogether removed from you,
and we exhort you to continue stedfastly in your accustomed prayers, and
to make him, as we said before, your advocate and helper towards God. So
that, when this your determination, beloved, has influenced the prayers
of all men, even those heathen who are still addicted to the false
worship of idols may eagerly desire to come to the knowledge of our
sacred religion. Again therefore we exhort you to continue in these
things, and gladly to receive your Bishop, who is sent back to you by
the decree of the Most High, and by our decision, and determine to greet
him cordially with all your soul and with all your mind. For this is
what is both becoming in you, and agreeable to our clemency. In order
that all occasions of disturbance and sedition may be taken away from
those who are maliciously disposed, we have by letter commanded the
magistrates who are among you to subject to the vengeance of <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-Page_130"></span>the
law all whom they find to be factious. Wherefore taking into
consideration both these things, our decision in accordance with the
will of the Most High, and our regard for you and for concord among you,
and the punishment that awaits the disorderly, observe such things as
are proper and suitable to the order of our sacred religion, and
receiving the afore-mentioned Bishop with all reverence and honour, take
care to offer up with him your prayers to God, the Father of all, in
behalf of yourselves, and for the well-being of your whole lives.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p28"></span>56. Having written these letters, he
also commanded that the decrees, which he had formerly sent out against
me in consequence of the calumnies of Eusebius and his fellows, should
be cancelled and struck out from the Orders of the Duke and the Prefect
of Egypt; and Eusebius the Decurion <span
id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651.md) was sent to withdraw them from the
Order-books. His letter on this occasion was as follows.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p30"></span>Constantius, Victor, Augustus, to
Nestorius <span id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652.md) . (*And in the same
terms, to the Governors of Augustamnica, the Thebais, and Libya*.)

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p32"></span>Whatever Orders are found to have
been passed heretofore, tending to the injury and dishonour of those who
hold communion with the Bishop Athanasius, we wish them to be now
erased. For we desire that whatever immunities his Clergy possessed
before, they should again possess the same. And we wish this our Order
to be observed, that when the Bishop Athanasius is restored to his
Church, those who hold communion with him may enjoy the immunities which
they have always enjoyed, and which the rest of the Clergy enjoy; so
that they may have the satisfaction of being on an equal footing with
others.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p33"></span>57. Being thus set forward on my
journey, as I passed through Syria, I met with the Bishops of Palestine,
who when they had called a Council <span
id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653.md) at Jerusalem, received me cordially,
and themselves also sent me on my way in peace, and addressed the
following letter to the Church and the Bishops.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p35"></span>The Holy Council, assembled at
Jerusalem, to the fellow-ministers in Egypt and Libya, and to the
Presbyters, Deacons, and People at Alexandria, brethren beloved and
greatly longed for, sends health in the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p36"></span>We cannot give worthy thanks to the
God of all, dearly beloved, for the wonderful things which He has done
at all times, and especially at this time for your Church, in restoring
to you your pastor and lord, and our fellow-minister Athanasius. For who
ever hoped that his eyes would see what you are now actually obtaining?
Of a truth, your prayers have been heard by the God of all, Who cares
for His Church, and has looked upon your tears and groans, and has
therefore heard your petitions. For ye were as sheep scattered and
fainting, not having a shepherd <span id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654.md)
. Wherefore the true Shepherd, Who careth for His own sheep, has visited
you from heaven, and has restored to you him whom you desire. Behold, we
also, being ready to do all things for the peace of the Church, and
being prompted by the same affection as yourselves, have saluted him
before you; and communicating with you through him, we send you these
greetings, and our offering of thanksgiving, that you may know that we
also are united in the bond of love that joins you to him. You are bound
to pray also for the piety of our most God-beloved Emperors, who, when
they knew your earnest longings after him, and his innocency, determined
to restore him to you with all honour. Wherefore receive him with
uplifted hands, and take good heed that you offer up due thanksgiving on
his behalf to God Who has bestowed these blessings upon you; so that you
may continually rejoice with God and glorify our Lord, in Christ Jesus
our Lord, through Whom to the Father be glory for ever. Amen.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p38"></span>I have set down here the names of
those who subscribed this letter, although I have mentioned them
before <span id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655.md) . They are these;
Maximus, Aetius, Arius, Theodorus <span
id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656.md) , Germanus, Silvanus, Paulus,
Patricius, Elpidius, Germanus, Eusebius, Zenobius, Paulus,
Macrinus <span id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657.md) , Petrus, Claudius.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p42"></span>58. When Ursacius and Valens saw all
this, they forthwith condemned themselves for what they had done, and
going up to Rome, confessed their crime, declared themselves penitent,
and sought forgiveness <span id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658.md) ,
addressing the following letters to Julius, Bishop of ancient Rome, and
to ourselves. Copies of them were sent to me from Paulinus, Bishop of
Treveri <span id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p45"></span>*A Translation from the Latin of a
Letter* <span id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660.md) *to Julius, concerning
the recantation of Ursacius and Valens* <span
id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p48"></span>Ursacius and Valens to the most
blessed lord, pope Julius.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p49"></span><span id="page_131">p. 131</span>
<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-Page_131"></span>Whereas it is well known that we
have heretofore in letters laid many grievous charges against the Bishop
Athanasius, and whereas when we were corrected by the letters of your
Goodness, we were unable to render an account of the statement we had
made; we do now confess before your Goodness, and in the presence of all
the Presbyters our brethren, that all the reports which have heretofore
come to your hearing respecting the case of the aforesaid Athanasius,
are falsehoods and fabrications, and are utterly inconsistent with his
character. Wherefore we earnestly desire communion with the aforesaid
Athanasius, especially since your Piety, with your characteristic
generosity, has vouchsafed to pardon our error. But we also declare,
that if at any time the Eastern Bishops, or even Athanasius himself,
ungenerously should wish to bring us to judgment for this matter, we
will not depart contrary to your judgment. And as for the heretic Arius
and his supporters, who say that once the Son was not, and that the Son
was made of that which was not, and who deny that Christ is God and the
Son of God before the worlds, we anathematize them both now and for
evermore, as also we have set forth in our former declaration at
Milan <span id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662.md) . We have written this
with our own hands, and we profess again, that we have renounced for
ever, as we said before, the Arian heresy and its authors.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p51"></span>I Ursacius subscribed this my
confession in person; and likewise I Valens.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p52"></span>Ursacius and Valens, Bishops, to
their lord and brother, the Bishop Athanasius.

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p53"></span>Having an opportunity of sending by
our brother and fellow Presbyter Musæus, who is coming to your Charity,
we salute you affectionately, beloved brother, through him, from
Aquileia, and pray you, being as we trust in health, to read our letter.
You will also give us confidence, if you will return to us an answer in
writing. For know that we are at peace with you, and in communion with
the Church, of which the salutation prefixed to this letter is a proof.
May Divine Providence preserve you, my Lord, our beloved brother!

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p54"></span>Such were their letters, and such the
sentence and the judgment of the Bishops in my behalf. But in order to
prove that they did not act thus to ingratiate themselves, or under
compulsion in any quarter, I desire, with your permission, to recount
the whole matter from the beginning, so that you may perceive that the
bishops wrote as they did with upright and just intentions, and that
Ursacius and Valens, though they were slow to do so, at last confessed
the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_641"></span>[127:642](2040191.htm#fr_641.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p4"></span> Written <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 345.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[128:643](2040191.htm#fr_642.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p7"></span> Gothof. in *Cod. Theod.* viii. 5. p.
507.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[128:644](2040191.htm#fr_643.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p11"></span> *Apol. Const.* 3, 15.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[128:645](2040191.htm#fr_644.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p12"></span> “They acquainted Julius the Bishop
of Rome with their case; and he, according to the prerogative (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p12.2"></span>προνόμια</span>) of
the Church in Rome, fortified them with letters in which he spoke his
mind, and sent them back to the East, restoring each to his own place,
and remarking on those who had violently deposed them. They then set out
from Rome, and on the strength (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p12.4"></span>θαῤ& 191·οῦντες</span>) of the letters of
Bishop Julius, take possession of their Churches.” Socr. ii. 15. It must
be observed, that in the foregoing sentences Socrates has spoken of
“(*imperial*) Rome.” Sozomen says, “Whereas the care of all (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p12.6"></span>κηδεμονίας</span>)
pertained to him on account of the dignity of his see, he restored each
to his own Church.” iii. 8. “I answer,” says Barrow, “the Pope did not
restore them *judicially* but *declaratively,* that is, declaring his
approbation of their right and innocence, did admit them to
communion.…Besides, the Pope’s proceeding was taxed, and protested
against, as irregular;.…and, lastly, the restitution of Athanasius and
the other Bishops had no complete effect, till it was confirmed by the
synod of Sardica, backed by the imperial authority.” *Suprem.* p. 360.
ed. 1836.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[128:646](2040191.htm#fr_645.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p14"></span> Written early in 346 <span
class="c10"><span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p14.2"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_646"></span>[128:647](2040191.htm#fr_646.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p16"></span> Athan. here omits a paragraph in his
own praise. vid. Socr. ii. 23.

<span id="fn_647"></span>[128:648](2040191.htm#fr_647.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p18"></span> §35, note 3.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[129:649](2040191.htm#fr_648.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p19"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[129:650](2040191.htm#fr_649.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p21"></span> \[At Antioch September (?) 346. See
Prolegg. ch. ii. §6 (3).\]

<span id="fn_650"></span>[129:651](2040191.htm#fr_650.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p24"></span> Vid. Bingh. *Antiqu.* I. v. 10.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[130:652](2040191.htm#fr_651.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p29"></span> Member of the Curia or Council.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[130:653](2040191.htm#fr_652.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p31"></span> Prefect of Egypt, vid. *Vita Ant.*
86, *Fest. Ind.* xvii.–xxiv.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[130:654](2040191.htm#fr_653.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p34"></span> *Hist. Arian.* 25.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[130:655](2040191.htm#fr_654.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p37"></span> [Matt. ix.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[130:656](2040191.htm#fr_655.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p39"></span> §50.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[130:657](2040191.htm#fr_656.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p40"></span> Theodosius, *supr.*

<span id="fn_657"></span>[130:658](2040191.htm#fr_657.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p41"></span> Not *supr.*

<span id="fn_658"></span>[130:659](2040191.htm#fr_658.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p43"></span> Cf. §20, note 4.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[130:660](2040191.htm#fr_659.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p44.1"></span>Τριβέρων</span>, Paul *infr. Hist. Ar.*
26.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[130:661](2040191.htm#fr_660.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p46"></span> *Hist. Arian.* 25. 26.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[130:662](2040191.htm#fr_661.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p47"></span> \[Gibbon, ch. xxi. note 108, doubts
the fact of this recantation on the ground of the dissimilar tone of the
two letters that follow. Newman explains that they treat Julius as ‘a
superior,’ Athanasius as ‘an equal;’ but surely he was something more
than an equal. Fear of Constans, and the desire to secure themselves
from attack, would make it important for them at any price to obtain the
favour of the first bishop of the West. In order to do this they had to
make their peace with Athanasius; but in doing so, they went no further
than they could help.\]

<span id="fn_662"></span>[131:663](2040191.htm#fr_662.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p50"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.i.iv-p50.2"></span>a.d.</span> 347.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](2040192.md)
