[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040115)  [Next](2040117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xix-p1"></span> §19. *Man, unmoved by nature, was to be
taught to know God by that sacred Manhood, Whose deity all nature
confessed, especially in His Death.*

<span id="vii.ii.xix-p2"></span>But all this it seemed well for the
Saviour to do; that since men had failed to know His Providence,
revealed in the Universe, and had failed to perceive His Godhead shewn
in creation, they might at any rate from the works of His body recover
their sight, and through Him receive an idea of the knowledge of the
Father, inferring, as I said before, from particular cases His
Providence over the whole. 2. For who that saw His power over evil
spirits, or who that saw the evil spirits confess that He was their
Lord, will hold his mind any longer in doubt whether this be the Son and
Wisdom and Power of God? 3. For He made even the creation break silence:
in that even at His death, marvellous to relate, or rather at His actual
trophy over death—the Cross I mean—all creation was confessing that He
that was made manifest and suffered in the body was not man merely, but
the Son of God and Saviour of all. For the sun hid His face, and the
earth quaked and the mountains were rent: all men were awed. Now these
things shewed that Christ on the Cross was God, while all creation was
His slave, and was witnessing by its fear to its Master’s presence.
Thus, then, God the Word shewed Himself to men by His works. But our
next step must be to recount and speak of the end of His bodily life and
course, and of the nature of the death of His body; especially as this
is the sum of our faith, and all men without exception are full of it:
so that you may know that no whit the less from this also Christ is
known to be God and the Son of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: None, then, could bestow incorruption, but He Who had made, none
restore the likeness of God, save His Own Image, none quicken, but the
Life, none teach, but the Word. And He, to pay our debt of death, must
also die for us, and rise again as our first-fruits from the grave.
Mortal therefore His Body must be; corruptible, His Body could not
be.](2040117)
