[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040046)  [Next](2040048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.ii-p1"></span> §2. *Evil no part of the essential
nature of things. The original creation and constitution of man in grace
and in the knowledge of God.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.ii-p2"></span>In the beginning wickedness did not
exist. Nor indeed does it exist even now in those who are holy, nor does
it in any way belong to their <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span
id="vi.ii.i.ii-Page_5"></span>nature. But men later on began to contrive
it and to elaborate it to their own hurt. Whence also they devised the
invention of idols, treating what was not as though it were. 2. For God
Maker of all and King of all, that has His Being beyond <span
id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) all substance and human discovery,
inasmuch as He is good and exceeding noble, made, through His own Word
our Saviour Jesus Christ, the human race after His own image, and
constituted man able to see and know realities by means of this
assimilation to Himself, giving him also a conception <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) and knowledge even of His own
eternity, in order that, preserving his nature intact, he might not ever
either depart from his idea of God, nor recoil from the communion of the
holy ones; but having the grace of Him that gave it, having also God’s
own power from the Word of the Father, he might rejoice and have
fellowship with the Deity, living the life of immortality unharmed and
truly blessed. For having nothing to hinder his knowledge of the Deity,
he ever beholds, by his purity, the Image of the Father, God the Word,
after Whose image he himself is made. He is awe-struck as he
contemplates that Providence <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107)
which through the Word extends to the universe, being raised above the
things of sense and every bodily appearance, but cleaving to the divine
and thought-perceived things in the heavens by the power of his mind. 3.
For when the mind of men does not hold converse with bodies, nor has
mingled with it from without aught of their lust, but is wholly above
them, dwelling with itself as it was made to begin with, then,
transcending the things of sense and all things human, it is raised up
on high; and seeing the Word, it sees in Him also the Father of the
Word, taking pleasure in contemplating Him, and gaining renewal by its
desire toward Him; 4. exactly as the first of men created, the one who
was named Adam in Hebrew, is described in the Holy Scriptures as having
at the beginning had his mind to God-ward in a freedom unembarrassed by
shame, and as associating with the holy ones in that contemplation of
things perceived by the mind which he enjoyed in the place where he
was—the place which the holy Moses called in figure a Garden. So purity
of soul is sufficient of itself to reflect God, as the Lord also says,
“Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[5:106](2040047.htm#fr_105) <span
id="vi.ii.i.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.ii-p3"></span> See Orig. *c. Cels.* vii. 42 *sqq*. *de
Princ.* I. 1.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[5:107](2040047.htm#fr_106) <span
id="vi.ii.i.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.ii-p4"></span> Restored in Christ, see §34.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[5:108](2040047.htm#fr_107) <span
id="vi.ii.i.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.ii-p5"></span> Cf. *Ep. Æg.* 15, *Apol. Fug.* passim,
*Orat.* iii. 37.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The decline of man from the above condition, owing to his
absorption in material things.](2040048)
