[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040260)  [Next](2040262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-Page_223"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xvii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>To the Bishops of Egypt.</span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="xvii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Chapter I.</span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p4"></span>1. *Christ warned His followers against
false prophets.*

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p5"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xvii.ii.i-p5.1"></span>All</span> things whatsoever our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, as Luke wrote, ‘both hath done and taught <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146) ,’ He effected after having
appeared for our salvation; for He came, as John saith, ‘not to condemn
the world, but that the world through Him might be saved <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147) .’ And among the rest we have
especially to admire this instance of His goodness, that He was not
silent concerning those who should fight against us, but plainly told us
beforehand, that, when those things should come to pass, we might
straightway be found with minds established by His teaching. For He
said, ‘There shall arise false prophets and false Christs, and shall
shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were possible, the
very elect shall be deceived. Behold, I have told you before <span
id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148) .’ Manifold indeed and beyond human
conception are the instructions and gifts of grace which He has laid up
in us; as the pattern of heavenly conversation, power against demons,
the adoption of sons, and that exceeding great and singular grace, the
knowledge of the Father and of the Word Himself, and the gift of the
Holy Ghost. But the mind of man is prone to evil exceedingly; moreover,
our adversary the devil, envying us the possession of such great
blessings, goeth about seeking to snatch away the seed of the word which
is sown within us. Wherefore as if by His prophetic warnings He would
seal up His instructions in our hearts as His own peculiar treasure, the
Lord said, ‘Take heed that no man deceive you: for many shall come in My
name, saying, I am he; and the time draweth near; and they shall deceive
many: go ye not therefore after them <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) .’ This is a great gift which the
Word has bestowed upon us, that we should not be deceived by
appearances, but that, howsoever these things are concealed, we should
all the more distinguish them by the grace of the Spirit. For whereas
the inventor of wickedness and great spirit of evil, the devil, is
utterly hateful, and as soon as he shews himself is rejected <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150) of all men,—as a serpent, as a
dragon, as a lion seeking whom he may seize upon and devour,—therefore
he conceals and covers what he really is, and craftily personates that
Name which all men desire, so that deceiving by a false appearance, he
may thenceforth fix fast in his own chains those whom he has led astray.
And as if one that desired to kidnap the children of others during the
absence of their parents, should personate their appearance, and so
putting a cheat on the affections of the offspring, should carry them
far away and destroy them; in like manner this evil and wily spirit the
devil, having no confidence in himself, and knowing the love which men
bear to the truth, personates its appearance, and so spreads his own
poison among those that follow after him.

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p11"></span>2. *Satan pretending to be holy, is
detected by the Christian.*

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p12"></span>Thus he deceived Eve, not speaking his
own, but artfully adopting the words of God, and perverting their
meaning. Thus he suggested evil to the wife of Job, persuading her to
feign affection for her husband, while he taught her to blaspheme God.
Thus does the crafty spirit mock men by false displays, deluding and
drawing each into his own pit of wickedness. When of old he deceived the
first man Adam, thinking that through him he should have all men subject
unto him, he exulted with great boldness and said, ‘My hand hath found
as a nest the riches of the people; and as one gathereth eggs that are
left, have I gathered all the earth; and there is none that shall escape
me or speak against <span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-Page_224"></span>me <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151) .’ But when the Lord came upon
earth, and the enemy made trial of His human Economy, being unable to
deceive the flesh which He had taken upon Him, from that time forth he,
who promised himself the occupation of the whole world, is for His sake
mocked even by children: that proud one is mocked as a sparrow <span
id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152) . For now the infant child lays his
hand upon the hole of the asp, and laughs at him that deceived Eve <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153) ; and all that rightly believe in
the Lord tread under foot him that said, ‘I will ascend above the
heights of the clouds: I will be like the Most High <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154) .’ Thus he suffers and is
dishonoured; and although he still ventures with shameless confidence to
disguise himself, yet now, wretched spirit, he is detected the rather by
them that bear the Sign on their foreheads <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) ; yea, more, he is rejected of
them, and is humbled, and put to shame. For even if, now that he is a
creeping serpent, he shall transform himself into an angel of light, yet
his deception will not profit him; for we have been taught that ‘though
an angel from heaven preach unto us any other gospel than that we have
received, he is anathema <span id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) .’

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p19"></span>3. And although, again, he conceal his
natural falsehood, and pretend to speak truth with his lips; yet are we
‘not ignorant of his devices <span id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157)
,’ but are able to answer him in the words spoken by the Spirit against
him; ‘But unto the ungodly, said God, why dost thou preach My laws?’
and, ‘Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) .’ For even though he speak the
truth, the deceiver is not worthy of credit. And whereas Scripture
shewed this, when relating his wicked artifices against Eve in Paradise,
so the Lord also reproved him,—first in the mount, when He laid open
‘the folds of his breast-plate <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159) ,’ and shewed who the crafty spirit
was, and proved that it was not one of the saints <span
id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160) , but Satan that was tempting Him.
For He said, ‘Get thee behind Me Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve <span
id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161) .’ And again, when He put a curb in
the mouths of the demons that cried after Him from the tombs. For
although what they said was true, and they lied not then, saying, ‘Thou
art the Son of God,’ and ‘the Holy One of God <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162) ;’ yet He would not that the truth
should proceed from an unclean mouth, and especially from such as them,
lest under pretence thereof they should mingle with it their own
malicious devices, and sow these also while men slept. Therefore He
suffered them not to speak such words, neither would He have us to
suffer such, but hath charged us by His own mouth, saying, ‘Beware of
false prophets, which come to you in sheeps’ clothing, but inwardly they
are ravening wolves <span id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163) ;’ and by
the mouth of His Holy Apostles, ‘Believe not every spirit <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164) .’ Such is the method of our
adversary’s operations; and of the like nature are all these inventions
of heresies, each of which has for the father of its own device the
devil, who changed and became a murderer and a liar from the beginning.
But being ashamed to profess his hateful name, they usurp the glorious
Name of our Saviour ‘which is above every name <span
id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165) ,’ and deck themselves out in the
language of Scripture, speaking indeed the words, but stealing away the
true meaning thereof; and so disguising by some artifice their false
inventions, they also become the murderers of those whom they have led
astray.

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p29"></span>4. *It profits not to receive part of
Scripture, and reject part.*

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p30"></span>For whence do Marcion and Manichæus
receive the Gospel while they reject the Law? For the New Testament
arose out of the Old, and bears witness to the Old; if then they reject
this, how can they receive what proceeds from it? Thus Paul was an
Apostle of the Gospel, ‘which God promised afore by His prophets in the
holy Scriptures <span id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166) :’ and our
Lord Himself said, ‘ye search the Scriptures, for they are they which
testify of Me <span id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167) .’ How then
shall they confess the Lord unless they first search the Scriptures
which are written concerning Him? And the disciples say that they have
found Him, ‘of whom Moses and the Prophets did write <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168) .’ And what is the Law to the
Sadducees if they receive not the Prophets <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169) ? For God who gave the Law, Himself
promised in the Law that He would raise up Prophets also, so that the
same is Lord both of the Law and of the Prophets, and he that denies the
one must of necessity deny the other also. And again, what is the Old
Testament to the Jews, unless they acknowledge the Lord whose coming was
expected according to it? For had they believed the writings of Moses,
they would have believed the words of the Lord; for He said, ‘He wrote
of Me <span id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170) .’ Moreover, what are
the Scriptures to him <span id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171) of
Samosata, who denies the Word of God and His incarnate <span
id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-Page_225"></span>Presence <span
id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172) , which is signified and declared
both in the Old and New Testament? And of what use are the Scriptures to
the Arians also, and why do they bring them forward, men who say that
the Word of God is a creature, and like the Gentiles ‘serve the creature
more than’ God ‘the Creator <span id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173)
?’ Thus each of these heresies, in respect of the peculiar impiety of
its invention, has nothing in common with the Scriptures. And their
advocates are aware of this, that the Scriptures are very much, or
rather altogether, opposed to the doctrines of every one of them; but
for the sake of deceiving the more simple sort (such as are those of
whom it is written in the Proverbs, ‘The simple believeth every
word <span id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174) ),’ they pretend like
their ‘father the devil <span id="fr_1175"></span>[1176](#fn_1175) ’ to
study and to quote the language of Scripture, in order that they may
appear by their words to have a right belief, and so may persuade their
wretched followers to believe what is contrary to the Scriptures.
Assuredly in every one of these heresies the devil has thus disguised
himself, and has suggested to them words full of craftiness. The Lord
spake concerning them, that ‘there shall arise false Christs and false
prophets, so that they shall deceive many <span
id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176) .’ Accordingly the devil has come,
speaking by each and saying, ‘I am Christ, and the truth is with me;’
and he has made them, one and all, to be liars like himself. And strange
it is, that while all heresies are at variance with one another
concerning the mischievous inventions which each has framed, they are
united together only by the common purpose of lying <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177) . For they have one and the same
father that has sown in them all the seeds, of falsehood. Wherefore the
faithful Christian and true disciple of the Gospel, having grace to
discern spiritual things, and having built the house of his faith upon a
rock, stands continually firm and secure from their deceits. But the
simple person, as I said before, that is not thoroughly grounded in
knowledge, such an one, considering only the words that are spoken and
not perceiving their meaning, is immediately drawn away by their wiles.
Wherefore it is good and needful for us to pray that we may receive the
gift of discerning spirits, so that every one may know, according to the
precept of John, whom he ought to reject, and whom to receive as friends
and of the same faith. Now one might write at great length concerning
these things, if one desired to go into details respecting them; for the
impiety and perverseness of heresies will appear to be manifold and
various, and the craft of the deceivers to be very terrible. But since
holy Scripture is of all things most sufficient <span
id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178) for us, therefore recommending to
those who desire to know more of these matters, to read the Divine word,
I now hasten to set before you that which most claims attention, and for
the sake of which principally I have written these things.

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p44"></span>5. *Attempt of Arians to substitute a
Creed for the Nicene.*

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p45"></span>I heard during my sojourn in these
parts <span id="fr_1179"></span>[1180](#fn_1179) (and they were true and
orthodox brethren that informed me), that certain professors of Arian
opinions had met together, and drawn a confession of faith to their own
liking, and that they intend to send word to you, that you must either
subscribe to what pleases them, or rather to what the devil has inspired
them with, or in case of refusal must suffer banishment. They are indeed
already beginning to molest the Bishops of these parts; and thereby are
plainly manifesting their disposition. For inasmuch as they frame this
document only for the purpose of inflicting banishment or other
punishments, what does such conduct prove them to be, but enemies of the
Christians, and friends of the devil and his angels? and especially
since they spread abroad what they like contrary to the mind of that
gracious Prince, our most religious Emperor Constantius <span
id="fr_1180"></span>[1181](#fn_1180) . And this they do with great
craftiness, and, as appears to me, chiefly with two ends in view; first,
that by obtaining your subscriptions, they may seem to remove the evil
repute that rests upon the name of Arius, and may escape notice
themselves as if not professing his opinions; and again, that by putting
forth these statements they may cast a shade over the Council of
Nicæa <span id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181) , and the confession of
faith which was then put forth against the Arian heresy. But this
proceeding does but prove the more plainly their own maliciousness and
heterodoxy. For had they believed aright, they would have been satisfied
with the confession put forth at Nicæa by the whole Ecumenic Council;
and had they considered themselves calumniated and falsely called
Arians, they ought not to have been so eager to innovate upon what was
written against Arius, lest what was directed against him might seem to
be aimed at them also. This, however, is not the course they pursue, but
they conduct the struggle in their own behalf, just as if they were
Arius. Observe how entirely they disregard the truth, and how everything
they say and do is for the sake of the Arian heresy. For in that they
dare to question those sound <span id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-Page_226"></span>definitions of the faith, and take upon
themselves to produce others contrary to them, what else do they but
accuse the Fathers, and stand up in defence of that heresy which they
opposed and protested against? And what they now write proceeds not from
any regard for the truth, as I said before, but rather they do it as in
mockery and by an artifice, for the purpose of deceiving men; that by
sending about their letters they may engage the ears of the people to
listen to these notions, and so put off the time when they will be
brought to trial; and that by concealing their impiety from observation,
they may have room to extend their heresy, which, ‘like a gangrene <span
id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182) ,’ eats its way everywhere.

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p50"></span>6. Accordingly they disturb and disorder
everything, and yet not even thus are they satisfied with their own
proceedings. For every year, as if they were going to draw up a
contract, they meet together and pretend to write about the faith,
whereby they expose themselves the more to ridicule and disgrace,
because their expositions are rejected, not by others, but by
themselves. For had they had any confidence in their previous
statements, they would not have desired to draw up others; nor again,
leaving these last, would they now have set down the one in question,
which no doubt true to their custom they will again alter, after a very
short interval, and as soon as they shall find a pretence for their
customary plotting against certain persons. For when they have a design
against any, then it is that they make a great show of writing about the
faith; that, as Pilate washed his hands, so they by writing may destroy
those who rightly believe in Christ, hoping that, as making definitions
about the faith, they may appear, as I have repeatedly said, to be free
from the charge of false doctrine. But they will not be able to hide
themselves, nor to escape; for they continually become their own
accusers even while they defend themselves. Justly so, since instead of
answering those who bring proof against them, they do but persuade
themselves to believe whatever they wish. And when is an acquittal
obtained, upon the criminal becoming his own judge? Hence it is that
they are always writing, and always altering their own previous
statements, and thus they shew an uncertain faith <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183) ,’ or rather a manifest unbelief
and perverseness. And this, it appears to me, must needs be the case
with them; for since, having fallen away from the truth, and desiring to
overthrow that sound confession of faith which was drawn up at Nicæa,
they have, in the language of Scripture, ‘loved to wander, and have not
refrained their feet <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184) ;’
therefore, like Jerusalem of old, they labour and toil in their changes,
sometimes writing one thing, and sometimes another, but only for the
sake of gaining time, and that they may continue enemies of Christ, and
deceivers of mankind.

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p53"></span>7. *The party of Acacius really Arians.*

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p54"></span>Who, then, that has any real regard for
truth, will be willing to suffer these men any longer? who will not
justly reject their writing? who will not denounce their audacity, that
being but few <span id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185) in number, they
would have their decisions to prevail over everything, and as desiring
the supremacy of their own meetings, held in corners and suspicious in
their circumstances, would forcibly cancel the decrees of an uncorrupt,
pure, and Ecumenic Council? Men who have been promoted by Eusebius and
his fellows for advocating this Antichristian heresy, venture to define
articles of faith, and while they ought to be brought to judgment as
criminals, like Caiaphas, they take upon themselves to judge. They
compose a Thalia, and would have it received as a standard of faith,
while they are not yet themselves determined what they believe. Who does
not know that Secundus <span id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186) of
Pentapolis, who was several times degraded long ago, was received by
them for the sake of the Arian madness; and that George <span
id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187) , now of Laodicea, and Leontius the
Eunuch, and before him Stephanus, and Theodorus of Heraclea <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188) , were promoted by them? Ursacius
and Valens also, who from the first were instructed by Arius as young
men <span id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189) , though they had been
formerly degraded from the Priesthood, afterwards got the title of
Bishops on account of their impiety; as did also Acacius,
Patrophilus <span id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190) , and Narcissus,
who have been most forward in all manner of impiety. These were degraded
in the great Synod of Sardica; Eustathius also now of Sebastea,
Demophilus and Germinius <span id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191) ,
Eudoxius, and Basil, who are supporters of that impiety, were advanced
in the same manner. Of Cecropius <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192) , and him they called Auxentius,
and of Epictetus <span id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193) the
impostor, it were superfluous for me to speak, since it is manifest to
all men, in what manner, on what pretexts, and by what enemies of ours
these were promoted, that they might bring their false charges against
the orthodox Bishops who were the objects of their designs. For although
they resided at the distance of eighty posts, and were unknown to the
people, yet on the ground of their impiety they purchased for themselves
the title of Bishop. For <span id="page_227">p. 227</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-Page_227"></span>the same reason also they have now <span
id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194) hired one George of Cappadocia,
whom they wish to impose upon you. But no respect is due to him any more
than to the rest; for there is a report in these parts that he is not
even a Christian, but is devoted to the worship of idols; and he has a
hangman’s temper <span id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195) . And this
person, such as he is described to be, they have taken into their ranks,
that they may be able to injure, to plunder, and to slay; for in these
things he is a great proficient, but is ignorant of the very principles
of the Christian faith.

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p66"></span>8. *Words are bad, though Scriptural,
which proceed from bad men.*

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p67"></span>Such are the machinations of these men
against the truth: but their designs are manifest to all the world,
though they attempt in ten thousand ways, like eels, to elude the grasp,
and to escape detection as enemies of Christ. Wherefore I beseech you,
let no one among you be deceived, no one seduced by them; rather,
considering that a sort of judaical impiety is invading the Christian
faith, be ye all zealous for the Lord; hold fast, every one, the faith
we have received from the Fathers, which they who assembled at Nicæa
recorded in writing, and endure not those who endeavour to innovate
thereon. And however they may write phrases out of the Scripture, endure
not their writings; however they may speak the language of the orthodox,
yet attend not to what they say; for they speak not with an upright
mind, but putting on such language like sheeps’ clothing, in their
hearts they think with Arius, after the manner of the devil, who is the
author of all heresies. For he too made use of the words of Scripture,
but was put to silence by our Saviour. For if he had indeed meant them
as he used them, he would not have fallen from heaven; but now having
fallen through his pride, he artfully dissembles in his speech, and
oftentimes maliciously endeavours to lead men astray by the subtleties
and sophistries of the Gentiles. Had these expositions of theirs
proceeded from the orthodox, from such as the great Confessor Hosius,
and Maximinus <span id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196) of Gaul, or his
successor <span id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197) , or from such as
Philogonius and Eustathius <span id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198) ,
Bishops of the East <span id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199) , or
Julius and Liberius of Rome, or Cyriacus of Mœsia <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200) , or Pistus and Aristæus of Greece,
or Silvester and Protogenes of Dacia, or Leontius and Eupsychius of
Cappadocia, or Cæcilianus of Africa, or Eustorgius of Italy, or Capito
of Sicily, or Macarius of Jerusalem, or Alexander of Constantinople, or
Pæderos of Heraclea, or those great Bishops Meletius, Basil, and
Longianus, and the rest from Armenia and Pontus, or Lupus and Amphion
from Cilicia, or James <span id="fr_1201"></span>[1202](#fn_1201) and
the rest from Mesopotamia, or our own blessed Alexander, with others of
the same opinions as these;—there would then have been nothing to
suspect in their statements, for the character of apostolical men is
sincere and incapable of fraud.

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p74"></span>9. *For such words do but serve as their
cloak.*

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p75"></span>But when they proceed from those who are
hired to advocate the cause of heresy, and since, according to the
divine proverb, ‘The words of the wicked are to lie in wait,’ and ‘The
mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things,’ and ‘The counsels of the
wicked are deceit <span id="fr_1202"></span>[1203](#fn_1202) :’ it
becomes us to watch and be sober, brethren, as the Lord has said, lest
any deception arise from subtlety of speech and craftiness; lest any one
come and pretend to say, ‘I preach Christ,’ and after a little while he
be found to be Antichrist. These indeed are Antichrists, whosoever come
to you in the cause of the Arian madness. For what defect is there among
you, that any one need to come to you from without? Or, of what do the
Churches of Egypt and Libya and Alexandria stand so much in need, that
these men should make a purchase <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[1204](#fn_1203) of the Episcopate instead of wood
and goods, and intrude into Churches which do not belong to them? Who is
not aware, who does not perceive clearly, that they do all this in order
to support their impiety? Wherefore although they should make themselves
dumb, or although they should bind on their garments larger borders than
the Pharisees, and pour themselves forth in long speeches, and practise
the tones of their voice <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204) ,
they ought not to be believed; for it is not the mode of speaking, but
the intentions of the heart and a godly conversation that recommend the
faithful Christian. And thus the Sadducees and Herodians, although they
have the law in their mouths, were put to rebuke by our Saviour, who
said unto them, ‘Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of
God <span id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205) :’ and all men witnessed
the exposure of those who pretended to quote the words of the Law, as
being in their minds heretics and enemies of God <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206) . Others indeed they deceived by
these professions, but when our Lord became man they were not able to
deceive Him; ‘for <span id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-Page_228"></span>the Word was made Flesh,’ who ‘knoweth
the thoughts of men that they are vain.’ Thus He exposed the carping of
the Jews, saying, ‘If God were your Father, ye would love Me, for I
proceeded forth from the Father, and am come to you <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207) .’ In like manner these men seem
now to act; for they disguise their real sentiments, and then make use
of the language of Scripture for their writings, which they hold forth
as a bait for the ignorant, that they may inveigle them into their own
wickedness.

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p82"></span>10. *They ought first to condemn Arius,
if they are to be heard.*

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p83"></span>Consider, whether this be not so. If,
when there is no reason for their doing so, they write confessions of
faith, it is a superfluous, and perhaps also a mischievous proceeding,
because, when there is no enquiry, they offer occasion for controversy
of words, and unsettle the simple hearts of the brethren, disseminating
among them such notions as have never entered into their minds. And if
they are attempting to write a defence of themselves in regard to the
Arian heresy, they ought first to have removed the seeds of those evils
which have sprung up, and to have proscribed those who produced them,
and then in the room of former statements to set forth others which are
sound; or else let them openly vindicate the opinions of Arius, that
they may no longer covertly but openly shew themselves enemies of
Christ, and that all men may fly from them as from the face of a
serpent. But now they keep back those opinions, and for a pretence write
on other matters; just as if a surgeon, when summoned to attend a person
wounded and suffering, should upon coming in to him say not a word
concerning his wounds, but proceed to discourse about his sound limbs.
Such an one would be chargeable with utter stupidity, for saying nothing
on the matter for which he came, but discoursing on those other points
in which he was not needed. Yet just in the same manner these men omit
those matters which concern their heresy, and take upon themselves to
write on other subjects; whereas if they had any regard for the Faith,
or any love for Christ, they ought first to have removed out of the way
those blasphemous expressions uttered against Him, and then in the room
of them to speak and to write the sound words. But this they neither do
themselves, nor permit those that desire to do so, whether it be from
ignorance, or through craft and artifice.

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p84"></span>11. *No profit to do right in one way,
if we do wrong in another.*

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p85"></span>If they do this from ignorance they must
be charged with rashness, because they affirm positively concerning
things that they know not; but if they dissemble knowingly, their
condemnation is the greater, because while they overlook nothing in
consulting for their own interests, in writing about faith in our Lord
they make a mockery, and do anything rather than speak the truth; they
keep back those particulars respecting which their heresy is accused,
and merely bring forward the language of the Scriptures. Now this is a
manifest theft of the truth, and a practice full of all iniquity; and so
I am sure your piety will readily perceive it to be from the following
illustrations. No person being accused of adultery defends himself as
innocent of theft; nor would any one in prosecuting a charge of murder
suffer the accused parties to defend themselves by saying, ‘We have not
committed perjury, but have preserved the deposit which was entrusted to
us.’ This would be mere child’s play, instead of a refutation of the
charge and a demonstration of the truth. For what has murder to do with
a deposit, or adultery with theft? The vices are indeed related to each
other as proceeding from the same heart; yet in respect to the
refutation of an alleged offence, they have no connection with each
other. Accordingly as it is written in the Book of Joshua <span
id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208) the son of Nun, when Achan was
charged with theft, he did not excuse himself with the plea of his zeal
in the wars; but being convicted of the offence was stoned by all the
people. And when Saul was charged with negligence and a breach of the
law, he did not benefit his cause by alleging his conduct on other
matters <span id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209) . For a defence on
one count will not operate to obtain an acquittal on another count; but
if all things should be done according to law and justice, a man must
defend himself in those particulars wherein he is accused, and must
either disprove the past, or else confess it with the promise that he
will desist, and do so no more. But if he is guilty of the crime, and
will not confess, but in order to conceal the truth speaks on other
points instead of the one in question, he shews plainly that he has
acted amiss, nay, and is conscious of his delinquency. But what need of
many words, seeing that these persons are themselves accusers of the
Arian heresy? For since they have not the boldness to speak out, but
conceal their blasphemous expressions, it is plain that they know <span
id="page_229">p. 229</span> <span id="xvii.ii.i-Page_229"></span>that
this heresy is separate and alien from the truth. But since they
themselves conceal it and are afraid to speak, it is necessary for me to
strip off the veil from their impiety, and to expose the heresy to
public view, knowing as I do the statements which Arius and his fellows
formerly made, and how they were cast out of the Church, and degraded
from the Clergy. But here first I ask for pardon <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210) of the foul words which I am about
to produce, since I use them, not because I thus think, but in order to
convict the heretics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[223:1147](2040261.htm#fr_1146) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p6"></span> [Acts i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[223:1148](2040261.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p7"></span> [John iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[223:1149](2040261.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p8"></span> <span id="xvii.ii.i-p8.1"></span>[Matt.
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#025)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p8.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[223:1150](2040261.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p9"></span> [Luke xxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#008)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[223:1151](2040261.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvii.ii.i-p10.1"></span>βάλλεται</span>, vid. p. 170, note 6.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[224:1152](2040261.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p13"></span> [Is. x.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#014)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p13.1"></span>.
LXX., cf. p. 202, note 8.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[224:1153](2040261.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p14"></span> Vid. [Job
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#005), [Job
40:24](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#024)<span
id="xvii.ii.i-p14.1"></span>. LXX.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[224:1154](2040261.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p15"></span> <span id="xvii.ii.i-p15.1"></span>[Isa.
xi. 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008)<span
id="xvii.ii.i-p15.3"></span>; [2 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p15.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[224:1155](2040261.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p15.5"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p16"></span> [Is. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[224:1156](2040261.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p17"></span> [Ezek. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p17.1"></span>.
LXX.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[224:1157](2040261.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p18"></span> [Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[224:1158](2040261.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p20"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[224:1159](2040261.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p21"></span> [Ps. 1.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#016)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p21.1"></span>;
[Ecclesiasticus 15.9](../../../bib/apo/sir015.htm#009)<span
id="xvii.ii.i-p21.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[224:1160](2040261.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p21.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p22"></span> [Job xli.
13](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#013)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p22.1"></span>,
*v*. 4. LXX. and cf. *Orat.* i. 1, and *Vit. Ant. supr*. p. 197, note
15.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[224:1161](2040261.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p23"></span> Or sacred writers, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvii.ii.i-p23.2"></span>ἁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xvii.ii.i-p23.3"></span>γίων</span>.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[224:1162](2040261.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p23.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p24"></span> [Matt. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[224:1163](2040261.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p25"></span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p25.1"></span>[Matt. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p25.3"></span>;
[Mark i. 24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024)<span
id="xvii.ii.i-p25.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[224:1164](2040261.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p25.5"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p26"></span> [Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[224:1165](2040261.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p27"></span> [1 John iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[224:1166](2040261.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p28"></span> [Phil. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[224:1167](2040261.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p31"></span> [Rom. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[224:1168](2040261.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p32"></span> [John v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[224:1169](2040261.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p33"></span> [John i.
45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[224:1170](2040261.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p34"></span> Vid. Prideaux, *Conn.* ii. 5. (vol. 3,
p. 474. ed. 1725).

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[224:1171](2040261.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p35"></span> [John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[224:1172](2040261.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p36"></span> See Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) a.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[225:1173](2040261.htm#fr_1172) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p37"></span> See *Orat.* i. 49.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[225:1174](2040261.htm#fr_1173) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p38"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[225:1175](2040261.htm#fr_1174) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p39"></span> [Prov. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#015)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[225:1176](2040261.htm#fr_1175) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p40"></span> [John viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[225:1177](2040261.htm#fr_1176) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p41"></span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p41.1"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p41.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[225:1178](2040261.htm#fr_1177) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p41.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p42"></span> vid. *Orat.* ii. §18.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[225:1179](2040261.htm#fr_1178) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p43"></span> Cf. p. 4, note 2.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[225:1180](2040261.htm#fr_1179) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p46"></span> \[Probably Cyrenaica, see above,
Introd. *sub. fin.*\]

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[225:1181](2040261.htm#fr_1180) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p47"></span> Cf. §23, and *Apol. Const.* 32.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[225:1182](2040261.htm#fr_1181) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p48"></span> Cf. *de Syn.* 7.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[226:1183](2040261.htm#fr_1182) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p49"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[226:1184](2040261.htm#fr_1183) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p51"></span> Cf. *de Syn.* §§3, 6.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[226:1185](2040261.htm#fr_1184) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p52"></span> [Jer. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#010)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[226:1186](2040261.htm#fr_1185) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p55"></span> Cf. *de Syn.* 5, note.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[226:1187](2040261.htm#fr_1186) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p56"></span> Cf. *de Syn.* 12; Prolegg. ch. ii. §3
(1), &c.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[226:1188](2040261.htm#fr_1187) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p57"></span> p. 104, note 3.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[226:1189](2040261.htm#fr_1188) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p58"></span> Supr. p. 119.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[226:1190](2040261.htm#fr_1189) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p59"></span> Supr. p. 107, note 9.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[226:1191](2040261.htm#fr_1190) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p60"></span> Omitted supr. p. 123.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[226:1192](2040261.htm#fr_1191) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p61"></span> *De Syn.* §9.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[226:1193](2040261.htm#fr_1192) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p62"></span> Of Nicomedia, see D.C.B. *s.v.*

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[226:1194](2040261.htm#fr_1193) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p63"></span> Vid. *Hist. Ar.* §74 fin.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[227:1195](2040261.htm#fr_1194) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p64"></span> *Hist. Ar.* 75.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[227:1196](2040261.htm#fr_1195) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p65"></span> Cf. *de Syn.* 37.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[227:1197](2040261.htm#fr_1196) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p68"></span> Supr. *Apol. Ar.* 50.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[227:1198](2040261.htm#fr_1197) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p68.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p69"></span> Paulinus of Treveri, cf. supr. p. 130,
note 10.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[227:1199](2040261.htm#fr_1198) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p70"></span> At Nicæa, as most of the others.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[227:1200](2040261.htm#fr_1199) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p70.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p71"></span> i.e. of Antioch.

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[227:1201](2040261.htm#fr_1200) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p72"></span> \[Unknown.\]

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[227:1202](2040261.htm#fr_1201) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p73"></span> \[Of Nisibis. See D.C.B. iii. p. 325
and foll.\]

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[227:1203](2040261.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p76"></span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p76.1"></span>[Prov. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#006)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p76.3"></span>;
xv. 28; xii. 5.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[227:1204](2040261.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p76.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p77"></span> *Ap. ad Const.* §28. *Hist. Arian*.
§73, supr.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[227:1205](2040261.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p78"></span> Vid. Basil. Ep. 223<span
id="xvii.ii.i-p78.2"></span>. 3.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[227:1206](2040261.htm#fr_1205) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p78.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p79"></span> <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p79.1"></span>[Matt. xxii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p79.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[227:1207](2040261.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p79.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p80"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvii.ii.i-p80.1"></span>θεομάχοι</span>

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[228:1208](2040261.htm#fr_1207) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p80.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p81"></span> <span id="xvii.ii.i-p81.1"></span>[John
i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xvii.ii.i-p81.3"></span>; [Ps. xciv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p81.4"></span>;
[John viii. 43](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#043)<span
id="xvii.ii.i-p81.5"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvii.ii.i-p81.7"></span>ἥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xvii.ii.i-p81.8"></span>κω</span>, vid. Hipp. *contr. Noet.* 16. and
*de Syn*. 16.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[228:1209](2040261.htm#fr_1208) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p86"></span> [Josh. vii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#020)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p86.1"></span>,
& c.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[228:1210](2040261.htm#fr_1209) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p86.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p87"></span> [1 Sam.
xv](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#000)<span id="xvii.ii.i-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[229:1211](2040261.htm#fr_1210) <span
id="xvii.ii.i-p87.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.i-p88"></span> Cf. *Orat.* i. §25 note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](2040262)
