[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040246)  [Next](2040248) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p1"></span> 82. Being known to be so great a man,
therefore, and having thus given answers to those who visited him, he
returned again to the inner mountain, and maintained his wonted
discipline. And often when people came to him, as he was sitting or
walking, as it is written in Daniel <span
id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130) , he became dumb, and after a
season he resumed the thread of what he had been saying before to the
brethren who were with him. And his companions perceived that he was
seeing a vision. For often when he was on the mountains he saw what was
happening in Egypt, and told it to Serapion the bishop <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131) , who was indoors with him, and who
saw that Antony was wrapped in a vision. Once as he was sitting and
working, he fell, as it were, into a trance, and groaned much at what he
saw. Then after a time, having turned to the bystanders with groans and
trembling, he prayed, and falling on his knees remained so a long time.
And having arisen the old man wept. His companions, therefore, trembling
and terrified, desired to learn from him what it was. And they troubled
him much, until he was forced to speak. And with many groans he spake as
follows: ‘O, my children, it were better to die before what has appeared
in the vision come to <span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-Page_218"></span>pass.’ And when again they asked him,
having burst into tears, he said, ‘Wrath is about to seize the Church,
and it is on the point of being given up to men who are like senseless
beasts. For I saw the table of the Lord’s House, and mules standing
around it on all sides in a ring, and kicking the things therein, just
like a herd kicks when it leaps in confusion. And you saw,’ said he,
‘how I groaned, for I heard a voice saying, “My altar shall be
defiled.”’ These things the old man saw, and after two years the
present <span id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132) inroad of the Arians
and the plunder of the churches took place, when they violently carried
off the vessels, and made the heathen carry them; and when they forced
the heathen from the prisons to join in their services, and in their
presence did upon the Table as they would. Then we all understood that
these kicks of the mules signified to Antony what the Arians,
senselessly like beasts, are now doing. But when he saw this vision, he
comforted those with him, saying, ‘Be not downcast, my children; for as
the Lord has been angry, so again will He heal us, and the Church shall
soon again receive her own order, and shall shine forth as she is wont.
And you shall behold the persecuted restored, and wickedness again
withdrawn to its own hiding-place, and pious faith speaking boldly in
every place with all freedom. Only defile <span
id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133) not yourselves with the Arians, for
their teaching is not that of the Apostles, but that of demons and their
father the devil; yea, rather, it is barren and senseless, and without
light understanding, like the senselessness of these mules.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[217:1131](2040247.htm#fr_1130) <span
id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p2"></span> [Dan. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#019)<span id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>
(*v*. 16 (LXX).

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[217:1132](2040247.htm#fr_1131) <span
id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p3"></span> Of Thmuis, the friend and
correspondent of Athanasius: see below, §91.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[218:1133](2040247.htm#fr_1132) <span
id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p4"></span> Cf. below, ‘what the Arians are *now*
doing.’ This incidental notice of time fixes the date of the present
passage. Weingarten in vain attempts to extract some other sense from
the Greek, which is plainness itself. It also fixes the date of Antony’s
death to within two years of the troubles in question. The Benedictines
refer the troubles to the intrusion of Gregory ‘in 341’ (really 339),
and the apparently unprecedented character ascribed to the outrages by
Antony is in favour of this, as well as the fact (*Encyc. 3*) that in
339 the heathen are said to have offered sacrifice in the churches. But
the latter is only in superficial agreement with the Greek text of the
present passage, which speaks of *Arian* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p4.2"></span>συνάξεις</span> at which heathen were
impressed to be present, apparently to make some show of a congregation.
The Evagrian version, indeed, adds that the Gentiles on this occasion
also carried on idolatrous rites in the Church and polluted the
baptisteries; but Evagrius is in the habit of interpolating little
details from his own knowledge or opinion (e.g. 16, ‘Ita exorsus,’ &c.,
26, ‘qui vinctas hominum linguas solvebat,’ 58, ‘qui effosso pro Christo
oculo sub Maximiano,’ &c.), and in this case appears to borrow from
*Encycl.* 3. Again, the writer of the *Vita* was not present (‘the
bystanders’ *supra;* ‘*they* troubled him;’ ‘*they* asked him;’…and
*infr.* ‘those with him’) when the Vision took place: but when, two
years later, it was interpreted by events, he was in the company of
those who had been with Antony at the time (*infr.* ‘then *we all*
understood’). This (on the assumption of Athanasian authorship) excludes
the year 339, when Athanasius fled to Italy, and compels us to refer the
Vision to the troubles of 356 (*Apol. Fug.* 6, 7. *Hist. Ar*. 55, 56,
*Ep. ad Lucif.*), after which Athanasius fled to the desert and was in
the company of the monks. This conclusion is in independent agreement
with (1) the fact, decisive by itself, that Antony is still alive in
345, when Nestorius became Prefect of Egypt (§86, note 3), i.e. six
years after the troubles of 339; (2) the evidence that Antony was still
living about 353 <span class="c10"><span
id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p4.4"></span>a.d.</span> (*Epist. Ammon. de Pachom. et
Theod.* 20, 21, in *Act. SS. Mai.* tom. iii. Appendix 70 C E, Tillemont
vii. 123), and (3) the statement of Jerome (Chron.) that Antony died in
356. Against it Weingarten urges the prophecy of restored peace to the
Church (*infr.*) as pointing to a time after the overthrow of Arianism.
This is of little weight, for the prophecy expresses only what must have
been the hope and belief of all. The prologue, which Tillemont (viii.
227) thinks must have been written in a time of peace at Alexandria, is
not sufficiently explicit on the point to weigh against the plain sense
of the present passage.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[218:1134](2040247.htm#fr_1133) <span
id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p4.5"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xxxvi-p5"></span> Cf. the Second Letter to monks
(Letter 53).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sections 83, 84](2040248)
