[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040182)  [Next](2040184.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.vii-p1"></span> §7. *Appeal to the bishops of the whole
Church to unite against Gregory.*

<span id="xii.ii.vii-p2"></span>You are acquainted with the history of
the Arian madmen, beloved, for you have often, both individually and in
a body, condemned their impiety; and you know also that Eusebius and his
fellows, as I said before, are engaged in the same heresy; for the sake
of which they have long been carrying on a conspiracy against me. And I
have represented to you, what has now been done, both for them and by
them, with greater cruelty than is usual even in time of war, in order
that after the example set before you in the history which I related at
the beginning, you may entertain a zealous hatred of their wickedness,
and reject those who have committed such enormities against the Church.
If the brethren at Rome <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470.md) \[last
year\], before these things had happened, and on account of their former
misdeeds, wrote letters to call a Council, that these evils might be set
right (fearing which, Eusebius and his fellows took care previously to
throw the Church into confusion, and desired to destroy me, in order
that they might thenceforth be able to act as they pleased without fear,
and might have no one to call them to account), how much more ought you
now to be indignant at these outrages, and to condemn them, seeing they
have added this to their former misconduct.

<span id="xii.ii.vii-p4"></span>I beseech you, overlook not such
proceedings, nor suffer the famous Church of the Alexandrians to be
trodden down by heretics. In consequence of these things the people and
their ministers are separated from one another, as one might expect,
silenced by the violence of the Prefect, yet abhorring the impiety of
the Arian madmen. If therefore Gregory shall write unto you, or any
other in his behalf, receive not his letters, brethren, but tear them in
pieces and put the bearers of them to shame, as the ministers of impiety
and wickedness. And even if he presume to write to you after a friendly
fashion, nevertheless receive them not. Those who bring his letters
convey them only from fear of the Governor, and on account of his
frequent acts of violence. And since it is probable that Eusebius and
his fellows will write to you concerning him, I was anxious to admonish
you beforehand, so that you may herein imitate God, Who is no respecter
of persons, and may drive out from before you those that come from them;
because for the sake of the Arian madmen they caused persecutions, rape
of virgins, murders, plunder of the Church’s property, burnings, and
blasphemies in the Churches, to be committed by the heathens and Jews at
such a season. The impious and mad Gregory cannot deny that he is an
Arian, being proved to be so by the person who writes his letters. This
is his secretary Ammon, who was cast out of the Church long ago by my
predecessor the blessed Alexander for many misdeeds and for impiety.

<span id="xii.ii.vii-p5"></span>For all these reasons, therefore,
vouchsafe to send me a reply, and condemn these impious men; so that
even now the ministers and people of this place, seeing your orthodoxy
and hatred of wickedness, may rejoice in your concord in the Christian
faith, and that those who have been guilty of these lawless deeds
against the Church may be reformed by your letters, and brought at last,
though late, to repentance. Salute the brotherhood that is among you.
All the brethren that are with me salute you. Fare ye well, and remember
me, and the Lord preserve you continually, most truly beloved lords.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_470"></span>[96:471](2040183.htm#fr_470.md) <span
id="xii.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.vii-p3"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 22, 30, *Hist. Ar.* 9.
\[The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ii.vii-p3.2"></span>πέρυσιν</span>, ‘last year, is absent from
the best <span class="c10"><span id="xii.ii.vii-p3.4"></span>ms.</span>
used by Montfaucon.’\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Defence Against the Arians. (Apologia Contra Arianos.)](2040184.md)
