[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040443)  [Next](2040445.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_555">p. 555</span>
<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-Page_555"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Letter XLVII</span>.—*To the Church of
Alexandria on the same occasion.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>Athanasius</span> to all the presbyters
and deacons of the holy Catholic Church at Alexandria and the Parembola,
brethren most beloved, greeting.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p3"></span>In writing this I must begin my
letter, most beloved brethren, by giving thanks to Christ. But now this
is especially fitting, since both many things and great, done by the
Lord, deserve our thanks <span id="fr_4575"></span>[4576](#fn_4575.md) ,
and those who believe in Him ought not to be ungrateful for His many
benefits. We thank the Lord therefore, who always manifests us to all in
the faith, who also has at this time done many wonderful things for the
Church. For what the heretical party of Eusebius and heirs of Arius have
maintained and spread abroad, all the bishops who assembled have
pronounced false and fictitious. And the very men who are thought
terrible by many, like those who are called giants, were counted as
nothing, and rightly so, for just as the darkness is illuminated when
light comes, so, iniquity is unveiled by the coming of the just, and
when the good are present, the worthless are exposed.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p5"></span>For you yourselves, beloved, are not
ignorant what the successors of the ill-named heresy of Eusebius did,
namely Theodore, Narcissus, Valens, Ursacius, and the worst of them all,
George, Stephen, Acacius, Menophantus, and their colleagues, for their
madness is manifest to all; nor has it escaped your observation what
they committed against the Churches. For you were the first they
injured, your Church the first they tried to corrupt. But they who did
so many great things, and were, as I said above, terrible to the minds
of all, have been so frightened as to pass all imagination. For not only
did they fear the Roman Synod, not only when invited to it did they
excuse themselves, but, now also having arrived at Sardica, so
conscience-stricken were they, that when they had seen the judges, they
were astonished. So they fainted in their minds. Verily, one might say
to them: ‘Death, where is thy sting, Death, where is thy victory?’ For
neither did it go as they wished, for them to give judgment as they
pleased; this time they could not over-reach whom they would. But they
saw faithful men, that cared for justice, nay rather, they saw our Lord
Himself among them, like the demons of old from the tombs; for being
sons of falsehood, they could not bear to see the truth. So Theodore,
Narcissus, and Ursacius, with their friends said as follows <span
id="fr_4576"></span>[4577](#fn_4576.md) : ‘Stay, what have we to do with
you, men of Christ? We know that you are true, and fear to be convicted:
we shrink from confessing our calumnies to your face. We have nothing to
do with you; for you are Christians, while we are foes to Christ; and
while with you truth is powerful, we have learned to over-reach. We
thought our deeds were hid; we did not think that we were now coming to
judgment; why do you expose our deeds before their time; and by exposing
us vex us before the day?’ and although they are of the worst character
and walk in darkness, yet they have learnt at last that there is no
agreement between light and darkness, and no concord between Christ and
Belial. Accordingly, beloved brethren, since they knew what they had
done, and saw their victims <span id="fr_4577"></span>[4578](#fn_4577.md)
ready as accusers, and the witnesses before their eyes, they followed
the example of Cain and fled like him; in that they greatly
wandered <span id="fr_4578"></span>[4579](#fn_4578.md) , for they imitated
his flight, and so have received his condemnation. For the holy council
knows their works; it has heard our blood crying aloud, heard from
themselves the voices of the wounded. All the Bishops know how they have
sinned, and how many things they have done against our Churches and
others; and accordingly they have expelled these men from the Churches
like Cain. For who did not weep when your letter was read? who did not
groan to see whom those men had exiled? Who did not reckon your
tribulations his own? Most beloved brethren, you suffered formerly when
they were committing evil against you, and perhaps it is no long time
since the war has ceased. Now, however, all the Bishops who assembled
and heard what you have suffered, grieved and lamented just as you did
when you suffered the injuries and <span
id="fr_4579"></span>[4580](#fn_4579.md) they shared your grief at that
time.…

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p10"></span>On account of these deeds then, and
all the others which they have committed against the Churches, the holy
general council has deposed them all, and not only has judged them
aliens from the Church, but has held them <span id="page_556">p.
556</span> <span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-Page_556"></span>unworthy to be
called Christians. For how can men be called Christians who deny Christ?
And how can men be admitted to church who do evil against the Churches?
Accordingly, the holy council has sent to the Churches everywhere, that
they may be marked among all, so that they who were deceived by them may
now return to full assurance and truth. Do not therefore fail, beloved
brethren; like servants of God, and professors of the faith of Christ,
be tried in the Lord, and let not tribulation cast you down, neither let
troubles caused by the heretics who plot against you make you sad. For
you have the sympathy of the whole world in your grief, and what is
more, it bears you all in mind. Now I think that those deceived by them
will, when they see the severe sentence of the Council, turn aside from
them and reject their impiety. If, however, even after this their hand
is lifted up, do you not be astonished, nor fear if they rage; but pray
and raise your hands to God, and be sure that the Lord will not tarry
but will perform all things according to your will. I could wish indeed
to write you a longer letter with a detailed account of what has taken
place, but since the presbyters and deacons are competent to tell you in
person of all they have seen, I have refrained from writing much. One
thing alone I charge you, considering it a necessity, that having the
fear of the Lord before your eyes you will put Him first, and carry on
all things with your wonted concord as men of wisdom and understanding.
Pray for us, bearing in mind the necessities of the widows <span
id="fr_4580"></span>[4581](#fn_4580.md) , especially since the enemies of
truth have taken away what belongs to them. But let your love overcome
the malice of the heretics. For we believe that according to your
prayers the Lord will be gracious and permit me to see you speedily.
Meanwhile you will learn the proceedings at the Synod by what all the
Bishops have written to you, and from the appended letter you will
perceive the deposition of Theodore, Narcissus, Stephen, Acacius,
George, Menophantus, Ursacius and Valens. For Gregory they did not wish
to mention: since they thought it superfluous to name a man who lacked
the very name of bishop. Yet for the sake of those deceived by him they
have mentioned his name, not that his name was worthy of mention, but in
order that those deceived by him may learn his infamy and blush for the
sort of man they have communicated with <span
id="fr_4581"></span>[4582](#fn_4581.md) .…I pray that you may be preserved
in the Lord, brethren most beloved and longed for.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4575"></span>[555:4576](2040444.htm#fr_4575.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p4"></span> Latin hardly translateable.

<span id="fn_4576"></span>[555:4577](2040444.htm#fr_4576.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p6"></span> Cf. *Hist. Ar.* and Introd. Fialon,
p. 209, remarks on the uncritical adoption (by Fleury and his plagiarist
Rohrbacher) of these satirical colloquies as an authentic account of
what was actually said.

<span id="fn_4577"></span>[555:4578](2040444.htm#fr_4577.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p7"></span> Lat. ‘quæcunque miserrimos videntes
accusatores, testes præ oculis habentes:’ apparently a barbarous
rendering of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p7.2"></span>ἴ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p7.3"></span>δοντες καὶ τοὺς παρ᾽ αὐτῶν παθόντας, τοὺς
κατηγόρους, τοὺς ἐλέγχους πρὸ ὀφθαλμῶν ἔχοντες</span>, as in *Apol. Ar.*
45.

<span id="fn_4578"></span>[555:4579](2040444.htm#fr_4578.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p8"></span> ‘Granditer erraverunt,’ either for
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>μακρὰν
ἀπέφυγον</span>, or for <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p8.2"></span>σφόδρα ἐπλημμέλησαν</span>: no verb
elsewhere used in this connection in Athanasius exactly corresponds to
‘erraverunt,’ nor is the flight to Philippopolis elsewhere compared, as
here, to that of Cain. But the latter comparison is often used by Ath.
in other connections.

<span id="fn_4579"></span>[555:4580](2040444.htm#fr_4579.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p9"></span> illis…erat dolor communis illo
tempore quo processistis. The Latin has quite lost the sense.

<span id="fn_4580"></span>[556:4581](2040444.htm#fr_4580.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p11"></span> For the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p11.2"></span>φιλοπτωχία</span> of Athanasius, cf.
*Hist. Ar.* 61, *Vit. Ant.* 17, 30, and the stress laid on the hardship
of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p11.4"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p11.5"></span>ρτοι</span> (as here) in *Encycl.* 4,
*Hist. Ar. ubi supr.* and 72.

<span id="fn_4581"></span>[556:4582](2040444.htm#fr_4581.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p11.7"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.ii-p12"></span> ….‘tamen, et hoc cum illis.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter to Amun. Written before 354 A.D.](2040445.md)
