[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040393)  [Next](2040395) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Part II. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p1.2"></span>History of Arian Opinions</span>.</span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p2"></span>Arius’s own sentiments; his Thalia and
Letter to S. Alexander; corrections by Eusebius and others; extracts
from the works of Asterius; letter of the Council of Jerusalem; first
Creed of Arians at the Dedication of Antioch; second, Lucian’s on the
same occasion; third, by Theophronius; fourth, sent to Constans in Gaul;
fifth, the Macrostich sent into Italy; sixth, at Sirmium; seventh, at
the same place; and eighth also, as given above in §8; ninth, at
Seleucia; tenth, at Constantinople; eleventh, at Antioch.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p3"></span>15. Arius and those with him thought and
professed thus: ‘God made the Son out of nothing, and called Him His
Son;’ ‘The Word of God is one of the creatures;’ and ‘Once He was not;’
and ‘He is alterable; capable, when it is His Will, of altering.’
Accordingly they were expelled from the Church by the blessed Alexander.
However, after his expulsion, when he was with Eusebius and his fellows,
he drew up his heresy upon paper, and imitating in the Thalia no grave
writer, but the Egyptian Sotades, in the dissolute tone of his
metre <span id="fr_3501"></span>[3502](#fn_3501) , he writes at great
length, for instance as follows:—

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p5"></span>Blasphemies of Arius.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p6"></span>God Himself then, in His own nature, is
ineffable by all men. Equal or like Himself He alone has none, or one in
glory. And Ingenerate we call Him, because of Him who is generate by
nature. We praise Him as without beginning because of Him who has a
beginning. And adore Him as everlasting, because of Him who in time has
come to be. The Unbegun made the Son a beginning of things originated;
and advanced Him as a Son to Himself by adoption. He has nothing proper
to God in proper subsistence. For He is not equal, no, nor one in
essence <span id="fr_3502"></span>[3503](#fn_3502) with Him. Wise is
God, for He is the teacher of Wisdom <span
id="fr_3503"></span>[3504](#fn_3503) . There is full proof that God is
invisible to all beings; both to things which are through the Son, and
to the Son He is invisible. I will say it expressly, how by the Son is
seen the Invisible; by that power by which God sees, and in His own
measure, the Son endures to see the Father, as is lawful. Thus there is
a Triad, not in equal glories. Not intermingling with each other <span
id="fr_3504"></span>[3505](#fn_3504) are their subsistences. One more
glorious than the other in their glories unto immensity. Foreign from
the Son in essence is the Father, for He is without beginning.
Understand that the Monad was; but the Dyad was not, before it was in
existence. It follows at once that, though the Son was not, the Father
was God. Hence the Son, not being (for He existed at the will of the
Father), is God Only-begotten <span id="fr_3505"></span>[3506](#fn_3505)
, and He is alien from either. Wisdom existed as Wisdom by the will of
the Wise God. <span id="page_458">p. 458</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_458"></span>Hence He is conceived in numberless
conceptions <span id="fr_3506"></span>[3507](#fn_3506) : Spirit, Power,
Wisdom, God’s glory, Truth, Image, and Word. Understand that He is
conceived to be Radiance and Light. One equal to the Son, the Superior
is able to beget; but one more excellent, or superior, or greater, He is
not able. At God’s will the Son is what and whatsoever He is. And when
and since He was, from that time He has subsisted from God. He, being a
strong God, praises in His degree the Superior. To speak in brief, God
is ineffable to His Son. For He is to Himself what He is, that is,
unspeakable. So that nothing which is called comprehensible <span
id="fr_3507"></span>[3508](#fn_3507) does the Son know to speak about;
for it is impossible for Him to investigate the Father, who is by
Himself. For the Son does not know His own essence, For, being Son, He
really existed, at the will of the Father. What argument then allows,
that He who is from the Father should know His own parent by
comprehension? For it is plain that for that which hath a beginning to
conceive how the Unbegun is, or to grasp the idea, is not possible.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p13"></span>16. And what they wrote by letter to
the blessed Alexander, the Bishop, runs as follows:—

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p14"></span>*To Our Blessed Pope* <span
id="fr_3508"></span>[3509](#fn_3508) *and Bishop, Alexander, the
Presbyters and Deacons send health in the Lord.*

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p16"></span>Our faith from our forefathers, which
also we have learned from thee, Blessed Pope, is this:—We acknowledge
One God, alone Ingenerate, alone Everlasting, alone Unbegun, alone True,
alone having Immortality, alone Wise, alone Good, alone Sovereign;
Judge, Governor, and Providence of all, unalterable and unchangeable,
just and good, God of Law and Prophets and New Testament; who begat an
Only-begotten Son before eternal times, through whom He has made both
the ages and the universe; and begat Him, not in semblance, but in
truth; and that He made Him subsist at His own will, unalterable and
unchangeable; perfect creature of God, but not as one of the creatures;
offspring, but not as one of things begotten; nor as Valentinus
pronounced that the offspring of the Father was an issue <span
id="fr_3509"></span>[3510](#fn_3509) ; nor as Manichæus taught that the
offspring was a portion of the Father, one in essence <span
id="fr_3510"></span>[3511](#fn_3510) ; or as Sabellius, dividing the
Monad, speaks of a Son-and-Father <span
id="fr_3511"></span>[3512](#fn_3511) ; nor as Hieracas, of one torch
from another, or as a lamp divided into two <span
id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512) ; nor that He who was before, was
afterwards generated or new-created into a Son <span
id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513) , as thou too thyself, Blessed
Pope, in the midst of the Church and in session hast often condemned;
but, as we say, at the will of God, created before times and before
ages, and gaining life and being from the Father, who gave subsistence
to His glories together with Him. For the Father did not, in giving to
Him the inheritance of all things, deprive Himself of what He has
ingenerately in Himself; for He is the Fountain of all things. Thus
there are Three Subsistences. And God, being the cause of all things, is
Unbegun and altogether Sole, but the Son being begotten apart from time
by the Father, and being created and founded before ages, was not before
His generation, but being begotten apart from time before all things,
alone was made to subsist by the Father. For He is not eternal or
co-eternal or co-unoriginate with the Father, nor has He His being
together with the Father, as some speak of relations <span
id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514) , introducing two ingenerate
beginnings, but God is before all things as being Monad and Beginning of
all. Wherefore also He is before the Son; as we have learned also from
thy preaching in the midst of the Church. So far then as from God He has
being, and glories, and life, and all things are delivered unto Him, in
such sense is God His origin. For He is above Him, as being His God and
before Him. But if the terms ‘from Him,’ and ‘from the womb,’ and ‘I
came forth from the Father, and I am come <span
id="fr_3515"></span>[3516](#fn_3515) ’ ([Rom.
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036), [Ps.
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003), [John
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p23.4"></span>), be understood by some to mean as if a
part of Him, one in essence or as an issue, then the Father is according
to them compounded and divisible and alterable and material, and, as far
as their belief goes, has the circumstances of a body, Who is the
Incorporeal God.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p24"></span>This is a part of what Arius and his
fellows vomited from their heretical hearts.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p25"></span>17. And before the Nicene Council took
place, similar statements were made by Eusebius and his fellows,
Narcissus, Patrophilus, Maris, Paulinus, Theodotus, and Athanasius of
\[A\]nazarba <span id="fr_3516"></span>[3517](#fn_3516) . And Eusebius
of Nicomedia <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_459"></span>wrote over and above to Arius, to this
effect, ‘Since your sentiments are good, pray that all may adopt them;
for it is plain to any one, that what has been made was not before its
origination; but what came to be has a beginning of being.’ And Eusebius
of Cæsarea in Palestine, in a letter to Euphration the Bishop <span
id="fr_3517"></span>[3518](#fn_3517) , did not scruple to say plainly
that Christ was not true God <span id="fr_3518"></span>[3519](#fn_3518)
. And Athanasius of \[A\]nazarba uncloked the heresy still further,
saying that the Son of God was one of the hundred sheep. For writing to
Alexander the Bishop, he had the extreme audacity to say: ‘Why complain
of Arius and his fellows, for saying, The Son of God is made as a
creature out of nothing, and one among others? For all that are made
being represented in parable by the hundred sheep, the Son is one of
them. If then the hundred are not created and originate, or if there be
beings beside that hundred, then may the Son be not a creature nor one
among others; but if those hundred are all originate, and there is
nothing besides the hundred save God alone, what absurdity do Arius and
his fellows utter, when, as comprehending and reckoning Christ in the
hundred, they say that He is one among others?’ And George who now is in
Laodicea, and then was presbyter of Alexandria, and was staying at
Antioch, wrote to Alexander the Bishop; ‘Do not complain of Arius and
his fellows, for saying, “Once the Son of God was not,” for Isaiah came
to be son of Amos, and, whereas Amos was before Isaiah came to be,
Isaiah was not before, but came to be afterwards.’ And he wrote to the
Arians, ‘Why complain of Alexander the Pope, saying, that the Son is
from the Father? for you too need not fear to say that the Son was from
God.’ For if the Apostle wrote ([1 Cor. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#012)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p28.3"></span>), ‘All things are from God,’ and it is
plain that all things are made of nothing, though the Son too is a
creature and one of things made, still He may be said to be from God in
that sense in which all things are said to be ‘from God.’ From him then
those who hold with Arius learned to simulate the phrase ‘from God,’ and
to use it indeed, but not in a good meaning. And George himself was
deposed by Alexander for certain reasons, and among them for manifest
irreligion; for he was himself a presbyter, as has been said before.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p29"></span>18. On the whole then such were their
statements, as if they all were in dispute and rivalry with each other,
which should make the heresy more irreligious, and display it in a more
naked form. And as for their letters I had them not at hand, to dispatch
them to you; else I would have sent you copies; but, if the Lord will,
this too I will do, when I get possession of them. And one
Asterius <span id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519) from Cappadocia, a
many-headed Sophist, one of the fellows of Eusebius, whom they could not
advance into the Clergy, as having done sacrifice in the former
persecution in the time of Constantius’s grandfather, writes, with the
countenance of Eusebius and his fellows, a small treatise, which was on
a par with the crime of his sacrifice, yet answered their wishes; for in
it, after comparing, or rather preferring, the locust and the
caterpillar to Christ, and saying that Wisdom in God was other than
Christ, and was the Framer as well of Christ as of the world, he went
round the Churches in Syria and elsewhere, with introductions from
Eusebius and his fellows, that as he once made trial of denying, so now
he might boldly oppose the truth. The bold man intruded himself into
forbidden places, and seating himself in the place of Clergy <span
id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520) , he used to read publicly this
treatise of his, in spite of the general indignation. The treatise is
written at great length, but portions of it are as follows:—

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p32"></span>For the Blessed Paul said not that he
preached Christ, His, that is, God’s, ‘own Power’ or ‘Wisdom,’ but
without the article, ‘God’s Power and God’s Wisdom’ ([1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p32.1"></span>), preaching that the own power of God
Himself was distinct, which was con-natural and co-existent with Him
unoriginately, generative indeed of Christ, creative of the whole world;
concerning which he teaches in his Epistle to the Romans, thus, ‘The
invisible things of Him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things which are made, even His eternal power
and divinity’ ([Rom. i. 20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p32.2"></span>). For as no one would say that the Deity
there mentioned was Christ, but the Father Himself, so, as I think, His
eternal power is also not the Only-begotten God ([Joh. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p32.3"></span>), but the Father who begat Him. And he
tells us of another Power and Wisdom of God, namely, that which is
manifested through Christ, and made known through the works themselves
of His Ministry.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p33"></span>And again:—

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p34"></span>Although His eternal Power and Wisdom,
which <span id="page_460">p. 460</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_460"></span>truth argues to be Unbegun and
Ingenerate, would appear certainly to be one and the same, yet many are
those powers which are one by one created by Him, of which Christ is the
First-born and Only-begotten. All however equally depend upon their
Possessor, and all His powers are rightly called His, who created and
uses them; for instance, the Prophet says that the locust, which became
a divine punishment of human sin, was called by God Himself, not only a
power of God, but a great power ([Joel ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>). And the blessed David too in several of
the Psalms, invites, not Angels alone, but Powers also to praise God.
And while he invites them all to the hymn, he presents before us their
multitude, and is not unwilling to call them ministers of God, and
teaches them to do His will.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p35"></span>19. These bold words against the
Saviour did not content him, but he went further in his blasphemies, as
follows:

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p36"></span>The Son is one among others; for He is
first of things originate, and one among intellectual natures; and as in
things visible the sun is one among phenomena, and it shines upon the
whole world according to the command of its Maker, so the Son, being one
of the intellectual natures, also enlightens and shines upon all that
are in the intellectual world.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p37"></span>And again he says, Once He was not,
writing thus:—‘And before the Son’s origination, the Father had
pre-existing knowledge how to generate; since a physician too, before he
cured, had the science of curing <span
id="fr_3521"></span>[3522](#fn_3521) .’ And he says again: ‘The Son was
created by God’s beneficent earnestness; and the Father made Him by the
superabundance of His Power.’ And again: ‘If the will of God has
pervaded all the works in succession, certainly the Son too, being a
work, has at His will come to be and been made.’ Now though Asterius was
the only person to write all this, Eusebius and his fellows felt the
like in common with him.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p39"></span>20. These are the doctrines for which
they are contending; for these they assail the ancient Council, because
its members did not propound the like, but anathematized the Arian
heresy instead, which they were so eager to recommend. This was why they
put forward, as an advocate of their irreligion, Asterius who
sacrificed, a sophist too, that he might not spare to speak against the
Lord, or by a show of reason to mislead the simple. And they were
ignorant, the shallow men, that they were doing harm to their own cause.
For the ill savour of their advocate’s idolatrous sacrifice betrayed
still more plainly that the heresy is Christ’s foe. And now again, the
general agitations and troubles which they are exciting, are in
consequence of their belief, that by their numerous murders and their
monthly Councils, at length they will undo the sentence which has been
passed against the Arian heresy <span
id="fr_3522"></span>[3523](#fn_3522) . But here too they seem ignorant,
or to pretend ignorance, that even before Nicea that heresy was held in
detestation, when Artemas <span id="fr_3523"></span>[3524](#fn_3523) was
laying its foundations, and before him Caiaphas’s assembly and that of
the Pharisees his contemporaries. And at all times is this gang of
Christ’s foes detestable, and will not cease to be hateful, the Lord’s
Name being full of love, and the whole creation bending the knee, and
confessing ‘that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father’
([Phil. ii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p41.2"></span>).

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p42"></span>21. Yet so it is, they have convened
successive Councils against that Ecumenical One, and are not yet tired.
After the Nicene, Eusebius and his fellows had been deposed; however, in
course of time they intruded themselves without shame upon the Churches,
and began to plot against the Bishops who withstood them, and to
substitute in the Church men of their own heresy. Thus they thought to
hold Councils at their pleasure, as having those who concurred with
them, whom they had ordained on purpose for this very object.
Accordingly, they assemble at Jerusalem, and there they write thus:—

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p43"></span>The Holy Council assembled in
Jerusalem <span id="fr_3524"></span>[3525](#fn_3524) by the grace of
God, &c….their orthodox teaching in writing <span
id="fr_3525"></span>[3526](#fn_3525) , which we all confessed to be
sound and ecclesiastical. And he reasonably recommended that they should
be received and united to the Church of God, as you will know yourselves
from the transcript of the same Epistle, which we have transmitted to
your reverences. We believe that yourselves also, as if recovering the
very members of your own body, will experience great joy and gladness,
in acknowledging and recovering your own bowels, your own brethren and
fathers; since not only the Presbyters, Arius and his fellows, are given
back to you, but also the whole Christian people and the entire
multitude, which on occasion of the aforesaid men have a long time been
in dissension among you. Moreover it were fitting, now that you know for
certain what has passed, and that the men have communicated with us and
have been received by so great a Holy Council, that you should with all
readiness hail this your coalition and peace with your own members,
specially since the articles of the faith which they have published
preserve indisputable the universally confessed apostolical tradition
and teaching.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p46"></span>22. This was the beginning of their
Councils, and in it they were speedy in divulging their views, and could
not conceal them. For when they said that they had banished all
jealousy, and, after the expulsion of Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria,
recommended the reception of Arius and his friends, they shewed that
their measures against Athanasius himself then, and before against all
the other Bishops who withstood them, had for their object their
receiving <span id="page_461">p. 461</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_461"></span>Arius and his fellows, and introducing
the heresy into the Church. But although they had approved in this
Council all Arius’s malignity, and had ordered to receive his party into
communion, as they had set the example, yet feeling that even now they
were short of their wishes, they assembled a Council at Antioch under
colour of the so-called Dedication <span
id="fr_3526"></span>[3527](#fn_3526) and, since they were in general and
lasting odium for their heresy, they publish different letters, some of
this sort, and some of that and what they wrote in one letter was as
follows:—

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p48"></span>We have not been followers of
Arius,—how could Bishops, such as we, follow a Presbyter?—nor did we
receive any other faith beside that which has been handed down from the
beginning. But, after taking on ourselves to examine and to verify his
faith, we admitted him rather than followed him; as you will understand
from our present avowals.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p49"></span>For we have been taught from the first,
to believe <span id="fr_3527"></span>[3528](#fn_3527) in one God, the
God of the Universe, the Framer and Preserver of all things both
intellectual and sensible.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p51"></span>And in One Son of God, Only-begotten,
who existed before all ages, and was with the Father who had begotten
Him, by whom all things were made, both visible and invisible, who in
the last days according to the good pleasure of the Father came down;
and has taken flesh of the Virgin, and jointly fulfilled all His
Father’s will, and suffered and risen again, and ascended into heaven,
and sitteth on the right hand of the Father, and cometh again to judge
quick and dead, and remaineth King and God unto all ages.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p52"></span>And we believe also in the Holy Ghost;
and if it be necessary to add, we believe concerning the resurrection of
the flesh, and the life everlasting.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p53"></span>23. Here follows what they published
next at the same Dedication in another Epistle, being dissatisfied with
the first, and devising something newer and fuller:

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p54"></span>We believe <span
id="fr_3528"></span>[3529](#fn_3528) , conformably to the evangelical
and apostolical tradition, in One God, the Father Almighty, the Framer,
and Maker, and Provider of the Universe, from whom are all things.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p56"></span>And in One Lord Jesus Christ, His Son,
Only-begotten God ([Joh. i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p56.1"></span>), by whom are all things, who was begotten
before all ages from the Father, God from God, whole from whole, sole
from sole <span id="fr_3529"></span>[3530](#fn_3529) , perfect from
perfect, King from King, Lord from Lord, Living Word, Living Wisdom,
true Light, Way, Truth, Resurrection, Shepherd, Door, both unalterable
and <span id="fr_3530"></span>[3531](#fn_3530) unchangeable; exact
Image <span id="fr_3531"></span>[3532](#fn_3531) of the Godhead,
Essence, Will, Power and Glory of the Father; the first born of every
creature, who was in the beginning with God, God the Word, as it is
written in the Gospel, ‘and the Word was God’ ([John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.22"></span>); by whom all things were made, and in
whom all things consist; who in the last days descended from above, and
was born of a Virgin according to the Scriptures, and was made Man,
Mediator <span id="fr_3532"></span>[3533](#fn_3532) between God and man,
and Apostle of our faith, and Prince of life, as He says, ‘I came down
from heaven, not to do Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent Me’
([John vi. 38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p60.2"></span>); who suffered for us and rose again on
the third day, and ascended into heaven, and sat down on the right hand
of the Father, and is coming again with glory and power, to judge quick
and dead.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p61"></span>And in the Holy Ghost, who is given to
those who believe for comfort, and sanctification, and initiation, as
also our Lord Jesus Christ enjoined His disciples, saying, ‘Go ye, teach
all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost’ ([Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p61.1"></span>); namely of a Father who is truly Father,
and a Son who is truly Son, and of the Holy Ghost who is truly Holy
Ghost, the names not being given without meaning or effect, but denoting
accurately the peculiar subsistence, rank, and glory of each that is
named, so that they are three in subsistence, and in agreement one <span
id="fr_3533"></span>[3534](#fn_3533) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p63"></span>Holding then this faith, and holding it
in the presence of God and Christ, from beginning to end, we
anathematize every heretical heterodoxy <span
id="fr_3534"></span>[3535](#fn_3534) . And if any teaches, beside the
sound and right faith of the Scriptures, that time, or season, or
age <span id="fr_3535"></span>[3536](#fn_3535) , either is or has been
before the generation of the Son, be he anathema. Or if any one says,
that the Son is a creature as one of the creatures, or an offspring as
one of the offsprings, or a work as one of the works, and not the
aforesaid articles one after another, as the divine Scriptures have
delivered, or if he teaches or preaches beside what we received, be he
anathema. For all that has been delivered in the divine Scriptures,
whether by Prophets or Apostles, do we truly and reverentially both
believe and follow <span id="fr_3536"></span>[3537](#fn_3536) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p67"></span>24. And one Theophronius <span
id="fr_3537"></span>[3538](#fn_3537) , Bishop of Tyana, put forth before
them all the following statement of his personal faith. And they
subscribed it, accepting the faith of this man:—

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p69"></span>God <span
id="fr_3538"></span>[3539](#fn_3538) knows, whom I call as a witness
upon my soul, that so I believe:—in God the Father Almighty, the Creator
and Maker of the Universe, from whom are all things.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p71"></span>And in His Only-begotten Son, Word,
Power, and Wisdom, our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all things;
who has been begotten from the Father before the ages, perfect God from
perfect God <span id="fr_3539"></span>[3540](#fn_3539) , and was with
<span id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_462"></span>God in subsistence, and in the last days
descended, and was born of the Virgin according to the Scriptures, and
was made man, and suffered, and rose again from the dead, and ascended
into the heavens, and sat down on the right hand of His Father, and
cometh again with glory and power to judge quick and dead, and remaineth
for ever:

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p73"></span>And in the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete,
the Spirit of truth ([Joh. xv. 26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p73.1"></span>), which also God promised by His Prophet
to pour out ([Joel ii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p73.2"></span>) upon His servants, and the Lord promised
to send to His disciples: which also He sent, as the Acts of the
Apostles witness.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p74"></span>But if any one teaches, or holds in his
mind, aught beside this faith, be he anathema; or with Marcellus of
Ancyra <span id="fr_3540"></span>[3541](#fn_3540) , or Sabellius, or
Paul of Samosata, be he anathema, both himself and those who communicate
with him.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p76"></span>25. Ninety Bishops met at the
Dedication under the Consulate of Marcellinus and Probinus, in the 14th
of the Indiction <span id="fr_3541"></span>[3542](#fn_3541) ,
Constantius the most irreligious being present. Having thus conducted
matters at Antioch at the Dedication, thinking that their composition
was deficient still, and fluctuating moreover in their own opinions,
again they draw up afresh another formulary, after a few months,
professedly concerning the faith, and despatch Narcissus, Maris,
Theodorus, and Mark into Gaul <span id="fr_3542"></span>[3543](#fn_3542)
. And they, as being sent from the Council, deliver the following
document to Constans Augustus of blessed memory, and to all who were
there:

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p79"></span>We believe <span
id="fr_3543"></span>[3544](#fn_3543) in One God, the Father Almighty,
Creator and Maker of all things; from whom all fatherhood in heaven and
on earth is named. ([Eph. iii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p80.4"></span>.)

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p81"></span>And in His Only-begotten Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ, who before all ages was begotten from the Father, God from
God, Light from Light, by whom all things were made in the heavens and
on the earth, visible and invisible, being Word, and Wisdom, and Power,
and Life, and True Light; who in the last days was made man for us, and
was born of the Holy Virgin; who was crucified, and dead, and buried,
and rose again from the dead the third day, and was taken up into
heaven, and sat down on the right hand of the Father; and is coming at
the consummation of the age, to judge quick and dead, and to render to
every one according to his works; whose Kingdom endures indissolubly
into the infinite ages <span id="fr_3544"></span>[3545](#fn_3544) ; for
He shall be seated on the right hand of the Father, not only in this age
but in that which is to come.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p83"></span>And in the Holy Ghost, that is, the
Paraclete; which, having promised to the Apostles, He sent forth after
His ascension into heaven, to teach them and to remind of all things;
through whom also shall be sanctified the souls of those who sincerely
believe in Him.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p84"></span><span id="page_463">p. 463</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_463"></span>But those who say, that the Son was from
nothing, or from other subsistence and not from God, and, there was time
when He was not, the Catholic Church regards as aliens <span
id="fr_3545"></span>[3546](#fn_3545) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p86"></span>26. As if dissatisfied with this, they
hold their meeting again after three years, and dispatch Eudoxius,
Martyrius, and Macedonius of Cilicia <span
id="fr_3546"></span>[3547](#fn_3546) , and some others with them, to the
parts of Italy, to carry with them a faith written at great length, with
numerous additions over and above those which have gone before. They
went abroad with these, as if they had devised something new.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p88"></span>We believe <span
id="fr_3547"></span>[3548](#fn_3547) in one God the Father Almighty, the
Creator and Maker of all things, from whom all fatherhood in heaven and
on earth is named.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p90"></span>And in His Only-begotten Son our Lord
Jesus Christ, who before all ages was begotten from the Father, God from
God, Light from Light, by whom all things were made, in heaven and on
the earth, visible and invisible, being Word and Wisdom and Power and
Life and True Light, who in the last days was made man for us, and was
born of the Holy Virgin, crucified and dead and buried, and rose again
from the dead the third day, and was taken up into heaven, and sat down
on the right hand of the Father, and is coming at the consummation of
the age to judge quick and dead, and to render to every one according to
his works, whose Kingdom endures unceasingly unto the infinite ages; for
He sitteth on the right hand of the Father not only in this age, but
also in that which is to come.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p91"></span>And we believe in the Holy Ghost, that
is, the Paraclete, which, having promised to the Apostles, He sent forth
after the ascension into heaven, to teach them and to remind of all
things: through whom also shall be sanctified the souls of those who
sincerely believe in Him.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p92"></span>But those who say, (1) that the Son was
from nothing, or from other subsistence and not from God; (2) and that
there was a time or age when He was not, the Catholic and Holy Church
regards as aliens. Likewise those who say, (3) that there are three
Gods: (4) or that Christ is not God; (5) or that before the ages He was
neither Christ nor Son of God; (6) or that Father and Son, or Holy
Ghost, are the same; (7) or that the Son is Ingenerate; or that the
Father begat the Son, not by choice or will; the Holy and Catholic
Church anathematizes.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p93"></span>(1.) For neither is safe to say that
the Son is from nothing, (since this is no where spoken of Him in
divinely inspired Scripture,) nor again of any other subsistence before
existing beside the Father, but from God alone do we define Him
genuinely to be generated. For the divine Word teaches that the
Ingenerate and Unbegun, the Father of Christ, is One <span
id="fr_3548"></span>[3549](#fn_3548) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p95"></span>(2.) Nor may we, adopting the hazardous
position, ‘There was once when He was not,’ from unscriptural sources,
imagine any interval of time before Him, but only the God who has
generated Him apart from time; for through Him both times and ages came
to be. Yet we must not consider the Son to be co-unbegun and
co-ingenerate with the Father; for no one can be properly called Father
or Son of one who is co-unbegun and co-ingenerate with Him <span
id="fr_3549"></span>[3550](#fn_3549) . But we acknowledge <span
id="fr_3550"></span>[3551](#fn_3550) that the Father who alone is
Unbegun and Ingenerate, hath generated inconceivably and
incomprehensibly to all: and that the Son hath been generated before
ages, and in no wise to be ingenerate Himself like the Father, but to
have the Father who generated Him as His beginning; for ‘the Head of
Christ is God.’ ([1 Cor. xi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p97.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p98"></span>(3.) Nor again, in confessing three
realities and three Persons, of the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost according to the Scriptures, do we therefore make Gods three;
since we acknowledge the Self-complete and Ingenerate and Unbegun and
Invisible God to be one only <span id="fr_3551"></span>[3552](#fn_3551)
, the God and Father ([Joh. xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p99.2"></span>)
of the Only-begotten, who alone hath being from Himself, and alone
vouchsafes this to all others bountifully.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p100"></span>(4.) Nor again, in saying that the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is one only God, the only Ingenerate, do
we therefore deny that Christ also is God before ages: as the disciples
of Paul of Samosata, who say that after the incarnation He was by
advance <span id="fr_3552"></span>[3553](#fn_3552) made God, from being
made by nature a mere man. For we acknowledge, that though He be
subordinate to His Father and God, yet, being before ages begotten of
God, He is God perfect according to nature and true <span
id="fr_3553"></span>[3554](#fn_3553) , and not first man and then God,
but first God and then becoming man for us, and never having been
deprived of being.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p103"></span>(5.) We abhor besides, and
anathematize those who make a pretence of saying that He is but the mere
word of God and unexisting, having His being in another,—now as if
pronounced, as some speak, now as mental <span
id="fr_3554"></span>[3555](#fn_3554) ,—holding that He was not Christ or
Son of God or mediator or image of God before ages; but that He first
became Christ and Son of God, when He took our flesh from the Virgin,
not quite four hundred years since. For they will have it that then
Christ began His Kingdom, and that it will have an end after the
consummation of all and the judgment <span
id="fr_3555"></span>[3556](#fn_3555) . Such are the disciples of
Marcellus and Scotinus <span id="fr_3556"></span>[3557](#fn_3556) of
Galatian Ancyra, who, equally with Jews, negative Christ’s existence
before ages, and His Godhead, and unending Kingdom, upon pretence of
supporting the divine Monarchy. We, on the contrary, regard Him not as
simply God’s pronounced word or mental, but as Living God and Word,
existing in Himself, and Son of God and Christ; being and abiding with
His Father before ages, and that not in foreknowledge only <span
id="fr_3557"></span>[3558](#fn_3557) , and ministering to Him for the
whole framing whether of things visible or invisible. For He it is, to
whom the Father said, ‘Let Us make man in Our image, after Our
likeness <span id="fr_3558"></span>[3559](#fn_3558) ’ ([Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p108.2"></span>), who also was seen in His own
Person <span id="fr_3559"></span>[3560](#fn_3559) by the patriarchs,
gave the law, spoke by the prophets, and at last, became man, and
manifested His own Father to all men, and reigns to never-ending ages.
For Christ has taken no recent dignity, but we have believed Him to be
perfect from the first, and like in all things to the Father <span
id="fr_3560"></span>[3561](#fn_3560) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p111"></span>(6.) And those who say that the Father
and Son and Holy Ghost are the same, and irreligiously take the Three
Names of one and the same Reality and Person, we justly proscribe from
the Church, because they suppose the illimitable and impassible Father
to be limitable withal and passible through His becoming man: for such
are they whom Romans call Patripassians, and we Sabellians <span
id="fr_3561"></span>[3562](#fn_3561) . For we acknowledge that the
Father who sent, remained in the peculiar state of His unchangeable
Godhead, and that Christ who was sent fulfilled the economy of the
Incarnation.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p113"></span>(7.) And at the same time those who
irreverently say that the Son has been generated not by choice or will,
thus encompassing God with a necessity which excludes choice and
purpose, so that He begat the Son unwillingly, we account as most
irreligious and alien to the Church; in that they have dared to define
such things concerning God, beside the common notions concerning Him,
nay, beside the purport of divinely inspired Scripture. For <span
id="page_464">p. 464</span> <span id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_464"></span>we,
knowing that God is absolute and sovereign over Himself, have a
religious judgment that He generated the Son voluntarily and freely;
yet, as we have a reverent belief in the Son’s words concerning Himself
([Prov. viii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p113.1"></span>), ‘The Lord created me a beginning of His
ways for His works,’ we do not understand Him to have been originated
like the creatures or works which through Him came to be. For it is
irreligious and alien to the ecclesiastical faith, to compare the
Creator with handiworks created by Him, and to think that He has the
same manner of origination with the rest. For divine Scripture teaches
us really and truly that the Only-begotten Son was generated sole and
solely <span id="fr_3562"></span>[3563](#fn_3562) . Yet <span
id="fr_3563"></span>[3564](#fn_3563) , in saying that the Son is in
Himself, and both lives and exists like the Father, we do not on that
account separate Him from the Father, imagining place and interval
between their union in the way of bodies. For we believe that they are
united with each other without mediation or distance <span
id="fr_3564"></span>[3565](#fn_3564) , and that they exist inseparable;
all the Father embosoming the Son, and all the Son hanging and adhering
to the Father, and alone resting on the Father’s breast
continually <span id="fr_3565"></span>[3566](#fn_3565) . Believing then
in the All-perfect Triad, the most Holy, that is, in the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, and calling the Father God, and the Son God,
yet we confess in them, not two Gods, but one dignity of Godhead, and
one exact harmony of dominion, the Father alone being Head over the
whole universe wholly, and over the Son Himself, and the Son
subordinated to the Father; but, excepting Him, ruling over all things
after Him which through Himself have come to be, and granting the grace
of the Holy Ghost unsparingly to the saints at the Father’s will. For
that such is the account of the Divine Monarchy towards Christ, the
sacred oracles have delivered to us.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p118"></span>Thus much, in addition to the faith
before published in epitome, we have been compelled to draw forth at
length, not in any officious display, but to clear away all unjust
suspicion concerning our opinions, among those who are ignorant of our
affairs: and that all in the West may know, both the audacity of the
slanders of the heterodox, and as to the Orientals, their ecclesiastical
mind in the Lord, to which the divinely inspired Scriptures bear witness
without violence, where men are not perverse.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p119"></span>27. However they did not stand even to
this; for again at Sirmium <span id="fr_3566"></span>[3567](#fn_3566)
they met together <span id="fr_3567"></span>[3568](#fn_3567) against
Photinus <span id="fr_3568"></span>[3569](#fn_3568) and there composed a
faith again, not drawn out into such length, not so full in words; but
subtracting the greater part and adding in its place, as if they had
listened to the suggestions of others, they wrote as follows:—

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p123"></span>We believe <span
id="fr_3569"></span>[3570](#fn_3569) in One God, the Father Almighty,
the Creator and Maker of all things, ‘from whom all fatherhood in heaven
and earth is named <span id="fr_3570"></span>[3571](#fn_3570) ’

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p126"></span>And in His Only-begotten Son, our Lord
Jesus the Christ, who before all the ages was begotten from the Father,
God from God, Light from Light, by whom all things were made, in heaven
and on the earth, visible and invisible, being Word and Wisdom and True
Light and Life, who in the last of days was made man for us, and was
born of the Holy Virgin, and crucified and dead and buried, and rose
again from the dead the third day, and was taken up into heaven, and sat
down on the right hand of the Father, and is coming at the consummation
of the age, to judge quick and dead, and to render to every one
according to his works; whose Kingdom being unceasing endures unto the
infinite ages; for He shall sit on the right hand of the Father, not
only in this age, but also in that which is to come.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p127"></span>And in the Holy Ghost, that is, the
Paraclete; which, having promised to the Apostles to send forth after
His ascension into heaven, to teach and to remind them of all things, He
did send; through whom also are sanctified the souls of those who
sincerely believe in Him.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p128"></span>(1.) But those who say that the Son
was from nothing or from other subsistence <span
id="fr_3571"></span>[3572](#fn_3571) and not from God, and that there
was time or age when He was not, the Holy and Catholic Church regards as
aliens.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p130"></span>(2.) Again we say, Whosoever says that
the Father and the Son are two Gods, be he anathema <span
id="fr_3572"></span>[3573](#fn_3572) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p132"></span>(3.) And whosoever, saying that Christ
is God, before ages Son of God, does not confess that He has subserved
the Father for the framing of the universe, be he anathema <span
id="fr_3573"></span>[3574](#fn_3573) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p134"></span><span id="page_465">p. 465</span>
<span id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_465"></span>(4.) Whosoever presumes to say
that the Ingenerate, or a part of Him, was born of Mary, be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p135"></span>(5.) Whosoever says that according to
foreknowledge <span id="fr_3574"></span>[3575](#fn_3574) the Son is
before Mary and not that, generated from the Father before ages, He was
with God, and that through Him all things were originated, be he
anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p137"></span>(6.) Whosoever shall pretend that the
essence of God is dilated or contracted <span
id="fr_3575"></span>[3576](#fn_3575) , be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p139"></span>(7.) Whosoever shall say that the
essence of God being dilated made the Son, or shall name the dilation of
His essence Son, be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p140"></span>(8.) Whosoever calls the Son of God
the mental or pronounced Word <span id="fr_3576"></span>[3577](#fn_3576)
, be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p142"></span>(9.) Whosoever says that the Son from
Mary is man only, be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p143"></span>(10.) Whosoever, speaking of Him who
is from Mary God and man, thereby means God the Ingenerate <span
id="fr_3577"></span>[3578](#fn_3577) , be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p145"></span>(11.) Whosoever shall explain ‘I God
the First and I the Last, and besides Me there is no God,’ ([Is. xliv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p145.1"></span>), which is said for the denial of idols
and of gods that are not, to the denial of the Only-begotten, before
ages God, as Jews do, be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p146"></span>(12.) Whosoever hearing ‘The Word was
made flesh,’ ([John i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p146.1"></span>), shall consider that the Word has
changed into flesh, or shall say that He has undergone alteration by
taking flesh, be he anathema <span id="fr_3578"></span>[3579](#fn_3578)
.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p148"></span>(13.) Whosoever hearing the
Only-begotten Son of God to have been crucified, shall say that His
Godhead has undergone corruption, or passion. or alteration, or
diminution, or destruction, be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p149"></span>(14.) Whosoever shall say that ‘Let Us
make man’ ([Gen. i. 26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p149.1"></span>), was not said by the Father to the Son,
but by God to Himself, be he anathema <span
id="fr_3579"></span>[3580](#fn_3579) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p151"></span>(15.) Whosoever shall say that Abraham
saw, not the Son, but the Ingenerate God or part of Him, be he
anathema <span id="fr_3580"></span>[3581](#fn_3580) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p153"></span>(16.) Whosoever shall say that with
Jacob, not the Son as man, but the Ingenerate God or part of Him, has
wrestled, be he anathema <span id="fr_3581"></span>[3582](#fn_3581) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p155"></span>(17.) Whosoever shall explain, ‘The
Lord rained fire from the Lord’ ([Gen. xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p155.1"></span>), not of the Father and the Son, and says
that He rained from Himself, be he anathema. For the Son, being Lord,
rained from the Father Who is Lord.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p156"></span>(18.) Whosoever, hearing that the
Father is Lord and the Son Lord and the Father and Son Lord, for there
is Lord from Lord, says there are two Gods, be he anathema. For we do
not place the Son in the Father’s Order, but as subordinate to the
Father; for He did not descend upon Sodom without the Father’s will, nor
did He rain from Himself, but from the Lord, that is, the Father
authorising it. Nor is He of Himself set down on the right hand, but He
hears the Father saying, ‘Sit Thou on My right hand’ ([Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p156.1"></span>).

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p157"></span>(19.) Whosoever says that the Father
and the Son and the Holy Ghost are one Person, be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p158"></span>(20.) Whosoever, speaking of the Holy
Ghost as Paraclete, shall mean the Ingenerate God, be he anathema <span
id="fr_3582"></span>[3583](#fn_3582) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p160"></span>(21.) Whosoever shall deny, what the
Lord taught us, that the Paraclete is other than the Son, for He hath
said, ‘And another Paraclete shall the Father send to you, whom I will
ask,’ ([John xiv. 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p160.1"></span>) be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p161"></span>(22.) Whosoever shall say that the
Holy Ghost is part of the Father or of the Son <span
id="fr_3583"></span>[3584](#fn_3583) be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p163"></span>(23.) Whosoever shall say that the
Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost are three Gods, be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p164"></span>(24.) Whosoever shall say that the Son
of God at the will of God has come to be, as one of the works, be he
anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p165"></span>(25.) Whosoever shall say that the Son
has been generated, the Father not wishing it <span
id="fr_3584"></span>[3585](#fn_3584) , be he anathema. For not by
compulsion, led by physical necessity, did the Father, as He wished not,
generate the Son, but He at once willed, and, after generating Him from
Himself apart from time and passion, manifested Him.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p167"></span>(26.) Whosoever shall say that the Son
is without beginning and ingenerate, as if speaking of two unbegun and
two ingenerate, and making two Gods, be he anathema. For the Son is the
Head, namely the beginning of all: and God is the Head, namely the
beginning of Christ; for thus to one unbegun beginning of the universe
do we religiously refer all things through the Son.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p168"></span>(27.) And in accurate delineation of
the idea of Christianity we say this again; Whosoever shall not say that
Christ is God, Son of God, as being before ages, and having subserved
the Father in the framing of the Universe, but that from the time that
He was born of Mary, from thence He was called Christ and Son, and took
an origin of being God, be he anathema.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p169"></span>28. Casting aside the whole of this,
as if they had discovered something better, they <span id="page_466">p.
466</span> <span id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_466"></span>propound another faith,
and write at Sirmium in Latin what is here translated into Greek <span
id="fr_3585"></span>[3586](#fn_3585) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p171"></span>Whereas <span
id="fr_3586"></span>[3587](#fn_3586) it seemed good that there should be
some discussion concerning faith, all points were carefully investigated
and discussed at Sirmium in the presence of Valens, and Ursacius, and
Germinius, and the rest.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p173"></span>It is held for certain that there is
one God, the Father Almighty, as also is preached in all the world.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p174"></span>And His One Only-begotten Son, our
Lord Jesus Christ, generated from Him before the ages; and that we may
not speak of two Gods, since the Lord Himself has said, ‘I go to My
Father and your Father, and My God and your God’ ([John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p174.1"></span>). On this account He is God of all, as
also the Apostle taught: ‘Is He God of the Jews only, is He not also of
the Gentiles? yea of the Gentiles also: since there is one God who shall
justify the circumcision from faith, and the uncircumcision through
faith’ ([Rom. 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p174.2"></span>); and every thing else agrees, and has no
ambiguity.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p175"></span>But since many persons are disturbed
by questions concerning what is called in Latin ‘Substantia,’ but in
Greek ‘Usia,’ that is, to make it understood more exactly, as to
‘Coessential,’ or what is called, ‘Like-in-Essence,’ there ought to be
no mention of any of these at all, nor exposition of them in the Church,
for this reason and for this consideration, that in divine Scripture
nothing is written about them, and that they are above men’s knowledge
and above men’s understanding; and because no one can declare the Son’s
generation, as it is written, ‘Who shall declare His generation’ ([Is.
liii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p175.1"></span>)? for it is plain that the Father only
knows how He generated the Son, and again the Son how He has been
generated by the Father. And to none can it be a question that the
Father is greater: for no one can doubt that the Father is greater in
honour and dignity and Godhead, and in the very name of Father, the Son
Himself testifying, ‘The Father that sent Me is greater than I’ ([John
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029), [John
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p175.2"></span>). And no one is ignorant, that it is
Catholic doctrine, that there are two Persons of Father and Son, and
that the Father is greater, and the Son subordinated to the Father
together with all things which the Father has subordinated to Him, and
that the Father has no beginning, and is invisible, and immortal, and
impassible; but that the Son has been generated from the Father, God
from God, Light from Light, and that His origin, as aforesaid, no one
knows, but the Father only. And that the Son Himself and our Lord and
God, took flesh, that is, a body, that is, man, from Mary the Virgin, as
the Angel preached beforehand; and as all the Scriptures teach, and
especially the Apostle himself, the doctor of the Gentiles, Christ took
man of Mary the Virgin, through which He has suffered. And the whole
faith is summed up <span id="fr_3587"></span>[3588](#fn_3587) , and
secured in this, that a Trinity should ever be preserved, as we read in
the Gospel, ‘Go ye and baptize all the nations in the Name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost’ ([Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p176.3"></span>). And entire and perfect is the number of
the Trinity; but the Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, sent forth through the
Son, came according to the promise, that He might teach and sanctify the
Apostles and all believers <span id="fr_3588"></span>[3589](#fn_3588) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p178"></span>29. After drawing up this, and then
becoming dissatisfied, they composed the faith which to their shame they
paraded with ‘the Consulate.’ And, as is their wont, condemning this
also, they caused Martinian the notary to seize it from the parties who
had the copies of it <span id="fr_3589"></span>[3590](#fn_3589) . And
having got the Emperor Constantius to put forth an edict against it,
they form another dogma afresh, and with the addition of certain
expressions, according to their wont, they write thus in Isauria.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p180"></span>We decline <span
id="fr_3590"></span>[3591](#fn_3590) not to bring forward the authentic
faith published at the Dedication at Antioch <span
id="fr_3591"></span>[3592](#fn_3591) ; though certainly our fathers at
the time met together for a particular subject under investigation. But
since ‘Coessential’ and ‘Like-in-essence,’ have troubled many persons in
times past and up to this day, and since moreover some are said recently
to have devised the Son’s ‘Unlikeness’ to the Father, on their account
we reject ‘Coessential’ and ‘Like-in-essence,’ as alien to the
Scriptures, but ‘Unlike’ we anathematize, and account all who profess it
as aliens from the Church. And we distinctly confess the ‘Likeness’ of
the Son to the Father, according to the Apostle, who says of the Son,
‘Who is the Image of the Invisible God’ ([Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p182.2"></span>).

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p183"></span>And we confess and believe in one God,
the Father Almighty, the Maker of heaven and earth, of all things
visible and invisible.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p184"></span>And we believe also in our Lord Jesus
Christ, His Son, generated from Him impassibly before all the ages, God
the Word, God from God, Only-begotten, light, life, truth, wisdom,
power, through whom all things were made, in the heavens and on the
earth, whether visible or invisible. He, as we believe, at the end of
the world, for the abolishment of sin, took flesh of the Holy Virgin,
and was made man, and suffered for our sins, and rose again, and was
taken up into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of the Father, and
is coming again in glory, to judge quick and dead.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p185"></span>We believe also in the Holy Ghost,
which our Saviour and Lord named Paraclete, having promised to send Him
to the disciples after His own departure, as He did send; through whom
He sanctifieth those in the Church who believe, and are baptized in the
Name of Father and Son and Holy Ghost.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p186"></span>But those who preach aught beside this
faith the Catholic Church regards as aliens. And that to this faith that
is equivalent which was published lately at Sirmium, under sanction of
his religiousness the Emperor, is plain to all who read it.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p187"></span>30. Having written thus in Isauria,
they <span id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_467"></span>went up to Constantinople <span
id="fr_3592"></span>[3593](#fn_3592) , and there, as if dissatisfied,
they changed it, as is their wont, and with some small additions against
using even ‘Subsistence’ of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, they
transmitted it to those at Ariminum, and compelled even those in the
said parts to subscribe, and those who contradicted them they got
banished by Constantius. And it runs thus:—

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p189"></span>We believe <span
id="fr_3593"></span>[3594](#fn_3593) in One God, Father Almighty, from
whom are all things;

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p191"></span>And in the Only-begotten Son of God,
begotten from God before all ages and before every beginning, by whom
all things were made, visible and invisible, and begotten as
only-begotten, only from the Father only <span
id="fr_3594"></span>[3595](#fn_3594) , God from God, like to the Father
that begat Him according to the Scriptures; whose origin no one knows,
except the Father alone who begat Him. He as we acknowledge, the
Only-begotten Son of God, the Father sending Him, came hither from the
heavens, as it is written, for the undoing of sin and death, and was
born of the Holy Ghost, of Mary the Virgin according to the flesh, as it
is written, and convened with the disciples, and having fulfilled the
whole Economy according to the Father’s will, was crucified and dead and
buried and descended to the parts below the earth; at whom hades itself
shuddered: who also rose from the dead on the third day, and abode with
the disciples, and, forty days being fulfilled, was taken up into the
heavens, and sitteth on the right hand of the Father, to come in the
last day of the resurrection in the Father’s glory, that He may render
to every man according to his works.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p193"></span>And in the Holy Ghost, whom the
Only-begotten Son of God Himself, Christ, our Lord and God, promised to
send to the race of man, as Paraclete, as it is written, ‘the Spirit of
truth’ ([Joh. xvi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p193.1"></span>), which He sent unto them when He had
ascended into the heavens.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p194"></span>But the name of ‘Essence,’ which was
set down by the Fathers in simplicity, and, being unknown by the people,
caused offence, because the Scriptures contain it not, it has seemed
good to abolish, and for the future to make no mention of it at all;
since the divine Scriptures have made no mention of the Essence of
Father and Son. For neither ought Subsistence to be named concerning
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. But, we say that the Son is Like the
Father, as the divine Scriptures say and teach; and all the heresies,
both those which have been afore condemned already, and whatever are of
modern date, being contrary to this published statement, be they
anathema <span id="fr_3595"></span>[3596](#fn_3595) .

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p196"></span>31. However, they did not stand even
to this: for coming down from Constantinople to Antioch, they were
dissatisfied that they had written at all that the Son was ‘Like the
Father, as the Scriptures say;’ and putting their ideas upon paper <span
id="fr_3596"></span>[3597](#fn_3596) , they began reverting to their
first doctrines, and said that ‘the Son is altogether unlike the
Father,’ and that the ‘Son is in no manner like the Father,’ and so much
did they change, as to admit those who spoke the Arian doctrine nakedly
and to deliver to them the Churches with licence to bring forward the
words of blasphemy with impunity <span
id="fr_3597"></span>[3598](#fn_3597) . Because then of the extreme
shamelessness of their blasphemy they were called by all Anomœans,
having also the name of Exucontian <span
id="fr_3598"></span>[3599](#fn_3598) , and the heretical Constantius for
the patron of their irreligion, who persisting up to the end in
irreligion, and on the point of death, thought good to be baptized <span
id="fr_3599"></span>[3600](#fn_3599) ; not however by religious men, but
by Euzoius <span id="fr_3600"></span>[3601](#fn_3600) , who for his
Arianism had been deposed, not once, but often, both when he was a
deacon, and when he was in the see of Antioch.

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p202"></span>32. The forementioned parties then had
proceeded thus far, when they were stopped and deposed. But well I know,
not even under these circumstances will they stop, as many as have now
dissembled, <span id="fr_3601"></span>[3602](#fn_3601) but they will
always be making parties against the truth, until they return to
themselves and say, ‘Let us rise and go to our fathers, and we will say
unto them, We anathematize the Arian heresy, and we acknowledge the
Nicene Council;’ for against this is their quarrel. Who then, with ever
so little understanding, will bear them any longer? who, on hearing in
every Council some things taken away and others added, but perceives
that their mind is shifty and treacherous against Christ? who on seeing
them embodying to so great a length both their professions of faith, and
their own exculpation, but sees that they are giving sentence against
themselves, and studiously writing much which may be likely by their
officious display and abundance of words to seduce the simple and <span
id="page_468">p. 468</span> <span id="xxii.ii.ii-Page_468"></span>hide
what they are in point of heresy? But as the heathen, as the Lord said,
using vain words in their prayers ([Mat. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#007)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p203.6"></span>), are nothing profited; so they too,
after all this outpouring, were not able to quench the judgment
pronounced against the Arian heresy, but were convicted and deposed
instead; and rightly; for which of their formularies is to be accepted
by the hearer? or with what confidence shall they be catechists to those
who come to them? for if they all have one and the same meaning, what is
the need of many? But if need has arisen of so many, it follows that
each by itself is deficient, not complete; and they establish this point
better than we can, by their innovating on them all and remaking them.
And the number of their Councils, and the difference of their statements
is a proof that those who were present at them, while at variance with
the Nicene, are yet too feeble to harm the Truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3501"></span>[457:3502](2040394.htm#fr_3501) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p4"></span> Cf. *Orat.* i. §§2–5; *de Sent. D.* 6;
Socr. i. 9. The Arian Philostorgius tells us that ‘Arius wrote songs for
the sea and for the mill and for the road, and then set them to suitable
music,’ *Hist.* ii. 2. It is remarkable that Athanasius should say the
*Egyptian* Sotades, and again in *Sent. D.* 6. There were two Poets of
the name; one a writer of the Middle Comedy, *Athen. Deipn.* vii. 11;
but the other, who is here spoken of, was a native of Maronea in Crete,
according to Suidas (*in voc.*), under the successors of Alexander,
*Athen.* xiv. 4. He wrote in Ionic metre, which was of infamous name
from the subjects to which he and others applied it. vid. *Suid.* ibid.
Horace’s Ode. ‘Miserarum est neque amori, &c.’ is a specimen of this
metre, and some have called it Sotadic; but Bentley shews *in loc.* that
Sotades wrote in the Ionic a majore. Athenæus implies that all Ionic
metres were called Sotadic, or that Sotades wrote in various Ionic
metres. The Church adopted the Doric music, and forbade the Ionic and
Lydian. The name ‘Thalia’ commonly belonged to convivial songs; Martial
contrasts the ‘lasciva Thalia’ with ‘carmina sanctiora,’ *Epigr.* vii.
17. vid. Thaliarchus, ‘the master of the feast,’ Horat. Od. i. 9. \[The
metre of the fragments of the ‘Thalia’ is obscure, there are no traces
of the Ionic foot, but very distinct anapæstic cadences. In fact the
lines resemble ill-constructed or very corrupt anapæstic tetrameters
catalectic, as in a comic *Parabasis.* For Sotades, the Greek text here
reads corruptly Sosates.\]

<span id="fn_3502"></span>[457:3503](2040394.htm#fr_3502) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p7"></span> This passage ought to have been added
*supr.* p. 163, note 8, as containing a more direct denial of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p7.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p7.3"></span>μοούσιον</span>

<span id="fn_3503"></span>[457:3504](2040394.htm#fr_3503) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p8"></span> That is, Wisdom, or the Son, is but the
*disciple* of Him who is Wise, and not the *attribute* by which He is
Wise, which is what the Sabellians said, vid. *Orat*. iv. §2, and what
Arius imputed to the Church.

<span id="fn_3504"></span>[457:3505](2040394.htm#fr_3504) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>νεπιμικτοί</span>, that is, he denied the
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p9.4"></span>περιχώρησις</span>, vid. *supr. Orat.* iii.
3, &c.

<span id="fn_3505"></span>[457:3506](2040394.htm#fr_3505) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p9.6"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p10"></span> \[[John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>,
best <span class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p10.3"></span>mss.</span>,
and cf. Hort, *Two Diss.* p. 26.

<span id="fn_3506"></span>[458:3507](2040394.htm#fr_3506) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p11.2"></span>πινοίαις</span>, that is, our Lord’s titles
are but *names, or figures,* not properly belonging to Him, but \[cf.
Bigg. *B. L.* p. 168 *sq.*\]

<span id="fn_3507"></span>[458:3508](2040394.htm#fr_3507) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>κατὰ κατάληψιν</span>, that is, there is
nothing comprehensible in the Father for the Son to know and declare. On
the other hand the doctrine of the Anomœans was, that all men could know
Almighty God perfectly.

<span id="fn_3508"></span>[458:3509](2040394.htm#fr_3508) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p15"></span> \[The ordinary title of eminent
bishops, especially of the bishop of Alexandria.\]

<span id="fn_3509"></span>[458:3510](2040394.htm#fr_3509) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p17"></span> What the Valentinian <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p17.2"></span>προβολὴ</span> was is
described in Epiph. *Hær.* 31, 13 \[but see D.C.B. iv. 1086 *sqq.*\]
Origen protests against the notion of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p17.4"></span>προβολή</span>, *Periarch.* iv. p. 190, and
Athanasius *Expos.* §1. The Arian Asterius too considers <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p17.6"></span>προβολὴ</span> to
introduce the notion of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p17.7"></span>τεκνογονία</span>, Euseb. *contr. Marc.* i.
4. p. 20. vid. also Epiph. *Hær.* 72. 7. Yet Eusebius uses the word
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p17.9"></span>προβάλλεσθαι</span>. *Eccl. Theol.* i. 8.
On the other hand Tertullian uses it with a protest against the
Valentinian sense. Justin has <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p17.11"></span>προβληθὲν γέννημα</span>, *Tryph.* 62. And
Nazianzen calls the Almighty Father <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p17.13"></span>προβολεὺς</span> of the Holy Spirit.
*Orat.* 29. 2. Arius introduces the word here as an *argumentum ad
invidiam.* Hil. *de Trin.* vi. 9.

<span id="fn_3510"></span>[458:3511](2040394.htm#fr_3510) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p17.15"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p18"></span> The Manichees adopting a material
notion of the divine substance, considered that it was divisible, and
that a portion of it was absorbed by the power of darkness.

<span id="fn_3511"></span>[458:3512](2040394.htm#fr_3511) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>υἱοπατόρα</span>. The term is ascribed to
Sabellius, Ammon. in *Caten. Joan.* i. 1. p. 14: to Sabellius and
\[invidiously to\] Marcellus, Euseb. *Eccl. Theol.* ii. 5: Cf., as to
Marcellus, Cyr. Hier. *Catech.* xv. 9. also iv. 8. xi. 16; Epiph. *Hær.*
73. 11 fin.: to Sabellians, Athan. *Expos. Fid.* 2. and 7, and Greg.
Nyssen. *contr. Eun.* xii. p. 733: to certain heretics, Cyril. Alex. *in
Joann.* p. 243: to Praxeas and Montanus, *Mar. Merc.* p. 128: to
Sabellius, Cæsar. *Dial.* i. p. 550: to Noetus, Damasc. *Hær.* 57.

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[458:3513](2040394.htm#fr_3512) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p20"></span> \[On Hieracas, see D.C.B. iii. 24;
also Epiph. *Hær.* 67; Hil. *Trin.* vi. 12.\]

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[458:3514](2040394.htm#fr_3513) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p21"></span> Bull considers that the doctrine of
such Fathers is here spoken of as held that our Lord’s <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p21.2"></span>συγκατάβασις</span> to
create the world was a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p21.3"></span>γέννησις</span>, and certainly such
language as that of Hippol. *contr. Noet.* §15. favours the supposition.
But one class of \[Monarchians\] may more probably be intended, who held
that the Word became the Son upon His incarnation, such as Marcellus,
vid. Euseb. *Eccles. Theol.* i. 1. *contr. Marc.* ii. 3. vid. also
*Eccles. Theol.* ii. 9. p. 114 b. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p21.5"></span>μηδ᾽ ἄλλοτε ἄλλην κ.τ.λ</span>. Also the
Macrostich says, ‘We anathematize those who call Him the mere Word of
God, not allowing Him to be Christ and Son of God before all ages, but
from the time He took on Him our flesh: such are the followers of
Marcellus and Photinus, &c.’ *infr.* §26. Again, Athanasius, *Orat.* iv.
15, says that, of those who divide the Word from the Son, some called
our Lord’s manhood the Son, some the two Natures together, and some said
‘that the Word Himself became the Son when He was made man.’ It makes it
more likely that Marcellus is meant, that Asterius seems to have written
against him before the Nicene Council, and that Arius in other of his
writings borrowed from Asterius. vid. *de Decret.* §8.

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[458:3515](2040394.htm#fr_3514) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p21.7"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p22"></span> Eusebius’s letter to Euphration, which
is mentioned just after, expresses this more distinctly—‘If they
coexist, how shall the Father be Father and the Son Son? or how the One
first, the Other second? and the One ingenerate and the other generate?’
*Acta Conc.* 7. p. 301. The phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p22.2"></span>τὰ πρός τι</span> Bull well explains to
refer to the Catholic truth that the Father or Son being named; the
Other is therein implied without naming. *Defens. F. N.* iii. 9. §4.
Hence Arius, in his Letter to Eusebius, complains that Alexander says,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p22.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p22.5"></span>εὶ ὁ θεός, ἀεὶ ὁ υἱ&
231·ς ἅμα πατήρ, ἅμα υἱ& 231·ς</span>. Theod. *H. E.* i. 4.

<span id="fn_3515"></span>[458:3516](2040394.htm#fr_3515) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p22.7"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>ἥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p23.2"></span>κω</span>, and so Chrys. *Hom.* 3. *Hebr.*
init. Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 31, and 36.

<span id="fn_3516"></span>[458:3517](2040394.htm#fr_3516) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p26"></span> Most of these original Arians were
attacked in a work of Marcellus’s which Eusebius answers. ‘Now he
replies to Asterius,’ says Eusebius, ‘now to the great Eusebius’ \[of
Nicomedia\], ‘and then he turns upon that man of God, that indeed thrice
blessed person Paulinus \[of Tyre\]. Then he goes to war with
Origen.…Next he marches out against Narcissus, and pursues the other
Eusebius,’ \[himself\]. ‘In a word, he counts for nothing all the
Ecclesiastical Fathers, being satisfied with no one but himself.’
*contr. Marc.* i. 4. \[On Maris (who was *not* at Ariminum, and scarcely
at Antioch in 363) see D.C.B. *s.v.* (2). On Theodotus see vol. i. of
this series, p. 320, note 37. On Paulinus, *ib.* p. 369.\]

<span id="fn_3517"></span>[459:3518](2040394.htm#fr_3517) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p27"></span> \[Of Balaneæ, see *Ap. Fug.* 3; *Hist.
Ar.* 5.\]

<span id="fn_3518"></span>[459:3519](2040394.htm#fr_3518) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p28"></span> Quoted, among other passages from
Eusebius, in the 7th General Council, [Act.
6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#000)<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p28.2"></span>.
p. 409. \[Mansi. xiii. 701 D\]. ‘The Son Himself is God, but not Very
God.’ \[But see Prolegg. *ubi supr.* note 5\].

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[459:3520](2040394.htm#fr_3519) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p30"></span> Asterius has been mentioned above, p.
155, note 2, &c. Philostorgius speaks of him as adopting Semi-Arian
terms; and Acacius gives an extract from him containing them, ap. Epiph.
*Hær.* 72. 6. He seems to be called many-headed with an allusion to the
Hydra, and to his activity in the Arian cause and his fertility in
writing. He wrote comments on Scripture. \[See Prolegg. ii. §3 (2) a,
*sub. fin*.\]

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[459:3521](2040394.htm#fr_3520) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p31"></span> None but the clergy might enter the
Chancel, i.e. in Service time. Hence Theodosius was made to retire by S.
Ambrose. *Theod.* v. 17. The Council of Laodicea, said to be held <span
class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p31.2"></span>a.d.</span> 372, forbids
any but persons in orders, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p31.3"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p31.4"></span>ερατικοί</span>, to enter the Chancel and
then communicate. Can. 19. vid. also 44. *Conc.* t. i. pp. 788, 789. It
is doubtful what orders the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p31.6"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p31.7"></span>ερατικοὶ</span> is intended to include.
vid. Bingham, *Antiqu.* viii. 6. §7.

<span id="fn_3521"></span>[460:3522](2040394.htm#fr_3521) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p38"></span> *Ep. Æg.* 13.

<span id="fn_3522"></span>[460:3523](2040394.htm#fr_3522) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p40"></span> Vid. *infr.* §32.

<span id="fn_3523"></span>[460:3524](2040394.htm#fr_3523) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p41"></span> \[On Artemas or Artemon and Theodotus,
see Prolegg. ii. §3 (2) a.\]

<span id="fn_3524"></span>[460:3525](2040394.htm#fr_3524) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p44"></span> \[See *Apol. Ar.* 84; *Hist. Ar.* 1;
Prolegg. ii. §5. The first part of the letter will be found *supr. Apol.
Ar.* p. 144.\]

<span id="fn_3525"></span>[460:3526](2040394.htm#fr_3525) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p45"></span> This is supposed to be the same
Confession which is preserved by Socr. i. 26. and Soz. ii. 27. and was
presented to Constantine by Arius in 330.

<span id="fn_3526"></span>[461:3527](2040394.htm#fr_3526) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p47"></span> \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §6 (2).\]

<span id="fn_3527"></span>[461:3528](2040394.htm#fr_3527) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p50"></span> 1st Confession or 1st of Antioch,
<span class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p50.2"></span>a.d.</span> 341.
\[See Socr. ii. 10.\]

<span id="fn_3528"></span>[461:3529](2040394.htm#fr_3528) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p55"></span> 2nd Confession or 2nd of Antioch,
<span class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p55.2"></span>a.d.</span> 341.
This formulary is that known as *the* Formulary of the Dedication. It is
quoted as such by Socr. ii. 39, 40. Soz. iv. 15. and *infr.* §29. \[On
its attribution to Lucian, see Prolegg. *ubi supr.,* and Caspari *Alte.
u. Neue Q*. p. 42 note.\]

<span id="fn_3529"></span>[461:3530](2040394.htm#fr_3529) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p57"></span> Vid. 10th Confession, *infr.* §30.

<span id="fn_3530"></span>[461:3531](2040394.htm#fr_3530) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p58"></span> These strong words and those which
follow, whether Lucian’s or not, mark the great difference between this
confession and the foregoing. The words ‘unalterable and unchangeable’
are formal anti-Arian symbols, as the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p58.2"></span>τρεπτὸν</span> or alterable was one of the
most characteristic parts of Arius’s creed. vid. *Orat.* i. §35, &c.

<span id="fn_3531"></span>[461:3532](2040394.htm#fr_3531) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p58.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p59"></span> On <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.2"></span>παράλλακτος εἰκὼν κατ᾽ οὐσίαν</span>, which
was synonymous with <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.4"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.5"></span>μοιούσιος</span>, vid. *infr.* §38. *supr.*
p. 163, note 9. It was in order to secure the true sense of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.7"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.8"></span>παράλλακτον</span> that
the Council adopted the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.9"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.10"></span>μοούσιον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.11"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.12"></span>Απαράλλακτον</span> is accordingly used as
a familiar word by Athan. *de Decr.* §§20, 24. *Orat.* iii. §36. *contr.
Gent.* 41. 46. fin. Philostorgius ascribing it to Asterius, and Acacius
quotes a passage from his writings containing it; cf. S. Alexander <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.14"></span>τὴν κατὰ πάντα
ὁμοιότητα αὐτοῦ ἐκ φύσεως ἀπομαξάμενος</span>, in Theod. *H. E.* i. 4.
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.16"></span>Χαρακτήρ</span>,
<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.18"></span>[Hebr. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.20"></span>.
contains the same idea. Basil. *contr. Eunom.* i. 18.

<span id="fn_3532"></span>[461:3533](2040394.htm#fr_3532) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p59.23"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p60"></span> This statement perhaps is the most
Catholic in the Creed; not that the former are not more explicit in
themselves, or that in a certain true sense our Lord may not be called a
Mediator before He became incarnate, but because the Arians, even
Eusebius, like Philo and the Platonists, consider Him as made in the
beginning the ‘Eternal Priest of the Father,’ *Demonst.* v. 3. *de Laud.
C.* 3, 11, ‘an intermediate divine power,’ §§26, 27, and notes.

<span id="fn_3533"></span>[461:3534](2040394.htm#fr_3533) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p62"></span> On this phrase, which is justified by
S. Hilary, *de Syn.* 32, and is protested against in the Sardican
Confession, Theod. *H. E.* ii. 6 \[see Prolegg. *ubi supr.*\]

<span id="fn_3534"></span>[461:3535](2040394.htm#fr_3534) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p64"></span> The whole of these anathemas are \[a
compromise\]. The Council anathematizes ‘*every* heretical heterodoxy;’
*not*, as Athanasius observes, *supr.,* §7, the Arian.

<span id="fn_3535"></span>[461:3536](2040394.htm#fr_3535) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p65"></span> Our Lord was, as they held, *before*
time, but still created.

<span id="fn_3536"></span>[461:3537](2040394.htm#fr_3536) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p66"></span> This emphatic mention of Scripture is
also virtually an Arian evasion, admitting of a silent reference to
themselves as interpreters of Scripture.

<span id="fn_3537"></span>[461:3538](2040394.htm#fr_3537) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p68"></span> On this Creed see Prolegg. *ubi supr.*

<span id="fn_3538"></span>[461:3539](2040394.htm#fr_3538) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p70"></span> 3rd Confession or 3rd of Antioch,
<span class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p70.2"></span>a.d.</span> 341.

<span id="fn_3539"></span>[461:3540](2040394.htm#fr_3539) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p72"></span> It need scarcely be said, that
‘perfect from perfect’ is a symbol on which the Catholics laid stress,
Athan. *Orat.* ii. 35. Epiph. *Hær.* 76. p. 945. but it admitted of an
evasion. An especial reason for insisting on it in the previous
centuries had been the Sabellian doctrine, which considered the title
‘Word’ when applied to our Lord to be adequately explained by the
ordinary sense of the term, as a word spoken by us. In consequence they
insisted on His <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p72.2"></span>τὸ τέλειον</span>, perfection, which became
almost synonymous with His personality. (Thus the Apollinarians, e.g.
denied that our Lord was *perfect* man, because His *person* was not
human. Athan. *contr. Apoll.* i. 2.) And Athan. condemns the notion of
‘the <span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p72.4"></span>λόγος ἐν τῷ
θεῷ ἀτελὴς, γεννηθεὶς τέλειος</span>, *Orat*. iv. 11. The Arians then,
as being the especial opponents of the Sabellians, insisted on nothing
so much as our Lord’s being a real, living, substantial, Word. vid.
Eusebius *passim.* ‘The Father,’ says Acacius against Marcellus, ‘begat
the Only-begotten, alone alone, and perfect perfect; for there is
nothing imperfect in the Father, wherefore neither is there in the Son,
but the Son’s perfection is the genuine offspring of His perfection, and
superperfection.’ *ap. Epiph. Hær.* 72. 7. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p72.6"></span>Τέλειος</span> then was a relative word,
varying with the subject matter, vid. *Damasc. F. O.* i. 8. p. 138. and
when the Arians said that our Lord was perfect God, they meant,
‘perfect, *in that sense in which* He is God’—i.e. as a secondary
divinity.—Nay, in one point of view, holding as they did no real
condescension or assumption of a really new state, they would use the
term of His divine Nature more freely than the Catholics sometimes had.
‘Nor was the Word,’ says Hippolytus, ‘before the flesh and by Himself,
perfect Son, though being perfect Word, Only-begotten; nor could the
flesh subsist by itself without the Word, because that in the Word it
has its consistence: thus then He was manifested One perfect Son of
God.’ *contr. Noet.* 15.

<span id="fn_3540"></span>[462:3541](2040394.htm#fr_3540) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p75"></span> \[See Prolegg.\] Marcellus wrote his
work against Asterius in 335, the year of the Arian Council of
Jerusalem, which at once took cognisance of it, and cited Marcellus to
appear before them. The next year a Council held at Constantinople
condemned and deposed him.

<span id="fn_3541"></span>[462:3542](2040394.htm#fr_3541) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p77"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p77.2"></span>a.d.</span> 341.

<span id="fn_3542"></span>[462:3543](2040394.htm#fr_3542) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p77.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p78"></span> \[Cf. Prolegg. ii. §6 (3) *init.*\]

<span id="fn_3543"></span>[462:3544](2040394.htm#fr_3543) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p80"></span> 4th Confession, or 4th of Antioch,
<span class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p80.2"></span>a.d.</span> 342.
The fourth, fifth, and sixth Confessions are the same, and with them
agree the Creed of Philippopolis \[<span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p80.3"></span>a.d.</span> 343, see Gwatkin, *Stud.* p.
119, espec. note 2\].

<span id="fn_3544"></span>[462:3545](2040394.htm#fr_3544) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p82"></span> These words, which answer to those
\[of our present ‘Nicene’ Creed\], are directed against the doctrine of
Marcellus \[on which see Prolegg. ii. §3 (2) c, 3\]. Cf. Eusebius, *de
Eccl. Theol.* iii. 8. 17. *cont. Marc.* ii. 4.

<span id="fn_3545"></span>[463:3546](2040394.htm#fr_3545) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p85"></span> S. Hilary, as we have seen above, p.
78, by implication calls this the Nicene Anathema; but it omits many of
the Nicene clauses, and evades our Lord’s eternal existence,
substituting for ‘once He was not,’ ‘there was *time* when He was not.’
It seems to have been considered sufficient for Gaul, as used now, for
Italy as in the 5th Confession or Macrostich, and for Africa as in the
creed of Philippopolis.

<span id="fn_3546"></span>[463:3547](2040394.htm#fr_3546) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p87"></span> Little is known of Macedonius who was
Bishop of Mopsuestia, or of Martyrius; and too much of Eudoxius. This
Long Confession, or Macrostich, which follows, is remarkable; \[see
*Prolegg,* ch. ii. §6 (3), Gwatkin, p. 125 *sq.*\]

<span id="fn_3547"></span>[463:3548](2040394.htm#fr_3547) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p89"></span> 5th Confession or Macrostich, <span
class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p89.2"></span>a.d.</span> 344.
\[Published by the Council which deposed Stephen and elected Leontius
bishop of Antioch.\]

<span id="fn_3548"></span>[463:3549](2040394.htm#fr_3548) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p94"></span> It is observable that here and in the
next paragraph the only reasons they give against using the only two
Arian formulas which they condemn is that they are not found in
Scripture. Here, in their explanation of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p94.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p94.3"></span>ξ οὐκ ὄντων</span>, or from nothing, they
do but deny it with Eusebius’s evasion, *supr.* p. 75, note 5.

<span id="fn_3549"></span>[463:3550](2040394.htm#fr_3549) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p96"></span> They argue after the usual Arian
manner, that the term ‘Son’ essentially implies beginning, and excludes
the title ‘co-unoriginate;’ but see *supr.* §16, note 1, and p. 154,
note 5.

<span id="fn_3550"></span>[463:3551](2040394.htm#fr_3550) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p97"></span> \[The four lines which follow are
cited by Lightfoot, *Ign.* p. 91. ed. 2, as from *de Syn.* §3.\]

<span id="fn_3551"></span>[463:3552](2040394.htm#fr_3551) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p99"></span> Cf. §28, end.

<span id="fn_3552"></span>[463:3553](2040394.htm#fr_3552) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p101"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p101.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p101.2"></span>κ προκοπῆς</span>, *de Decr.* §10, note
10.

<span id="fn_3553"></span>[463:3554](2040394.htm#fr_3553) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p101.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p102"></span> These strong words, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p102.2"></span>θεὸν κατὰ φύσιν
τέλειον καὶ ἀληθῆ</span> are of a different character from any which
have occurred in the Arian Confessions. They can only be explained away
by considering them used *in contrast* to the Samosatene doctrine; so
that ‘perfect according to nature’ and ‘true,’ will not be directly
connected with ‘God’ so much as opposed to, ‘by advance,’ ‘by adoption,’
&c.

<span id="fn_3554"></span>[463:3555](2040394.htm#fr_3554) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p104"></span> The use of the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.3"></span>νδιάθετος</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.4"></span>προφορικός</span>, *mental* and
*pronounced,* to distinguish the two senses of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.6"></span>λόγος</span>, *reason* and *word,* came
from the school of the Stoics, and is found in Philo, and was under
certain limitations allowed in Catholic theology, Damasc. *F. O.* ii.
21. To use either absolutely and to the exclusion of the other would
have involved some form of Sabellianism, or Arianism as the case might
be; but each might correct the defective sense of either. S. Theophilus
speaks of our Lord as at once <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.8"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.9"></span>νδιάθετος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.10"></span>προφορικός</span>.
*ad Autol.* ii. 10 and 22, S. Cyril as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.12"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.13"></span>νδιάθετος</span>, *in Joann.* p. 39. but
see also *Thesaur.* p. 47. When the Fathers deny that our Lord is the
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.15"></span>προφορικὸς
λόγος</span>, they only mean that that title is not, even as far as its
philosophical idea went, an adequate representative of Him, a word
spoken being insubstantive, vid. *Orat.* ii. 35; Hil. *de Syn.* 46; Cyr.
*Catech.* xi. 10; Damas. *Ep.* ii. p. 203; Cyril *in Joann.* p. 31;
Iren. *Hær*. ii. 12. n. 5. Marcellus is said by Eusebius to have
considered our Lord as first the one and then the other. *Eccl. Theol.*
ii. 15.

<span id="fn_3555"></span>[463:3556](2040394.htm#fr_3555) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p104.17"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p105"></span> This passage seems taken from
Eusebius, and partly from Marcellus’s own words. S. Cyril speaks of his
doctrine in like terms. *Catech.* xv. 27.

<span id="fn_3556"></span>[463:3557](2040394.htm#fr_3556) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p105.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p106"></span> i.e. Photinus. \[A note illustrating
the frequency of similar nicknames is omitted. On Photinus, see Prolegg.
ch. ii. §3. *ad fin.*\]

<span id="fn_3557"></span>[463:3558](2040394.htm#fr_3557) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p106.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p107"></span> Cf. Euseb. *contr. Marc*. i. 2.

<span id="fn_3558"></span>[463:3559](2040394.htm#fr_3558) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p107.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p108"></span> Cf. §27, notes.

<span id="fn_3559"></span>[463:3560](2040394.htm#fr_3559) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p108.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p109"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p109.1"></span>αὐτοπροσωπῶς</span> and so Cyril Hier.
*Catech.* xv. 14 and 17 (It means, ‘not in personation’), and Philo
contrasting divine appearances with those of Angels. *Leg. Alleg.* iii.
62. On the other hand, Theophilus on the text, ‘The voice of the Lord
God walking in the garden,’ speaks of the Word, ‘assuming the person,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p109.3"></span>πρόσωπον</span>,
of the Father,’ and ‘in the person of God,’ *ad Autol.* ii. 22. the word
not then having its theological sense.

<span id="fn_3560"></span>[463:3561](2040394.htm#fr_3560) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p109.5"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p110"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p110.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p110.2"></span>μοιον κατὰ πάντα</span>. Here again we
have a strong Semi-Arian or almost Catholic formula introduced by the
bye. Of course it admitted of evasion, but in its fulness it included
‘essence.’ \[See above §8, note 1, and Introd.\]

<span id="fn_3561"></span>[463:3562](2040394.htm#fr_3561) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p112"></span> See vol. i. of this series, p. 295,
note 1. In the reason which the Confession alleges against that
heretical doctrine it is almost implied that the divine nature of the
Son suffered on the Cross. They would naturally fall into this notion
directly they gave up our Lord’s absolute divinity. It would naturally
follow that our Lord had no human soul, but that His pre-existent nature
stood in the place of it:—also that His Mediatorship was no peculiarity
of His Incarnation. vid. §23, note 2. §27, *Anath.* 12, note.

<span id="fn_3562"></span>[464:3563](2040394.htm#fr_3562) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p113.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p114"></span> The Confession still insists upon the
unscripturalness of the Catholic positions. On the main subject of this
paragraph the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p114.2"></span>θελήσει γεννηθὲν</span>, cf. *Orat.* iii.
59, &c. The doctrine of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p114.4"></span>μονογενὲς</span> has already partially
come before us in *de Decr.* §§7–9. pp. 154 *sq.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p114.6"></span>Μόνως</span>, not as
the creatures. vid. p. 75, note 6.

<span id="fn_3563"></span>[464:3564](2040394.htm#fr_3563) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p114.7"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p115"></span> The following passage is in its very
form an interpolation or appendix, while its doctrine bears distinctive
characters of something higher than the old absolute separation between
the Father and the Son. \[Eusebius of Cæs. had\] considered Them as two
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p115.2"></span>οὐσίαι,
ὅμοιαι</span> like, but not as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p115.4"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p115.5"></span>μοούσιοι</span>; his very explanation of
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p115.7"></span>τέλειος</span> was ‘*independent*’ and
‘*distinct.*’ Language then, such as that in the text, was the nearest
assignable approach to the reception of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p115.9"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p115.10"></span>μοούσιον</span>; \[and in fact, to\] the
doctrine of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p115.12"></span>περιχώρησις</span>, of which *supr.
Orat.* iii.

<span id="fn_3564"></span>[464:3565](2040394.htm#fr_3564) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p115.14"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p116"></span> *De Decr.* §8.

<span id="fn_3565"></span>[464:3566](2040394.htm#fr_3565) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p116.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p117"></span> *De Decr.* §26.

<span id="fn_3566"></span>[464:3567](2040394.htm#fr_3566) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p120"></span> Sirmium \[Mitrowitz on the Save\] was
a city of lower Pannonia, not far from the Danube, and was the great
bulwark of the Illyrian provinces of the Empire. There Vetranio assumed
the purple; and there Constantius was born. The frontier war caused it
to be from time to time the Imperial residence. We hear of Constantius
at Sirmium in the summer of 357. Ammian. xvi. 10. He also passed there
the ensuing winter. ibid. xvii. 12. In October, 358, after the Sarmatian
war, he entered Sirmium in triumph, and passed the winter there. xvii.
13 fin. and with a short absence in the spring, remained there till the
end of May, 359.

<span id="fn_3567"></span>[464:3568](2040394.htm#fr_3567) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p120.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p121"></span> \[Cf. Prolegg. ch. ii. §7\]. The
leading person in this Council was Basil of Ancyra. Basil held a
disputation with Photinus. Silvanus too of Tarsus now appears for the
first time: while, according to Socrates, Mark of Arethusa drew up the
Anathemas; the Confession used was the same as that sent to Constans, of
the Council of Philippopolis, and the Macrostich.

<span id="fn_3568"></span>[464:3569](2040394.htm#fr_3568) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p121.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p122"></span> S. Hilary treats their creed as a
Catholic composition. *de Syn.* 39–63. Philastrius and Vigilius call the
Council a meeting of ‘holy bishops’ and a ‘Catholic Council,’ *de Hær.*
65. *in Eutych.* v. init. What gave a character and weight to this
Council was, that it met to set right a real evil, and was not a mere
pretence with Arian objects.

<span id="fn_3569"></span>[464:3570](2040394.htm#fr_3569) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p124"></span> 6th Confession, or 1st Sirmian, <span
class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p124.2"></span>a.d.</span> 351.

<span id="fn_3570"></span>[464:3571](2040394.htm#fr_3570) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p124.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p125"></span> [Eph. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3571"></span>[464:3572](2040394.htm#fr_3571) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p129"></span> Vid. p. 77, *sqq.*

<span id="fn_3572"></span>[464:3573](2040394.htm#fr_3572) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p131"></span> This Anathema which has occurred in
substance in the Macrostich, and again *infr. Anath.* 18 and 23. is a
disclaimer of their in fact holding a supreme and a secondary God. In
the Macrostich it is disclaimed upon a simple Arian basis. The
Semi-Arians were more open to this imputation; Eusebius, as we have seen
above, distinctly calling our Lord a second and another God. vid. p. 75,
note 7. It will be observed that this Anathema contradicts the one which
immediately follows, and the 11th, in which Christ is called God;
except, on the one hand the Father and Son are One God, which was the
Catholic doctrine, or, on the other, the Son is God in name only, which
was the pure Arian or Anomœan.

<span id="fn_3573"></span>[464:3574](2040394.htm#fr_3573) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p132.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p133"></span> The language of Catholics and
heretics is very much the same on this point of the Son’s ministration,
with this essential difference of sense, that Catholic writers mean a
ministration internal to the divine substance and an instrument
connatural with the Father, and Arius meant an external and created
medium of operation. Thus S. Clement calls our Lord ‘the All-harmonious
Instrument (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.2"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.3"></span>ργανον</span>) of God.’ *Protrept.* p. 6;
Eusebius ‘an animated and living instrument (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.5"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.6"></span>ργανον ἔμψυχον</span>), nay, rather divine
and vivific of every substance and nature.’ *Demonstr.* iv. 4. S. Basil,
on the other hand, insists that the Arians reduced our Lord to ‘an
inanimate instrument,’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.8"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.9"></span>ργανον ἄψυχον</span>, though they called
Him <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.11"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.12"></span>πουργὸν τελειότατον</span>, most perfect
minister or underworker. *adv. Eunom.* ii. 21. Elsewhere he makes them
say, ‘the nature of a cause is one, and the nature of an instrument,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.14"></span>ὀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.15"></span>ργάνου</span>,
another;….foreign then in nature is the Son from the Father, since such
is an instrument from a workman.’ *De Sp. S.* n. 6 fin. vid. also n. 4
fin. 19, and 20. And so S. Gregory, ‘The Father signifies, the Word
accomplishes, not servilely, nor ignorantly, but with knowledge and
sovereignty, and to speak more suitably, in a father’s way, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.17"></span>πατρικῶς</span>.
*Orat*. 30. 11. Cf. S. Cyril, *in Joann.* p. 48. Explanations such as
these secure for the Catholic writers some freedom in their modes of
speaking, e.g. Athan. speaks of the Son, as ‘enjoined and ministering,’
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.19"></span>προσταττόμενος,
καὶ ὑπουργῶν</span>, *Orat.* ii. §22. Thus S. Irenæus speaks of the
Father being well-pleased and commanding, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.21"></span>κελεύοντος</span>, and the Son doing and
framing. *Hær.* iv. 75. S. Basil too, in the same treatise in which are
some of the foregoing protests, speaks of ‘the Lord ordering,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.23"></span>προστάσσοντα</span>,
and the word framing.’ *de Sp. S.* n. 38, S. Cyril of Jerusalem, of ‘Him
who bids, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.25"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.26"></span>ντελλεται</span>, bidding to one who is
present with Him,’ *Cat.* xi. 16. vid. also <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.28"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.29"></span>πηρετῶν τῇ βουλῇ</span>, Justin. *Tryph.*
126, and ὑ<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.31"></span>πουργόν</span>, Theoph. *ad Autol.* ii.
10. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.33"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p133.34"></span>ξυπηρετῶν θελήματι</span>, Clem. *Strom.*
vii. p. 832.

<span id="fn_3574"></span>[465:3575](2040394.htm#fr_3574) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p136"></span> §26, n. 7.

<span id="fn_3575"></span>[465:3576](2040394.htm#fr_3575) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p138"></span> *Orat.* iv. §13.

<span id="fn_3576"></span>[465:3577](2040394.htm#fr_3576) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p140.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p141"></span> §26, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3577"></span>[465:3578](2040394.htm#fr_3577) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p143.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p144"></span> §26 (2) n. (2).

<span id="fn_3578"></span>[465:3579](2040394.htm#fr_3578) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p146.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p147"></span> The 12th and 13th Anathemas are
intended to meet the charge which is alluded to §26 (6), note 2, that
Arianism involved the doctrine that our Lord’s divine nature suffered.
\[But see Gwatkin, p. 147.\] Athanasius brings this accusation against
them distinctly in his work against Apollinaris. *contr. Apoll.* i. 15.
vid. also Ambros. *de Fide,* iii. 31. Salig in his *de Eutychianismo
ant. Eutychen* takes notice of none of the passages in the text.

<span id="fn_3579"></span>[465:3580](2040394.htm#fr_3579) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p149.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p150"></span> This Anathema is directed against
Marcellus, who held the very opinion which it denounces, that the
Almighty spake with Himself. Euseb. *Eccles. Theol.* ii. 15. The Jews
said that Almighty God spoke to the Angels. Basil. *Hexaem.* fin. Others
that the plural was used as authorities on earth use it in way of
dignity. Theod. *in Gen.* 19. As to the Catholic Fathers, as is well
known, they interpreted the text in the sense here given. See Petav.

<span id="fn_3580"></span>[465:3581](2040394.htm#fr_3580) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p151.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p152"></span> This again, in spite of the wording.
which is directed against the Catholic doctrine \[or Marcellus?\] is a
Catholic interpretation. vid. \[besides Philo *de Somniis.* i. 12.)
Justin. *Tryph.* 56. and 126. Iren. *Hær.* iv. 10. n. 1. Tertull. *de
carn. Christ.* 6. *adv. Marc.* iii. 9. *adv. Prax.* 16. Novat. *de
Trin.* 18. Origen. *in Gen. Hom.* iv. 5. Cyprian. *adv. Jud.* ii. 5.
Antioch. Syn. *contr. Paul. apud Routh. Rell.* t. 2. p. 469. Athan.
*Orat.* ii. 13. Epiph. *Ancor.* 29 and 39. *Hær.* 71. 5. Chrysost. *in
Gen. Hom.* 41. 7. These references are principally from Petavius; also
from Dorscheus, who has written an elaborate commentary on this Council,
&c. The Catholic doctrine is that the Son has condescended to become
visible by means of material appearances. Augustine seems to have been
the first who changed the mode of viewing the texts in question, and
considered the divine appearance, not God the Son, but a created Angel.
Vid. *de Trin.* ii. *passim.* Jansenius considers that he did so from a
suggestion of S. Ambrose, that the hitherto received view had been the
origo hæresis Arianæ, vid. his *Augustinus, lib. proœm.* c. 12. t. 2. p.
12.

<span id="fn_3581"></span>[465:3582](2040394.htm#fr_3581) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p153.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p154"></span> This and the following Canon are
Catholic in their main doctrine, and might be illustrated, if necessary,
as the foregoing.

<span id="fn_3582"></span>[465:3583](2040394.htm#fr_3582) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p158.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p159"></span> It was an expedient of the later
Macedonians to deny that the Holy Spirit was God because it was not
usual to call Him Ingenerate. They asked the Catholics whether the Holy
Spirit was *Ingenerate, generate,* or *created,* for into these three
they divided all things. vid. Basil *in Sabell. et Ar. Hom.* xxiv. 6.
But, as the Arians had first made the alternative only between
*Ingenerate* and *created,* and Athan. *de Decr.* §28. shews that
*generate* is a third idea really distinct from one and the other, so S.
Greg. Naz. adds. *processive,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p159.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p159.3"></span>κπορευτὸν</span>, as an intermediate idea,
contrasted with *Ingenerate,* yet distinct from *generate. Orat.* xxxi.
8. In other words, *Ingenerate* means, not only *not generate,* but *not
from any origin.* vid. August. *de Trin.* xv. 26.

<span id="fn_3583"></span>[465:3584](2040394.htm#fr_3583) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p161.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p162"></span> *Supra* (16).

<span id="fn_3584"></span>[465:3585](2040394.htm#fr_3584) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p165.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p166"></span> §26 (7).

<span id="fn_3585"></span>[466:3586](2040394.htm#fr_3585) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p169.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p170"></span> \[The ‘blasphemia’ of Potamius,
bishop of Lisbon; see *Prolegg.* ch. ii. §8 (2), Hil. *de Syn.* 11;
Socr. ii. 30\].

<span id="fn_3586"></span>[466:3587](2040394.htm#fr_3586) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p171.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p172"></span> 7th Confession, or 2nd Sirmian, <span
class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p172.2"></span>a.d.</span> 357.

<span id="fn_3587"></span>[466:3588](2040394.htm#fr_3587) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p175.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p176"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p176.1"></span>κεφάλαιον</span>. vid. *de Decr.* §31. p.
56; *Orat.* i. §34; Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 11.

<span id="fn_3588"></span>[466:3589](2040394.htm#fr_3588) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p176.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p177"></span> It will be observed that this
Confession; 1. by denying ‘two Gods,’ and declaring that the One God is
the God of Christ, implies that our Lord is not God. 2. It says that the
word ‘substance,’ and its compounds, ought not to be used as being
unscriptural, mysterious, and leading to disturbance; 3. it holds that
the Father is greater than the Son ‘in honour, dignity, and godhead;’ 4.
that the Son is subordinate to the Father *with* all other things; 5.
that it is the Father’s characteristic to be invisible and impassible.
They also say that our Lord, hominem suscepisse per quem *compassus*
est, a word which Phœbadius condemns in his remarks on this Confession;
where, by the way, he uses the word ‘spiritus’ in the sense of Hilary
and the Ante-Nicene Fathers, in a connection which at once explains the
obscure words of the supposititious Sardican Confession (vid. above, §9,
note 3), and turns them into another evidence of this additional heresy
involved in Arianism. ‘Impassibilis Deus,’says Phœbadius, ‘quia Deus
*Spiritus*…non ergo passibilis Dei Spiritus, licet in homine suo
passus.’ Now the Sardican Confession is thought ignorant, as well as
unauthoritative, e.g. by Natalis Alex. *Sæc.* 4. *Diss.* 29, because it
imputes to Valens and Ursacius the following belief, which he supposes
to be Patripassianism, but which exactly answers to this aspect and
representation of Arianism: <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p177.5"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p177.6"></span>τι ὁ λόγος καὶ ὅτι τὸ πνεῦμα καὶ ἐσταυρώθη
καὶ ἐσφάγη καὶ ἀπέθανεν καὶ ἀνέστη</span>. Theod. *H. E.* ii. 6. p. 844.

<span id="fn_3589"></span>[466:3590](2040394.htm#fr_3589) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p178.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p179"></span> Socrates \[wrongly\] connects this
with the ‘blasphemia.’ *Hist.* ii. 30.

<span id="fn_3590"></span>[466:3591](2040394.htm#fr_3590) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p180.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p181"></span> 9th Confession, at Seleucia <span
class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p181.2"></span>a.d.</span> 359.

<span id="fn_3591"></span>[466:3592](2040394.htm#fr_3591) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p181.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p182"></span> The Semi-Arian majority in the
Council had just before been confirming the Creed of the Dedication;
hence this beginning. vid. *supr.* §11. The present creed, as if to
propitiate the Semi-Arian majority, adds an anathema upon the Anomœan as
well as on the Homoüsion and Homœusion.

<span id="fn_3592"></span>[467:3593](2040394.htm#fr_3592) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p187.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p188"></span> These two sections seem to have been
inserted by Athan. after his Letter was finished, and contain later
occurrences in the history of Ariminum, than were contemplated when he
wrote *supr.* §11. vid. note 7 *in loc.* It should be added that at this
Council Ulfilas the Apostle of the Goths, who had hitherto followed the
Council of Nicæa, conformed, and thus became the means of spreading
through his countrymen the Creed of Ariminum.

<span id="fn_3593"></span>[467:3594](2040394.htm#fr_3593) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p189.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p190"></span> 10th Confession at Niké and
Constantinople, <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p190.2"></span>a.d.</span> 359, 360.

<span id="fn_3594"></span>[467:3595](2040394.htm#fr_3594) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p191.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p192"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p192.1"></span>μόνος ἐκ μόνου</span>. This phrase may be
considered a symptom of Anomœan influence; <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p192.3"></span>μόνος παρά</span>, or <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p192.4"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p192.5"></span>πό, μόνον</span> being
one special formula adopted by Eunomius, explanatory of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p192.7"></span>μονογενὴς</span>, in
accordance with the original Arian theory, mentioned *de Decr.* §7.
*supr.* p. 154, that the Son was the one instrument of creation.
Eunomius said that He alone was created by the Father alone; all other
things being created by the Father, not alone, but *through* Him whom
alone He had first created. vid. Cyril. *Thesaur.* 25. Basil *contr.
Eunom.* ii. 21. Acacius ap. Epiph. *Hær.* 72. 7. p. 839.

<span id="fn_3595"></span>[467:3596](2040394.htm#fr_3595) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p194.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p195"></span> Here as before, instead of speaking
of Arianism, the Confession anathematizes *all* heresies, vid. *supr*.
§23, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3596"></span>[467:3597](2040394.htm#fr_3596) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p196.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p197"></span> 11th Confession at Antioch, <span
class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.ii-p197.2"></span>a.d.</span> 361. \[Socr.
ii. 45. The occasion was the installation of Euzoius in place of
Meletius.\]

<span id="fn_3597"></span>[467:3598](2040394.htm#fr_3597) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p197.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p198"></span> Acacius, Eudoxius, and the rest,
after ratifying at Constantinople the Creed framed at Niké and
subscribed at Ariminum, appear next at Antioch a year and a half later,
when they throw off the mask, and, avowing the Anomœan Creed, ‘revert,’
as S. Athanasius says, ‘to their first doctrines,’ i.e. those with which
Arius started.

<span id="fn_3598"></span>[467:3599](2040394.htm#fr_3598) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p198.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p199"></span> From <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p199.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p199.2"></span>ξ οὐκ ὄντων</span>, ‘out of nothing,’ one
of the original Arian positions concerning the Son. Theodoret says that
they were also called Hexakionitæ, from the nature of their place of
meeting, *Hær.* iv. 3. and Du Cange confirms it so far as to show that
there was a place or quarter of Constantinople Hexakionium. \[Cf. Soph.
*Lex. s.v.*\]

<span id="fn_3599"></span>[467:3600](2040394.htm#fr_3599) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p199.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p200"></span> This passage shews that Athanasius
did not insert these sections till two years after the composition of
the work itself; for Constantine died <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p200.2"></span>a.d.</span> 361.

<span id="fn_3600"></span>[467:3601](2040394.htm#fr_3600) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p200.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p201"></span> Euzoius, now Arian Bishop of Antioch,
was excommunicated with Arius in Egypt and at Nicæa, and was restored
with him to the Church at the Council of Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_3601"></span>[467:3602](2040394.htm#fr_3601) <span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p202.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p203"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p203.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.ii-p203.2"></span>πεκρίναντο</span>. *Hypocrites* is almost
a title of the Arians (with an apparent allusion to [1 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002)<span id="xxii.ii.ii-p203.4"></span>.
vid. Socr. i. p. 5, *Orat.* i. §8).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Symbols 'Of the Essence' And 'Coessential.'](2040395)
