[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040066)  [Next](2040068.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxii-p1"></span> §22. *The image cannot represent the
true form of God, else God would be corruptible.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxii-p2"></span>For if the reason of their being thus
fashioned is, that the Deity is of human form, why do they invest it
also with the forms of irrational creatures? Or if the form of it is
that of the latter, why do they embody it also in the images of rational
creatures? Or if it be both at once, and they conceive God to be of the
two combined, namely, that He has the forms both of rational and of
irrational, why do they separate what is joined together, and separate
the images of brutes and of men, instead of always carving it of both
kinds, such as are the fictions in the myths, Scylla, Charybdis, the
Hippocentaur, and the dog-headed Anubis of the Egyptians? For they ought
either to represent them solely of two natures in this way, or, if they
have a single form, not to falsely represent them in the other as well.
2. And again, if their forms are male, why do they also invest them with
female shapes? Or if they are of the latter, why do they also falsify
their forms as though they were males? Or if again they are a mixture of
both, they ought not to be divided, but both ought to be combined, and
follow the type of the so-called hermaphrodites, so that their
superstition should furnish beholders with a spectacle not only of
impiety and calumny, but of ridicule as well. 2. And generally, if they
conceive the Deity to be corporeal, so that they contrive for it and
represent belly and hands and feet, and neck also, and breasts and the
other organs that go to make man, see to what impiety and godlessness
their mind has come down, to have such ideas of the Deity. For it
follows that it must be capable of all other bodily casualties as well,
of being cut and divided, and even of perishing altogether. But these
and like things are not properties of God, <span id="page_16">p.
16</span> <span id="vi.ii.i.xxii-Page_16"></span>but rather of earthly
bodies. 3. For while God is incorporeal and incorruptible, and immortal,
needing nothing for any purpose, these are both corruptible, and are
shapes of bodies, and need bodily ministrations, as we said before <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) . For often we see images which have
grown old renewed, and those which time, or rain, or some or other of
the animals of the earth have spoiled, restored. In which connexion one
must condemn their folly, in that they proclaim as gods things of which
they themselves are the makers, and themselves ask salvation of objects
which they themselves adorn with their arts to preserve them from
corruption, and beg that their own wants may be supplied by beings which
they well know need attention from themselves, and are not ashamed to
call lords of heaven and all the earth creatures whom they shut up in
small chambers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[16:137](2040067.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="vi.ii.i.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxii-p3"></span> Supra xiii. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The variety of idolatrous cults proves that they are
false.](2040068.md)
