[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040073)  [Next](2040075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxix"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxix-p1"></span> §29. *The balance of powers in Nature
shews that it is not God, either collectively, or in parts*.

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxix-p2"></span>And in yet another way one may refute
their godlessness by the light of truth. For if God is incorporeal and
invisible and intangible by nature, how do they imagine God to be a
body, and worship with divine honour things which we both see with our
eyes and touch with our hands? 2. And again, if what is said of God hold
true, namely, that He is almighty, and that while nothing has power over
Him, He has power and rule over all, how can they who deify creation
fail to see that it does not satisfy this definition of God? For when
the sun is under the earth, the earth’s shadow makes his light
invisible, while by day the sun hides the moon by the brilliancy of his
light. And hail ofttimes injures the fruits of the earth, while fire is
put out if an overflow of water take place. And spring makes winter give
place, while summer will not suffer spring to outstay its proper limits,
and it in its turn is forbidden by autumn to outstep its own season. 3.
If then they were gods, they ought not to be defeated and obscured by
one another, but always to co-exist, and to discharge their respective
functions simultaneously. Both by night and by day the sun and the moon
and the rest of the band of stars ought to shine equally together, and
give their light to all, so that all things might be illumined by them.
Spring and summer and autumn and winter ought to go on without
alteration, and together. The sea ought to mingle with the springs, and
furnish their drink to man in common. Calms and windy blasts ought to
take place at the same time. Fire and water together ought to furnish
the same service to man. For no one would take any hurt from them, if
they are gods, as our opponents say, and do nothing for hurt, but rather
all things for good. 4. But if none of these things are possible,
because of their mutual incompatibility, how does it remain possible to
give to these things, mutually incompatible and at strife, and unable to
combine, the name of gods, or to worship them with the honours due to
God? How could things naturally discordant give peace to others for
their prayers, and become to them authors of concord? It is not then
likely that the sun or the moon, or any other part of creation, still
less statues in stone, gold, or other material, or the Zeus, Apollo, and
the rest, who are the subject of the poet’s fables, are true gods: this
our argument has shewn. But some of these are parts of creation, others
have no life, others have been mere mortal men. Therefore their worship
and deification is no part of religion, but the bringing in of
godlessness and of all impiety, and a sign of a wide departure from the
knowledge of the one true God, namely the Father of Christ. 5. Since
then this is thus proved, and the idolatry of the Greeks is shewn to be
full of all ungodliness, and that its introduction has been not for the
good, but for the ruin, of human life;—come now, as our argu<span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="vi.ii.i.xxix-Page_20"></span>ment
promised at the outset, let us, after having confuted error, travel the
way of truth, and behold the Leader and Artificer of the Universe, the
Word of the Father, in order that through Him we may apprehend the
Father, and that the Greeks may know how far they have separated
themselves from the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](2040075.md)
