[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040345)  [Next](2040347.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-Page_306"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p1.1"></span>Four Discourses Against the Arians.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p2"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p2.1"></span>Discourse I.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p4.1"></span>Chapter I</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p4.2"></span>Introduction</span>. *Reason for writing;
certain persons indifferent about Arianism; Arians not Christians,
because sectaries always take the name of their founder.*

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p5"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p5.1"></span>Of</span> all other heresies which have
departed from the truth it is acknowledged that they have but
devised <span id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820.md) a madness, and their
irreligiousness has long since become notorious to all men. For
that <span id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821.md) their authors went out
from us, it plainly follows, as the blessed John has written, that they
never thought nor now think with us. Wherefore, as saith the Saviour, in
that they gather not with us, they scatter with the devil, and keep an
eye on those who slumber, that, by this second sowing of their own
mortal poison, they may have companions in death. But, whereas one
heresy, and that the last, which has now risen as harbinger <span
id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822.md) of Antichrist, the Arian, as it is
called, considering that other heresies, her elder sisters, have been
openly proscribed, in her craft and cunning, affects to array herself in
Scripture language <span id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823.md) , like her
father the devil, and is forcing her way back into the Church’s
paradise,—that with the pretence of Christianity, her smooth sophistry
(for reason she has none) may deceive men into wrong thoughts of
Christ,—nay, since she has already seduced certain of the foolish, not
only to corrupt their ears, but even to take and eat with Eve, till in
their ignorance which ensues they think bitter sweet, and admire this
loathsome heresy, on this account I have thought it necessary, at your
request, to unrip ‘the folds of its breast-plate <span
id="fr_1824"></span>[1825](#fn_1824.md) ,’ and to shew the ill savour of
its folly. So while those who are far from it may continue to shun it,
those whom it has deceived may repent; and, opening the eyes of their
heart, may understand that darkness is not light, nor falsehood truth,
nor Arianism good; nay, that those <span
id="fr_1825"></span>[1826](#fn_1825.md) who call these men Christians are
in great and grievous error, as neither having studied Scripture, nor
understanding Christianity at all, and the faith which it contains.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p12"></span>2. For what have they discovered in
this heresy like to the religious Faith, that they vainly talk as if its
supporters said no evil? This in truth is to call even Caiaphas <span
id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826.md) a Christian, and to reckon the
traitor Judas still <span id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-Page_307"></span>among the Apostles, and to say that they
who asked Barabbas instead of the Saviour did no evil, and to recommend
Hymenæus and Alexander as right-minded men, and as if the Apostle
slandered them. But neither can a Christian bear to hear this, nor can
he consider the man who dared to say it sane in his understanding. For
with them for Christ is Arius, as with the Manichees Manichæus; and for
Moses and the other saints they have made the discovery of one
Sotades <span id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827.md) , a man whom even
Gentiles laugh at, and of the daughter of Herodias. For of the one has
Arius imitated the dissolute and effeminate tone, in writing Thaliæ on
his model; and the other he has rivalled in her dance, reeling and
frolicking in his blasphemies against the Saviour; till the victims of
his heresy lose their wits and go foolish, and change the Name of the
Lord of glory into the likeness of the ‘image of corruptible man <span
id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828.md) ,’ and for Christians come to be
called Arians, bearing this badge of their irreligion. For let them not
excuse themselves; nor retort their disgrace on those who are not as
they, calling Christians after the names of their teachers <span
id="fr_1829"></span>[1830](#fn_1829.md) , that they themselves may appear
to have that Name in the same way. Nor let them make a jest of it, when
they feel shame at their disgraceful appellation; rather, if they be
ashamed, let them hide their faces, or let them recoil from their own
irreligion. For never at any time did Christian people take their title
from the Bishops among them, but from the Lord, on whom we rest our
faith. Thus, though the blessed Apostles have become our teachers, and
have ministered the Saviour’s Gospel, yet not from them have we our
title, but from Christ we are and are named Christians. But for those
who derive the faith which they profess from others, good reason is it
they should bear their name, whose property they have become <span
id="fr_1830"></span>[1831](#fn_1830.md) .

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p18"></span>3. Yes surely; while all of us are and
are called Christians after Christ, Marcion broached a heresy a long
time since and was cast out; and those who continued with him who
ejected him remained Christians; but those who followed Marcion were
called Christians no more, but henceforth Marcionites. Thus Valentinus
also, and Basilides, and Manichæus, and Simon Magus, have imparted their
own name to their followers; and some are accosted as Valentinians, or
as Basilidians, or as Manichees, or as Simonians; and other,
Cataphrygians from Phrygia, and from Novatus Novatians. So too Meletius,
when ejected by Peter the Bishop and Martyr, called his party no longer
Christians, but Meletians <span id="fr_1831"></span>[1832](#fn_1831.md) ,
and so in consequence when Alexander of blessed memory had cast out
Arius, those who remained with Alexander, remained Christians; but those
who went out with Arius, left the Saviour’s Name to us who were with
Alexander, and as to them they were hence-forward denominated Arians.
Behold then, after Alexander’s death too, those who communicate with his
successor Athanasius, and those with whom the said Athanasius
communicates, are instances of the same rule; none of them bear his
name, nor is he named from them, but all in like manner, and as is
usual, are called Christians. For though we have a succession of
teachers and become their disciples, yet, because we are taught by them
the things of Christ, we both are, and are called, Christians all the
same. But those who follow the heretics, though they have innumerable
successors in their heresy, yet anyhow bear the name of him who devised
it. Thus, though Arius be dead, and many of his party have succeeded
him, yet those who think with him, as being known from Arius, are called
Arians. And, what is a remarkable <span id="page_308">p. 308</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-Page_308"></span>evidence of this, those of the
Greeks who even at this time come into the Church, on giving up the
superstition of idols, take the name, not of their catechists, but of
the Saviour, and begin to be called Christians instead of Greeks: while
those of them who go off to the heretics, and again all who from the
Church change to this heresy, abandon Christ’s name, and henceforth are
called Arians, as no longer holding Christ’s faith, but having inherited
Arius’s madness.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p20"></span>4. How then can they be Christians, who
for Christians are Ario-maniacs <span
id="fr_1832"></span>[1833](#fn_1832.md) ? or how are they of the Catholic
Church, who have shaken off the Apostolical faith, and become authors of
fresh evils? who, after abandoning the oracles of divine Scripture, call
Arius’s Thaliæ a new wisdom? and with reason too, for they are
announcing a new heresy. And hence a man may marvel, that, whereas many
have written many treatises and abundant homilies upon the Old Testament
and the New, yet in none of them is a Thalia found; nay nor among the
more respectable of the Gentiles, but among those only who sing such
strains over their cups, amid cheers and jokes, when men are merry, that
the rest may laugh; till this marvellous Arius, taking no grave pattern,
and ignorant even of what is respectable, while he stole largely from
other heresies, would be original in the ludicrous, with none but
Sotades for his rival. For what beseemed him more, when he would dance
forth against the Saviour, than to throw his wretched words of
irreligion into dissolute and loose metres? that, while ‘a man,’ as
Wisdom says, ‘is known from the utterance of his word <span
id="fr_1833"></span>[1834](#fn_1833.md) ,’ so from those numbers should be
seen the writer’s effeminate soul and corruption of thought <span
id="fr_1834"></span>[1835](#fn_1834.md) . In truth, that crafty one did not
escape detection; but, for all his many writhings to and fro, like the
serpent, he did but fall into the error of the Pharisees. They, that
they might transgress the Law, pretended to be anxious for the words of
the Law, and that they might deny the expected and then present Lord,
were hypocritical with God’s name, and were convicted of blaspheming
when they said, ‘Why dost Thou, being a man, make Thyself God,’ and
sayest, ‘I and the Father are one <span
id="fr_1835"></span>[1836](#fn_1835.md) ?’ And so too, this counterfeit and
Sotadean Arius, feigns to speak of God, introducing Scripture
language <span id="fr_1836"></span>[1837](#fn_1836.md) , but is on all
sides recognised as godless <span id="fr_1837"></span>[1838](#fn_1837.md)
Arius, denying the Son, and reckoning Him among the creatures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[306:1821](2040346.htm#fr_1820.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p6.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p6.2"></span>πινοήσασαι</span>. This is almost a
technical word, and has occurred again and again already, as descriptive
of heretical teaching in opposition to the received traditionary
doctrine. It is also found *passim* in other writers. Thus Socrates,
speaking of the decree of the Council of Alexandria, 362, against
Apollinaris; ‘for not originating, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p6.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p6.5"></span>πινοήσαντες</span>, any *novel* devotion,
did they introduce it into the Church, but what from the beginning the
*Ecclesiastical Tradition* declared.’ *Hist.* iii. 7. The sense of the
word ἐπίνοια which will come into consideration below, is akin to this,
being the view taken by the mind of an object independent of (whether or
not correspondent to) the object itself. \[But see Bigg. *B. L.* p. 168,
*sq.*\]

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[306:1822](2040346.htm#fr_1821.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p6.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p7.1"></span>τὸ γὰρ ἐξελθεῖν</span>…<span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p7.2"></span>δῆλον ἂν εἴη</span>,
i.e. <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p7.3"></span>τῷ</span> and
so infr. §43. <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p7.5"></span>τὸ
δὲ καὶ προσκυνεῖσθαι</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p7.7"></span>δῆλον ἂν εἴη</span>.

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[306:1823](2040346.htm#fr_1822.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p7.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p8"></span> *de Syn.* 5.

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[306:1824](2040346.htm#fr_1823.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9"></span> Vid. infr. §4 fin. That heresies before
the Arian appealed to Scripture we learn from Tertullian, *de Præscr.*
42, who warns Catholics against indulging themselves in their own view
of isolated texts against the voice of the Catholic Church. vid. also
Vincentius, who specifies *obiter* Sabellius and Novation. *Commonit.*
2. Still Arianism was contrasted with other heresies on this point, as
in these two respects; (1.) they appealed to a *secret tradition,*
unknown even to most of the Apostles, as the Gnostics, Iren. *Hær.* iii.
1 or they professed a gift of prophecy introducing fresh *revelations,*
as Montanists, *de Syn.* 4, and Manichees, Aug. *contr. Faust.* xxxii.
6. (2.) The Arians availed themselves of certain texts as objections,
argued keenly and plausibly from them, and would not be driven from
them. *Orat.* ii. §18. c. Epiph. *Hær.* 69. 15. Or rather they took some
words of Scripture, and made their own deductions from them; viz. ‘Son,’
‘made,’ ‘exalted,’ &c. ‘Making their private irreligiousness as if a
rule, they misinterpret all the divine oracles by it.’ *Orat.* i. §52.
vid. also Epiph. *Hær.* 76. 5 fin. Hence we hear so much of their <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9.2"></span>θρυλληταὶ φωναὶ, λέξεις,
ἔπη, ῥητὰ</span>, sayings in general circulation, which were commonly
founded on some particular text. e.g. infr., §22, ‘amply providing
themselves with words of craft, they used to go about,’ &c. Also <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9.4"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9.5"></span>νω καὶ κάτω
περιφέροντες</span>, *de Decr.* §13. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9.7"></span>τῷ ῥ& 208·τῳ τεθρυλλήκασι τὰ
πανταχοῦ</span>. *Orat.* 2. §18. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9.9"></span>τὸ πολυθρύλλητον σόφισμα</span>, Basil.
*contr. Eunom.* ii. 14. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9.11"></span>τὴν πολυθρύλλητον διαλεκτικήν</span>,
Nyssen. *contr. Eun.* iii. p. 125. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9.13"></span>τὴν θρυλλουμένην ἀποῤ& 191·οήν</span>,
Cyril. *Dial.* iv. p. 505. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9.15"></span>τὴν πολυθρύλλητον φώνην</span>, Socr. ii.
43.

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[306:1825](2040346.htm#fr_1824.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p9.17"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p10"></span> [Job xli.
13](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#013.md)<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p10.1"></span>
(*v*. 4. LXX).

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[306:1826](2040346.htm#fr_1825.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p11"></span> These Orations and Discourses seem
written to shew the vital importance of the point in controversy, and
the unchristian character of the heresy, without reference to the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p11.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p11.3"></span>μοούσιον</span>. He has
\[elsewhere\] insisted that the enforcement of the symbol was but the
rejection of the heresy, and accordingly he is here content to bring out
the Catholic sense, as feeling that, if persons understood and embraced
it, they would not scruple at the word. He seems to allude to what may
be called the liberal or indifferent feeling as swaying the person for
whom he writes, also infr. §7 fin. §9. §10 init. §15 fin. §17. §21. §23.
He mentions *in Apollin.* i. 6. one Rhetorius, who was an Egyptian,
whose opinion, he says, it was ‘fearful to mention.’ S. Augustine tells
us that this man taught that ‘all heresies were in the right path, and
spoke truth,’ ‘which,’ he adds, ‘is so absurd as to seem to me
incredible.’ *Hær* 72. vid. also Philastr. *Hær.* 91.

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[306:1827](2040346.htm#fr_1826.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p13"></span> *de Decr.* §§2, 24, 27.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[307:1828](2040346.htm#fr_1827.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p14"></span> *de Syn.* §1.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[307:1829](2040346.htm#fr_1828.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p15"></span> Vid. Hil. *de Trin.* viii. 28; [Rom.
i. 25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1829"></span>[307:1830](2040346.htm#fr_1829.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p16"></span> He seems to allude to Catholics being
called Athanasians; vid. however next §. Two distinctions are drawn
between such a title as applied to Catholics, and again to heretics,
when they are taken by Catholics as a *note* against them. S. Augustine
says, ‘*Arians* call Catholics Athanasians or Homoüsians, *not other
heretics too.* But ye not only by Catholics *but also by heretics,*
those who agree with you and those who disagree, are called Pelagians;
as *even by heresies* are Arians called Arians. But ye, and ye only,
call us Traducianists, as Arians call us Homoüsians, as Donatists
Macarians, as Manichees Pharisees, and as the other heretics use various
titles.’ *Op. imp.* i. 75. It may be added that the heretical name
*adheres,* the Catholic dies away. S. Chrysostom draws a second
distinction, ‘Are we divided from the Church? have we heresiarchs? are
we called from man? is there any leader to us, as to one there is
Marcion, to another Manichæus, to another Arius, to another some other
author of heresy? for if we too have the name of any, still it is not
those who began the heresy, *but our superiors and governors of the
Church.* We have not “teachers upon earth,”’ &c. in Act. *Ap. Hom.* 33
fin.

<span id="fn_1830"></span>[307:1831](2040346.htm#fr_1830.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p17"></span> Vid. foregoing note. Also, ‘Let us
become His disciples, and learn to live according to Christianity; for
whoso is called by other name besides this, is not of God.’ Ignat. *ad
Magn.* 10. Hegesippus speaks of ‘Menandrians, and Marcionites, and
Carpocratians, and Valentinians, and Basilidians, and Saturnilians,’ who
‘each in his own way and that a different one brought in his own
doctrine.’ Euseb. *Hist.* iv. 22. ‘There are, and there have been, my
friends, many who have taught atheistic and blasphemous words and deeds,
coming in the name of Jesus; and they are called by us from the
appellation of the men, whence each doctrine and opinion began.…Some are
called Marcians, others Valentinians, others Basilidians, others
Saturnilians,’ &c. Justin. *Tryph.* 35. Iren. *Hær.* i. 23. ‘When men
are called Phrygians, or Novatians, or Valentinians, or Marcionites, or
Anthropians, or by any other name, they cease to be Christians; for they
have lost Christ’s Name, and clothe themselves in human and foreign
titles.’ Lact. *Inst.* iv. 30. ‘A. How are you a Christian, to whom it
is not even granted to bear the name of Christian? for you are not
called Christian but Marcionite. M. And you are called of the Catholic
Church; therefore ye are not Christians either. A. Did we profess man’s
name, you would have spoken to the point; but if we are called from
being all over the world, what is there bad in this?’ Adamant. *Dial*.
§1, p. 809. Epiph. *Hær.* 42. p. 366. ibid. 70. 15. vid. also *Hær*. 75.
6 fin. Cyril *Cat.* xviii. 26. ‘Christian is my name, Catholic my
surname.’ Pacian. *Ep.* 1. ‘If you ever hear those who are called
Christians, named, not from the Lord Jesus Christ, but from some one
else, say Marcionites, Valentinians, Mountaineers, Campestrians, know
that it is not Christ’s Church, but the synagogue of Antichrist.’ Jerom.
*adv. Lucif.* fin.

<span id="fn_1831"></span>[307:1832](2040346.htm#fr_1831.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p19"></span> Vid. *de Syn.* 12. \[Prolegg. ch. ii.
§2.\]

<span id="fn_1832"></span>[308:1833](2040346.htm#fr_1832.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p21"></span> *de Syn.* 13, note 4. Manes also was
called mad; ‘Thou must hate all heretics, but especially him who even in
name is a maniac.’ Cyril. *Catech.* vi. 20, vid. also ibid. 24 fin.—a
play upon the name, vid. *de Syn.* 26, ‘Scotinus.’

<span id="fn_1833"></span>[308:1834](2040346.htm#fr_1833.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p22"></span> Vid. [Ecclesiasticus
4.24](../../../bib/apo/sir004.htm#024.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1834"></span>[308:1835](2040346.htm#fr_1834.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p23"></span> It is very difficult to gain a clear
idea of the character of Arius. \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §2.\] Epiphanius’s
account of Arius is as follows:—‘From elation of mind the old man
swerved from the mark. He was in stature very tall, downcast in visage,
with manners like wily serpent, captivating to every guileless heart by
that same crafty bearing. For ever habited in cloke and vest, he was
pleasant of address, ever persuading souls and flattering; wherefore
what was his very first work but to withdraw from the Church in one body
as many as seven hundred women who professed virginity.?’ *Hær.* 69. 3,
cf. ib. §9 for a strange description of Arius attributed to Constantine,
also printed in the collections of councils: Hard. i. 457.

<span id="fn_1835"></span>[308:1836](2040346.htm#fr_1835.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p24"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1836"></span>[308:1837](2040346.htm#fr_1836.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p25"></span> §1, note 4.

<span id="fn_1837"></span>[308:1838](2040346.htm#fr_1837.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26"></span> And so godless or atheist Aetius, *de
Syn.* 6, note 3, cf. note on *de Decr.* 1, for an explanation of the
word. In like manner Athan. says, *ad Serap.* iii. 2, that if a man says
‘that the Son is a creature, who is word and Wisdom, and the Expression,
and the Radiance, whom whoso seeth seeth the Father,’ he falls under the
text, ‘Whoso denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father.’ ‘Such a
one,’ he continues, ‘will in no long time say, *as the fool, There is no
God.*’ In like manner he speaks of those who think the Son to be the
Spirit as ‘without (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.2"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.3"></span>ξω</span>) the Holy Trinity, and
*atheists*’ (*Serap.* iv. 6), because they really do not believe in the
God *that is*, and there is none other but He. Cf. also *Serap.* i. 30.
Eustathius speaks of the Arians as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.6"></span>νθρώπους ἀθέους</span>, who were attempting
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.8"></span>κρατῆσαι τοῦ
θείου</span>. ap. Theod. *Hist.* i. 7. p. 760. Naz. speaks of the
heathen <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.10"></span>πολύθεος
ἀθεΐα</span>. *Orat.* 25. 15. and he calls faith and regeneration ‘a
denial of atheism, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.12"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.13"></span>θεΐας</span>, and a confession of godhead,
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.14"></span>θεότητος</span>,’ *Orat.* 23. 12. He calls
Lucius, the Alexandrian Anti-pope, on account of his *cruelties,* ‘this
second Arius, the more copious river of the atheistic spring, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.16"></span>τῆς ἀθέου
πηγῆς</span>.’ *Orat.* 25. 11. Palladius, the Imperial officer, is <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.18"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.i-p26.19"></span>νὴρ ἄθεος</span>.
ibid. 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the Thalia of Arius. Arius maintains that God
became a Father, and the Son was not always; the Son out of nothing;
once He was not; He was not before his generation; He was created; named
Wisdom and Word after God's attributes; made that He might make us; one
out of many powers of God; alterable; exalted on God's foreknowledge of
what He was to be; not very God; but called so as others by
participation; foreign in essence from the Father; does not know or see
the Father; does not know Himself.](2040347.md)
