[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040178)  [Next](2040180.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.iii-p1"></span> §3. *Outrages which took place at the
time of Gregory’s arrival.*

<span id="xii.ii.iii-p2"></span>Thus was this notable appointment of
Gregory brought about by the Arians, and such was the beginning of it.
And what outrages he committed on his entry into Alexandria, and of what
great evils that event has been the cause, you may learn both from our
letters, and by enquiry of those who are sojourning among you. While the
people were offended at such an unusual proceeding, and in consequence
assembled in the churches, in order to prevent the impiety of the Arians
from mingling itself with the faith of the Church, Philagrius, who has
long been a persecutor of the Church and her virgins, and is now
Prefect <span id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453.md) of Egypt, an apostate
already, and a fellow-countryman of Gregory, a man too of no respectable
character, and moreover supported by Eusebius and his fellows, and <span
id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span id="xii.ii.iii-Page_94"></span>therefore
full of zeal against the Church; this person, by means of promises which
he afterwards fulfilled, succeeded in gaining over the heathen
multitude, with the Jews and disorderly persons, and having excited
their passions, sent them in a body with swords and clubs into the
churches to attack the people.

<span id="xii.ii.iii-p4"></span>What followed upon this <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454.md) it is by no means easy to describe:
indeed it is not possible to set before you a just representation of the
circumstances, nor even could one recount a small part of them without
tears and lamentations. Have such deeds as these ever been made the
subjects of tragedy among the ancients? or has the like ever happened
before in time of persecution or of war? The church and the holy
Baptistery were set on fire, and straightway groans, shrieks, and
lamentations, were heard through the city; while the citizens in their
indignation at these enormities, cried shame upon the governor, and
protested against the violence used to them. For holy and undefiled
virgins <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455.md) were being stripped
naked, and suffering treatment which is not to be named and if they
resisted, they were in danger of their lives. Monks were being trampled
under foot and perishing; some were being hurled headlong; others were
being destroyed with swords and clubs; others were being wounded and
beaten. And oh! what deeds of impiety and iniquity have been committed
upon the Holy Table! They were offering birds and pine cones <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456.md) in sacrifice, singing the praises of
their idols, and blaspheming even in the very churches our Lord and
Saviour Jesus-Christ, the Son of the living God. They were burning the
books of Holy Scripture which they found in the church; and the Jews,
the murderers of our Lord, and the godless heathen entering irreverently
(O strange boldness!) the holy Baptistery, were stripping themselves
naked, and acting such a disgraceful part, both by word and deed, as one
is ashamed even to relate. Certain impious men also, following the
examples set them in the bitterest persecutions, were seizing upon the
virgins and ascetics by the hands and dragging them along, and as they
were haling them, endeavoured to make them blaspheme and deny the Lord;
and when they refused to do so, were beating them violently and
trampling them under foot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_453"></span>[93:454](2040179.htm#fr_453.md) <span
id="xii.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.iii-p3"></span> The Prefect of Egypt was called \[after
367, see Sievers, p. 119, and Prolegg. ch. v. Appendix, yet see *Apol.
Ar.* §83\] Augustalis as having been first appointed by Augustus, after
his victories over Antony. He was of the Equestrian, not, as other
Prefects, of the Senatorian order. He was the imperial officer, as
answering to Proprætors in the Imperial Provinces. vid. Hofman. in voc.
\[on Philagrius, see *Apol. c. Ari.* §72, Prolegg. ch. ii. §5 (1)
note\].

<span id="fn_454"></span>[94:455](2040179.htm#fr_454.md) <span
id="xii.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.iii-p5"></span> Cf. *Hist. Ar.* §9 and 10. Apparently
the great Church of ‘Theonas’ is meant, see *Fest. Index* xi.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[94:456](2040179.htm#fr_455.md) <span
id="xii.ii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.iii-p6"></span> The sister of S. Antony was one of the
earliest known inmates of a nunnery, *vit. Ant.* §2. 3. They were called
by the Catholic Church by the title, “Spouse of Christ.” *Apol. ad
Const.* §33.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[94:457](2040179.htm#fr_456.md) <span
id="xii.ii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.iii-p7"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>θύος</span> or suffitus of Grecian
sacrifices generally consisted of portions of odoriferous trees. vid.
Potter. *Antiqu.* ii. 4. Some translate the word here used (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xii.ii.iii-p7.3"></span>στροβίλους</span>),
“shell-fish.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Outrages on Good Friday and Easter Day, 339.](2040180.md)
