[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040093)  [Next](2040095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.xiii-p1"></span> §47. *Necessity of a return to the
Word if our corrupt nature is to be restored*.

<span id="vi.ii.iii.xiii-p2"></span>Who then, who can declare the Father
by number, so as to discover the powers of His Word? For like as He is
the Father’s Word and Wisdom, so too condescending to created things, He
becomes, to impart the knowledge and apprehension of Him that begot Him,
His very Brightness and very Life, and the Door, and the Shepherd, and
the Way, and King and Governor, and Saviour over all, and Light, and
Giver of Life, and Providence over all. Having then such a Son begotten
of Himself, good, and Creator, the Father did not hide Him out of the
sight of His creatures, but even day by day reveals Him to all by means
of the organisation and life of all things, which is His work. 2. But in
and through Him He reveals Himself also, as the Saviour says <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) : “I in the Father and the Father in
Me:” so that it follows that the Word is in Him that begat Him, and that
He that is begotten lives eternally with the Father. But this being so,
and nothing being outside Him, but both heaven and earth and all that in
them is being dependent on Him, yet men in their folly have set aside
the knowledge and service of Him, and honoured things that are not
instead of things that are: and instead of the real and true God deified
things that were not, “serving the creature rather than the
Creator <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) ,” thus involving
themselves in foolishness and impiety. 3. For it is just as if one were
to admire the works more than the workman, and being awestruck at the
public works in the city, were to make light of their builder, or as if
one were to praise a musical instrument but to despise the man who made
and tuned it. Foolish and sadly disabled in eyesight! For how else had
they known the building, or ship, or lyre, had not the ship-builder made
it, the architect built it, or the musician fashioned it? 4. As then he
that reasons in such a way is mad, and beyond all madness, even so
affected in mind, I think, are those who do not recognise God or worship
His Word, our Lord Jesus Christ the Saviour of all, through Whom the
Father orders, and <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="vi.ii.iii.xiii-Page_30"></span>holds together all things, and
exercises providence over the Universe; having faith and piety towards
Whom, my Christ-loving friend, be of good cheer and of good hope,
because immortality and the kingdom of heaven is the fruit of faith and
devotion towards Him, if only the soul be adorned according to His laws.
For just as for them who walk after His example, the prize is life
everlasting, so for those who walk the opposite way, and not that of
virtue, there is great shame, and peril without pardon in the day of
judgment, because although they knew the way of truth their acts were
contrary to their knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_188"></span>[29:189](2040094.htm#fr_188) <span
id="vi.ii.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.xiii-p3"></span> [Joh. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="vi.ii.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[29:190](2040094.htm#fr_189) <span
id="vi.ii.iii.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.xiii-p4"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="vi.ii.iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Incarnation of the Word.](2040095)
