[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040177)  [Next](2040179) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.ii-p1"></span> §2. *Violent and Uncanonical Intrusion
of Gregory.*

<span id="xii.ii.ii-p2"></span>Now the outrages which have been
committed against us and against the Church are these. While we were
holding our assemblies in peace, as usual, and while the people were
rejoicing in them, and advancing in godly conversation, and while our
fellow-ministers in Egypt, and the Thebais, and Libya, were in love and
peace both with one another and with us; on a sudden the Prefect of
Egypt puts forth a public letter, bearing the form of an edict, and
declaring that one Gregory from Cappadocia was coming to be my successor
from the court. This announcement confounded every one, for such a
proceeding was entirely novel, and now heard of for the first time. The
people however assembled still more constantly in the churches <span
id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449) , for they very well knew that neither
they themselves, nor any Bishop or Presbyter, nor in short any one had
ever complained against me; and they saw that Arians only were on his
side, and were aware also that he was himself an Arian, and was sent by
Eusebius and his fellows to the Arian party. For you know, brethren,
that Eusebius and his fellows have always been the supporters and
associates of the impious heresy of the Arian madmen <span
id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450) , by whose means they have ever
carried on their designs against me, and were the authors of my
banishment into Gaul.

<span id="xii.ii.ii-p5"></span>The people, therefore, were justly
indignant and exclaimed against the proceeding, calling the rest of the
magistrates and the whole city to witness, that this novel and
iniquitous attempt was now made against the Church, not on the ground of
any charge brought against me by ecclesiastical persons, but through the
wanton assault of the Arian heretics. For even if there had been any
complaint generally prevailing against me, it was not an Arian, or one
professing Arian doctrines, that ought to have been chosen to supersede
me; but according to the ecclesiastical Canons, and the direction of
Paul, when the people were ‘gathered together, and the spirit’ of them
that ordain, ‘with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ <span
id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451) ’ all things ought to have been
enquired into and transacted canonically, in the presence of those among
the laity and clergy who demanded the change; and not that a person
brought from a distance by Arians, as if making a traffic of the title
of Bishop, should with the patronage and strong arm of heathen
magistrates, thrust himself upon those who neither asked for nor desired
his presence, nor indeed knew anything of what had been done. Such
proceedings tend to the dissolution of all the ecclesiastical Canons,
and compel the heathen to blaspheme, and to suspect that our
appointments are not made according to a divine rule, but as a result of
traffic and patronage <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_449"></span>[93:450](2040178.htm#fr_449) <span
id="xii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.ii-p3"></span> Assembling in the Churches seems to have
been a sort of protest or demonstration, sometimes peaceably, but
sometimes in a more exceptionable manner;—peaceably, during Justina’s
persecution at Milan, Ambros. [Ep. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020)<span id="xii.ii.ii-p3.2"></span>.
August. *Confess.* ix. 15, but at Ephesus after the third Ecumenical
Council the Metropolitan shut up the Churches, took possession of the
Cathedral, and succeeded in repelling the imperial troops. Churches were
asylums, vid. Cod. Theodos. ix. 45. §4. &c.; at the same time arms were
prohibited.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[93:451](2040178.htm#fr_450) <span
id="xii.ii.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.ii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xii.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>ρειομανιτῶν</span>, vid. note on *de Syn.*
13.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[93:452](2040178.htm#fr_451) <span
id="xii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.ii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004)<span id="xii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[93:453](2040178.htm#fr_452) <span
id="xii.ii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.ii-p7"></span> *Orat.* i. 8, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Outrages which took place at the time of Gregory's
arrival.](2040179)
