[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040373)  [Next](2040375) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p1.2"></span>Introductory to Texts
from the Gospels on the Incarnation</span>. *Enumeration of texts still
to be explained. Arians compared to the Jews. We must recur to the
Regula Fidei. Our Lord did not come into, but became, man, and therefore
had the acts and affections of the flesh. The same works divine and
human. Thus the flesh was purified, and men were made immortal.
Reference to* <span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p1.3"></span>*[I Pet. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p1.4"></span>*.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p2"></span>26. For behold, as if not wearied in
their words of irreligion, but hardened with Pharaoh, while they hear
and see the Saviour’s human attributes in the Gospels <span
id="fr_2981"></span>[2982](#fn_2981) , they have utterly forgotten, like
the Samosatene, the Son’s paternal Godhead <span
id="fr_2982"></span>[2983](#fn_2982) , and with arrogant and audacious
tongue they say, ‘How can the Son be from the Father by nature, and be
like Him in essence,’ who says, ‘All power is given unto Me;’ and ‘The
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son;’
and ‘The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into His hand;
he that believeth in the Son hath everlasting life;’ and again, ‘All
things were delivered unto Me of My Father, <span id="page_408">p.
408</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-Page_408"></span>and no one knoweth
the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him;’
and again, ‘All that the Father hath given unto Me, shall come to
Me <span id="fr_2983"></span>[2984](#fn_2983) .’ On this they observe,
‘If He was, as ye say, Son by nature, He had no need to receive, but He
had by nature as a Son.’ “Or how can He be the natural and true Power of
the Father, who near upon the season of the passion says, ‘Now is My
soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save Me from this hour; but
for this came I unto this hour. Father, glorify Thy Name. Then came
there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again <span id="fr_2984"></span>[2985](#fn_2984) .’ And He
said the same another time; ‘Father, if it be possible, let this cup
pass from Me;’ and ‘When Jesus had thus said, He was troubled in spirit
and testified and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you
shall betray Me <span id="fr_2985"></span>[2986](#fn_2985) .’” Then
these perverse men argue; ‘If He were Power, He had not feared, but
rather He had supplied power to others.’ Further they say; ‘If He were
by nature the true and own Wisdom of the Father,’ how is it written,
‘And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and
man <span id="fr_2986"></span>[2987](#fn_2986) ?’ In like manner, when
He had come into the parts of Cæsarea Philippi, He asked the disciples
whom men said that He was; and when He was at Bethany He asked where
Lazarus lay; and He said besides to His disciples, ‘How many loaves have
ye <span id="fr_2987"></span>[2988](#fn_2987) ? How then,’ say they, ‘is
He Wisdom, who increased in wisdom and was ignorant of what He asked of
others?’ This too they urge; “How can He be the own Word of the Father,
without whom the Father never was, through whom He makes all things, as
ye think, who said upon the Cross ‘My God, My God, why hast Thou
forsaken Me?’ and before that had prayed, ‘Glorify Thy Name,’ and, ‘O
Father, glorify Thou Me with the glory which I had with Thee before the
world was.’ And He used to pray in the deserts and charge His disciples
to pray lest they should enter into temptation; and, ‘The spirit indeed
is willing,’ He said, ‘but the flesh is weak.’ And, ‘Of that day and
that hour knoweth no man, no, nor the Angels, neither the Son <span
id="fr_2988"></span>[2989](#fn_2988) .’” Upon this again say the
miserable men, “If the Son were, according to your interpretation <span
id="fr_2989"></span>[2990](#fn_2989) , eternally existent with God, He
had not been ignorant of the Day, but had known as Word; nor had been
forsaken as being coexistent; nor had asked to receive glory, as having
it in the Father; nor would have prayed at all; for, being the Word, He
had needed nothing; but since He is a creature and one of things
originate, therefore He thus spoke, and needed what He had not; for it
is proper to creatures to require and to need what they have not.”

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p12"></span>27. This then is what the irreligious
men allege in their discourses; and if they thus argue, they might
consistently speak yet more daringly; ‘Why did the Word become flesh at
all?’ and they might add; ‘For how could He, being God, become man?’ or,
‘How could the Immaterial bear a body?’ or they might speak with
Caiaphas still more Judaically, ‘Wherefore at all did Christ, being a
man, make Himself God <span id="fr_2990"></span>[2991](#fn_2990) ?’ for
this and the like the Jews then muttered when they saw, and now the
Ario-maniacs disbelieve when they read, and have fallen away into
blasphemies. If then a man should carefully parallel the words of these
and those, he will of a certainty find them both arriving at the same
unbelief, and the daring of their irreligion equal, and their dispute
with us a common one. For the Jews said; ‘How, being a man, can He be
God?’ And the Arians, ‘If He were very God from God, how could He become
man?’ And the Jews were offended then and mocked, saying, ‘Had He been
Son of God, He had not endured the Cross;’ and the Arians standing over
against them, urge upon us, ‘How dare ye say that He is the Word proper
to the Father’s Essence, who had a body, so as to endure all this?’
Next, while the Jews sought to kill the Lord, because He said that God
was His own Father and made Himself equal to Him, as working what the
Father works, the Arians also, not only have learned to deny, both that
He is equal to God and that God is the own and natural Father of the
Word, but those who hold this they seek to kill. Again, whereas the Jews
said, ‘Is not this the Son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know?
how then is it that He saith, Before Abraham was, I am, and I came down
from heaven <span id="fr_2991"></span>[2992](#fn_2991) ?’ the Arians on
the other hand make response <span id="fr_2992"></span>[2993](#fn_2992)
and say conformably, ‘How can He be Word or God who slept as man, and
wept, and inquired?’ Thus both parties deny the Eternity and Godhead of
the Word in consequence of those human attributes which the Saviour took
on Him by reason of that flesh which He bore.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p16"></span>28. Such error then being Judaic, and
Judaic after the mind of Judas the traitor, <span id="page_409">p.
409</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-Page_409"></span>let them openly
confess themselves scholars of Caiaphas and Herod, instead of cloking
Judaism with the name of Christianity, and let them deny outright, as we
have said before, the Saviour’s appearance in the flesh, for this
doctrine is akin to their heresy; or if they fear openly to Judaize and
be circumcised <span id="fr_2993"></span>[2994](#fn_2993) , from
servility towards Constantius and for their sake whom they have
beguiled, then let them not say what the Jews say; for if they disown
the name, let them in fairness renounce the doctrine. For we are
Christians, O Arians, Christians we; our privilege is it well to know
the Gospels concerning the Saviour, and neither, with Jews to stone Him,
if we hear of His Godhead and Eternity, nor with you to stumble at such
lowly sayings as He may speak for our sakes as man. If then you would
become Christians <span id="fr_2994"></span>[2995](#fn_2994) , put off
Arius’s madness, and cleanse <span id="fr_2995"></span>[2996](#fn_2995)
with the words of religion those ears of yours which blaspheming has
defiled; knowing that, by ceasing to be Arians, you will cease also from
the malevolence of the present Jews. Then at once will truth shine on
you out of darkness, and ye will no longer reproach us with holding two
Eternals <span id="fr_2996"></span>[2997](#fn_2996) , but ye will
yourselves acknowledge that the Lord is God’s true Son by nature, and
not as merely eternal <span id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997) , but
revealed as co-existing in the Father’s eternity. For there are things
called eternal of which He is Framer; for in the twenty-third Psalm it
is written, ‘Lift up your gates, O ye rulers, and be ye lift up, ye
everlasting gates <span id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998) ;’ and it
is plain that through Him these things were made; but if even of things
everlasting He is the Framer, who of us shall be able henceforth to
dispute that He is anterior to those things eternal, and in consequence
is proved to be Lord not so much from His eternity, as in that He is
God’s Son; for being the Son, He is inseparable from the Father, and
never was there when He was not, but He was always; and being the
Father’s Image and Radiance, He has the Father’s eternity. Now what has
been briefly said above may suffice to shew their misunderstanding of
the passages they then alleged; and that of what they now allege from
the Gospels they certainly give an unsound interpretation <span
id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999) , we may easily see, if we now
consider the scope <span id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000) of that
faith which we Christians hold, and using it as a rule, apply ourselves,
as the Apostle teaches, to the reading of inspired Scripture. For
Christ’s enemies, being ignorant of this scope, have wandered from the
way of truth, and have stumbled <span
id="fr_3001"></span>[3002](#fn_3001) on a stone of stumbling, thinking
otherwise than they should think.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p26"></span>29. Now the scope and character of
Holy Scripture, as we have often said, is this,—it contains a double
account of the Saviour; that He was ever God, and is the Son, being the
Father’s Word and Radiance and Wisdom <span
id="fr_3002"></span>[3003](#fn_3002) ; and that afterwards for us He
took flesh of a Virgin, Mary Bearer of God <span
id="fr_3003"></span>[3004](#fn_3003) , and was made man. And this scope
is to be found throughout inspired Scripture, as the Lord Himself has
said, ‘Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of
Me <span id="fr_3004"></span>[3005](#fn_3004) .’ But lest I should
exceed in writing, by bringing together all the passages on the subject,
let it suffice to mention as a specimen, first John saying, ‘In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by Him, and
without Him was made not one thing <span
id="fr_3005"></span>[3006](#fn_3005) ;’ next, ‘And the Word was made
flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory, the glory as of one
Only-begotten from the Father <span id="fr_3006"></span>[3007](#fn_3006)
;’ and next Paul writing, ‘Who being in the form of God, thought it not
a prize to be equal with God, but emptied Himself, taking the form of a
servant, being made in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion
like a man, He humbled Himself, becoming obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross <span id="fr_3007"></span>[3008](#fn_3007) .’ Any
one, beginning with these passages and going through the <span
id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-Page_410"></span>whole of the Scripture upon the
interpretation <span id="fr_3008"></span>[3009](#fn_3008) which they
suggest, will perceive how in the beginning the Father said to Him, ‘Let
there be light,’ and ‘Let there be a firmament,’ and ‘Let us make
man <span id="fr_3009"></span>[3010](#fn_3009) ;’ but in fulness of the
ages, He sent Him into the world, not that He might judge the world, but
that the world by Him might be saved, and how it is written ‘Behold, the
Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall
call his Name Emmanuel, which, being interpreted, is God with us <span
id="fr_3010"></span>[3011](#fn_3010) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p36"></span>30. The reader then of divine
Scripture may acquaint himself with these passages from the ancient
books; and from the Gospels on the other hand he will perceive that the
Lord became man; for ‘the Word,’ he says, ‘became flesh, and dwelt among
us <span id="fr_3011"></span>[3012](#fn_3011) .’ And He became man, and
did not come into man; for this it is necessary to know, lest perchance
these irreligious men fall into this notion also, and beguile any into
thinking, that, as in former times the Word was used to come into each
of the Saints, so now He sojourned in a man, hallowing him also, and
manifesting <span id="fr_3012"></span>[3013](#fn_3012) Himself as in the
others. For if it were so, and He only appeared in a man, it were
nothing strange, nor had those who saw Him been startled, saying, Whence
is He? and wherefore dost Thou, being a man, make Thyself God? for they
were familiar with the idea, from the words, ‘And the Word of the Lord
came’ to this or that of the Prophets <span
id="fr_3013"></span>[3014](#fn_3013) . But now, since the Word of God,
by whom all things came to be, endured to become also Son of man, and
humbled Himself, taking a servant’s form, therefore to the Jews the
Cross of Christ is a scandal, but to us Christ is ‘God’s power’ and
‘God’s wisdom <span id="fr_3014"></span>[3015](#fn_3014) ;’ for ‘the
Word,’ as John says, ‘became flesh’ (it being the custom <span
id="fr_3015"></span>[3016](#fn_3015) of Scripture to call man by the
name of ‘flesh,’ as it says by Joel the Prophet, ‘I will pour out My
Spirit upon all flesh;’ and as Daniel said to Astyages, ‘I do not
worship idols made with hands, but the Living God, who hath created the
heaven and the earth, and hath sovereignty over all flesh <span
id="fr_3016"></span>[3017](#fn_3016) ;’ for both he and Joel call
mankind flesh).

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p43"></span>31. Of old time He was wont to come
to the Saints individually, and to hallow those who rightly <span
id="fr_3017"></span>[3018](#fn_3017) received Him; but neither, when
they were begotten was it said that He had become man, nor, when they
suffered, was it said that He Himself suffered. But when He came among
us from Mary once at the end of the ages for the abolition of sin (for
so it was pleasing to the Father, to send His own Son ‘made of a woman,
made under the Law’), then it is said, that He took flesh and became
man, and in that flesh He suffered for us (as Peter says, ‘Christ
therefore having suffered for us in the flesh <span
id="fr_3018"></span>[3019](#fn_3018) ,’ that it might be shewn, and that
all might believe, that whereas He was ever God, and hallowed those to
whom He came, and ordered all things according to the Father’s
will <span id="fr_3019"></span>[3020](#fn_3019) , afterwards for our
sakes He became man, and ‘bodily <span
id="fr_3020"></span>[3021](#fn_3020) ,’ as the Apostle says, the Godhead
dwelt in the flesh; as much as to say, ‘Being God, He had His own body,
and using this as an instrument <span
id="fr_3021"></span>[3022](#fn_3021) , He became man for our sakes.’ And
on account of this, the properties of the flesh are said to be His,
since He was in it, such as to hunger, to thirst, to suffer, to weary,
and the like, of which the flesh is capable; while on the other hand the
works proper to the Word Himself, such as to raise the dead, to restore
sight to the blind, and to cure the woman with an issue of blood, He did
through His own body <span id="fr_3022"></span>[3023](#fn_3022) . And
the Word bore the infirmities of the flesh, as His own, for His was the
flesh; and the flesh ministered to the works of the Godhead, because the
Godhead was in it, for the body was God’s <span
id="fr_3023"></span>[3024](#fn_3023) . And well has <span
id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-Page_411"></span>the
Prophet said ‘carried <span id="fr_3024"></span>[3025](#fn_3024) ;’ and
has not said, ‘He remedied our infirmities,’ lest, as being external to
the body, and only healing it, as He has always done, He should leave
men subject still to death; but He carries our infirmities, and He
Himself bears our sins, that it might be shewn that He has become man
for us, and that the body which in Him bore them, was His own body; and,
while He received no hurt <span id="fr_3025"></span>[3026](#fn_3025)
Himself by ‘bearing our sins in His body on the tree,’ as Peter speaks,
we men were redeemed from our own affections <span
id="fr_3026"></span>[3027](#fn_3026) , and were filled with the
righteousness <span id="fr_3027"></span>[3028](#fn_3027) of the Word.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p55"></span>32. Whence it was that, when the
flesh suffered, the Word was not external to it; and therefore is the
passion said to be His: and when He did divinely His Father’s works, the
flesh was not external to Him, but in the body itself did the Lord do
them. Hence, when made man, He said <span
id="fr_3028"></span>[3029](#fn_3028) , ‘If I do not the works of the
Father, believe Me not; but if I do, though ye believe not Me, believe
the works, that ye may know that the Father is in Me and I in Him.’ And
thus when there was need to raise Peter’s wife’s mother, who was sick of
a fever, He stretched forth His hand humanly, but He stopped the illness
divinely. And in the case of the man blind from the birth, human was the
spittle which He gave forth from the flesh, but divinely did He open the
eyes through the clay. And in the case of Lazarus, He gave forth a human
voice as man; but divinely, as God, did He raise Lazarus from the
dead <span id="fr_3029"></span>[3030](#fn_3029) . These things were so
done, were so manifested, because He had a body, not in appearance, but
in truth <span id="fr_3030"></span>[3031](#fn_3030) ; and it became the
Lord, in putting on human flesh, to put it on whole with the affections
proper to it; that, as we say that the body was His own, so also we may
say that the affections of the body were proper to Him alone, though
they did not touch Him according to His Godhead. If then the body had
been another’s, to him too had been the affections attributed; but if
the flesh is the Word’s (for ‘the Word became flesh’), of necessity then
the affections also of the flesh are ascribed to Him, whose the flesh
is. And to whom the affections are ascribed, such namely as to be
condemned, to be scourged, to thirst, and the cross, and death, and the
other infirmities of the body, of Him too is the triumph and the grace.
For this cause then, consistently and fittingly such affections are
ascribed not to another <span id="fr_3031"></span>[3032](#fn_3031) , but
to the Lord; that the grace also may be from Him <span
id="fr_3032"></span>[3033](#fn_3032) , and that we may become, not
worshippers of any other, but truly devout towards God, because we
invoke no originate thing, no ordinary <span
id="fr_3033"></span>[3034](#fn_3033) man, but the natural and true Son
from God, who has become man, yet is not the less Lord and God and
Saviour.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p62"></span>33. Who will not admire this? or who
will not agree that such a thing is truly divine? for if the works of
the Word’s Godhead had not taken place through the body, man had not
been deified; and again, had not the properties of the flesh been
ascribed to the Word, man had not been thoroughly delivered from
them <span id="fr_3034"></span>[3035](#fn_3034) ; but though they had
ceased for a little while, as I said before, still sin had remained in
him and corruption, as was the case with mankind before Him; and for
this reason:—Many for instance have been made holy and clean from all
sin; nay, Jeremiah was hallowed <span
id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035) even from the womb, and John, while
yet in the womb, leapt for joy at the voice of Mary Bearer of God <span
id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036) ; nevertheless ‘death reigned from
Adam to Moses, even over those that had not sinned after the similitude
of Adam’s transgression <span id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037) ;’
and thus man remained mortal and corruptible as before, liable to the
affections proper to their nature. But now the Word having become man
and having appropriated <span id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038) what
<span id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-Page_412"></span>pertains to the flesh, no longer do
these things touch the body, because of the Word who has come in it, but
they are destroyed <span id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039) by Him,
and henceforth men no longer remain sinners and dead according to their
proper affections, but having risen according to the Word’s power, they
abide <span id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040) ever immortal and
incorruptible. Whence also, whereas the flesh is born of Mary Bearer of
God <span id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041) , He Himself is said to
have been born, who furnishes to others an origin of being; in order
that He may transfer our origin into Himself, and we may no longer, as
mere earth, return to earth, but as being knit into the Word from
heaven, may be carried to heaven by Him. Therefore in like manner not
without reason has He transferred to Himself the other affections of the
body also; that we, no longer as being men, but as proper to the Word,
may have share in eternal life. For no longer according to our former
origin in Adam do we die; but henceforward our origin and all infirmity
of flesh being transferred to the Word, we rise from the earth, the
curse from sin being removed, because of Him who is in us <span
id="fr_3042"></span>[3043](#fn_3042) , and who has become a curse for
us. And with reason; for as we are all from earth and die in Adam, so
being regenerated from above of water and Spirit, in the Christ we are
all quickened; the flesh being no longer earthly, but being henceforth
made Word <span id="fr_3043"></span>[3044](#fn_3043) , by reason of
God’s Word who for our sake ‘became flesh.’

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p73"></span>34. And that one may attain to a more
exact knowledge of the impassibility of the Word’s nature and of the
infirmities ascribed to Him because of the flesh, it will be well to
listen to the blessed Peter; for he will be a trustworthy witness
concerning the Saviour. He writes then in his Epistle thus; ‘Christ then
having suffered for us in the flesh <span
id="fr_3044"></span>[3045](#fn_3044) .’ Therefore also when He is said
to hunger and thirst and to toil and not to know, and to sleep, and to
weep, and to ask, and to flee, and to be born, and to deprecate the cup,
and in a word to undergo all that belongs to the flesh <span
id="fr_3045"></span>[3046](#fn_3045) , let it be said, as is congruous,
in each case ‘Christ then hungering and thirsting “for us in the
flesh;”’ and saying ‘He did not know, and being buffeted, and toiling
“for us in the flesh;”’ and ‘being exalted too, and born, and growing
“in the flesh;”’ and ‘fearing and hiding “in the flesh;”’ and ‘saying,
“If it be possible let this cup pass from Me <span
id="fr_3046"></span>[3047](#fn_3046) ,” and being beaten, and receiving,
“for us in the flesh;”’ and in a word all such things ‘for us in the
flesh.’ For on this account has the Apostle himself said, ‘Christ then
having suffered,’ not in His Godhead, but ‘for us in the flesh,’ that
these affections may be acknowledged as, not proper to the very Word by
nature, but proper by nature to the very flesh.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p77"></span>Let no one then stumble at what
belongs to man, but rather let a man know that in nature the Word
Himself is impassible, and yet because of that flesh which He put on,
these things are ascribed to Him, since they are proper to the flesh,
and the body itself is proper to the Saviour. And while He Himself,
being impassible in nature, remains as He is, not harmed <span
id="fr_3047"></span>[3048](#fn_3047) by these affections, but rather
obliterating and destroying them, men, their passions as if changed and
abolished <span id="fr_3048"></span>[3049](#fn_3048) in the Impassible,
henceforth become themselves also impassible and free <span
id="fr_3049"></span>[3050](#fn_3049) from them for ever, as John taught,
saying, ‘And ye know that He was manifested to take away our sins, and
in Him is no sin <span id="fr_3050"></span>[3051](#fn_3050) .’ And this
being so, no heretic shall object, ‘Wherefore rises the flesh, being by
nature mortal? and if it rises, why not hunger too and thirst, and
suffer, and remain mortal? for it came from the earth, and how can its
natural condition pass from it?’ since the flesh is able now to make
answer to this so contentious heretic, ‘I am from earth, being by nature
mortal, but afterwards I have become the Word’s flesh,’ and He ‘carried’
my affections, though He is without them; and so I became free from
them, being no more abandoned to their service because of the Lord who
has made me free from them. For if you object to my being rid of that
corruption which is by nature, see that you object not to God’s Word
having taken my form <span id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-Page_413"></span>of servitude; for as the Lord, putting
on the body, became man, so we men are deified by the Word as being
taken to Him through His flesh, and henceforward inherit life
‘everlasting.’

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p82"></span>35. These points we have found it
necessary first to examine, that, when we see Him doing or saying aught
divinely through the instrument <span
id="fr_3051"></span>[3052](#fn_3051) of His own body, we may know that
He so works, being God, and also, if we see Him speaking or suffering
humanly, we may not be ignorant that He bore flesh and became man, and
hence He so acts and so speaks. For if we recognise what is proper to
each, and see and understand that both these things and those are done
by One <span id="fr_3052"></span>[3053](#fn_3052) , we are right in our
faith, and shall never stray. But if a man looking at what is done
divinely by the Word, deny the body, or looking at what is proper to the
body, deny the Word’s presence in the flesh, or from what is human
entertain low thoughts concerning the Word, such a one, as a Jewish
vintner <span id="fr_3053"></span>[3054](#fn_3053) , mixing water with
the wine, shall account the Cross an offence, or as a Gentile, will deem
the preaching folly. This then is what happens to God’s enemies the
Arians; for looking at what is human in the Saviour, they have judged
Him a creature. Therefore they ought, looking also at the divine works
of the Word, to deny <span id="fr_3054"></span>[3055](#fn_3054) the
origination of His body, and henceforth to rank themselves with
Manichees <span id="fr_3055"></span>[3056](#fn_3055) . But for them,
learn they, however tardily, that ‘the Word became flesh;’ and let us,
retaining the general scope <span id="fr_3056"></span>[3057](#fn_3056)
of the faith, acknowledge that what they interpret ill, has a right
interpretation <span id="fr_3057"></span>[3058](#fn_3057) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2981"></span>[407:2982](2040374.htm#fr_2981) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p3"></span> This Oration alone, and this
entirely, treats of texts from the Gospels; hitherto from the Gospel
according to St. John, and now chiefly from the first three. Hence they
lead Athan. to treat more distinctly of the doctrine of the Incarnation,
and to anticipate a refutation of both Nestorius and Eutyches.

<span id="fn_2982"></span>[407:2983](2040374.htm#fr_2982) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p4"></span> §1, n. 13.

<span id="fn_2983"></span>[408:2984](2040374.htm#fr_2983) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p5"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p5.3"></span>; [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p5.4"></span>; iii. 35, 36; [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p5.5"></span>; [John vi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p5.6"></span>; *infr.* §§35–41.

<span id="fn_2984"></span>[408:2985](2040374.htm#fr_2984) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p5.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p6"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>[John
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p6.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2985"></span>[408:2986](2040374.htm#fr_2985) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p6.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p7"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p7.3"></span>; [John xiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p7.4"></span>; *infr.* §§53–58.

<span id="fn_2986"></span>[408:2987](2040374.htm#fr_2986) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p7.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p8"></span> [Luke ii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>; *infr.* §§50–53.

<span id="fn_2987"></span>[408:2988](2040374.htm#fr_2987) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p9"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p9.1"></span>[Matt. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p9.3"></span>; [John xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#034)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p9.4"></span>; [Mark vi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#038)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p9.5"></span>; *infr.* §27.

<span id="fn_2988"></span>[408:2989](2040374.htm#fr_2988) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p9.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p10"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p10.1"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p10.3"></span>; [John xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p10.4"></span>; xvii. 5; [Matt. xxvi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p10.5"></span>; [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p10.6"></span>; *infr.* §§42–50.

<span id="fn_2989"></span>[408:2990](2040374.htm#fr_2989) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p10.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>διάνοιαν</span>, ii. 44, a. 53, c.; iv.
17, d. &c.

<span id="fn_2990"></span>[408:2991](2040374.htm#fr_2990) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p13"></span> *De Decr.* 1; *Or.* i. 4.

<span id="fn_2991"></span>[408:2992](2040374.htm#fr_2991) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p14"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>[John vi.
42](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#042)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p14.3"></span>; viii. 58.

<span id="fn_2992"></span>[408:2993](2040374.htm#fr_2992) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p14.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p15.2"></span>πακούουσιν</span>. Montfaucon
(Onomasticon in t. 2 fin.) so interprets this word. vid. *Apol. contr.
Ar.* 88. note 7.

<span id="fn_2993"></span>[409:2994](2040374.htm#fr_2993) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p17"></span> *Or.* i. 38.

<span id="fn_2994"></span>[409:2995](2040374.htm#fr_2994) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p18"></span> *Apol. Fug.* 27, n. 10.

<span id="fn_2995"></span>[409:2996](2040374.htm#fr_2995) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p19"></span> *De Decr.* 2, n. 9, c. *Sab. Greg.*
6 fin.

<span id="fn_2996"></span>[409:2997](2040374.htm#fr_2996) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p20"></span> Cf. *de Decr.* 25, n. 4. The
peculiarity of the Catholic doctrine, as contrasted with the heresies on
the subject of the Trinity, is that it professes a mystery. It involves,
not merely a contradiction in the terms used, which would be little, for
we might solve it by assigning different senses to the same word, or by
adding some limitation (e.g. if it were said that Satan was an Angel and
not an Angel, or man was mortal and immortal), but an incongruity in the
ideas which it introduces. To say that the Father is wholly and
absolutely the one infinitely-simple God, and then that the Son is also,
and yet that the Father is eternally distinct from the Son, is to
propose ideas which we cannot harmonize together; and our reason is
reconciled to this state of the case only by the consideration (though
fully by means of it) that no idea of ours can embrace the simple truth,
so that we are obliged to separate it into portions, and view it in
aspects, and adumbrate it under many ideas, if we are to make any
approximation towards it at all; as in mathematics we approximate to a
circle by means of a polygon, great as is the dissimilarity between the
two figures. \[Cf. Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) b.\]

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[409:2998](2040374.htm#fr_2997) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>οὐχ ἁπλῶς ἀ& 188·διος</span>, i.e. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.3"></span>ΐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.4"></span>διος</span> is not
one of our Lord’s highest titles, for things have it which the Son
Himself has created, and whom of course He precedes. Instead of two
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.6"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.7"></span>ΐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.8"></span>δια</span> then, as
the Arians say, there are many <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.9"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.10"></span>ΐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.11"></span>δια</span>; and our Lord’s high title is
not this, but that He is ‘the Son,’ and thereby ‘eternal in the Father’s
eternity,’ or there was not ever when He was not, and ‘Image’ and
‘Radiance.’ The same line of thought is implied throughout his proof of
our Lord’s eternity in *Orat.* i. ch. 4 6. This is worth remarking, as
constituting a special distinction between ancient and modern Scripture
proofs of the doctrine, and as coinciding with what was said *supr. Or.*
ii. 1, n. 13, 44, n. 1. His mode of proof is still more brought out by
what he proceeds to say about the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.13"></span>σκοπός</span>, or general bearing or
drift of the Christian faith, and its availableness as a <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.15"></span>κανὼν</span> or rule
of interpretation.

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[409:2999](2040374.htm#fr_2998) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p21.17"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p22"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[409:3000](2040374.htm#fr_2999) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p23"></span> Cf. 26, n. 9.

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[409:3001](2040374.htm#fr_3000) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p24.1"></span>σκοπὸς</span>, vid. 58. fin.

<span id="fn_3001"></span>[409:3002](2040374.htm#fr_3001) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p24.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p25"></span> [Rom. ix.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3002"></span>[409:3003](2040374.htm#fr_3002) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p27"></span> *Or.* i. 28, n. 5.

<span id="fn_3003"></span>[409:3004](2040374.htm#fr_3003) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>θεοτόκου</span>. vid. *supr.* 14, n. 3.
Vid. S. Cyril’s quotations in his *de Recta Fide,* p. 49, &c.; and Cyril
himself, *Adv. Nest.* i. p. 18. Procl. *Hom.* i. p. 60. Theodor. *ap.
Conc. Eph.* (p. 1529. Labbe.) Cassian. *Incarn.* iv. 2. Hil. *Trin.* ii.
25. Ambros. *Virgin.* i. n. 47. Chrysost. ap. Cassian. *Incarn.* vii.
30. Jerom. in [Ezek. 44](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#000)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p28.3"></span> init. Capreolus of Carthage, ap. Sirm.
*Opp.* t. i. p. 216. August. *Serm.* 291, 6. Hippolytus, ap. Theod.
*Eran.* i. p. 55, &c. Ignatius, *Ep. ad Eph.* 7.

<span id="fn_3004"></span>[409:3005](2040374.htm#fr_3004) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p28.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p29"></span> [John v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3005"></span>[409:3006](2040374.htm#fr_3005) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p30"></span> [John
1.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3006"></span>[409:3007](2040374.htm#fr_3006) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p31"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3007"></span>[409:3008](2040374.htm#fr_3007) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p31.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p32"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p32.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p32.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3008"></span>[410:3009](2040374.htm#fr_3008) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p32.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p33"></span> Cf. 26, n. 9.

<span id="fn_3009"></span>[410:3010](2040374.htm#fr_3009) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p34"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p34.1"></span>[Gen.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p34.3"></span>; *de Syn.* 28 (14).

<span id="fn_3010"></span>[410:3011](2040374.htm#fr_3010) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p34.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p35"></span> [Matt. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3011"></span>[410:3012](2040374.htm#fr_3011) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p37"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3012"></span>[410:3013](2040374.htm#fr_3012) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p38.1"></span>τούτῳ χρώμενος ὀργάνῳ</span> *infr.*42.
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p38.2"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p38.3"></span>ργανον πρὸς τὴν ἐνέργειαν καὶ τὴν
ἔκλαμψιν τῆς θεότητος</span>. 53. This was a word much used afterwards
by the Apollinarians, who looked on our Lord’s manhood as merely a
*manifestation* of God. vid. *Or.* ii. 8, n. 3. vid. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p38.5"></span>σχῆμα
ὀργανικὸν</span> in *Apoll.* i. 2, 15. vid. a parallel in Euseb. *Laud.
Const.* p. 536. However, it is used freely by Athan. e.g. *infr.* 35,
53. *Incarn.* 8, 9, 41, 43, 44. This use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p38.7"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p38.8"></span>ργανον</span> must not be confused with
its heretical application to our Lord’s Divine Nature, vid. Basil *de
Sp. S.* n. 19 fin. of which *de Syn.* 27 (3). It may be added that <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p38.10"></span>φανέρωσις</span> is
a Nestorian as well as Eutychian idea; Facund. *Tr. Cap.* ix. 2, 3. and
the Syrian use of *parsopa* Asseman. *B. O.* t. 4. p. 219. Thus both
parties really denied the Atonement. vid. *supr. Or.* i. 60, n. 5; ii.
8, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3013"></span>[410:3014](2040374.htm#fr_3013) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p38.12"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p39"></span> *Ad Epict.* 11, *ad Max.* 2.

<span id="fn_3014"></span>[410:3015](2040374.htm#fr_3014) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p40"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3015"></span>[410:3016](2040374.htm#fr_3015) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p41"></span> *Infr.* iv. 33 init.

<span id="fn_3016"></span>[410:3017](2040374.htm#fr_3016) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p42"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p42.1"></span>[Joel ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p42.3"></span>; Bel and Dr. 5.

<span id="fn_3017"></span>[410:3018](2040374.htm#fr_3017) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p44"></span> *Or.* i. 39, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3018"></span>[410:3019](2040374.htm#fr_3018) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p45"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p45.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p45.3"></span>; [1 Pet. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p45.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3019"></span>[410:3020](2040374.htm#fr_3019) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p45.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p46.1"></span>κατὰ τὸ βούλημα</span>. vid. *Orat.* i.
63. *infr.* §63, notes. Cf. *supr.* ii. 31, n. 7, for passages in which
[Ps. xxxiii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p46.3"></span>. is taken to shew the unity of Father
and Son from the instantaneousness of the accomplishment upon the
willing, as well as the Son’s existence before creation. Hence the Son
not only works <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p46.5"></span>κατὰ τὸ βούλημα</span>, but is the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p46.7"></span>βουλὴ</span> of the
Father. ibid. note 8. For the contrary Arian view, even when it is
highest, vid Euseb. *Eccl. Theol.* iii. 3. quoted ii. 64, n. 5. In that
passage the Father’s <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p46.9"></span>νεύματα</span> are spoken of, a word
common with the Arians. Euseb. ibid. p. 75, a. *de Laud. Const.* p. 528,
Eunom. *Apol.* 20 fin. The word is used of the Son’s command given to
the creation, in Athan. *contr. Gent.* e.g. 42, 44, 46. S. Cyril. Hier.
frequently as the Arians, uses it of the Father. *Catech.* x. 5, xi.
*passim,* xv. 25, &c. The difference between the orthodox and Arian
views on this point is clearly drawn out by S. Basil *contr.* *Eunom.*
i. 21.

<span id="fn_3020"></span>[410:3021](2040374.htm#fr_3020) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p46.11"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p47"></span> [Col. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3021"></span>[410:3022](2040374.htm#fr_3021) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p48.1"></span>τούτῳ χρώμενος ὀργάνῳ</span> *infr.*42.
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p48.2"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p48.3"></span>ργανον πρὸς τὴν ἐνέργειαν καὶ τὴν
ἔκλαμψιν τῆς θεότητος</span>. 53. This was a word much used afterwards
by the Apollinarians, who looked on our Lord’s manhood as merely a
*manifestation* of God. vid. *Or.* ii. 8, n. 3. vid. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p48.5"></span>σχῆμα
ὀργανικὸν</span> in *Apoll.* i. 2, 15. vid. a parallel in Euseb. *Laud.
Const.* p. 536. However, it is used freely by Athan. e.g. *infr.* 35,
53. *Incarn.* 8, 9, 41, 43, 44. This use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p48.7"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p48.8"></span>ργανον</span> must not be confused with
its heretical application to our Lord’s Divine Nature, vid. Basil *de
Sp. S.* n. 19 fin. of which *de Syn.* 27 (3). It may be added that <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p48.10"></span>φανέρωσις</span> is
a Nestorian as well as Eutychian idea; Facund. *Tr. Cap.* ix. 2, 3. and
the Syrian use of *parsopa* Asseman. *B. O.* t. 4. p. 219. Thus both
parties really denied the Atonement. vid. *supr. Or.* i. 60, n. 5; ii.
8, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3022"></span>[410:3023](2040374.htm#fr_3022) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p48.12"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p49"></span> *Orat.* iv. 6. and *fragm. ex
Euthym.* p. 1275. ed. Ben. This interchange \[of language\] is called
theologically the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p49.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p49.3"></span>ντίδοσις</span> or communicatio <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p49.5"></span>ἰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p49.6"></span>διωμάτων</span>.
Nyssen. *in Apoll.* t. 2. pp. 697, 8. Leon. *Ep.* 28, 51. Ambros. *de
fid.* ii. 58. Nyssen. *de Beat.* p. 767. Cassian. *Incarn.* vi. 22. Aug.
*contr. Serm. Ar. c.* 8 init. Plain and easy as such statements seem,
they are of the utmost importance in the Nestorian and Eutychian
controversies.

<span id="fn_3023"></span>[410:3024](2040374.htm#fr_3023) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p49.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50.1"></span>θεοῦ ἦν σῶμα</span>. also *ad Adelph.* 3.
*ad Max.* 2. and so <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50.3"></span>τὴν πτωχεύσασαν φύσιν θεοῦ ὅλην
γενομένην</span>. *c.* *Apoll.* ii. 11. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50.5"></span>τὸ πάθος τοῦ λόγου</span>. ibid. 16, c.
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50.6"></span>σὰρξ τοῦ
λόγου</span>. *infr.* 34. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50.8"></span>σῶμα σοφίας</span> *infr.*53. also *Or.*
ii. 10, n. 7. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50.10"></span>πάθος Χριστοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ μου</span>.
Ignat. *Rom.* 6. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50.12"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50.13"></span>θεὸς πέπονθεν</span>. Melit. *ap. Anast.
Hodeg.* 12. Dei passiones. Tertull. *de Carn. Christ.* 5. Dei
interemptores. ibid. caro Deitatis. Leon. *Serm.* 65 fin. Deus mortuus
et sepultus. Vigil. *c. Eut.* ii. p. 502. vid. *supr. Or.* i. 45, n. 3.
Yet Athan. objects to the phrase, ‘God suffered in the flesh,’ i.e. as
used by the Apollinarians. vid. *contr.* *Apoll.* ii. 13 fin. \[Cf.
Harnack, *Dogmg.* ed. 1. vol. i. pp. 131, 628. notes.\]

<span id="fn_3024"></span>[411:3025](2040374.htm#fr_3024) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p50.15"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p51"></span> [Is. liii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3025"></span>[411:3026](2040374.htm#fr_3025) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p52.1"></span>οὐδὲν ἐβλάπτετο</span>. (<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p52.3"></span>[1 Pet. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p52.5"></span>.) Cf. *de Incarn.* 17, 54, 34; Euseb.
*de Laud. Const.* p. 536. and 538. also Dem. *Evang.* vii. p. 348.
Vigil. *contr. Eutych.* ii. p. 503. (B. P. ed. 1624.) Anast. *Hodeg.* c.
12. p. 220 (ed. 1606.) also p. 222. Vid also the beautiful passage in
Pseudo-Basil: *Hom. in Sanct. Christ. Gen.* (t. 2. p. 596. ed. Ben.)
also Rufin. *in Symb.* 12. Cyril. *Quod unus est Christus.* p. 776.
Damasc. *F. O.* iii. 6 fin. August. *Serm.* 7. p. 26 init. ed. 1842.
Suppl. 1.

<span id="fn_3026"></span>[411:3027](2040374.htm#fr_3026) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p52.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p53.1"></span>παθῶν</span>, vid. §33, n. 2.

<span id="fn_3027"></span>[411:3028](2040374.htm#fr_3027) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p53.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p54"></span> *Orat.* i. 51.

<span id="fn_3028"></span>[411:3029](2040374.htm#fr_3028) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p56"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p56.1"></span>[John
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p56.3"></span>. vid. *Incarn.* 18. Cf. Leo, *Serm.* 54,
2. ‘Suscepit nos in suam proprietatem illa natura, quæ nec nostris sua,
nec suis nostra consumeret, &c.’ *Serm.* 72, p. 286, vid. also *Ep.*
165, 6. *Serm.* 30, 5. Cyril *Cat.* iv. 9. Amphiloch. ap. Theod. *Eran.*
i. p. 66. also pp. 30, 87, 8. ed. 1614.

<span id="fn_3029"></span>[411:3030](2040374.htm#fr_3029) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p56.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p57"></span> Cf. Leo’s Tome (*Ep.* 28.) 4. ‘When
He touched the leper, it was the man that was seen; but something beyond
man, when He cleansed him, &c.’ Ambros. *Epist.* i. 46, n. 7. Hil.
*Trin.* x. 23 fin. vid. *infr.* 56 note, and S. Leo’s extracts in his
*Ep.* 165. Chrysol. *Serm.* 34 and 35. Paul. *ap. Conc. Eph.* (p. 1620.
Labbe.) These are instances of what is theologically called the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p57.2"></span>θεανδρικὴ
ἐνέργεια</span> \[a condemned formula\], i.e. the union of the energies
of both Natures in one act.

<span id="fn_3030"></span>[411:3031](2040374.htm#fr_3030) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p57.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p58.1"></span>μὴ φαντασί& 139· ἀλλ᾽ ἀληθῶς</span>. vid.
*Incarn.* 18, d. *ad Epict.* 7, c. The passage is quoted by S. Cyril.
*Apol. adv. Orient* p. 194.

<span id="fn_3031"></span>[411:3032](2040374.htm#fr_3031) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p58.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p59.1"></span>οὐκ ἄλλου, ἀλλὰ τοῦ κυρίου·</span> and so
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p59.3"></span>οὐκ ἑτέρου
τινός</span>, *Incarn.* 18; also *Orat.* i. 45. *supr.* p. 244. and
*Orat.* iv. 35. Cyril *Thes.* p. 197. and Anathem. 11. who defends the
phrase against the Orientals.

<span id="fn_3032"></span>[411:3033](2040374.htm#fr_3032) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p59.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p60"></span> Cf. Procl. *ad Armen.* p. 615, ed.
1630.

<span id="fn_3033"></span>[411:3034](2040374.htm#fr_3033) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p61.1"></span>κοινόν</span> opposed to <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p61.2"></span>ἴ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p61.3"></span>διον</span>. vid.
*infr.* §51, Cyril *Epp.* p. 23, e. communem, Ambros. *de Fid.* i. 94.

<span id="fn_3034"></span>[411:3035](2040374.htm#fr_3034) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p63"></span> *Or*. i. 5 n. 5, ii. 56 n. 5, 68, n.
1, *infr.* note 6.

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[411:3036](2040374.htm#fr_3035) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p64"></span> Vid. [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p64.1"></span>. And so S. Jerome, S. Leo, &c., as
mentioned in Corn. a Lap. *in loc.* S. Jerome implies a similar gift in
the case of Asella, *ad Marcell.* (*Ep.* xxiv. 2.) And so S. John
Baptist, Maldon. *in Luc.* i. 16. It is remarkable that no ancient
writer (unless indeed we except S. Austin), \[Patrol. Lat. xlvii.
1144?\] refers to the instance of S. Mary;—perhaps from the circumstance
of its not being mentioned in Scripture.

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[411:3037](2040374.htm#fr_3036) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p64.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p65.1"></span>θεοτόκου</span>. For instances of this
word vid. Alexandr. *Ep. ad Alex.* ap. Theodor. *H. E.* i. 4. p. 745.
(al. 20). Athan. (supra); Cyril. *Cat.* x. 19. Julian Imper. ap. Cyril
*c. Jul.* viii. p. 262. Amphiloch. *Orat.* 4. p. 41. (if Amphil.) ed.
1644. Nyssen. *Ep. ad Eustath.* p. 1093. Chrysost. apud. Suicer *Symb.*
p. 240. Greg. Naz. *Orat.* 29, 4 *Ep.* 181. p. 85. ed. Ben. Antiochus
and Ammon. ap. Cyril. *de Recta Fid.* pp. 49, 50. Pseudo-Dion. *contr.
Samos.* 5. Pseudo-Basil. *Hom.* t. 2. p. 600 ed. Ben.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[411:3038](2040374.htm#fr_3037) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p65.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p66"></span> [Rom. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[411:3039](2040374.htm#fr_3038) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p66.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p67.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p67.2"></span>διοποιουμένου</span>. vid. also
\[*Incar.* 8.\] *infr.* §38. *ad Epict.* 6, e. fragm. ex Euthym. (t. i.
p. 1275. ed. Ben.) Cyril. in *Joann.* p. 151, a. For <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p67.4"></span>ἴ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p67.5"></span>διον</span>, which
occurs so frequently here, vid. Cyril. *Anathem.* 11. And <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p67.7"></span>οἰκείωται</span>.
*contr.* *Apoll.* ii. 16, e. Cyril. *Schol. de Incarn.* p. 782, d.
Concil. *Eph.* pp. 1644, d. 1697, b. (Hard.) Damasc. *F. O.* iii. 3. p.
208. ed. Ven. Vid. Petav. *de Incarn.* iv. 15.

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[412:3040](2040374.htm#fr_3039) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p67.9"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p68"></span> Vid. *Or.* i. §§45, 46, ii. 65,
note. Vid. also iv. 33. *Incarn. c. Arian.* 12. *contr.* *Apoll.* i. 17.
ii. 6. ‘Since God the Word willed to annul the passions, whose end is
death, and His deathless nature was not capable of them…He is made flesh
of the Virgin, in the way He knoweth, &c.’ Procl. *ad Armen. p.* 616.
also Leo. *Serm.* 22. pp. 69. 71. *Serm.* 26. p. 88. Nyssen *contr.
Apoll.* t. 2 p. 696. Cyril. *Epp.* p. 138, 9. *in Joan.* p. 95. Chrysol.
*Serm.* 148.

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[412:3041](2040374.htm#fr_3040) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p68.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p69"></span> ii. 69, n. 3, &c.

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[412:3042](2040374.htm#fr_3041) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p70.1"></span>θεοτόκου</span>. *supr.* 14, n. 3. For
‘mater Dei’ vid. before S. Leo, Ambros. *de Virg.* ii. 7. Cassian.
*Incarn.* ii. 5. vii. 25. Vincent. Lir. *Commonit.* 21. It is obvious
that <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p70.3"></span>θεοτόκος</span>, though framed as a test
against Nestorians, was equally effective against Apollinarians \[?\]
and Eutychians, who denied that our Lord had taken human flesh at all,
as is observed by Facundus *Def. Trium. Cap.* i. 4. Cf. Cyril. *Epp.*
pp. 106, 7. Yet these sects, as the Arians, maintained the term. vid.
*supr. Or.* ii. 8, n. 5.

<span id="fn_3042"></span>[412:3043](2040374.htm#fr_3042) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p70.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p71"></span> ii. 59. n. 5.

<span id="fn_3043"></span>[412:3044](2040374.htm#fr_3043) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p72.1"></span>λογωθείσης τῆς σαρκὄς</span>. This strong
term is here applied to human nature generally; Damascene speaks of the
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p72.3"></span>λόγωσις</span>
of the flesh, but he means especially our Lord’s flesh. *F. O.* iv. 18.
p. 286. (Ed. Ven.) for the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p72.5"></span>θεοῦσθαι</span>, &c. vid. *supr.* ii. 70,
n. 1.

<span id="fn_3044"></span>[412:3045](2040374.htm#fr_3044) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p74"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3045"></span>[412:3046](2040374.htm#fr_3045) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p74.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p75"></span> Cf. Chrysost. *in Joann. Hom.* 67. 1
and 2. Cyril *de Rect. Fid.* p. 18. ‘As a man He doubts, as a man He is
troubled; it is not His Power (virtus) that is troubled, not His
Godhead, but His soul, &c.’ Ambros. *de Fid.* ii. n. 56. vid. a
beautiful passage in S. Basil’s *Hom.* iv. 5. in which he insists on our
Lord’s having wept to shew us how to weep neither too much nor too
little.

<span id="fn_3046"></span>[412:3047](2040374.htm#fr_3046) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p76"></span> [Mat. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3047"></span>[412:3048](2040374.htm#fr_3047) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p78"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p78.1"></span>βλαπτόμενος</span>, §31, n. 15.

<span id="fn_3048"></span>[412:3049](2040374.htm#fr_3048) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p78.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p79"></span> Cf. 33, n. 6.

<span id="fn_3049"></span>[412:3050](2040374.htm#fr_3049) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p79.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p80"></span> Vid. *Or.* ii. 56, n. 5. Cf. Cyril.
*de Rect. Fid.* p. 18.

<span id="fn_3050"></span>[412:3051](2040374.htm#fr_3050) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p80.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p81"></span> [1 John iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3051"></span>[413:3052](2040374.htm#fr_3051) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p83"></span> Cf. 31, n. 10.

<span id="fn_3052"></span>[413:3053](2040374.htm#fr_3052) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p83.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p84"></span> Vid. *infr.* 39–41. and 56, n. 7.
Cf. Procl. *ad Armen.* p. 615. Leo’s Tome (*Ep.* 28, 3) also Hil.
*Trin.* ix. 11 fin. ‘Vagit infans, sed in cœlo est, &c.’ ibid. x. 54.
Ambros. *de Fid.* ii. 77. Erat vermis in cruce sed dimittebat peccata.
Non habebat speciem, sed plenitudinem divinitatis, &c. Id. *Epist.* i.
46, n. 5. Theoph. *Ep. Pasch.* 6. ap. *Conc. Ephes.* p. 1404. Hard.

<span id="fn_3053"></span>[413:3054](2040374.htm#fr_3053) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p84.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p85"></span> Vid. [Is. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p85.1"></span>, LXX.; *Or.* ii. 80; *de Decr.* 10.

<span id="fn_3054"></span>[413:3055](2040374.htm#fr_3054) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p85.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p86"></span> Thus heresies are *partial* views of
the truth, starting from some truth which they exaggerate, and disowning
and protesting against other truth, which they fancy inconsistent with
it. vid. *supr. Or.* i. 26, n. 2.

<span id="fn_3055"></span>[413:3056](2040374.htm#fr_3055) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p87"></span> *De Syn.* 33; *Or.* i. 8.

<span id="fn_3056"></span>[413:3057](2040374.htm#fr_3056) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p87.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p88"></span> Cf. §28, n. 11.

<span id="fn_3057"></span>[413:3058](2040374.htm#fr_3057) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p88.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.iv-p89"></span> Cf. §30, n. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Texts Explained; Tenthly, Matthew xi. 27; John iii. 35, &c. These
texts intended to preclude the Sabellian notion of the Son; they fall in
with the Catholic doctrine concerning the Son; they are explained by
'so' in John v. 26. (Anticipation of the next chapter.) Again they are
used with reference to our Lord's human nature; for our sake, that we
might receive and not lose, as receiving in Him. And consistently with
other parts of Scripture, which shew that He had the power, &c., before
He received it. He was God and man, and His actions are often at once
divine and human.](2040375)
