[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040032)  [Next](2040034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p1"></span> §5. *Content of Revelation. God Three in
One and the Incarnation.*

<span id="v.iv.v-p2"></span>To dwell at length on the theology of
Athanasius under this head is unnecessary here, not because there is
little to say, but partly because what there is to say has been to some
extent anticipated above, §§2, 3, and ch. ii. pp. xxxii., xxxvi., partly
because the history of his life and work is the best exposition of what
he believed and taught. That his theology on these central subjects was
profoundly moulded by the Nicene formula is (to the present writer at
least) the primary fact (see ch. ii. §3 (1), and (2) b). This of course
presupposes that the Nicene faith found in him a character and mind
prepared to become its interpreter and embodiment; and that this was so
his pre-Nicene writings sufficiently shew.

<span id="v.iv.v-p3"></span>For instance, his progressive stress on the
Unity of the Godhead in Father, Son, and Spirit is but the following up
of the thought expressed *de Incarn.* 17. 1 <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p3.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p3.2"></span>ν μόνῳ τῷ ἑαυτοῦ Πατρὶ ὅλος ὢν κατὰ
πάντα</span>. It may be noted that he argues also from the idea of the
Trinity to the coessential Godhead of the Spirit, *ad Serap.* i. 28,
*sq.,* <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p3.3"></span>Τριὰς δέ ἐστιν
οὐχ ἕως ὀνομάτος μόνον</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p3.4"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p3.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p3.6"></span>λλὰ ἀληθεί& 139· καὶ ὑπάρξει τριάς</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p3.7"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p3.8"></span>εἰπάτωσαν πάλιν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p3.9"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p3.10"></span>τριάς ἐστιν ἢ δυάς</span>;
and that he meets the difficulty (see *infra,* p. 438, ten lines from
end, also Petav. *Trin.* VII. xiv.) of differentiating the relation of
the Spirit to the Father from the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p3.11"></span>γέννησις</span> of the Son by a confession of
ignorance and a censure upon those who assume that they can search out
the deep things of God (*ib.* 17–19). The principle might be applied to
this point which is laid down *de Decr.* 11, that ‘an act’ belonging to
the essence of God, cannot, by virtue of the simplicity of the Divine
Nature, be more than one: the ‘act’ therefore of divine <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p3.12"></span>γέννησις</span> (the nature
of which we do not know) cannot apply to the Spirit but only to the Son.
But I do not recollect any passage in which Athanasius draws this
conclusion from his own premises. The language of Athanasius on the
procession of the Spirit is unstudied. In *Exp. Fid.* 4, he appears to
adopt the ‘procession’ of the Spirit from the Father *through* the Son
(after Dionysius, see *Sent. Dion.* 17). In *Serap.* i. 2, 20, 32, iii.
1, he speaks of the Spirit as <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p3.13"></span>ἴ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p3.14"></span>διον τοῦ Λόγου</span>, just as the Word is
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p3.15"></span>ἴ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p3.16"></span>διος τοῦ Πατρός</span>. His
language on the subject, expressing the *idea* common to East and West
(under the cloud of logomachies which envelop the subject) might
possibly furnish the basis of an ‘eirenicon’ between the two separated
portions of Christendom. In explaining the ‘theophanies’ of the Old
Testament, Athanasius takes a position intermediate between that of the
Apologists, &c. (*supr.,* p. xxiii.) who referred them to the Word, and
that of Augustine who referred them to Angels only. According to
Athanasius the ‘Angel’ was and was not the Word: regarded as visible he
was an Angel simply, but the Voice was the Divine utterance through the
Word (see *Orat.* iii. 12, 14; *de Syn.* 27, Anath 15, note; also
*Serap.* i. 14).

<span id="v.iv.v-p4"></span>Lastly, it must again be insisted that in
his polemic against Arianism Athanasius is centrally soteriological. It
is unnecessary to collect passages in support of what will be fully
appreciated only after a thorough study of the controversial treatises.
The essence of his position is comprised in his paraphrase of St.
Peter’s address to the Jews, *Orat.* ii. 16, *sq.,* or in the argument,
*ib.* 67, *sqq.,* i. 43, and iii. 13. With regard to the Incarnation, it
may be admitted that Athanasius uses language which might have been
modified had he had later controversies in view. His common use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p4.1"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p4.2"></span>νθρωπος</span> for the
Manhood of Christ (see below, p. 83) might be alleged by the Nestorian,
his comparison of it to the vesture of the High Priest (*Orat.* i. 47,
ii. 8, see note there) by the Apollinarian or Monophysite partisan. But
at least his use of either class of expressions shews that he did not
hold the doctrine associated in later times with the other. Moreover,
while from first to last he is explicitly clear as to the seat of
personality in Christ, which is uniformly assigned to the Divine Logos
(p. 40, note 2 <span id="page_lxxviii">p. lxxviii</span> <span
id="v.iv.v-Page_lxxviii"></span>and reff.), the integrity of the manhood
of Christ is no less distinctly asserted (cf. *de Incarn.* 18. 1, 21.
7). He uses <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p4.3"></span>σῶμα</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p4.4"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p4.5"></span>νθρωπος</span> indifferently during the earlier
stages of the conflict, ignoring or failing to notice the peculiarity of
the Luciano-Arian Christology. But from 362 onward the full integrity of
the Saviour’s humanity, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p4.6"></span>σὰρξ</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p4.7"></span>ψυχὴ λογικὴ</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p4.8"></span>πνεῦμα</span>, is energetically asserted against
the theory of Apollinarius and those akin to it <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) (cf. *Letters* 59 and 60, and *c.
Apoll.*). Some corollaries of this doctrine must now be mentioned.

<span id="v.iv.v-p6"></span>The question of the *sinlessness* of Christ
is not discussed by Athanasius *ex professo* until the controversy with
Apollinarianism. In the earlier Arian controversy the question was in
reality involved, partly by the Arian theory of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p6.1"></span>πρεπτότης</span> of the
Word, partly by the correlated theory of <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p6.2"></span>προκοπή</span> (cf. *Orat.* ii. 6, *sqq.*), and
Athanasius instinctively falls back on the consideration that the
*Personality* of the Son, if Divine, is necessarily sinless. In *c.
Apoll.* i. 7, 17, ii. 10 the question is more thoroughly analysed. The
complete *psychological* identity of Christ’s human nature with our own
is maintained along with the absolute *moral* identity of His will
(<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p6.3"></span>θέλησις</span>, the
determination of will, not the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p6.4"></span>θελημα οὐσιῶδες</span> or volitional faculty)
with the Divine will.

<span id="v.iv.v-p7"></span>With regard to the *human knowledge* of
Christ, the texts [Mark 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032), [Luke
2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span id="v.iv.v-p7.1"></span>,
lie at the foundation of his discussion *Orat.* iii. 42–53. The Arians
appealed to these passages to support the contention that the *Word,* or
Son of God in His Divine nature, was ignorant of ‘the Day,’ and advanced
in knowledge. The whole argument of Athan. in reply is directed to
shewing that these passages apply not to the Word or Son in Himself, but
to the Son *Incarnate.* He knows as God, is ignorant as man. Omniscience
is the attribute of Godhead, ignorance is proper to man. The Incarnation
was not the sphere of advancement to the Word, but of humiliation and
condescension; but the Manhood advanced in wisdom *as it did in stature*
also, for advance belongs to man. That is the decisive and clear-cut
position of Athanasius on this subject (which the notes there vainly
seek to accommodate to the rash dogmatism of the schools). Athanasius
appeals to the utterances of Christ which imply knowledge transcending
human limitations in order to shew that such knowledge, or rather all
knowledge, was possessed *by the Word;* in other words such utterances
belong to the class of ‘divine’ not to that of ‘human’ phenomena in the
life of Christ. So far as His human nature was concerned, He assumed its
limitations of knowledge equally with all else that belongs to the
physical and mental endowments of man. Why then was not Divine
Omniscience exerted by Him at all times? This question is answered as
all questions must be which arise out of any limitation of the
Omnipotence of God in the Manhood of Christ. It was ‘for our profit, as
I at least think’ (*ib.* 48). The very idea of the Incarnation is that
of a *limiting* of the Divine under human conditions, the Divine being
manifested in Christ only so far as the Wisdom of God has judged it
necessary in order to carry out the purpose of His coming. In other
words, Athanasius regarded the ignorance of Christ as ‘economical’ only
in so far as the Incarnation is itself an <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p7.2"></span>οἰκονομία</span>, a measured revelation, at once
a veiling and a manifestation, of all that is in God. That the divine
Omniscience wielded in the man Christ Jesus an adequate instrument for
its own manifestation Athanasius firmly holds: the exact extent to which
such manifestation was carried, the reserve of miraculous power or
knowledge with which that Instrument was used, must be explained not by
reference to the human mind, will, or character of Christ, but to the
Divine Will and Wisdom which alone has both effected our redemption and
knows the secrets of its bringing about. With Athanasius, we may quote
St. Paul, <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p7.3"></span>τίς ἔγνω
νοῦν Κυρίου</span>.

<span id="v.iv.v-p8"></span>It may be observed before leaving this point
that Athanasius takes occasion (§43, *fin.,* cf. 45) to distinguish two
senses of the words ‘the Son,’ as referring on the one hand to the
eternal, on the other to the human existence of Christ. To the latter he
limits [Mark xiii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span
id="v.iv.v-p8.1"></span>: the point is of importance in view of his
relation to Marcellus (*supra,* p. xxxvi.).

<span id="v.iv.v-p9"></span>As a further corollary of the Incarnation we
may notice his frequent use (*Orat.* iii. 14, 29, 33, iv. 32, *c.
Apoll.* i. 4, 12, 21) of the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v-p9.1"></span>θεοτόκος</span> as an epithet or as a name for
the Virgin Mary. The translation ‘Mother of God’ is of course erroneous.
‘God-bearer’ (Gottes-bärerin), the literal equivalent, is scarcely
idiomatic English. The perpetual virginity of Mary is maintained
incidentally (*c. Apoll.* i. 4), but there is an entire absence in his
writings not only of worship of the Virgin, but of ‘Mariology,’ *i.e.,*
of the tendency to assign to her <span id="page_lxxix">p. lxxix</span>
<span id="v.iv.v-Page_lxxix"></span>a personal agency, or any peculiar
place, in the work of Redemption ([Gen. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.v-p9.2"></span>,
*Vulg.*). Further, the argument of *Orat.* i. 51 *fin.,* that the
sending of Christ in the flesh *for the first time* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v-p9.3"></span>λοιπόν</span>) liberated
human nature from sin, and enabled the requirement of God’s law to be
fulfilled in man (an argument strictly within the lines of [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v-p9.4"></span>),
would be absolutely wrecked by the doctrine of the freedom of Mary from
original sin (‘immaculate conception’). If that doctrine be held, sin
was ‘condemned in the flesh’ (*i.e.,* first deposed from its place in
human nature, see Gifford or Meyer-Weiss *in loc.*), not by the sending
of Christ, but by the congenital sinlessness of Mary. If the Arians had
only known of the latter doctrine, they would have had an easy reply to
that powerful passage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_95"></span>[lxxviii:96](2040033.htm#fr_95) <span
id="v.iv.v-p4.9"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v-p5"></span> The doctrine of Athanasius is, not formally
but none the less really, the doctrine of Chalcedon, which again stands
or falls together with that of Nicæa. Like the latter, it transcends the
power of human thought to do more than state it in terms which exclude
the (Nestorian and Monophysite) alternatives. The Man Jesus Christ is
held to have *lacked* nothing that constitutes personality in man; the
human personality which therefore belongs to it *ideally,* being *in
fact* merged in the Divine personality of the Son. The
*‘impersonality,’* as it is sometimes called, of Christ *quâ* man is
therefore better spoken of as His *Divine* Personality. Personality and
will are correlated but not identical ideas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Derivative Doctrines. Grace and the Means of Grace; The Christian
Life; The Last Things.](2040034)
