[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040020)  [Next](2040022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p1"></span> §8. *The Third Exile,* 356–362.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p2"></span>The third exile of Athanasius marks the
summit of his achievement. Its commencement is the triumph, its
conclusion the collapse of Arianism. It is true that after the death of
Constantius the battle went on with variations of fortune for twenty
years, mostly under the reign of an ardently Arian Emperor (364–378).
But by 362 the utter lack of inner coherence in the Arian ranks was
manifest to all; the issue of the fight might be postponed by
circumstances but could not be in doubt. The break-up of the Arian power
was due to its own lack of reality: as soon as it had a free hand, it
began to go to pieces. But the watchful eye of Athanasius followed each
step in the process from his hiding-place, and the event was greatly due
to his powerful personality and ready pen, knowing whom to overwhelm and
whom to conciliate, where to strike and where to spare. This period then
of forced abstention from affairs was the most stirring in spiritual and
literary activity in the whole life of Athanasius. It produced more than
half of the treatises which fill this volume, and more than half of his
entire extant works. With this we shall have to deal presently; but let
it be noted once for all how completely the amazing power wielded by the
wandering fugitive was based upon the devoted fidelity of Egypt to its
pastor. Towns and villages, deserts and monasteries, the very tombs were
scoured by the Imperial inquisitors in the search for Athanasius; but
all in vain; not once do we hear of any suspicion of betrayal. The work
of the golden decade was bearing its fruit.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p3"></span>(1.) On leaving the church of Theonas,
Athanasius appears to have made his escape from the city. If for once we
may hazard a conjecture, the numerous cells of the Nitrian desert
offered a not too distant but fairly inpenetrable refuge. He must at any
rate have selected a place where he could gain time to reflect on the
situation, and above all ensure that he should be kept well informed of
events from time to time. For in Athanasius we never see the
panic-stricken outlaw; he is always the general meditating his next
movement and full of the prospects of his cause. He made up his mind to
appeal to Constantius in person. He could not believe that an Emperor
would go back upon his solemn pledges, especially such a voluntary
assurance as he had received after the death of Constans. Accordingly he
drew up a carefully elaborated defence (*Ap. Const.* 1–26) dealing with
the four principal charges against him, and set off through the
Libyan <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) desert with the intention of
crossing to Italy and finding Constantius at Milan. But while he was on
his way, he encountered rumours confirming the reports of the wholesale
banishment not only of the recalcitrants of Milan, but of Liberius of
Rome and the great Hosius of Spain. Next came the news of the severe
measures against Egyptian bishops, and of the banishment of sixteen of
their number, coupled with the violence practised by the troops at
Alexandria on Easter Day (p. 248 *sq*.); however, his journey was
continued, until he received copies of letters from the Emperor, one
denouncing him to the Alexandrians and recommending a new bishop, one
George, as their future guide, the other summoning the princes of
Auxumis to send Frumentius (*supr.* p. xlviii.) to Egypt in order that
he might unlearn what he had been taught by ‘the most wicked Athanasius’
and receive instruction from the ‘venerable George.’ These letters,
which shew how completely the pursuers were off the scent (p. 249),
convinced Athanasius that a personal interview was out of the question.
He returned ‘into the desert,’ and at leisure completed his apology (pp.
249–253), with the view partly of possible future delivery, partly no
doubt of literary circulation. Before turning back, however, he appears
to have drawn up his letter to the bishops of Egypt and Libya, warning
them against the formula (see p. 222) which was being tendered for their
subscription, and encouraging them to endure persecution, which had
already begun at least in Libya (*Ep. Æg.*); the designation of George
(§7) was already known, but he had not arrived, nor had Secundus (19)
reappeared in Egypt, at any rate not in Libya (he was there in Lent,
357, p. 294). The letter to the bishops, then, must have been written
about Easter, 356; not long after, <span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>
<span id="v.ii.ix-Page_lii"></span>because it contains no details of the
persecution in Egypt; not before, for the persecution had already begun,
and Athanasius was already in Cyrenaica, whence he turned back not
earlier than April (to allow time for Constantius (1) to hear that
Athanasius was thought to have fled to Ethiopia, (2) to write to Egypt,
(3) for copies of the letter to overtake Athanasius on his way to Italy.
Constantius was at Milan Jan.–April).

<span id="v.ii.ix-p5"></span>Meanwhile in Alexandria disorders had
continued. The ‘duke’ appears to have been either unable for a time, or
to have thought it needless, to take possession of the churches; but we
hear of a violent dispersion of worshippers from the neighbourhood of
the cemetery on Easter Day (p. 249, cf. the Virgins *after Syrianus but
before Heraclius,* p. 288); while throughout Egypt subscription to an
Arianising formula was being enforced on the bishops under pain of
expulsion. After Easter, a change of governor took place, Maximus of
Nicæa (pp. 301 *sqq.,* 247) being succeeded by Cataphronius, who reached
Alexandria on the 10th of June (*Hist. Aceph.* iv.). He was accompanied
by a Count Heraclius, who brought a letter from Constantius threatening
the heathen with severe measures (pp. 288, 290), unless active
hostilities against the Athanasian party were begun (this letter was not
the one given p. 249; Ath. rightly remarks ‘it reflected great discredit
upon the writer’). Heraclius announced that by Imperial order the
Churches were to be given up to the Arians, and compelled all the
magistrates, including the functionaries of heathen temples, to sign an
undertaking to execute the Imperial incitements to persecution, and to
agree to receive as Bishop the Emperor’s nominee. These incredible
precautions shew the general esteem for Athanasius even outside the
Church, and the misgivings felt at Court as to the reception of the new
bishop. The Gentiles reluctantly agreed, and the next acts of violence
were carried out with their aid, ‘or rather with that of the more
abandoned among them’ (p. 291). On the fourth day from the arrival of
Cataphronius, that is in the early hours of Thursday, June 13, after a
service (which had began overnight, pp. 290, 256 *fin., Hist. Aceph.*
v.), just as all the congregation except a few women had left, the
church of Theonas was stormed and violences perpetrated which left far
behind anything that Syrianus had done. Women were murdered, the church
wrecked and polluted with the very worst orgies of heathenism, houses
and even tombs were ransacked throughout the city and suburbs on
pretence of ‘seeking for Athanasius.’ Sebastian the Manichee, who about
this time succeeded to the military command of Syrianus, appears to have
carried on these outrages with the utmost zest (yet see *Hist. Ar*. 60).
Many more bishops were driven into exile (compare the twenty-six of p.
297 with the ‘sixteen’ p. 248, but some may belong to a still later
period, see p. 257), and the Arian bishops and clergy installed,
including the bitterly vindictive Secundus in Libya (p. 257). The formal
transfer of churches at Alexandria took place on Saturday, June 15
(*infr.,* p. 290, note 9): the anniversary of Eutychius (p. 292) was
kept at Alexandria on July 11, (*Martyrol. Vetust.* Ed. 1668). After a
further delay of ‘eight months and eleven days’ George, the new bishop,
made his appearance (Feb. 24, 357 <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) ,
third Friday in Lent). His previous career <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md) and character <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) were strange qualifications for the
second bishopric in Christendom. He had been a pork-contractor at
Constantinople, and according to his many enemies a fraudulent one; he
had amassed considerable wealth, and was a zealous Arian. His violent
temper perhaps recommended him as a man likely to crush the opposition
that was expected. The history of his episcopate may be briefly disposed
of here. He entered upon his See in Lent, 357, with an armed force. At
Easter he renewed the violent persecution of bishops, clergy, virgins,
and lay people. In the week <span id="page_liii">p. liii</span> <span
id="v.ii.ix-Page_liii"></span>after Pentecost he let loose the cruel
commandant Sebastian against a number of persons who were worshipping at
the cemetery instead of communicating with himself; many were killed,
and many more banished. The expulsion of bishops (‘over thirty,’ p. 257,
cf. other reff. above) was continued (the various data of Ath. are not
easy to reconcile, the first 16 of p. 257 may be the ‘sixteen’ of p.
248, before Easter, 356: we miss the name of Serapion in all the lists!)
Theodore, Bishop of Oxyrynchus, the largest town of middle Egypt, upon
submitting to George, was compelled by him to submit to reordination.
The people refused to have anything more to do with him, and did without
a bishop for a long time, until they obtained a pastor in one
Heraclides, who is said to have become a ‘Luciferian.’ (Cf. *Lib.
Prec.,* and Le Quien ii. p. 578.) George carried on his tyranny eighteen
months, till Aug. 29, 358. His fierce insults against Pagan worship were
accompanied by the meanest and most oppressive rapacity. At last the
populace, exasperated by his ‘adder’s bites’ (Ammian.), attacked him,
and he was rescued with difficulty. On Oct. 2 he left the town, and the
party of Athanasius expelled his followers from the churches on Oct. 11,
but on Dec. 24, Sebastian came in from the country and restored the
churches to the people of George. On June 23, 359, ‘the notary Paul’
(‘in complicandis calumniarum nexibus artifex dirus, unde ei *Catenæ*
inditum est cognomentum,’ Ammian. Marc. XIV. v., XV. iii.), the Jeffreys
of the day, held a commission of blood, and ‘vindictively punished
many <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md) .’ George was at this time
busy with the councils of Seleucia and Constantinople (he was not
actually present at the latter, Thdt. *H. E.* ii. 28), and was in no
hurry to return. At last, just after the death of Constantius, he
ventured back, Nov. 26, 361, but on the proclamation of Julian on Nov.
30 was seized by the populace and thrown into chains; on Dec. 24,
‘impatient of the tedious forms of judicial proceedings,’ the people
dragged him from prison and lynched him with the utmost ignominy.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p10"></span>Athanasius meanwhile eluded all search.
During part of the year 357–358 he was in concealment in Alexandria
itself, and he was supposed to be there two years later (*Fest. Ind.*
xxx., xxxii.; the latter gives some colour to the tale of Palladius—cf.
Soz. v. 6—of his having during part of this period remained concealed in
the house of a Virgin of the church), but the greater part of his time
was undoubtedly spent in the numberless cells of Upper and Lower Egypt,
where he was secure of close concealment, and of loyal and efficient
messengers to warn him of danger, keep him informed of events, and carry
his letters and writings far and wide. The tale of Rufinus (i. 18) that
he lay hid all the six years in a dry cistern is probably a confused
version of this general fact. The tombs of kings and private persons
were at this time the common abode of monks (cf. p. 564, note 1; also
Socr. iv. 13, a similar mistake). Probably we must place the composition
of the *Life of Antony,* the great classic of Monasticism, at some date
during this exile, although the question is surrounded with difficulties
(see pp. 188 *sqq.*). The importance of the period, however, lies in the
march of events outside Egypt. (For a brilliant sketch of the desert
life of Athanasius see D.C.B. i. 194 *sq.*; also Bright, *Hist.
Treatises,* p. lxxiv. *sq.*)

<span id="v.ii.ix-p11"></span>(2.) With the accession of Constantius to
sole power, the anti-Nicene reaction at last had a free hand throughout
the Empire. Of what elements did it now consist? The original reaction
was conservative in its numerical strength, Arian in its motive power.
The stream was derived from the two fountain heads of Paul of Samosata,
the ancestor of Arius, and of Origen the founder of the theology of the
Eastern Church generally and especially of that of Eusebius of Cæsarea.
Flowing from such heterogeneous sources, the two currents never
thoroughly mingled. Common action, dictated on the one hand by dread of
Sabellianism, manipulated on the other hand by wire-pullers in the
interest of Arianism, united the East till after the death of
Constantine in the campaign against the leaders of Nicæa. Then for the
last ten years of the life of Constans, Arianism, or rather the
Reaction, had its ‘stationary period’ (Newman). The chaos of creeds at
the Council of Antioch (*supr.* p. xliv.) shewed the presence of
discordant aims; but opposition to Western interference, and the urgent
panic of Photinus and his master, kept them together: the lead was still
taken by the Arianisers, as is shewn by the continued prominence of the
fourth Antiochene Creed at Philippopolis (343), Antioch (344), and
Sirmium (351). But the second or Lucianic Creed was on record as the
protest of the conservative majority, and was not forgotten. Yet until
after 351, when Photinus was finally got rid of and Constantius master
of the world, the reaction was still embodied in a fairly compact and
united party. But now the latent heterogeneity of the reaction began to
make itself felt. Differing in source and motive, the two main currents
made in different directions. The influence of Aristotle and Paul and
Lucian set steadily toward a harder and more consistent Arianism, that
of Plato and the Origenists toward an understanding with the Nicenes.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p12"></span>(*a.*) The original Arians, now gradually
dying out, were all tainted with compromise and political subserviency.
Arius, Asterius, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and the rest (Secundus and
Theonas are the solitary exception), were all at one time or another,
and in different degrees, willing to make concessions and veil their
more objectionable tenets under some evasive confession. But in many
cases temporary humiliation produced its natural result in subsequent
uncompromising defiance. This is exemplified in the history of <span
class="c10"><span id="v.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>Valens</span> and <span
id="page_liv">p. liv</span> <span id="v.ii.ix-Page_liv"></span>Ursacius
after 351. Valens, especially, figures as the head of a new party of
‘<span class="c10"><span id="v.ii.ix-p12.2"></span>Anomœans</span>’ or
ultra-Arians. The rise of this party is associated with the name of
<span class="c10"><span id="v.ii.ix-p12.3"></span>Aetius</span>, its
after-history with that of his pupil Eunomius, bishop of Cyzicus from
361. It was marked by a genuine scorn for the compromises of earlier
Arianism, from which it differed in nothing except its more resolute
sincerity. The career of Aetius (D.C.B. i. 50, *sqq.*) was that of a
struggling, self-made, self-confident man. A pupil of the Lucianists
(*supr.,* p. xxviii.), he shrunk from none of the irreverent conclusions
of Arianism. His loud voice and clear-cut logic lost none of their
effect by fear of offending the religious sensibilities of others. In
350 Leontius ordained him deacon, with a licence to preach, at Antioch;
but Flavian and Diodorus (see above, §7) raised such a storm that the
cautious bishop felt obliged to suspend him. On the appointment of
George he was invited to Alexandria, whither Eunomius was attracted by
his fame as a teacher. His influence gradually spread, and he found many
kindred spirits among the bishops. The survivors of the original Arians
were with him at heart, as also were men like Eudoxius, bishop of
Germanicia (of Antioch, 358, of CP. 360), who fell as far behind Aetius
in sincerity as he surpassed him in profanity; the Anomœans (<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p12.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p12.5"></span>νόμοιος</span>) were
numerically strong, and morally even more so; they were the wedge which
eventually broke up the reactionary mass, rousing the sincere horror of
the Conservatives, commanding the sometimes dissembled but always real
sympathy of the true Arians, and seriously embarrassing the political
Arians, whose one aim was to keep their party together by disguising
differences of principle under some convenient phrase.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p13"></span>(*b.*) This latter party were headed by
Acacius in the East and in the West by <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>Valens</span>, who while in reality, as stated
above, making play for the Anomœan cause, was diplomatist enough to use
the influential ‘party of no principle’ as his instrument for the
purpose. Valens during the whole period of the sole reign of Constantius
(and in fact until his own death about 375) was the heart and soul of
the new and last phase of Arianism, namely of *the formal attempt to
impose an Arian creed upon the Church* in lieu of that of Nicæa. But
this could only be done by skilful use of less extreme men, and in the
trickery and statecraft necessary for such a purpose Valens was *facile
princeps.* His main supporter in the East was <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p13.2"></span>Acacius</span>, who had succeeded to the
bishoprick, the library, and the doctrinal position of his preceptor
Eusebius of Cæsarea. The latter, as we saw (p. xxvii. note 5),
represented ‘the extreme left’ of the conservative reaction, meeting the
right wing, or rather the extreme concessions, of pure Arianism as
represented by its official advocate Asterius, whom in fact Eusebius had
defended against the onslaught of Marcellus. In so far then as the
stream of pure Arianism could be mingled with the waters of
Conservatism, Acacius was the channel in which they joined. Eusebius had
not been an Arian, neither was Acacius; Eusebius had theological
convictions, but lacked clearness of perception, Acacius was a
clear-headed man but without convictions; Eusebius was substantially
conservative in his theology, but tainted with political Arianism;
Acacius was a political Arian first, and anything you please afterwards.
On the whole, his sympathies seem to have been conservative, but he
manifests a rooted dislike of principle of any kind. He appoints
orthodox bishops (Philost. v. 1), but quarrels with them as soon as he
encounters their true mettle, Cyril in 358, Meletius in 361; he
befriends Arians, but betrays the too honest Aetius in 360. His
ecclesiastical career begins with the council of four creeds in 341; in
controversy with Marcellus he developed the concessions of Asterius till
he almost reached the Nicene standard; he hailed effusively the Anomœan
Creed of Valens in 358 (Soz. iv. 12), and in 359–60 forced that of Nike
in its amended form upon the Eastern Church far and wide. He is next
heard of, signing the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p13.3"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p13.4"></span>Ο</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p13.5"></span>μοούσιον</span>, in 363, and lastly (Socr. iv.
2) under Valens is named again along with Eudoxius. The real opinions of
a man with such a record are naturally not easy to determine, but we may
be sure that he was in thorough sympathy with the policy of Constantius,
namely the union of all parties in the Church on the basis of
subserviency to the State.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p14"></span>The difficulty was to find a formula. The
test of Nicæa could not be superseded without putting something in its
place, which should *in*clude Arianism as effectually as the other had
excluded it. Such a test was eventually (after 357) found in the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p14.2"></span>μοιος</span> <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) . It was a word with a good Catholic
history. We find it used freely by Athanasius in his earlier anti-Arian
writings, and it was thoroughly current in conservative theology, as for
example in Cyril’s Catecheses (he has <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.12"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.13"></span>μοιον κατὰ τας γραφάς</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p15.14"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p15.15"></span>μοιον κατὰ πάντα</span>).
It would therefore permit even the full Nicene belief. On the other hand
many of the more earnest conservative theologians had begun to reflect
on what was involved in the ‘likeness’ of the Son to the Father, and had
formulated the conviction that this likeness was *essential,* not, as
the Arians held, acquired. This was in fact a fair inference from the
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p15.16"></span>οὐσίας ἀπαράλλακτον
εἰκόνα</span> of the Dedication Creed. This question made an agreement
between men like Valens and Basil difficult, but it could be evaded by
keeping to the simple <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.17"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.18"></span>μοιον</span>, and deprecating non-scriptural
precision. Lastly, there were the Anomœans to be considered. Now the
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p15.19"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p15.20"></span>μοιον</span> had the
specious appearance of flatly contradicting this repellent avowal of the
extremists; but to Valens and his friends it had the substantial
recommendation of admitting it in reality. ‘Likeness’ is a relative
term. If two things are only ‘like’ they are *ipso facto* to some extent
unlike; the two words are not contradictories but correlatives, and if
the likeness is not essential, the unlikeness is. So far then as the
‘Homœan’ party rested on any doctrinal principle at all, that principle
was the principle of Arius; and that is how Valens forwarded the Anomœan
cause by putting himself at the head of the Homœans. His plan of
campaign had steadily matured. The deposition of Photinus in 351 had
sounded the note of war, Arles and Milan (353–5) and the expulsion of
Athanasius (356) had cleared the field of opponents, George was now in
possession at Alexandria, and in the summer of 357 the triumph of
Arianism was proclaimed. A small council of bishops met at Sirmium and
published a Latin Creed, insisting strongly (1) on the unique Godhead of
the Father, (2) on the subjection of the Son ‘along with all things
subjected to Him by the Father,’ and (3) strictly proscribing the terms
<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.21"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.22"></span>,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.23"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.24"></span>μοιούσιον</span>, and all discussion of <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p15.25"></span>οὐσία</span>, as
unscriptural and inscrutable.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p16"></span>This manifesto was none the less Anomœan
for not explicitly avowing the obnoxious phrase. It *forbids* the
definition of the ‘likeness’ as essential, and does not even condescend
to use the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p16.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p16.2"></span>μοιον</span> at all. The Nicene definition is
for the first time overtly and bluntly denounced, and the
‘conservatives’ are commanded to hold their peace. The ‘Sirmium
blasphemy’ was indeed a trumpet-blast of defiance. The echo came back
from the Homœans assembled at Antioch, whence Eudoxius the new bishop,
Acacius, and their friends addressed the <span id="page_lv">p. lv</span>
<span id="v.ii.ix-Page_lv"></span>Pannonians with a letter of thanks.
But the blast heralded the collapse of the Arian cause; the Reaction
‘fell to pieces the moment Arianism ventured to have a policy of its
own’ (Gwatkin, p. 158, the whole account should be consulted). Not only
did orthodox Gaul, under Phœbadius of Agen, the most stalwart of the
lesser men whom Milan had spared, meet in synod and condemn the
blasphemy, but the conservative East was up in arms against Arianism,
for the first time with thorough spontaneity. Times were changed indeed;
the East was at war with the West, but on the side of orthodoxy against
Arianism.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p17"></span>(c) We must now take account of the party
headed by <span class="c10"><span id="v.ii.ix-p17.1"></span>Basil</span>
of <span class="c10"><span id="v.ii.ix-p17.2"></span>Ancyra</span> and
usually (since Epiphanius), but with some injustice, designated as <span
class="c10"><span id="v.ii.ix-p17.3"></span>Semi-Arians</span>. Their
theological ancestry and antecedents have been already sketched (pp.
xxvii., xxxv.); they are the representatives of that conservatism,
moulded by the neo-Asiatic, or modified Origenist tradition, which
warmly condemned Arianism at Nicæa, but acquiesced with only half a
heart in the test by which the Council resolved to exclude it. They
furnished the numerical strength, the material basis so to call it, of
the anti-Nicene reaction; but the reaction on their part had not been
Arian in principle, but in part anti-Sabellian, in part the empirical
conservatism of men whose own principles are vague and ill-assorted, and
who fail to follow the keener sight which distinguishes the higher
conservatism from the lower. They lent themselves to the purposes of the
Eusebians (a name which ought to be dropped after 342) on purely
negative grounds and in view of questions of personal rights and
accusations. A positive doctrinal formula they did not possess. But in
the course of years reflexion did its work. A younger generation grew up
who had not been taught to respect Nicæa, nor yet had imbibed Arian
principles. Cyril at Jerusalem, Meletius at Antioch, are specimens of a
large class. The Dedication Creed at Antioch represents an early stage
in the growth of this body of conviction, conviction not absolutely
uniform everywhere, as the result shews, but still with a distinct
tendency to settle down to a formal position with regard to the great
question of the age. There was nothing in the Nicene *doctrine* that men
like this did not hold: but the *word* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p17.4"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> opened the door to the
dreaded Sabellian error: was not the history of Marcellus and Photinus a
significant comment upon it? But if <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p17.5"></span>οὐσία</span> meant not individuality, but
*specific* identity (*supr.,* p. xxxi. *sq.*) even this term might be
innocently admitted. But to make that meaning plain, what was more
effective than the insertion of an *iota?* <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p17.6"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p17.7"></span>Ομοιούσιος</span>, then, was the satisfactory
test which would banish Arius and Marcellus alike. Who first used the
word for the purpose, we do not know, but its first occurrence is its
prohibition in the ‘blasphemy’ of Valens in 357. The leader of the
‘semi-Arians’ in 357 was Basil of Ancyra, a man of deep learning and
high character. George of Laodicea, an original Arian, was in active but
short-lived <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) alliance with the
party, other prominent members of it were Eustathius, Bishop of Sebaste
(Sivas), Eleusius of Cyzicus, Macedonius of Constantinople, Eusebius of
Emesa, Cyril of Jerusalem, and Mark of Arethusa, a high-minded but
violent man, who represents the ‘left’ wing of the party as Cyril and
Basil represent the ‘right.’

<span id="v.ii.ix-p19"></span>Now the ‘trumpet-blast’ of Valens gave
birth to the ‘Semi-Arians’ as a formal party. An attempt was made to
reunite the reaction on a Homœan basis in 359, but the events of that
year made the breach more open than ever. The tendency towards the
Nicene position which received its impulse in 357 continued unchecked
until the Nicene cause triumphed in Asia in the hands of the
‘conservatives’ of the next generation.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p20"></span>Immediately after the Acacian Synod at
Antioch early in 358, George of Laodicea, who had reasons of his own for
indignation against Eudoxius, wrote off in hot haste to warn Basil of
the fearful encouragement that was being given to the doctrines of
Aetius in that city. Basil, who was in communication (through Hilary)
with Phœbadius and his colleagues, had invited twelve neighbouring
bishops to the dedication of a church in Ancyra at this time, and took
the opportunity of drawing up a synodical letter insisting on the
Essential Likeness of the Son to the Father (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p20.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p20.2"></span>μοιον κατ᾽ οὐσίαν</span>), and eighteen
anathemas directed against Marcellus and the Anomœans. (The censure of
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p20.3"></span>ὁμοούσιον ἢ
ταὐτοούσιον</span> is against the Marcellian sense of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p20.4"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span>). Basil,
Eustathius, and Eleusius then proceeded to the Court at Sirmium and were
successful in gaining the ear of the Emperor, who at this time had a
high regard for Basil, and apparently obtained the ratification by a
council, at which Valens, &c., were present, of a composite formula of
their own (Newman’s ‘semi-Arian digest of three Confessions’) which was
also signed by Liberius, who was thereupon sent back to Rome. (Soz. iv.
15 is our only authority here, and his account of the formula is not
very clear: he seems to mean that two, not three, confessions were
combined. (Cf. p. 449, note 4.) On the whole, it is most probable that
the ‘fourth’ Antiochene formula in its Sirmian recension of 351 is
intended, perhaps with the addition of twelve of the Ancyrene anathemas.
(The question of the signatures of Liberius need not detain us.) The
party of Valens were involved in sudden and unlooked-for discomfiture.
Basil even succeeded in obtaining a decree of banishment against
Eudoxius, Aetius, and ‘seventy’ others (Philost. iv. 8). But an Arian
deputation from Syria procured their recall, and all parties stood at
bay in mutual bitterness.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p21"></span>Now was the opportunity of Valens. He saw
the capabilities of the Homœan compromise, as yet embodied in no creed,
and resolved to try it: and his experiment was not unsuccessful. All
parties alike seem to have agreed <span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span>
<span id="v.ii.ix-Page_lvi"></span>upon the necessity for a council of
the whole Church (on the origin of the proposal, and for other details,
see p. 448). But Valens was determined what the result of the council
must be. Accordingly he prevailed on the Emperor to divide it, the
Western Synod to meet at Ariminum, the Eastern at ‘Rocky Seleucia,’ a
mountain fortress in Cilicia where there happened to be plenty of
troops. The management of the latter was entrusted to Acacius; at Rimini
Valens would be present in person. In event of the two synods differing,
a delegation of ten bishops from each was to meet at Court and settle
the matter. The Creed to be adopted had also to be arranged beforehand,
and for this purpose, to his great discredit, Basil of Ancyra entered
into a conference (along with Mark of Arethusa and certain colleagues)
with Valens, George of Alexandria, and others of like mind. The result
was the ‘Dated Creed’ (May 22, 359) drawn by Mark, prohibiting the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p21.1"></span>οὐσία</span> (in a
gentler tone than that of the creed of Valens in 357), but containing
the definition <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p21.2"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p21.3"></span>μοιον κατὰ πάντα</span> (‘as also the
Scriptures teach,’ see above, on Cyril, p. xlix.), words which Valens
and Ursacius sought to suppress. But Constantius insisted on their
retention, and Basil emphasised his subscription by a strongly-worded
addition. Moreover in conjunction with George of Laodicea he drew up a
memorandum (Epiph. 72, 12–22) vindicating the term <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p21.4"></span>οὐσία</span> as implied in
Scripture, insisting on the absolute essential likeness of the Son to
the Father, except in respect of the Incarnation, and repudiating the
idea that <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p21.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p21.6"></span>γεννησία</span> is the essential notion of
Godhead. Such a protest was highly significant as an approach to the
Nicene position, but Basil must have felt its inefficiency for the
purpose in hand. Had the creed been anything but a surrender of
principle on his part, no explanatory memoranda would have been needed.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p22"></span>After the *fiasco* of the Dated Creed, the
issue of the Councils was not doubtful. The details may be reserved for
another place (pp. 448, 453 *sqq.*), but the general result is
noteworthy. At both Councils the court party were in a minority, and in
both alike they eventually had their way. (See Bright, *Hist. Tr.*
lxxxiv.–xc., and Gwatkin, 170–180.) On the whole the Seleucian synod
came out of the affair more honourably than the other, as their eventual
surrender was confined to their delegates. Both Councils began bravely.
The majorities deposed their opponents and affirmed their own faith, the
Westerns that of Nicæa, the Easterns that of the Dedication. From both
Councils deputations from each rival section went to the Emperor, who
was now at Constantinople. The deputies from the majority at Ariminum,
where the meeting had begun fully two months before the other, were not
received, but detained first at Hadrianople, then at Niké in Thrace
(chosen, says Socr. ii. 37, to impose on the world by the name), where
they were induced to sign a recension of the Dated Creed (the Creed
itself had been revoked and recast without the date and perhaps without
the <span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p22.1"></span>κατὰ
πάντα</span> before the preliminary meeting at Sirmium broke up, p. 466)
of a more distinctly Homœan character. Armed with this document Valens
brought them back to the Council, and ‘by threats and cajolery’ obtained
the signatures of nearly all the bishops. Yet the stalwart Phœbadius,
Claudius of Picenum, the venerable African Muzonius, father of the
Council, and a few others, were undaunted. But Valens, by adroit
dissimulation and by guiding into a manageable shape the successive
anathematisms by which his orthodoxy was tested, managed to deceive
these simple-minded Westerns, and with applause and exultation, ‘plausu
quodam et tripudio’ (Jer.), amidst which ‘Valens was lauded to the
skies’ (!), the bishops were released from their wearisome detention and
suspense. But Valens ‘cum recessisset tunc gloriabatur’ ([Prov. xx.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#014)<span id="v.ii.ix-p22.2"></span>.md).
The Western bishops realised too late what they had done, ‘Ingemuit
totus orbis, et se Arianum esse miratus est.’ Valens hurried with the
creed and the anathemas of Phœbadius to Constantinople, where he found
the Seleucian deputies in hot discussion at court. The Eastern bishops
at Seleucia had held to the ‘Lucianic’ creed, and contemptuously set
aside not only the Acacian alternative (p. 466), but the whole
compromise of Basil and Mark at the Sirmian conference of the preceding
May. The ‘Conservatives’ and Acacians were at open war. But the change
of the seat of war to the court gave the latter the advantage, and
Valens and Acacius were determined to secure their position at any cost.
The first step was to compel the signature of the ‘semi-Arian’ deputies
to the creed of Ariminum. This was facilitated by the renewal on the
part of Acacius and Valens of their repudiation, already announced at
Seleucia (p. 466), of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p22.3"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p22.4"></span>Ανόμοιον</span>, (of course with the mental
reservation that the repudiation referred only to will). Even so,
tedious discussions <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) , and the
threats of Constantius, with whom Basil had now lost all his influence
(Thdt. ii. 27), were needed to bring about the required compliance late
at night on New Year’s Eve, 359–360 (Soz. iv. 23). In January, at the
dedication of the Great Church of Constantine, the second step was
taken. The revised creed of Niké was reissued without the anathemas of
Ariminum. Aetius was offered by his friend Eudoxius as a sacrifice to
the Emperor’s scruples (see the account of the previous debates in Thdt.
*ubi supra*), much as Arius had been sacrificed by his fellow-Lucianists
at Nicæa (§2 *supra:* nine bishops protested, but were allowed six
months to reconsider their objection; the six months lasted two years,
and then a reconciliation with Aetius took place for a time, Philost.
vii. 6). Next a clean sweep was made of the leading semi-Arians on
miscellaneous charges (Soz. iv. 24, *sq.*), and Eudoxius was installed
as bishop of the New Rome in the place of Macedonius. The sacrifice of
Aetius gave the Homœans a free hand against their opponents, and was
compensated by the appointment of numerous Anomœans to vacant sees. In
particular Eunomius replaced Eleusius at Cyzicus. In the eastern half of
the Empire Homœanism was supreme, and remained so politically for nearly
twenty years. But not in the West. Before the Council of Constantinople
met, the power of the West had passed away from Constantius. Gaul had
acknowledged Julian as Augustus, and from Gaul came the voice of
defiance for the Homœan leaders and sympathy for their deposed opponents
(Hil. *Frag.* xi.). And even in the East, throughout their twenty years
the Homœans retained their hold upon the Church by a dead hand. ‘The
moral strength of Christendom lay elsewhere;’ on the one hand the
followers of Eunomius were breaking loose from Eudoxius and forming a
definitely Arian sect, those of Macedonius crystallising their cruder
conservatism into the illogical creed of the ‘Pneumatomachi;’ on the
other hand the second generation of the ‘semi-Arians’ were, under the
influence of Athanasius, working their way to the Greek Catholicism of
the future, the Catholicism of the neo-Nicene school, of Basil and the
two Gregories.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p24"></span>The lack of inner cohesion in the Homœan
ranks was exemplified at the start in the election of a new bishop for
Antioch. Eudoxius had vacated the see for that of New Rome; Anianus, the
nominee of the Homœusian <span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span> <span
id="v.ii.ix-Page_lvii"></span>majority of Seleucia, was out of the
question; accordingly at a Council in 361 the Acacians fixed upon
Meletius, who had in the previous year accepted from the Homœans of CP.
the See of Sebaste in the room of the exiled Eustathius. The new Bishop
was requested by the Emperor to preach on the test passage [Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022.md)<span id="v.ii.ix-p24.1"></span>.
This he did to a vast and eagerly expectant congregation. To the delight
of the majority (headed by Diodorus and Flavian), although he avoided
the <span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p24.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p24.3"></span>μοούσιον</span>, he spoke
with no uncertain sound on the essential likeness of the Son to the
Father. Formally ‘Nicene,’ indeed, the sermon was not (text in Epiph.
*Hær.* lxxiii. 29–33, see Hort, p. 96, note 1), but the dismay of the
Homœan bishops equalled the joy of the Catholic laity. Meletius was
‘deposed’ in favour of the old Arian Euzoius (*infr.,* p. 70), and after
his return under Jovian gave in his formal adhesion to the Nicene test.

<span id="v.ii.ix-p25"></span>(3.) The history of Athanasius during this
period is the history of his writings. Hidden from all but devotedly
loyal eyes, whether in the cells of Nitria and the Thebaid, or lost in
the populous solitude of his own city, he followed with a keen and
comprehensive glance the march of events outside. Two men in this age
had skill to lay the physician’s finger upon the pulse of religious
conviction; Hilary, the Western who had learned to understand and
sympathise with the East, Athanasius, the Oriental representative of the
theological instincts of the West. First of all came the writings of
which we have spoken, the circular to the bishops and the Apology to
Constantius; then the dignified Apology for his flight, written not long
before the expulsion of George late in 358, when he had begun to realise
the merciless enmity and profound duplicity of the Emperor. We find him
not long after this in correspondence with the exiled confessor, Lucifer
of Calaris (pp. 561 *sq.,* 481 *sqq.*), and warning the Egyptian monks
against compromising relations with Arian visitors (*Letter* 53, a
document of high interest), narrating to the trusted Serapion the facts
as to the death of Arius, and sending to the monks a concise refutation
of Arian doctrine (*Letters* 52, 54). With the latter is associated a
reissue of the Apology of 351, and, as a continuation of it, the
solitary monument of a less noble spirit which Athanasius has left us,
the one work which we would gladly believe to have come from any other
pen <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) . But this supposition is
untenable, and in the ferocious pamphlet against Constantius known as
the *Arian History* we are reminded that noble as he was, our saint yet
lived in an age of fierce passions and reckless personal violence. The
*Arian History* has its noble features—no work of Athanasius could lack
them—but it reveals not the man himself but his generation; his
exasperation, and the meanness of his persecutors. (For details on all
these tracts see the Introductions and notes to them.) None of the above
books directly relate to the doctrinal developments sketched above. But
these developments called forth the three greatest works of his exile,
and indeed of his whole career. *Firstly,* the four <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p26.2"></span>Λόγοι</span> or *Tracts
against Arianism,* his most famous dogmatic work. Of these an account
will be given in the proper place, but it may be noticed here that they
are evidently written with a conciliatory as well as a controversial
purpose, and in view of the position between 357 and 359. *Next,* the
four dogmatic letters *to Serapion,* the second of which reproduces the
substance of his position against the Arians, while the other three are
devoted to a question overlooked in the earlier stages of the
controversy, the Coessentiality of the Holy Spirit. This work may
possibly have come after the *third,* and in some ways the most
striking, of the series, the *de Synodis* written about the end of 359,
and intended as a formal offer of peace to the Homœusian party.
Following as it did closely upon the conciliatory work of Hilary, who
was present at Seleucia on the side of the majority, this magnanimous
Eirenicon produced an immediate effect, which we trace in the letters of
the younger Basil written in the same or following year; but the full
effect and justification of the book is found in the influence exerted
by Athanasius upon the new orthodoxy which eventually restored the ‘ten
provinces’ to ‘the knowledge of God’ (Hil. *de Syn.* 63. Further details
in Introd. to *de Syn., infra,* p. 448. It may be remarked that the
romantic idea of his secret presence at Seleucia, and even at Ariminum,
must be dismissed as a too rigid inference from an expression used by
him in that work: see note 1 there).

<span id="v.ii.ix-p27"></span>This brings us to the close of the
eventful period of the Third Exile, and of the long series of creeds
which registers the variations of Arianism during thirty years. We may
congratulate ourselves on ‘having come at last to the end of the
labyrinth of expositions’ (Socr. ii. 41), and within sight of the
emergence of conviction out of confusion, of order out of chaos. The
work of setting in order opens our next period. Of the exile there is
nothing more to tell except its close. Hurrying from Antioch on his way
from the Persian frontier to oppose the eastward march of Julian,
Constantius caught a fever, was baptised by Euzoius, and died at
Mopsucrenæ under Mount Taurus, on Nov. 3, 361. Julian at once avowed the
heathenism he had long cherished in secret, and by an edict, published
in Alexandria on Feb. 9, recalled from exile all <span
id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span> <span
id="v.ii.ix-Page_lviii"></span>bishops banished by Constantius. ‘And
twelve days after the posting of this edict Athanasius appeared at
Alexandria and entered the Church on the twenty-seventh day of the same
month, Mechir (Feb. 21). He remained in the Church until the
twenty-sixth of Paophi (i.e., Oct. 23)…eight whole months’ (*Hist.
Aceph.* vii. The murder of George has been referred to above, p. liii.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[li:71](2040021.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="v.ii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p4"></span> The envoys of Magnentius had come from
Italy *through Libya* in 350–351. The ‘desert’ (*Apol. Const.* 27, 32)
must be the region between Alxa. and *Cyrenaica,* not *Palestine* as
Tillem. viii. 186, infers from *Ep. Æg.* 5. There is no evidence that
Ath. left his province during this exile, and Palestine was a most
dangerous territory to venture into. The cautious vagueness of his
language, *Ep. Æg.* 5, while it baffles even our curiosity, yet favours
the hypothesis that the events referred to belong to the *Egyptian*
persecution.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[lii:72](2040021.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="v.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p6"></span> This date, coming from the common source
of the *Historia Acephala* and *Festal Index* (i.e. from the accredited
Alexandrian chronology of the period), must be accepted unless there is
cogent proof of its incorrectness. No such proof is offered: we have *no
positive statement to the contrary,* but only (1) the fact that the
intrusion of George is related, *Apol. Fug.* 6, immediately after an
attack on the great church, possibly the *coup de main* of Syrianus, but
more probably that of p. 290, note 9, without any hint of a long
interval. This is true, and *if there were no evidence the other way*
might justify a *guess* that George came in Lent, 356; but no one would
claim that the passage is conclusive by itself; (2) the ‘improbability’
of George delaying his arrival so long. Improbability is a relative
term; we know too little of George’s consecration or movements to
justify its use in the present connection. All the evidence goes to shew
that the court party were far from sanguine as to the nature of his
reception, and that their misgivings were well-founded. The above
considerations look very small when we compare them with the mass of
positive evidence the other way. (1.) The civil Governor had changed:
Maximus held the post on Feb. 8, 356 (*Hist. Ar.* 81, &c.), Cataphronius
when the churches were transferred to the party of George, see below, 6.
(2.) The military Commander had changed: Syrianus was replaced by
Sebastian, who appears just after the transfer of churches, *Hist. Ar.*
55–60 (Dr. Bright in D.C.B. i. 194, *note,* seems to admit that
Sebastian belongs to a later date than the Lent of 356). (3.) The
Wednesday (and Thursday) of *Hist. Ar.* 55 were *not* ‘in Lent.’ They
suit the data of *Hist. Aceph.* perfectly well. (4.) Had George arrived
before Easter 356, Athan. would have heard of it ‘in the Desert,’ *Apol.
Const.* 27; but he has only heard of his *nomination* <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p6.2"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p6.3"></span>νομάσθη</span> 28, probably
from the letters given in §§30, 31). (5.) The Letter to the Egyptian
bishops was written from Libya or Cyrenaica, when the coercion of the
episcopate had begun: it postulates some time since his expulsion, but
George was then (§7) only in contemplation. (6.) There is no evidence
that the *coup de main* of Syrianus was other than unpopular in the
city. This was reported to Const., who *after* the (Easter) outrages on
the Virgins (*Ap. Const.* 27; *Hist. Ar.* 48), and *after* the expulsion
of the sixteen bishops (*Hist. Ar.* 54, this was probably about Easter,
*Ap. Const.* 27) sent Heraclius (with the ‘discreditable’ letter), *in
whose company* (*Hist. Ar.* 55) *the new Prefect Cataphronius first
appears. This* let loose the refuse of the heathen population as
described, ib. 55–60. (7.) Here the precise statement of the *Hist.
Aceph.* fits in exactly. The Presbyters and people of Ath. remained in
possession of the Churches until the arrival of the new Prefect, *with
Count Heraclius,* on June 10. (8.) Heraclius is expressly called the
*precursor* of George (p. 288) and is evidently sent to disarm the
reported hostility of the (even heathen) public to the appointment. It
may be added that if we are to take ‘probabilities’ into account, it is
easier to imagine a reason for a court nominee like George having been
slow to take up a dangerous post, than for the Alexandrian chronologists
of the day having invented a year’s interval when none had existed.
Montfaucon had already noticed that ‘a good deal must have happened’
between the irruption of Syrianus and the entry of George. The data of
Athanasius are for the first time clearly explained by the light thrown
on them by the chroniclers. I should also have urged the fact that the
commemoration of George’s Pentecost Martyrs on May 21 in the Roman
Martyrology *suits* 357 *and not* 356, had I succeeded in tracing the
history of the entry, which has, however, so far eluded my efforts.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[lii:73](2040021.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="v.ii.ix-p6.5"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p7"></span> We are quite in the dark as to when, and
by whom, George was consecrated bishop. The statement of Sozomen iv. 8,
that he was ordained by a council of thirty bishops at Antioch,
including Theodore of Heraclea, who had died before the exile of
Liberius in 355 (Thdt. *H. E.* ii. 16, p. 93. 13), is involved in too
hopeless a tangle of anachronisms to be of any value for our enquiry.
But that George was ordained in Antioch is in itself likely enough, and
if so, his ordination would probably follow close upon the expulsion of
Athanasius. But the repeated assurances of Ath. that George came *from
court* would imply that after his ordination George went to Italy. That
at once puts his arrival in Alxa. in Lent 356 out of the question.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[lii:74](2040021.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="v.ii.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p8"></span> The statements of Ath. as to George are
made at secondhand, and must be taken *cum grano.* He is ‘notoriously
wealthy,’ yet ‘hired’ by the Arians. (Cf. p. 249; but apparently he
combined wealth and avarice.) That he was ‘a heathen’ is certainly
untrue. His ‘ignorance’ is equally so: we know that he was a well-read
man and possessed a remarkably good library (D.C.B. ii. 638). That he
had ‘the temper of a hangman’ (p. 227) is in keeping with all that we
know of him, and as to his general character, the statements of
Athanasius and other churchmen are not stronger than Amm. Marcell. XXII.
xi. 4 (cf. Gibbon, iii. 171 *sqq.,* ed. Smith, but correct his *jeu
d’esprit* on ‘S. George and the Dragon’ by Bright, in D.C.B. *ubi
supra;* yet see Stanley, *Eastern Church,* Lect. vii. III..).

<span id="fn_74"></span>[liii:75](2040021.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="v.ii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p9"></span> p. 497. George was at Sirmium in the
Spring of 359 (Soz. (v. 16). Paul *Catena* came to Alxa. from a similar
commission at Scythopolis. He was apparently aided in both places by
Modestus the Comes Orientis. From Liban. *Ep.* 205, we gather, to the
credit of George, that he was the intermediary of requests for
mitigation on some of the sentences. He was at this time at Antioch,
from whence also ‘Ex Comitatu Principis,’ Amm. XXII. xi., he returned to
Alxa. in 361, evidently before he had heard of the Emperor’s death.
(Sievers, pp. 138 *sq.*)

<span id="fn_75"></span>[liv:76](2040021.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="v.ii.ix-p14.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p15"></span> We cannot fix the date when this word was
first adopted as a shibboleth. It occurs, but not conspicuously, in the
‘Macrostich’ of 344, but not in any other creed till the ‘dated’ symbol
of 359. But if (as Krüger, *Lucif,* p. 42, *note,* assumes) the <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p15.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.ix-p15.3"></span>μοιούσιον</span> was
adopted as a protest against the bald <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.4"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.5"></span>μοιον</span>, the latter must have been
current *long before* 357, when the former was proscribed. I incline to
regard the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.7"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.8"></span>μοιον</span> (*as a test word*) as a *later*
rival to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.10"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.ix-p15.11"></span>μοιούσιον</span>

<span id="fn_76"></span>[lv:77](2040021.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="v.ii.ix-p17.8"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p18"></span> Apparently it began with the quarrel over
the election to the bishopric of Antioch, which Eudoxius managed to
seize after the death of Leontius. George was aggrieved at his rights as
an elector being ignored, and may have had hopes of the see for himself.
See Soz. iv. 13; but Philost. iv. 5 with much less likelihood puts this
down to Basil.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[lvi:78](2040021.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="v.ii.ix-p22.5"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p23"></span> The discussions, reported with every
appearance of substantial accuracy by Thdt. ii. 27, may have taken place
at this time, or at the council of the succeeding month (Thdt. fails to
distinguish the two meetings). Gwatkin, p. 180, appears to be right in
adopting the former alternative, viz. that the party of Basil prudently
abstained from attending a council in which they would be overpowered:
cf. Soz. iv. 24, who however contradicts himself in the next chapter,
*sub fin.* But the case is not quite clear.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[lvii:79](2040021.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="v.ii.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p26"></span> He always used amanuenses, but we have no
evidence that he entrusted them with actual composition, p. 242.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Athanasius under Julian and his successors; Fourth and Fifth
Exiles. Feb. 21, 362, to Feb. 1, 366.](2040022.md)
