[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040206)  [Next](2040208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span
id="xv.i-Page_173"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to the de Sententia Dionysii.</span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xv.i-p3.1"></span>The</span> following tract, like the last, is a
letter to a person engaged in discussion with Arians, who were openly
finding fault with the Definition of Nicæa, and especially with the word
Co-essential (§19). Montfaucon suggests that both epistles were
addressed to the same person, the *de Decretis* (§25) having as it were
challenged the Arians to cite passages from Dionysius on behalf of their
own doctrine, whereupon their opponent came back to Athanasius with a
request for further help. But the language of the first sentence of our
present tract seems to imply that Athanasius had not previously heard of
the discussions in question. However, slender as such grounds are, the
tract furnishes no more decisive indication of date. (On certain
expressions which might seem to carry the date back to the lifetime of
Arius, see Prolegg. ch. ii. §7.)

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>Dionysius ‘the Great,’ Bishop of Alexandria
233–265, was a pupil of Origen (Eus. *H. E.* vi. 29), and equally
distinguished as a ruler of the Church and as a theologian. In all the
controversies of his age (the lapsed, rebaptism, Easter, Paul of
Samosata, Sabellianism, the authorship of the Apocalypse) his influence
made itself felt, and his writings were very numerous (Westcott in D. C.
B. i. p. 851 sq.; a good account of Dionysius in vol. I. of this series,
p. 281 note). The most celebrated controversy in which he was involved
was that which, a century later, gave rise to the tract before us.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>About the period when personal attacks on the
Nicene leaders began to be exchanged for overt objections to the Nicene
Definitions, the claim was freely made that ‘the fathers’ had been
condemned by the latter: in other words, that they had held with the
Arians (see below §1, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p5.2"></span>εὶ μὲν προφάσεις</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p5.3"></span>νῦν δὲ καὶ διαβάλλειν τοὺς πατέρας
τετολμήκασι</span>). Accordingly we find Athanasius at about the same
date, viz. early in the sole reign of Constantius, vindicating on the
one hand the work of the Council, on the other the orthodox reputation
of Dionysius. The Arians found material for their appeal to the latter
in a letter addressed by him to certain bishops in Pentapolis, called
Ammon and Euphranor. Whether or no Sabellius had been a native of that
province, at any rate his doctrine was at that time so popular there
‘that the Son of God was scarcely any longer preached in the Churches.’
Exercising the right of supervision over those districts which had
already become vested by prescription in the Alexandrian See, Dionysius
wrote to Ammon, Bishop of Berenice, (Euseb. *H. E.* vii. 26, who
enumerates three several letters to Ammon, Telesphorus, and Euphranor,
and a fourth to Ammon and Euporus: he also refers to his letters to
Dionysius of Rome: Montfaucon is therefore scarcely fair in charging
Eusebius with suppressing the episode ‘ne verbum quidem de hac historia
fecerit!’) insisting on the distinctness of the Son from the Father. In
doing so he used strong expressions akin to the language of Origen on
the subordination of the Son. These expressions were at once objected to
by certain orthodox churchmen (§13, it is not clear whether they
belonged to Pentapolis or Alexandria), who without consulting Dionysius
went to Rome (about 260), and spoke against him in the presence of his
namesake, the Roman Bishop. The latter, true to the traditions of his
See since the time of Callistus (see Hipp. *Philos* IX. vii. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.4"></span>δίθεοι ἔστε</span>), while
steering clear of Sabellianism, was especially jealous of error in the
opposite direction. Accordingly he assembled a synod (*de Synod*. 44),
and drew up a letter to Alexandria, in which he rebuked firstly the
Sabellians, but secondly and more fully those who separate the Godhead
or speak of the Son as a work, including under this category certain
*unnamed* catechists and teachers of Alexandria (*De Decr.* 26). At the
same time he wrote personally to Dionysius, informing him that he was
accused <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="xv.i-Page_174"></span>of maintaining the opinions in question. In
answer to this letter, Dionysius of Alexandria drew up a treatise in
four books, entitled ‘Refutation and Defence,’ and addressed to his
namesake of Rome, in which he explained his language, and stated his
belief in a manner which put an end to the controversy. He had been
charged with maintaining that the Son was made, that He was not eternal
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.5"></span>οὐκ ἀεὶ ἦν ὁ θεὸς
πατήρ, οὐκ ἀεὶ ἦν ὁ ὑιός</span>,…<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p5.6"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν γεννήθῃ, ἀλλ᾽ ἦν ποτὲ ὅτε οὐκ ἦν
κ.τ.λ</span>. §14), that he denied the co-essentiality (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.7"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.8"></span>μοούσιον</span>) of the Son,
and separated Him from the Father (§16, 18, cf. § 4, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.9"></span>ξένον κατ᾽ οὐσίαν
κ.τ.λ</span>). In his Refutation and Defence, Dionysius admits the use
of these expressions, withdraws the first (§15, line 1) and admits the
propriety of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p5.10"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p5.11"></span>μοούσιον</span>, although he himself prefers
Scriptural language (§ 18. The section shews the unfixed use of the
word. Dionysius had formerly used <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p5.12"></span>οὐσία</span> in the sense of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.13"></span>πρώτη οὐσία</span>, nearly as
equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p5.14"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p5.15"></span>πόστασις</span>: but now he clearly takes it as
<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.16"></span>δευτέρα οὐσία</span>,
indicative not of Person but of Nature). That the Son was made, he
explains as an inadequate formula, the word being applicable (in one of
its many senses) to the relation of son to father (§20. The defence of
Athanasius, that Dionysius referred to the Human Nature of Christ, is
scarcely tenable. It is not supported by what Dionysius himself says,
rather the contrary: and if his language did not refer to the Trinity,
where would be its relevancy against Sabellianism?). The words <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.17"></span>ἦ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.18"></span>ν ὅτε οὐκ ἦν</span>, and
<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p5.19"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν
γεννήθῃ</span>, he does not explain, but professes his belief in the
eternal union of the Word with the Father (§§24, 25). Lastly, he
repudiates the charge of dividing the Holy Trinity, or of mentioning
Father and Son as though separate Beings: When I mention the Father, I
have already mentioned the Son, before I pronounce His Name (§17, the
closing words of the section are a complete formula of agreement with
all that his Roman namesake could possibly require of him).

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>That Dionysius in his ‘Refutation and Defence’
merely restated, and did not (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p6.1"></span>κατ᾽ οἰκονομίαν</span>) alter, his theological
position is open to no doubt. Athanasius, not the Arians, had the right
to claim him as his own. He is clearly speaking *optima fide* when he
deprecates the pressing of statements in which he had given expression
to one side only, and that the less essential side, of his convictions.
At the same time we cannot but see that the Arians had good *prima
facie* ground for their appeal. Here were their special formulæ, those
anathematised at Nicæa, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p6.2"></span>ἦ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p6.3"></span>ν ποτὲ ὅτε οὐκ ἦν</span> and the rest, adopted,
and the <span class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.4"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.5"></span>μοούσιον</span> implicitly
rejected, by the most renowned bishop Alexandria had yet had. (Newman,
in *de Decr.* 26, note 7, fails to appreciate the reference to the
language of Dion. Alex.) Moreover it is only fair to admit that not only
in language, but in thought also, Athanasius had advanced upon his
predecessors of the Alexandrian School. The rude shock of Arianism had
shewn him and the other Nicene leaders the necessity of greater
consistency than had characterised the theology of Origen and his
school, a consistency to be gained only by breaking with one side of it
altogether. While on the one hand Origen held fast to the Godhead of the
Logos (<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.6"></span>κατ᾽ οὐσίαν ἐστὶ
θεὸς</span>), and to His co-eternity with the Father (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.7"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.8"></span>εὶ γεννᾶται ὁ σωτὴρ ὑπὸ τοῦ
πατρός</span>, and see *de Decr.* §27); he had yet, using <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.9"></span>οὐσία</span> in its ‘first’
sense, spoken of Him as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p6.10"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p6.11"></span>τερος κατ᾽ οὐσίαν τοῦ πατρός</span> (*de Orat.*
15), and placed him, after the manner of Philo, as an intermediary
between God and the Universe. He had spoken of the unity of the Father
and the Son as moral (*Cels.* viii. 12, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p6.12"></span>τῇ ὁμονοί& 139· καὶ τῇ συμφωνί& 139·</span>),
insisted upon the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p6.13"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.i-p6.14"></span>περοχὴ</span> of the Father (i.e. ‘subordination’
of the Son), and spoken (*De Orat*) as though the highest worship of all
were to be reserved for the Father (Jerome ascribes still stronger
language to him). Yet there is no real doubt that, as regards the core
of the question, Athanasius and not his opponents is the true successor
of Origen. The essential difference between Athanasius and the
‘Conservatives’ of the period following the great council consisted in
the fact that the former saw clearly what the latter failed to realise,
namely the insufficiency of the formulæ of the third century to meet the
problem of the fourth. We may then, without disparagement to Dionysius,
admit that he was not absolutely consistent in his language; that he
failed to distinguish the ambiguities which beset the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.15"></span>οὐσία</span>, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.16"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.17"></span>πόστασις</span>, and even
<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.18"></span>ποιεῖν</span> and <span
id="page_175">p. 175</span> <span id="xv.i-Page_175"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.19"></span>γένεσθαι</span>, and that he
used language (<span class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p6.20"></span>οὐκ ἦν
πρὶν γεννήθῃ</span> and the like) which we, with our minds cleared by
the Arian controversy, cannot reconcile with the more deliberate and
guarded statements of the ‘Refutation and Defence <span
id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) .’

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>The controversy of the two Dionysii has
another interesting side, as bearing upon the means then employed for
dealing with questions affecting the Church as a whole,—and in
particular upon the position of the Roman Church as the natural referee
in such questions. (Cf. Prolegg. ch. iv. §4.) This is not the place for
a general discussion of the question, or for an attempt to trace its
history previous to the case before us. But it should be noted, firstly,
that when the Pentapolite (?) opponents of Dionysius desire a lever
against him, their first resource is not a council of local bishops, but
the Roman Church: secondly, that the Roman bishop takes up the case, and
writes to his Alexandrian namesake for an explanation: thirdly, that the
explanation asked for is promptly given. Unfortunately the fragment of
the Roman letter preserved to us by Athanasius tells us nothing of the
form of the intervention, whether it was the request of one co-trustee
to another for an explanation of the latter’s action in a matter
concerning their common trust, or whether it was coupled with any
assumption of jurisdiction at all like that involved in the letter of
the Bishop of Alexandria to those of Libya. At any rate, the latter
alternative has no positive evidence in our documents; and the fragments
of the Refutation and Defence ‘shew the most complete and resolute
independence. There is nothing in the narrative of Athanasius which
implies that the Alexandrine Bishop recognised or that the Roman Bishop
claimed any dogmatic authority as belonging to the Imperial See.’ The
letter of Dionysius of Rome is certainly highly characteristic of the
indifference to theological reasoning and the close adherence to the
rule of faith as the authoritative solution of all questions of doctrine
which marks the genius of Rome as contrasted with that of Alexandria
(see Gore, *The Church and the Ministry,* ch. i. *sub fin.,* and
Harnack, *Dg.* i. 686, who observes upon the striking family likeness
between this letter and that of Leo to Flavian, and of Agatho to the
Sixth Ecumenical Council). Lastly, the Roman Church, which never
troubled about a precedent adverse to her imperial instinct, never
forgot one which favoured it. The intervention of Dionysius was
treasured up in her memory, and, when the time came, fully exploited
(*supr.* p. 113, note 3, where the note distinguishes somewhat too
carefully between the ‘Pope’ of Rome and the ‘Bishop,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.i-p8.1"></span>πάπας</span>, of Alexandria).

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span>The tract of Athanasius, with his extracts in
*de Decr.* and *de Syn.,* tell us all that we know of the history of
this important controversy. Dionysius had previously (Eus. *H. E.* vii.
6) had some correspondence with Xystus, the previous Bishop of Rome, on
the subject of the Sabellian teaching current in the Pentapolis. He was
in fact during his episcopate in constant communication with Rome and
with the other important churches of the Christian World. His letters
are much used in the sixth and seventh books of the History of Eusebius,
to whom we are indebted for most of our knowledge of his writings.

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>The general arrangement of the tract is as
follows:—

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>§1–4 are prefatory, the fourth section
broadly indicates the line of the defence. §§5–12 deal with the
incriminated passages: Athan. gives the history of them, and lays stress
on their incomplete presentation of the belief of Dionysius, as having
been written for a special purpose,—as may also be said of much of the
language of the Apostles. But even in themselves the expressions of
Dionysius are orthodox, referring (as Athanasius claims) to Christ as
man. In §§13–23 he turns to the Refutation and Defence, from which he
makes copious extracts, bringing out the diametrical opposition between
Dionysius and the Arians. In §§24, 25 the anti-Arian doctrine of
Dionysius is summed up, and §26 recapitulates the main points of §§5–12.
He concludes (§27) by claiming a verdict upon the evidence, and urging
upon the Arians the alternative of abandoning their error, or of being
left with the devil as their only partisan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_964"></span>[175:965](2040207.htm#fr_964) <span
id="xv.i-p6.21"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span> It may be added that the letter to Paul of
Samosata quoted by Bull, Def. III. iv. 3, Petavius, *Trin*. I. iv. is
not genuine. Posterity, which enveloped the name of Origen with storms
of controversy, did not entirely spare his pupil: Basil (*Ep*. 41) taxes
him with sowing the first seeds of the Anomœan heresy, Gennadius (*Eccl.
Dogm*. iv.) calls him ‘Fons Arii.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: De Sententia Dionysii. (Defence of Dionysius.)](2040208)
