[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040064)  [Next](2040066.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.xx"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xx-p1"></span> §20. *But where does this supposed
virtue of the image reside? in the material, or in the form, or in the
maker’s skill? Untenability of all these views.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.xx-p2"></span>For one might reply to them, bringing
the case before the tribunal of truth, How does God make answer or
become known by such objects? Is it due to the matter of which they
consist, or to the form which they possess? For if it be due to the
matter, what need is there of the form, instead of God manifesting
Himself through all matter without exception before these things were
fashioned? And in vain have they built their temples to shut in a single
stone, or stock, or piece of gold, when all the world is full of these
substances. 2. But if the superadded form be the cause of the divine
manifestation, what is the need of the material, gold and the rest,
instead of God manifesting Himself by the actual natural animals of
which the images are the figures? For the opinion held about God would
on the same principle have been a nobler one, were He to manifest <span
id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="vi.ii.i.xx-Page_15"></span>Himself
by means of living animals, whether rational or irrational, instead of
being looked for in things without life or motion. 3. Wherein they
commit the most signal impiety against themselves. For while they
abominate and turn from the real animals, beasts, birds, and creeping
things, either because of their ferocity or because of their dirtiness,
yet they carve their forms in stone, wood, or gold, and make them gods.
But it would be better for them to worship the living things themselves,
rather than to worship their figures in stone. 4. But perhaps neither is
the case, nor is either the material or the form the cause of the divine
presence, but it is only skilful art that summons the deity, inasmuch as
it is an imitation of nature. But if the deity communicates with the
inmates on account of the art, what need, once more, of the material,
since the art resides in the men? For if God manifests Himself solely
because of the art, and if for this reason the images are worshipped as
gods, it would be right to worship and serve the men who are masters of
the art, inasmuch as they are rational also, and have the skill in
themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The idea of communications through angels involves yet wilder
inconsistency, nor does it, even if true, justify the worship of the
image.](2040066.md)
