[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040026)  [Next](2040028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p1"></span> §3. *Personal characteristics* (see
Stanley’s *Eastern Church*, Lect. vii.).

<span id="v.iii.iii-p2"></span>To write an elaborate character of
Athanasius is superfluous. The full account of his life (chap. ii.), and
the specimens of his writings in this volume, may be trusted to convey
the right impression without the aid of analysis. But it may be well to
emphasise one or two salient points. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)

<span id="v.iii.iii-p4"></span>In Athanasius we feel ourselves in
contact with a commanding personality. His early rise to decisive
epoch-making influence,—he was scarcely more than 27 at the council of
Nicæa,—his election as bishop when barely of canonical age, the speedy
ascendancy which he gained over all Egypt and Libya, the rapid
consolidation of the distracted province under his rule, the
enthusiastic personal loyalty of his clergy and monks, the extraordinary
popularity <span id="page_lxvii">p. lxvii</span> <span
id="v.iii.iii-Page_lxvii"></span>enjoyed by him at Alexandria even among
the heathen (excepting, perhaps, ‘the more abandoned among them,’ *Hist.
Ar.* 58), the evident feeling of the Arians that as long as he was
intact their cause could not prosper, the jealously of his influence
shewn by Constantius and Julian, all this is a combined and impressive
tribute to his personal greatness. In what then did this consist?

<span id="v.iii.iii-p5"></span>Principally, no doubt, in his moral and
mental vigour; resolute ability characterises his writings and life
throughout. He had the not too common gift of seeing the proportions of
things. A great crisis was fully appreciated by him; he always saw at
once where principles separated or united men, where the bond or the
divergence was merely accidental. With Arius and Arianism no compromise
was to be thought of; but he did not fail to distinguish men really at
one with him on essentials, even where their conduct toward himself had
been indefensible (*de Syn.*). So long as the cause was advanced,
personal questions were insignificant. So far Athanasius was a partisan.
It may be admitted that he saw little good in his opponents; but unless
the evidence is singularly misleading there was little good to see. The
leaders of the Arian interest were unscrupulous men, either bitter and
unreasoning fanatics like Secundus and Maris, or more often political
theologians, like Eusebius of Nicomedia, Valens, Acacius, who lacked
religious earnestness. It may be admitted that he refused to admit error
in his friends. His long alliance with Marcellus, his unvarying refusal
to utter a syllable of condemnation of him by name; his refusal to name
even Photinus, while yet (*Orat.* iv.) exposing the error associated
with his name; his suppression of the name of Apollinarius, even when
writing directly against him; all this was inconsistent with strict
impartiality, and, no doubt, placed his adversaries partly in the right.
But it was the partiality of a generous and loyal spirit, and he could
be generous to personal enemies if he saw in them an approximation to
himself in principle. When men were dead, unlike too many theologians of
his own and later times, he restrained himself in speaking of them, even
if the dead man were Arius himself.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p6"></span>In the whole of our minute knowledge of
his life there is a total lack of self-interest. The glory of God and
the welfare of the Church absorbed him fully at all times. We see the
immense power he exercised in Egypt; the Emperors recognised him as a
political force of the first order; Magnentius bid for his support,
Constantius first cajoled, then made war upon him; but on no occasion
does he yield to the temptation of using the arm of flesh. Almost
unconscious of his own power, he treats Serapion and the monks as equals
or superiors, begging them to correct and alter anything amiss in his
writings. His humility is the more real for never being conspicuously
paraded.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p7"></span>Like most men of great power, he had a
real sense of humour (Stanley, p. 231, *sq*., ed. 1883). Even in his
youthful works we trace it (*infr*. p. 2), and it is always present,
though very rarely employed with purpose. But the exposure of the
Arsenius calumny at Tyre, the smile with which he answered the
importunate catechising of an Epiphanius about ‘old’ Marcellus, the
oracular interpretation of the crow’s ‘cras’ in answer to the heathen
(Sozom. iv. 10), the grave irony with which he often confronts his
opponents with some surprising application of Scripture, his reply to
the pursuers from the Nile boat in 362, allow us to see the twinkle of
his keen, searching eye. Courage, self-sacrifice, steadiness of purpose,
versatility and resourcefulness, width of ready sympathy, were all
harmonised by deep reverence and the discipline of a single-minded lover
of Christ. The Arian controversy was to him no battle for ecclesiastical
power, nor for theological triumph. It was a religious crisis involving
the reality of revelation and redemption. He felt about it as he wrote
to the bishops of Egypt, ‘we are contending for our all’ (p. 234).

<span id="v.iii.iii-p8"></span>‘A certain cloud of romance encircled
him’ (Reynolds). His escapes from Philagrius, Syrianus, Julian, his
secret presence in Alexandria, his life among the monasteries of Egypt
in his third exile, his reputed visits to distant councils, all impress
the imagination and lend themselves to legend and fable. Later ages even
claimed that he had fled in disguise to Spain and served as cook in a
monastery near Calahorra (Act. [SS.
2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#000)<span id="v.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>
Maii)! But he is also surrounded by an atmosphere of truth. Not a single
miracle of any kind is related of him. To invest him with the halo of
miracle the Bollandists have to come down to the ‘translation’ of his
body, not to Constantinople (an event surrounded with no little
uncertainty), but to Venice, whither a thievish sea-captain, who had
stolen it from a church in Stamboul, brought a body, which decisively
proved its identity by prodigies which left no room for doubt. But the
Athanasius of history is not the subject of any such tales. It has been
said that no saint outside the New Testament has ever claimed the gift
of miracles for himself. At any rate (though he displays credulity with
regard to Antony), the saintly reputation of Athanasius <span
id="page_lxviii">p. lxviii</span> <span
id="v.iii.iii-Page_lxviii"></span>rested on his life and character
alone, without the aid of any reputation for miraculous power.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p9"></span>And resting upon this firm foundation, it
has won the respect and admiration even of those who do not feel that
they owe to him the vindication of all that is sacred and precious. Not
only a Gregory or an Epiphanius, an Augustine or a Cyril, a Luther or a
Hooker, not only Montfaucon and Tillemont, Newman and Stanley pay
tribute to him as a Christian hero. Secular as well as Church historians
fall under the spell of his personality, and even Gibbon lays aside his
‘solemn sneer’ to do homage to Athanasius the great.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[lxvi:88](2040027.htm#fr_87) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p3"></span> Of his personal appearance little is
known. Gregory Naz. praises his beauty of expression, Julian sneers at
his small stature. Later tradition adds a slight stoop, a hooked nose
and small mouth, short beard spreading into large whiskers, and light
auburn hair, (See Stanley *ubi supr*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](2040028)
