[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040457)  [Next](2040459) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Letter LXI</span>.—*Letter to Maximus.
(Written about 371 <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p1.2"></span>a.d.</span>)*

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p2"></span>To our beloved and most truly
longed-for son, Maximus <span id="fr_4775"></span>[4776](#fn_4775) ,
philosopher, Athanasius greeting in the Lord.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p4"></span>Having read the letter now come from
you, I approve your piety: but, marvelling at the rashness of those ‘who
understand neither what they say nor whereof they confidently
affirm <span id="fr_4776"></span>[4777](#fn_4776) ,’ I had really
decided to say nothing. For to reply upon matters which are so plain and
which are clearer than light, is simply to give an excuse for
shamelessness to such lawless men. And this we have learned from the
Saviour. For when Pilate had washed his hands, and acquiesced in the
false accusation of the Jews of that day, the Lord answered him no more,
but rather warned his wife in a dream, so that He that was being judged
might be believed to be God not in word, but in power. While after
vouchsafing Caiaphas no reply to his folly, He Himself by his
promise <span id="fr_4777"></span>[4778](#fn_4777) brought all over to
knowledge. Accordingly for some time I delayed, and have reluctantly
yielded to your zeal for the truth, in view of the argumentativeness of
men without shame. And I have dictated nothing beyond what your letter
contains, in order that the adversary may from henceforth be convinced
on the points to which he has objected, and may ‘keep his tongue from
evil and his lips that they speak no guile <span
id="fr_4778"></span>[4779](#fn_4778) .’ And would that they would no
longer join the Jews who passed by of old in reproaching Him that hung
upon the Tree: ‘If thou be the Son of God save Thyself <span
id="fr_4779"></span>[4780](#fn_4779) .’ But if even after this they will
not give in, yet do you remember the apostolic injunction, and ‘a man
that is heretical after a first and second admonition refuse, knowing
that such an one is perverted and sinneth being self-condemned <span
id="fr_4780"></span>[4781](#fn_4780) .’ For if they are Gentiles, or of
the Judaisers, who are thus daring, let them, as Jews, think the Cross
of Christ a stumbling-block, or as Gentiles, foolishness <span
id="fr_4781"></span>[4782](#fn_4781) . But if they pretend to be
Christians let them learn that the crucified Christ is at once Lord of
Glory, and the Power of God and Wisdom of God <span
id="fr_4782"></span>[4783](#fn_4782) .

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p12"></span>2. But if they are in doubt whether
He is God at all, let them reverence Thomas, who handled the Crucified
and pronounced Him Lord and God <span
id="fr_4783"></span>[4784](#fn_4783) . Or let them fear the Lord
Himself, who said, after washing the feet of the disciples: ‘Ye call Me
Lord and Master <span id="fr_4784"></span>[4785](#fn_4784) , and ye say
well, for so I am.’ But in the same body in which He was when he washed
their feet, He also carried up our sins to the Tree <span
id="fr_4785"></span>[4786](#fn_4785) . And He was witnessed to as Master
of Creation, in that the Sun withdrew his beams and the earth trembled
and the rocks were rent, and the executioners recognised that the
Crucified was truly Son of God. For the Body they beheld was not that of
some man, but of God, being in which, even when being crucified, He
raised the dead. Accordingly it is no good venture of theirs to say that
the Word of God came into a certain holy man; for this was true of each
of the prophets and of the other saints, and on that assumption He would
clearly be born and die in the case of each one of them. But this is not
so, far be the thought. But once for all ‘at the consummation of the
ages <span id="fr_4786"></span>[4787](#fn_4786) , to put away sin’ ‘the
Word was made flesh <span id="fr_4787"></span>[4788](#fn_4787) ’ and
proceeded forth from Mary the Virgin, Man after our likeness, as also He
said to the Jews, ‘Wherefore seek ye to kill Me, a man that hath told
you the truth <span id="fr_4788"></span>[4789](#fn_4788) ?’ And we are
deified not by partaking of the body of some <span id="page_579">p.
579</span> <span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-Page_579"></span>man, but by
receiving the Body of the Word Himself.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p19"></span>3. And at this also I am much
surprised, how they have ventured to entertain such an idea as that the
Word became man in consequence of His Nature. For if this were so, the
commemoration of Mary would be superfluous. <span
id="fr_4789"></span>[4790](#fn_4789) For neither does Nature know of a
Virgin bearing apart from a man. Whence by the good pleasure of the
Father, being true God, and Word and Wisdom of the Father by nature, He
became man in the body for our salvation, in order that having somewhat
to offer <span id="fr_4790"></span>[4791](#fn_4790) for us He might save
us all, ‘as many as through fear of death were all their life-time
subject to bondage. <span id="fr_4791"></span>[4792](#fn_4791) ’ For it
was not some man that gave Himself up for us; since every man is under
sentence of death, according to what was said to all in Adam, ‘earth
thou art and unto earth thou shalt return. <span
id="fr_4792"></span>[4793](#fn_4792) ’ Nor yet was it any other of the
creatures, since every creature is liable to change. But the Word
Himself offered His own Body on our behalf that our faith and hope might
not be in man, but that we might have our faith in God the Word Himself.
Why, even now that He is become man we behold His Glory, ‘glory as of
one only-begotten of His Father—full of grace and truth. <span
id="fr_4793"></span>[4794](#fn_4793) ’ For what He endured by means of
the Body, He magnified as God. And while He hungered in the flesh, as
God He fed the hungry. And if anyone is offended by reason of the bodily
conditions, let him believe by reason of what God works. For humanly He
enquires where Lazarus is laid, but raises him up divinely. Let none
then laugh, calling Him a child, and citing His age, His growth, His
eating, drinking and suffering, lest while denying what is proper for
the body, he deny utterly also His sojourn among us. And just as He has
not become Man in consequence of His nature, in like manner it was
consistent that when He had taken a body He should exhibit what was
proper to it, lest the imaginary theory of Manichæus should prevail.
Again it was consistent that when He went about in the body, He should
not hide what belonged to the Godhead, lest he of Samosata should find
an excuse to call Him man, as distinct in person from God the Word.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p25"></span>4. Let then the unbelievers
perceive this, and learn that while as a Babe He lay in a manger, He
subjected the Magi and was worshipped by them; and while as a Child He
came down to Egypt, He brought to nought the hand-made objects of its
idolatry <span id="fr_4794"></span>[4795](#fn_4794) : and crucified in
the flesh, He raised the dead long since turned to corruption. And it
has been made plain to all that not for His own sake but for ours He
underwent all things, that we by His sufferings might put on freedom
from suffering and incorruption <span
id="fr_4795"></span>[4796](#fn_4795) , and abide unto life eternal.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p28"></span>5. This then I have concisely
dictated, following, as I said above, the lines of your own letter,
without working out any point any further but only mentioning what
relates to the Holy Cross, in order that the despisers may be taught
better upon the points where they were offended, and may worship the
Crucified. But do you thoroughly persuade the unbelievers; perhaps
somehow they may come from ignorance to knowledge, and believe aright.
And even though what your own letter contains is sufficient, yet it is
as well to have added what I have for the sake of reminder in view of
contentious persons; not so much in order that being refuted in their
venturesome statements they may be put to shame, as that being reminded
they may not forget the truth. For let what was confessed by the Fathers
at Nicæa prevail. For it is correct, and enough to overthrow every
heresy however impious, and especially that of the Arians which speaks
against the Word of God, and as a logical consequence profanes His Holy
Spirit. Greet all who hold aright. All that are with us greet you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4775"></span>[578:4776](2040458.htm#fr_4775) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p3"></span> Maximus, probably the Cynic
philosopher who plays so strange and grotesque a part in the history of
S. Gregory Nazianzen’s tenure of the see of Constantinople (the
identification is questioned by Bright, p. 72, but without very cogent
reasons), was the son of Alexandrian parents, persons of high social
standing, who had suffered much for the Faith. He himself was an ardent
opponent of Arianism and heathenism, and was banished under Valens
(further particulars in *Dict. Gr. and Rom. Biogr.* s.v. Maximus
Alexandrinus). The present letter compliments him on his success in
refuting heretics, some of whom advocated the Arian Christology; others
the doctrine of Paul of Samosata and Photinus. The Epistle has much in
common with those to Epictetus and Adelphius; Montfaucon’s date for it
is adopted. (See Migne xxvi. 1085; Bright, *Lat. Tr.*, p. 72.)

<span id="fn_4776"></span>[578:4777](2040458.htm#fr_4776) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p5"></span> [1 Tim. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4777"></span>[578:4778](2040458.htm#fr_4777) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p6"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p6.1"></span>[Mark xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p6.3"></span>; [Matt. xxvi.
64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p6.4"></span>; xxvii. 19

<span id="fn_4778"></span>[578:4779](2040458.htm#fr_4778) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p6.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p7"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4779"></span>[578:4780](2040458.htm#fr_4779) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p8"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p8.1"></span>[Matt. xxvii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p8.3"></span>; Luke xxviii. 37<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p8.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4780"></span>[578:4781](2040458.htm#fr_4780) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p8.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p9"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p9.1"></span>[Titus
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#011)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p9.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4781"></span>[578:4782](2040458.htm#fr_4781) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p9.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p10"></span> [1 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4782"></span>[578:4783](2040458.htm#fr_4782) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p11"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024), [1 Cor.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p11.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p11.3"></span>, and ii. 8.

<span id="fn_4783"></span>[578:4784](2040458.htm#fr_4783) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p13"></span> [John xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4784"></span>[578:4785](2040458.htm#fr_4784) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p14"></span> Ath. quotes [John xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p14.2"></span> in this, the order of several <span
class="c10"><span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p14.4"></span>mss.</span> and later
fathers, both here and elsewhere.

<span id="fn_4785"></span>[578:4786](2040458.htm#fr_4785) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p14.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p15"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4786"></span>[578:4787](2040458.htm#fr_4786) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p16"></span> [Heb. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4787"></span>[578:4788](2040458.htm#fr_4787) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p17"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4788"></span>[578:4789](2040458.htm#fr_4788) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p18"></span> [John
8.40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4789"></span>[579:4790](2040458.htm#fr_4789) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p20"></span> Cf. *Ad Epict.* 5 (*supr.* p.
572.)

<span id="fn_4790"></span>[579:4791](2040458.htm#fr_4790) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p21"></span> Cf. [Heb. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4791"></span>[579:4792](2040458.htm#fr_4791) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p22"></span> [Heb.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4792"></span>[579:4793](2040458.htm#fr_4792) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p23"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p23.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4793"></span>[579:4794](2040458.htm#fr_4793) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p24"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p24.1"></span> b.

<span id="fn_4794"></span>[579:4795](2040458.htm#fr_4794) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p26"></span> Cf. *de Incarn.* 36. 4.

<span id="fn_4795"></span>[579:4796](2040458.htm#fr_4795) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p27"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.xvi-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John and Antiochus.](2040459)
