[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040142)  [Next](2040144.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xlvi"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xlvi-p1"></span> §46. *Discredit, from the date of the
Incarnation, of idol-cultus, oracles, mythologies, demoniacal energy,
magic, and Gentile philosophy. And whereas the old cults were strictly
local and independent, the worship of Christ is catholic and uniform.*

<span id="vii.ii.xlvi-p2"></span>When did men begin to desert the
worshipping of idols, save since God, the true Word of God, has come
among men? Or when have the oracles among the Greeks, and everywhere,
ceased and become empty, save when the Saviour has manifested Himself
upon earth? 2. Or when did those who are called gods and heroes in the
poets begin to be convicted of being merely mortal men <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328.md) , save since the Lord erected His
conquest of death, and preserved incorruptible the body he had taken,
raising it from the dead? 3. Or when did the deceitfulness and madness
of demons fall into contempt, save when the power of God, the Word, the
Master of all these as well, condescending because of man’s weakness,
appeared on earth? Or when <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329.md) did
the art and the schools of magic begin to be trodden down, save when the
divine manifestation of the Word took place among men? 4. And, in a
word, at what time has the wisdom of the Greeks become foolish, save
when the true Wisdom of God manifested itself on earth? For formerly the
whole world <span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span
id="vii.ii.xlvi-Page_62"></span>and every place was led astray by the
worshipping of idols, and men regarded nothing else but the idols as
gods. But now, all the world over, men are deserting the superstition of
the idols, and taking refuge with Christ; and, worshipping Him as God,
are by His means coming to know that Father also Whom they knew not. 5.
And, marvellous fact, whereas the objects of worship were various and of
vast number, and each place had its own idol, and he who was accounted a
god among them had no power to pass over to the neighbouring place, so
as to persuade those of neighbouring peoples to worship him, but was
barely served even among his own people; for no one else worshipped his
neighbour’s god—on the contrary, each man kept to his own idol <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330.md) , thinking it to be lord of
all;—Christ alone is worshipped as one and the same among all peoples;
and what the weakness of the idols could not do—to persuade, namely,
even those dwelling close at hand,—this Christ has done, persuading not
only those close at hand, but simply the entire world, to worship one
and the same Lord, and through Him God, even His Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_328"></span>[61:329](2040143.htm#fr_328.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xlvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xlvi-p3"></span> Cf. notes on *c. Gent.* 10, and 12. 2.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[61:330](2040143.htm#fr_329.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xlvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xlvi-p4"></span> On the following argument see
Döllinger ii. 210 *sqq.*, and Bigg, *Bampt. Lect.* 248, note 1.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[62:331](2040143.htm#fr_330.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xlvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xlvi-p5"></span> On the local character of ancient
religions, see Döllinger i. 109, &c., and Coulanges, *La Cité Antique,*
Book III. ch. vi., and V. iii. (the substance in Barker’s *Aryan
Civilisation*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The numerous oracles,--fancied apparitions in sacred places, &c.,
dispelled by the sign of the Cross. The old gods prove to have been mere
men. Magic is exposed. And whereas Philosophy could only persuade select
and local cliques of Immortality, and goodness,--men of little intellect
have infused into the multitudes of the churches the principle of a
supernatural life.](2040144.md)
