[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040295)  [Next](2040297.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p1"></span> 31. *Letter of Constantius to the
Ethiopians against Frumentius.*

<span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p2"></span>The following is the letter which was
written to the Princes of Auxumis respecting Frumentius, Bishop of that
place.

<span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p3"></span>Constantius Victor Maximus Augustus,
to Æzanes and Sazanes.

<span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p4"></span>It is altogether a matter of the
greatest care and concern to us, to extend the knowledge of the supreme
God <span id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372.md) ; and I think that the
whole race of mankind claims from us equal regard in this respect, in
order that they may pass their lives in hope, being brought to a proper
knowledge of God, and having no <span id="page_251">p. 251</span> <span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-Page_251"></span>differences with each other in their
enquiries concerning justice and truth. Wherefore considering that you
are deserving of the same provident care as the Romans, and desiring to
shew equal regard for your welfare, we command that the same doctrine be
professed in your Churches as in theirs. Send therefore speedily into
Egypt the Bishop Frumentius to the most venerable Bishop George, and the
rest who are there, who have especial authority to appoint to these
offices, and to decide questions concerning them. For of course you know
and remember (unless you alone pretend to be ignorant of that which all
men are well aware of) that this Frumentius was advanced to his present
rank by Athanasius, a man who is guilty of ten thousand crimes; for he
has not been able fairly to clear himself of any of the charges brought
against him, but was at once deprived of his see, and now wanders about
destitute of any fixed abode, and passes from one country to another, as
if by this means he could escape his own wickedness. Now if Frumentius
shall readily obey our commands, and shall submit to an enquiry into all
the circumstances of his appointment, he will shew plainly to all men,
that he is in no respect opposed to the laws of the Church and the
established <span id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373.md) faith. And being
brought to trial, when he shall have given proof of his general good
conduct, and submitted an account of his life to those who are to judge
of these things, he shall receive his appointment from them, if it shall
indeed appear that he has any right to be a Bishop. But if he shall
delay and avoid the trial, it will surely be very evident, that he has
been induced by the persuasions of the wicked Athanasius, thus to
indulge impiety against God, choosing to follow the course of him whose
wickedness has been made manifest. And our fear is lest he should pass
over into Auxumis and corrupt your people, by setting before them
accursed and impious statements, and not only unsettle and disturb the
Churches, and blaspheme the supreme God, but also thereby cause utter
overthrow and destruction to the several nations whom he visits. But I
am sure that Frumentius will return home, perfectly acquainted with all
matters that concern the Church, having derived much instruction, which
will be of great and general utility, from the conversation of the most
venerable George, and such other of the Bishops, as are excellently
qualified to communicate such knowledge. May God continually preserve
you, most honoured brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[250:1373](2040296.htm#fr_1372.md) <span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.2"></span>τοῦ κρείττονος γνῶσις</span>, vid. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.4"></span>τὸν κρείττονα</span>,
infr. And so in Arius’s Thalia, the Eternal Father, in contrast to the
Son, is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.6"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.7"></span>κρείττων, τὸν κρείττονα</span>, *de
Synod.* §15. So again, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.9"></span>θεὸν τὸν</span> \[<span
class="Greek"><span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.10"></span>ὄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.11"></span>ντα</span>\] <span
class="Greek"><span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.12"></span>συνιέντας</span>,
supr. §30, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.14"></span>συνετῶν θεοῦ</span> in the Thalia,
*Orat.* i. 5. Again, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.16"></span>σοφίας ἐξηγητὰς</span>, supr. §30 and
<span class="Greek"><span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.17"></span>τῶν σοφίας
μεταχόντων, κατὰ πάντα σοφῶν</span> in the Thalia, ibid. And <span
class="Greek"><span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.19"></span>τῶν ἐξηγητῶν τοὺς
ἄκρους εἵλεσθε</span>, supr. §30, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.21"></span>τούτων κατ᾽ ἴχνος ἦλθον</span> in the
Thalia.

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[251:1374](2040296.htm#fr_1373.md) <span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p5.22"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxxi-p6.1"></span>κρατούσῃ</span>, supr. §23, note 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He defends his Flight.](2040297.md)
