[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040447)  [Next](2040449) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Letter LI</span>.—*Second Letter to
Lucifer.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>To</span> the most glorious lord and
deservedly much-desired fellow-Bishop Lucifer, Athanasius greeting in
the Lord.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p3"></span>Although I believe that tidings have
reached your holiness also of the persecution which the enemies of
Christ have just now attempted to raise, seeking our blood, yet our own
most beloved messengers can tell your piety about it. For to such a
length did they dare to carry their madness by means of the soldiers,
that they not only banished the Clergy of the city, but also went out to
the Hermits, and laid their fatal hands upon Solitaries. Hence I also
withdrew far away, lest those who entertained me should suffer trouble
at their hands. For whom do Arians spare, who have spared not even their
own souls? Or how can they give up their infamous actions while they
persist in denying Christ our Lord the only Son of God? This is the root
of their wickedness; on this foundation of sand they build up the
perversity of their ways, as we find it written in the thirteenth Psalm,
‘The fool said in his heart there is no God;’ and presently follows,
‘Corrupt are they and become abominable in their works <span
id="fr_4634"></span>[4635](#fn_4634) .’ Hence the Jews who denied the
Son of God, deserved to be called ‘a sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children without law <span
id="fr_4635"></span>[4636](#fn_4635) .’ Why ‘without law?’—because you
have deserted the Lord. And so the most blessed Paul, when he had begun
not only to believe in the Son of God, but also to preach His deity,
wrote, ‘I know nothing against myself <span
id="fr_4636"></span>[4637](#fn_4636) .’ Accordingly we too, according to
your confession of faith, desire to hold the Apostolic tradi<span
id="page_562">p. 562</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-Page_562"></span>tion, and to live according to the
commands of the divine law, that we may be found along with you in that
band in which now Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs are
rejoicing. So then, though the Arian madness, aided by external power,
was so active that our brethren on account of their fury could not even
see the open air with freedom, yet by God’s favour, according to your
prayers, I have been able, though with trouble and danger, to see the
brother who is wont to bring me necessaries and the letters of your
holiness, along with those of others. And so we have received the books
of your most wise and religious soul, in which we have seen the image of
an Apostle, the confidence of a Prophet, the teaching of truth, the
doctrine of true faith, the way of heaven, the glory of martyrdom, the
triumphs against the Arian heresy, the unimpaired tradition of our
Fathers, the right rule of the Church’s order. O truly Lucifer, who
according to your name bring the light of truth, and have set it on a
candlestick to give light to all. For who, except the Arians, does not
clearly see from your teaching the true faith and the taint of the
Arians. Forcibly and admirably, like light from darkness, you have
separated the truth from the subtilty and dishonesty of heretics,
defended the Catholic Church, proved that the arguments of the Arians
are nothing but a kind of hallucination, and taught that the diabolical
gnashings of the teeth are to be despised. How good and welcome are your
exhortations to martyrdom; how highly to be desired have you shewn death
to be on behalf of Christ the Son of the living God <span
id="fr_4637"></span>[4638](#fn_4637) . What love you have shewn for the
world to come and for the heavenly life. You seem to be a true temple of
the Saviour, Who dwells in you and utters these exact words through you,
and has given such grace to your discourses. Beloved as you were before
among all, now such passionate affection for you is settled in the minds
of all, that they call you the Elijah of our times; and no wonder. For
if they who seem to please God are called Sons of God, much more proper
is it to give that name to the associates of the Prophets, namely the
Confessors, and especially to you. Believe me, Lucifer, it is not you
only who has uttered this, but the Holy Spirit with you. Whence comes so
great a memory for the Scriptures? Whence an unimpaired sense and
understanding of them? Whence has such an order of discourse been
framed? Whence did you get such exhortations to the way of heaven,
whence such confidence against the devil, and such proofs against
heretics, unless the Holy Spirit had been lodged in you? Rejoice
therefore to see that you are already there where also are your
predecessors the martyrs, that is, among the band of angels. We also
rejoice, having you as an example of valour, and patience, and liberty.
For I blush to say anything of what you have written about my name <span
id="fr_4638"></span>[4639](#fn_4638) , lest I should appear a flatterer.
But I know and believe that the Lord Himself, Who has revealed all
knowledge to your holy and religious spirit, will reward you for this
labour also with a reward in the kingdom of the heavens. Since then you
are such a man, we ask the Lord in prayer that you may pray for us, that
in His mercy He may now deign to look down upon the Catholic Church, and
deliver all His servants from the hands of persecutors; in order that
all they too who have fallen on account of temporal fear may at length
be enabled to raise themselves and return to the way of righteousness,
led away from which they are wandering, poor people, not knowing in what
a pit they are. In particular I ask, if I have said anything amiss, you
would be good enough to overlook it, for from so great a fountain my
unskilfulness has not been able to draw what it might have done. But as
to our brethren, I ask you again to overlook my not having been able to
see them. For truth itself is my witness that I wished and longed to
compass this, and was greatly grieved at being unable. For my eyes
ceased not from tears, nor my spirit from groaning, because we are not
permitted even to see the brethren. But God is my witness, that on
account of their persecution I have not been able to see even the
parents whom I have <span id="fr_4639"></span>[4640](#fn_4639) . For
what is there that the Arians leave undone? They watch the roads,
observe those who enter and leave the city, search the vessels, go round
the deserts, ransack houses, harass the brethren, cause unrest to
everybody. But thanks be to God, in so doing they are more and more
incurring the execration of all, and coming to be truly known for what
your holiness has called them: slaves of Antichrist. And, poor wretches,
hated as they are, they persist in their malice, until they shall be
condemned to the death of their ancestor Pharaoh. Those with me salute
your piety. Pray salute those who are with you. May God’s divine grace
preserve you, mindful of us and ever blessed, worthily called man of
God, servant of Christ, partner of the Apostles, comfort of the
brotherhood, master of truth, and in all things most longed for.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4634"></span>[561:4635](2040448.htm#fr_4634) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p4"></span> [Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4635"></span>[561:4636](2040448.htm#fr_4635) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p5"></span> [Isa. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4636"></span>[561:4637](2040448.htm#fr_4636) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p6"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4637"></span>[562:4638](2040448.htm#fr_4637) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p7"></span> Lucifer had written among other
books one called ‘Moriendum pro Dei Filio.’ His two books ‘pro sancto
Athanasio’ are referred to below.

<span id="fn_4638"></span>[562:4639](2040448.htm#fr_4638) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p8"></span> Lucifer’s two books *pro Athanasio.*

<span id="fn_4639"></span>[562:4640](2040448.htm#fr_4639) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.vi-p9"></span> ‘Parentes quos habeo.’ Can this
refer to literal parents? (1) he was now over 60 years old; (2) some 6
years later, under Valens, he hid, according to the tale in Socr. iv.
13, for four months in his father’s tomb (see Prolegg. ch. ii. §9).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Letter to Monks. (Written 358-360).](2040449)
