[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040331)  [Next](2040333) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="xx.i-Page_266"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to Historia Arianorum.</span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>(<span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p3.1"></span>Written</span> 358.)

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p4.1"></span>This</span> History takes up the narrative from
the admission of Arius to communion at the ‘dedication’ synod of
Jerusalem (adjourned Council of Tyre) in 335, as described in *Apol. c.
Ar.* 84. It has been commonly assumed from its abrupt beginning (the
<span class="Greek"><span id="xx.i-p4.2"></span>ταῦτα</span>, referring
to an antecedent narrative) that the History has lost its earlier
chapters, which contained the story of Arianism *ab ovo.* Montfaucon
suggests in fact that the copyists omitted the first chapters on account
of their identity in substance with the great Apology. But this seems to
require reconsideration. If the alleged missing chapters were
different <span id="fr_1510"></span>[1511](#fn_1510) in form from the
second part of the Apology, they would not have been omitted: for such
repetitions of the same matter in other words are very frequent in the
works of Athanasius: but if they were identical in form, they are not
lost, and the conclusion is that the History was written with the
express intention of continuing the Apology. The customary inference
from the abrupt commencement of the History may be dismissed with a *non
sequitur.* Such a commencement was natural under the circumstances: we
may compare the case of Xenophon, whose ‘Hellenica’ begin with the words
<span class="Greek"><span id="xx.i-p5.2"></span>Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα, οὐ
πολλαῖς ἡμέραις ὕστερον</span>…, the reference being to the end of the
history of Thucydides. The view here maintained is clinched by the fact
that Athanasius at this very time *reissued* his Apology against the
Arians with an appendix (§§89, 90) on the lapse of Hosius and
Liberius <span id="fr_1511"></span>[1512](#fn_1511) .

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>The History of the Arians, then, is a complete
work, and written to continue the narrative of the second part of the
Apology. Being in fact a manifesto against Constantius, it naturally
takes up the tale just before his entry upon the scene as the patron of
Arianism. The substantially Athanasian authorship of the History cannot
be questioned. The writer occasionally, like many others ancient and
modern, speaks of himself in the third person (references §21, note 5,
see also *Orat.* i. 3); but in other places he clearly identifies
himself with Athanasius. The only passage which appears to distinguish
the writer from Athanasius (§52, see note), may be due to the bishop’s
habitual (*Apol. Const.* 11) employment of an amanuensis, but more
probably the text is corrupt; in any case the passage cannot weigh
against the clear sense of §21. The *immediate* Athanasian authorship of
the piece has been questioned partly on the ground of its alleged
incompleteness, partly on that of several slight discrepancies with
other writings. On this twofold ground it is inferred that the Arian
History has passed through some obscure process of re-editing (Gwatkin,
*Studies,* p. 99, §14 ‘dependent on the *Vita* \[*Antonii*\] 86,’ p.
127, ‘not an uncorrupted work’) by a later hand. I am quite unconvinced
of this. The incompleteness of the work is, as I think I have shewn
above, an unnecessary hypothesis, while the mistakes or inconsistencies
may well be due to circumstances of composition. It was written in
hiding, perhaps while moving from place to place, certainly under more
pressure of highly wrought agitation and bitterness of spirit than any
other work of Athanasius. The most accurate of men when working at
leisure make strange slips at times (e.g. §13, note 4); the mistakes in
the History are not more than one might expect in such a work. The
principal are, §21 (see note 3), §14 (reference in note 8), §11, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xx.i-p7.1"></span>πρὶν γενέσθαι ταῦτα</span>
(cf. *Encycl*. 5), §47 (inverting order of events in §39).

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>The date of the History is at first sight a
difficulty. The fall of Liberius is dealt with in Part V., which must
therefore have been written not earlier than 358 (the exact chronology
of the lapse of Liberius is not certain), while yet in §4 Leontius, who
died in the summer or autumn of 357, is still bishop of Antioch. We must
therefore suppose that the History was begun at about the time when the
*Apologia de Fuga* was finished (cf. the bitter conclusion <span
id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span id="xx.i-Page_267"></span>of that
tract) and completed when the lapse of Liberius was known in Egypt. A
more accurate determination of date is not permitted by our materials.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>The tract before us is in effect a fierce
anonymous pamphlet against Constantius. Even apart from the references
in the letters to the Monks and to Serapion (see below), the work bears
clear marks of having been intended for secret circulation (for the
practice, see Fialon, pp. 193–199). ‘Instead of the “pious” Emperor who
was so well versed in Scripture, whose presence would gladden a
dedication festival, whose well-known humanity forbade the supposition
that he could have perpetrated a deliberate injustice, we find a
Costyllius (or “Connikin”) whose misdeeds could only be palliated by the
imbecility which rendered him the slave of his own servant—inhuman
towards his nearest of kin,—false and crafty, a Pharaoh, a Saul, an
Ahab, a Belshazzar, more cruel than Pilate or Maximian, ignorant of the
Gospels, a patron of heresy, a precursor of Antichrist, an enemy of
Christ, as if himself, Antichrist, and—the words must be
written—self-abandoned to the future doom of fire’ (Bright, *Introd.* p.
lxxviii., and see §§9, 30, 32, 34, 40, 45, 46, 51, 53, 67–70, 74, 80).
There are certainly many passages which one could wish that Athanasius
had not written,—one, not necessary to specify, in which he fully
condescends to the coarse brutality of the age, mingling it unpardonably
with holy things. But Athanasius was human, and exasperated by inhuman
vindictiveness and perfidy. If in the passages referred to he falls
below himself, and speaks in the spirit of his generation, there are not
wanting passages equal in nobility to anything he ever wrote. Once more
to quote Dr. Bright: ‘The beautiful description of the Archbishop’s
return from his second exile, and of its moral and religious effect upon
Alexandrian Church society (25), the repeated protests against the
principle of persecution as alien to the mind of the Church of Christ
(29, 33, 67), the tender allusion to sympathy for the poor as
instinctive in human nature (63), the vivid picture—doubtless somewhat
coloured by imagination—of the stand made by Western bishops, and
notably for a time by Liberius, against the tyrannous dictation of
Constantius in matters ecclesiastical (34 *sqq.* 76), the generous
estimate of Hosius and Liberius in the hour of their infirmity (41, 45),
the three golden passages which describe the union maintained by a
common faith and a sincere affection between friends who are separated
from each other (40), the all-sufficient presence of God with His
servants in their extremest solitude (47), and the future joy when
heaven would be to sufferers for the truth as a calm haven to sailors
after a storm (79). It is in such contexts that we see the true
Athanasius, and touch the source of his magnificent insuperable
constancy’ (p. lxxix.). Nothing could be more just, or more happily put.
It ought to be noted before leaving this part of the subject, that the
language put into the mouth of Constantius and the Arians (33 fin. 1, 3,
9, 12, 15, 30, 42, 45, 60), is not so much a report of their words as ‘a
representation*ad invidiam* of what is assumed to have been in their
minds.’ Other instances of this are to be found in Athanasius (*Ep. Æg.*
18, *Orat.* iii. 17), and he uses the device advisedly (*de Syn.* 7,
*middle*).

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>The letter to Serapion on the death of Arius,
and the letter to Monks, which in <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p10.1"></span>mss.</span> and printed editions are prefixed to
this treatise, will be found in the collection of letters below (No. 54
and 52). They have been removed from their time-honoured place in
accordance with the general arrangement of this volume, though not
without hesitation, and apart from any intention to dogmatise on the
relation they bear to the present tract.

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>The ‘Arian History’ has commonly been called
the ‘Hist. Arianorum ad Monachos,’ or even the ‘Epistola ad Monachos;’
even at the present day it is sometimes cited simply as ‘ad Monachos.’
The History has derived this title from the fact, that in the Codices
and editions, the Letter and History are frequently joined together
without any sign of division. At the same time the correctness of this
collocation is not entirely free from doubt.

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>Serapion (*Letter* 54 §1) had written to
Athanasius asking for three things,—a history of recent events relating
to himself, an *exposé* of the Arian heresy, and an exact account of the
death of Arius. The latter Athanasius furnishes in the letter just
referred to. For the two former, he refers Serapion to a document he had
written for the monks (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.i-p12.1"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.i-p12.2"></span>περ ἔγραψα τοῖς μοναχοῖς</span>), and which he
now sends to Serapion. He begs Serapion at the end of his letter not on
any account to part with the letters he has received, nor to copy them
(he gave, he adds, the same directions to the monks, cf. *Letter* 52.
3), but to send them back with such corrections and additions as he
might think desirable. He refers him to his letter to the monks for an
explanation of the circumstances which render this precaution necessary.
The monks (*ib.* 1) had apparently made the same request as Serapion
afterwards made. It has been conjectured that the four ‘Orations’
against Arianism, or the first three, are the treatise on the heresy
addressed to the monks and subsequently sent to Serapion. But the <span
id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span id="xx.i-Page_268"></span>description
of that treatise <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.i-p12.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.i-p12.4"></span>γραψα δί ὀλίγων</span> (*Letter* 52. 1) is quite
inapplicable to the longest treatise extant among the works of
Athanasius. Still less, even if the Arian History were a fragment (see
above), could we suppose that the accompanying treatise formed the
missing first part. We must therefore acquiesce in the conclusion that
the treatise in question has perished. Accordingly we cannot be sure
(although it is generally regarded as highly probable <span
id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512) ) that the historical portion is
preserved to us in the ‘Arian History.’ In any case the Letter to Monks
is quite unconnected with it in its subject matter, and ends with the
blessing, as the History does with the doxology, in the form of an
independent document.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>While admitting, therefore, the naturalness
of the traditional arrangement, we may fairly treat the two as distinct,
and permit the Arian History to launch the reader without preamble *in
medias res.*

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span>As the tract is long, and various in its
subject-matter, the following scheme of contents may be found useful. It
will be noted that chronological order is observed in Parts I.–IV, i.e.
till 355, when the existing persecution of Constantius, the main theme
of the History (*Letter* 52, §1), is reached. The history of this
persecution is dealt with (Parts V.–VII.) with much more fulness, and is
grouped round subjects each of which covers more or less the same
period. Part VIII. deals with the more recent events in Egypt.

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p16.1"></span>Part</span> I. <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p16.2"></span>Proceedings of the Arians from the Council of
Tyre till the return of the Exiles</span> (335–337).

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>§§1–3. General character of their
proceedings.

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>§§4–7. Persecution of the orthodox bishops.

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>§8. Restoration of the exiles after
Constantine’s death.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p20.1"></span>Part</span> II. <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p20.2"></span>Second Exile of Athanasius, till the Council of
Sardica</span> (337–343).

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>§9. Renewed intrigues against Athanasius.

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span>§10. Gregory intruded by Constantius as
bishop.

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span>§11. Athanasius at Rome. Negotiations for a
Council there.

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span>§§12–14. Violent proceedings of Gregory. Case
of Duke Balacius.

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p25.1"></span>Part</span> III. <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p25.2"></span>From Sardica till the Death of Constans</span>
(343–350).

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span>§15. The meeting of the Synod. Dismay of the
Arianising bishops.

<span id="xx.i-p27"></span>§16. Their flight from the Synod.

<span id="xx.i-p28"></span>§17. Proceedings of the Synod.

<span id="xx.i-p29"></span>§§18, 19. Continued persecution after it.

<span id="xx.i-p30"></span>§20. The infamous plot of Stephen against the
Sardican legates at Antioch.

<span id="xx.i-p31"></span>§§21, 22. Constantius changes his mind and
recalls Athanasius with a solemn oath to defend him for the future.

<span id="xx.i-p32"></span>§§23, 24. Letters of Constantius at this
time.

<span id="xx.i-p33"></span>§25. Return of Athanasius (346).

<span id="xx.i-p34"></span>§26. Recantation of Valens and Ursacius.

<span id="xx.i-p35"></span>§27. Peace and joy of the Church.

<span id="xx.i-p36"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p36.1"></span>Part</span> IV. <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p36.2"></span>From the Death of Constans to the Council of
Milan</span> (351–355).

<span id="xx.i-p37"></span>§28. Renewed intrigues of the Arianising
party.

<span id="xx.i-p38"></span>§§29, 30. Valens, Ursacius, and the Emperor
return to Arianism.

<span id="xx.i-p39"></span>§§31, 32. Constantius again persecutes the
Church.

<span id="xx.i-p40"></span>§33. Wickedness of persecution. Western
bishops banished by Constantius \[at Milan\].

<span id="xx.i-p41"></span>§34. How they diffused the truth wherever
they went.

<span id="xx.i-p42"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p42.1"></span>Part</span> V. <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p42.2"></span>Liberius</span> (355–358).

<span id="xx.i-p43"></span>§35–37. Firmness of Liberius and rage of
Constantius.

<span id="xx.i-p44"></span>§38. Concerning the eunuchs at the Court.

<span id="xx.i-p45"></span>§39, 40. Liberius rebukes the Emperor and is
cruelly exiled.

<span id="xx.i-p46"></span>§41. After two years of exile, Liberius gives
way under force.

<span id="xx.i-p47"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p47.1"></span>Part</span> VI. <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p47.2"></span>Hosius</span> (355–358).

<span id="xx.i-p48"></span>§42. Intrigues against Hosius.

<span id="xx.i-p49"></span>§43. Vain attempts of Constantius to gain him
over.

<span id="xx.i-p50"></span>§44. Letter of Hosius remonstrating with the
Emperor.

<span id="xx.i-p51"></span>§§45, 46. Lapse of Hosius, his fidelity to
Athanasius, recantation, and death.

<span id="xx.i-p52"></span>§47. Monstrosity of the above proceedings.

<span id="xx.i-p53"></span><span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="xx.i-Page_269"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p53.1"></span>Part</span> VII. <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p53.2"></span>The attacks upon Athanasius</span> (351–356).

<span id="xx.i-p54"></span>§47. Athanasius isolated by the exile of
other bishops.

<span id="xx.i-p55"></span>§48. Attacks upon Athanasius himself
(353–356).

<span id="xx.i-p56"></span>§§49, (50), 51. Hypocrisy of the Emperor’s
pretended regard for his Father and Brother.

<span id="xx.i-p57"></span>§§52, 53. Impropriety of Imperial
intervention in Church affairs.

<span id="xx.i-p58"></span>§54. The Churches at Alexandria given to the
Arians.

<span id="xx.i-p59"></span>§55. Violence of Cataphronius, Prefect of
Egypt.

<span id="xx.i-p60"></span>§§56, 57. Sack of the great church: divine
judgments.

<span id="xx.i-p61"></span>§58. Scenes of persecution.

<span id="xx.i-p62"></span>§§59, 60. Savagery of Duke Sebastian.
Martyrdom of Eutychius (356).

<span id="xx.i-p63"></span>§§61–63. Cruel treatment of the poor, and of
the clergy.

<span id="xx.i-p64"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p64.1"></span>Part</span> VIII. <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.i-p64.2"></span>Further details of the Persecution in
Egypt</span> (357).

<span id="xx.i-p65"></span>§64. The Arian persecution more cruel than
that of Maximian.

<span id="xx.i-p66"></span>§65. Martyrdom of Secundus of Barka.

<span id="xx.i-p67"></span>§§66, 67. Persecution the disgrace of the new
heresy.

<span id="xx.i-p68"></span>§68, 69. Constantius worse than Ahab, &c.,
and inhuman toward his own family.

<span id="xx.i-p69"></span>§70. His fickleness, lack of character, and
tyranny.

<span id="xx.i-p70"></span>§71. Novelty of this persecution on the part
of pretended Christians.

<span id="xx.i-p71"></span>§72. Cruel exile of bishops and torture of
monks and lay people.

<span id="xx.i-p72"></span>§73. Venal appointments to fill the vacancies
thus created.

<span id="xx.i-p73"></span>§74. The predicted signs of Antichrist
applied to Constantius.

<span id="xx.i-p74"></span>§75. Arrival of George at Alexandria.

<span id="xx.i-p75"></span>§76, 77. Further marks of Antichrist in the
tyranny of Constantius over the Church.

<span id="xx.i-p76"></span>§78, 79. The Meletians the allies of Arianism
in Egypt.

<span id="xx.i-p77"></span>§80. Duty of separating from heretics.

<span id="xx.i-p78"></span>§81. *Appendix* to §48. Second protest of the
Church of Alexandria against the proceedings of Syrianus (356).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[266:1511](2040332.htm#fr_1510) <span
id="xx.i-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span> i.e. slight modifications excepted, see
Montf. in *Migne*, P.G. xxv. 318, note 46, and 389, note 60.

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[266:1512](2040332.htm#fr_1511) <span
id="xx.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span> For another example of hastily inferred
mutiliation, see §48, note 3.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[268:1513](2040332.htm#fr_1512) <span
id="xx.i-p12.5"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span> See Eichhorn, p. 61; Bright. p. lxxiv.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Arian History. (Historia Arianorum ad Monachos.)](2040333)
