[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040085)  [Next](2040087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.iii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.v-p1"></span> §39. *Impossibility of a plurality of
Gods*.

<span id="vi.ii.iii.v-p2"></span>For we must not think there is more
than one ruler and maker of Creation: but it belongs to correct and true
religion to believe that its Artificer is one, while Creation herself
clearly points to this. For the fact that there is one Universe only and
not more is a conclusive proof that its Maker is one. For if there were
a plurality of gods, there would necessarily be also more universes than
one. For neither were it reasonable for more than one God to make a
single universe, nor for the one universe to be made by more than one,
because of <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span
id="vi.ii.iii.v-Page_25"></span>the absurdities which would result from
this. 2. Firstly, if the one universe were made by a plurality of gods,
that would mean weakness on the part of those who made it, because many
contributed to a single result; which would be a strong proof of the
imperfect creative skill of each. For if one were sufficient, the many
would not supplement each other’s deficiency. But to say that there is
any deficiency in God is not only impious, but even beyond all
sacrilege. For even among men one would not call a workman perfect if he
were unable to finish his work, a single piece, by himself and without
the aid of several others. 3. But if, although each one was able to
accomplish the whole, yet all worked at it in order to claim a share in
the result, we have the laughable conclusion that each worked for
reputation, lest he should be suspected of inability. But, once more, it
is most grotesque to ascribe vainglory to gods. 4. Again, if each one
were sufficient for the creation of the whole, what need of more than
one, one being self-sufficient for the universe? Moreover it would be
evidently impious and grotesque, to make the thing created one, while
the creators were many and different, it being a maxim of science <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) that what is one and complete is
higher than things that are diverse. 5. And this you must know, that if
the universe had been made by a plurality of gods, its movements would
be diverse and inconsistent. For having regard to each one of its
makers, its movements would be correspondingly different. But such
difference again, as was said before, would involve disarray and general
disorder; for not even a ship will sail aright if she be steered by
many, unless one pilot hold the tiller <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) , nor will a lyre struck by many
produce a tuneful sound, unless there be one artist who strikes it. 6.
Creation, then, being one, and the Universe one, and its order one, we
must perceive that its King and Artificer also is one. For this is why
the Artificer Himself made the whole universe one, lest by the
coexistence of more than one a plurality of makers should be supposed;
but that as the work is one, its Maker also may be believed to be One.
Nor does it follow from the unity of the Maker that the Universe must be
one, for God might have made others as well. But because the Universe
that has been made is one, it is necessary to believe that its Maker
also is one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[25:159](2040086.htm#fr_158) <span
id="vi.ii.iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.v-p3"></span> Or, perhaps, “innate, self-evident
maxim” (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.ii.iii.v-p3.2"></span>λόγος
φυσικός</span>).

<span id="fn_159"></span>[25:160](2040086.htm#fr_159) <span
id="vi.ii.iii.v-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.v-p4"></span> lit. “the steering-paddles.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The rationality and order of the Universe proves that it is the
work of the Reason or Word of God.](2040087)
