[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040392)  [Next](2040394) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.i-Page_451"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Councils of Ariminum and Seleucia.</span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Part I. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p3.2"></span>History of the Councils</span>.</span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p4"></span>Reason why two Councils were called.
Inconsistency and folly of calling any; and of the style of the Arian
formularies; occasion of the Nicene Council; proceedings at Ariminum;
Letter of the Council to Constantius; its decree. Proceedings at
Seleucia; reflections on the conduct of the Arians.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p5"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p5.1"></span>Perhaps</span> news has reached even
yourselves concerning the Council, which is at this time the subject of
general conversation; for letters both from the Emperor and the
Prefects <span id="fr_3449"></span>[3450](#fn_3449) were circulated far
and wide for its convocation. However, you take that interest in the
events which have occurred, that I have determined upon giving you an
account of what I have seen myself, and accurately ascertained, which
may save you from the suspense attendant on the reports of others; and
this the more, because there are parties who are in the habit of
misrepresenting what has happened. At Nicæa then, which had been fixed
upon, the Council has not met, but a second edict was issued, convening
the Western Bishops at Ariminum in Italy, and the Eastern at Seleucia
the Rugged, as it is called, in Isauria. The professed reason of such a
meeting was to treat of the faith touching our Lord Jesus Christ; and
those who alleged it, were Ursacius, Valens, and one Germinius <span
id="fr_3450"></span>[3451](#fn_3450) from Pannonia; and from Syria,
Acacius, Eudoxius, and Patrophilus <span
id="fr_3451"></span>[3452](#fn_3451) of Scythopolis. These men who had
always been of the Arian party, and ‘understood neither how they believe
or whereof they affirm,’ and were silently deceiving first one and then
another, and scattering the second sowing <span
id="fr_3452"></span>[3453](#fn_3452) of their heresy, influenced some
who seemed to be somewhat, and the Emperor Constantius among them, being
a heretic <span id="fr_3453"></span>[3454](#fn_3453) , on some pretence
about the Faith, to call a Council; under the idea that they should be
able to put into the shade the Nicene Council, and prevail upon all to
turn round, and to establish irreligion everywhere instead of the Truth.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p11"></span>2. Now here I marvel first, and think
that I shall carry every sensible man whatever with me, that, whereas a
General Council had been fixed, and all were looking forward to it, it
was all of a sudden divided into two, so that one part met here, and the
other there. However, this was surely the doing of Providence, in order
in the respective Councils to exhibit the faith without guile or
corruption of the one party, and to expose the dishonesty and duplicity
of the other. Next, this too was on the mind of myself and my true
brethren here, and made us anxious, the impropriety of this great
gathering which we saw in progress; for what pressed so much, that the
whole world was to be put in confusion, and those who at the time bore
the profession of clergy, should run about far and near, seeking how
best to learn to believe in our Lord Jesus Christ? Certainly if they
were believers already, they would not have been seeking, as though they
were not. And to the catechumens, this was no small scandal; but to the
heathen, it was something more than common, and even furnished broad
merriment <span id="fr_3454"></span>[3455](#fn_3454) , that Christians,
as if waking out of sleep at this time of day, should be enquiring how
they were to believe concerning Christ; while their professed clergy,
though claiming deference from their flocks, as teachers, were
unbelievers on their own shewing, in that they were seeking what they
had not. And the party of Ursacius, who were at the bottom of all this,
did not understand what wrath they were storing up ([Rom. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span id="xxii.ii.i-p12.2"></span>)
against themselves, as our Lord says by His saints, ‘Woe unto them,
through whom My Name is blasphemed among the Gentiles’ ([Isa.
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005), [Rom.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024)<span
id="xxii.ii.i-p12.3"></span>); and by His own mouth in the Gospels
([Matt. xviii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006)<span
id="xxii.ii.i-p12.4"></span>), ‘Whoso shall offend one of these little
ones, it were better for him <span id="page_452">p. 452</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.i-Page_452"></span>that a millstone were hanged about his
neck and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea, than,’ as Luke
adds, ‘that he should offend one of these little ones’ ([Luke xvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#002)<span id="xxii.ii.i-p12.5"></span>).

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p13"></span>3. What defect of teaching was there for
religious truth in the Catholic Church <span
id="fr_3455"></span>[3456](#fn_3455) , that they should enquire
concerning faith now, and should prefix this year’s Consulate to their
profession of faith? For Ursacius and Valens and Germinius and their
friends have done what never took place, never was heard of among
Christians. After putting into writing what it pleased them to believe,
they prefix to it the Consulate, and the month and the day of the
current year <span id="fr_3456"></span>[3457](#fn_3456) ; thereby to
shew all sensible men, that their faith dates, not from of old, but now,
from the reign of Constantius <span id="fr_3457"></span>[3458](#fn_3457)
; for whatever they write has a view to their own heresy. Moreover,
though pretending to write about the Lord, they nominate another master
for themselves, Constantius, who has bestowed on them this reign of
irreligion <span id="fr_3458"></span>[3459](#fn_3458) ; and they who
deny that the Son is everlasting, have called him Eternal Emperor; such
foes of Christ are they in addition to irreligion. But perhaps the dates
in the holy Prophets form their excuse for the Consulate; so bold a
pretence, however, will serve but to publish more fully their ignorance
of the subject. For the prophecies of the saints do indeed specify their
times (for instance, Isaiah and Hosea lived in the days of Uzziah,
Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah; Jeremiah in the days of Josiah; Ezekiel and
Daniel prophesied under Cyrus and Darius; and others in other times);
yet they were not laying the foundations of divine religion; it was
before them, and was always, for before the foundation of the world God
prepared it for us in Christ. Nor were they signifying the respective
dates of their own faith; for they had been believers before these
dates. But the dates did but belong to their own preaching. And this
preaching spoke beforehand of the Saviour’s coming, but directly of what
was to happen to Israel and the nations; and the dates denoted not the
commencement of faith, as I said before, but of the prophets themselves,
that is, when it was they thus prophesied. But our modern sages, not in
historical narration, nor in prediction of the future, but, after
writing, ‘The Catholic Faith was published,’ immediately add the
Consulate and the month and the day, that, as the saints specified the
dates of their histories, and of their own ministries, so these may mark
the date of their own faith. And would that they had written, touching
‘their own <span id="fr_3459"></span>[3460](#fn_3459) ’ (for it does
date from today); and had not made their essay as touching ‘the
Catholic,’ for they did not write, ‘Thus we believe,’ but ‘the Catholic
Faith was published.’

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p19"></span>4. The boldness then of their design
shews how little they understand the subject; while the novelty of their
phrase matches the Arian heresy. For thus they shew, when it was they
began their own faith, and that from that same time present they would
have it proclaimed. And as according to the Evangelist Luke, there ‘was
made a decree’ ([Luke ii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)<span
id="xxii.ii.i-p19.1"></span>) concerning the taxing, and this decree
before was not, but began from those days in which it was made by its
framer, they also in like manner, by writing, ‘The Faith is now
published,’ shewed that the sentiments of their heresy are novel, and
were not before. But if they add ‘of the Catholic Faith,’ they fall
before they know it into the extravagance of the Phrygians, and say with
them, ‘To us first was revealed,’ and ‘from us dates the Faith of
Christians.’ And as those inscribe it with the names of Maximilla and
Montanus <span id="fr_3460"></span>[3461](#fn_3460) , so do these with
‘Constantius, Master,’ instead of Christ. If, however, as they would
have it, the faith dates from the present Consulate, what will the
Fathers do, and the blessed Martyrs? nay, what will they themselves do
with their own catechumens, who departed to rest before this Consulate?
how will they wake them up, that so they may obliterate their former
lessons, and may sow in turn the seeming discoveries which they have now
put into writing <span id="fr_3461"></span>[3462](#fn_3461) ? So
ignorant they are on the subject; with no knowledge but that of making
excuses, and those unbecoming and unplausible, and carrying with them
their own refutation.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p22"></span>5. As to the Nicene Council, it was not
a common meeting, but convened upon a pressing necessity, and for a
reasonable object. The Syrians, Cilicians, and Mesopotamians, were out
of order in celebrating the Feast, and kept Easter with the Jews <span
id="fr_3462"></span>[3463](#fn_3462) ; on the other hand, the Arian
heresy had risen up against the Catholic Church, and found supporters in
Eusebius and his fellows, who were both zealous <span id="page_453">p.
453</span> <span id="xxii.ii.i-Page_453"></span>for the heresy, and
conducted the attack upon religious people. This gave occasion for an
Ecumenical Council, that the feast might be everywhere celebrated on one
day, and that the heresy which was springing up might be anathematized.
It took place then; and the Syrians submitted, and the Fathers
pronounced the Arian heresy to be the forerunner of Antichrist <span
id="fr_3463"></span>[3464](#fn_3463) , and drew up a suitable formula
against it. And yet in this, many as they are, they ventured on nothing
like the proceedings <span id="fr_3464"></span>[3465](#fn_3464) of these
three or four men <span id="fr_3465"></span>[3466](#fn_3465) . Without
pre-fixing Consulate, month, and day, they wrote concerning Easter, ‘It
seemed good as follows,’ for it did then seem good that there should be
a general compliance; but about the faith they wrote not, ‘It seemed
good,’ but, ‘Thus believes the Catholic Church;’ and thereupon they
confessed how they believed, in order to shew that their own sentiments
were not novel, but Apostolical; and what they wrote down was no
discovery of theirs, but is the same as was taught by the
Apostles. <span id="fr_3466"></span>[3467](#fn_3466)

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p28"></span>6. But the Councils which they are now
setting in motion, what colourable pretext have they <span
id="fr_3467"></span>[3468](#fn_3467) ? If any new heresy has risen since
the Arian, let them tell us the positions which it has devised, and who
are its inventors? and in their own formula, let them anathematize the
heresies antecedent to this Council of theirs, among which is the Arian,
as the Nicene Fathers did, that it may appear that they too have some
cogent reason for saying what is novel. But if no such event has
happened, and they have it not to shew, but rather they themselves are
uttering heresies, as holding Arius’s irreligion, and are exposed day by
day, and day by day shift their ground <span
id="fr_3468"></span>[3469](#fn_3468) , what need is there of Councils,
when the Nicene is sufficient, as against the Arian heresy, so against
the rest, which it has condemned one and all by means of the sound
faith? For even the notorious Aetius, who was surnamed godless <span
id="fr_3469"></span>[3470](#fn_3469) , vaunts not of the discovering of
any mania of his own, but under stress of weather has been wrecked upon
Arianism, himself and the persons whom he has beguiled. Vainly then do
they run about with the pretext that they have demanded Councils for the
faith’s sake; for divine Scripture is sufficient above all things; but
if a Council be needed on the point, there are the proceedings of the
Fathers, for the Nicene Bishops did not neglect this matter, but stated
the doctrine so exactly, that persons reading their words honestly,
cannot but be reminded by them of the religion towards Christ announced
in divine Scripture <span id="fr_3470"></span>[3471](#fn_3470) .

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p33"></span>7. Having therefore no reason on their
side, but being in difficulty whichever way they turn, in spite of their
pretences, they have nothing left but to say; ‘Forasmuch as we
contradict our predecessors, and transgress the traditions of the
Fathers, therefore we have thought good that a Council should meet <span
id="fr_3471"></span>[3472](#fn_3471) ; but again, whereas we fear lest,
should it meet at one place, our pains will be thrown away, therefore we
have thought good that it be divided into two; that so when we put forth
our documents to these separate portions, we may overreach with more
effect, with the threat of Constantius the patron of this irreligion,
and may supersede the acts of Nicæa, under pretence of the simplicity of
our own documents.’ If they have not put this into words, yet this is
the meaning of their deeds and their disturbances. Certainly, many and
frequent as have been their speeches and writings in various Councils,
never yet have they made mention of the Arian heresy as objectionable;
but, if any present happened to accuse the heresies, they always took up
the defence of the Arian, which the Nicene Council had anathematized;
nay, rather, they cordially welcomed the professors of Arianism. This
then is in itself a strong argument, that the aim of the present
Councils was not truth, but the annulling of the acts of Nicæa; but the
proceedings of them and their friends in the Councils themselves, make
it equally clear that this was the case:—For now we must relate
everything as it occurred.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p35"></span>8. When all were in expectation that
they were to assemble in one place, whom the Emperor’s letters convoked,
and to form one Council, they were divided into two; and, while some
betook themselves to Seleucia called the Rugged, the others met at
Ariminum, to the number of those four hundred bishops and more, among
whom were Germinius, Auxentius, Valens, Ursacius, Demophilus, and
Gaius <span id="fr_3472"></span>[3473](#fn_3472) . And, while the whole
assembly was discussing the matter from the <span id="page_454">p.
454</span> <span id="xxii.ii.i-Page_454"></span>Divine Scriptures, these
men produced <span id="fr_3473"></span>[3474](#fn_3473) a paper, and,
reading out the Consulate, they demanded that it should be preferred to
every Council, and that no questions should be put to the heretics
beyond it, nor inquiry made into their meaning, but that it should be
sufficient by itself;—and what they had written ran as follows:—

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p38"></span>The Catholic Faith <span
id="fr_3474"></span>[3475](#fn_3474) was published in the presence of
our Master the most religious and gloriously victorious Emperor,
Constantius, Augustus, the eternal and august, in the Consulate of the
most illustrious Flavii, Eusebius and Hypatius, in Sirmium on the 11th
of the Calends of June <span id="fr_3475"></span>[3476](#fn_3475) .

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p41"></span>We believe in one Only and True God, the
Father Almighty, Creator and Framer of all things:

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p42"></span>And in one Only-begotten Son of God,
who, before all ages, and before all origin, and before all conceivable
time, and before all comprehensible essence, was begotten impassibly
from God: through whom the ages were disposed and all things were made;
and Him begotten as the Only-begotten, Only from the Only Father, God
from God, like to the Father who begat Him, according to the Scriptures;
whose origin no one knoweth save the Father alone who begat Him. We know
that He, the Only-begotten Son of God, at the Father’s bidding came from
the heavens for the abolishment of sin, and was born of the Virgin Mary,
and conversed with the disciples, and fulfilled the Economy according to
the Father’s will, and was crucified, and died and descended into the
parts beneath the earth, and regulated the things there, Whom the
gate-keepers of hell saw ([Job xxxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#017)<span id="xxii.ii.i-p42.1"></span>,
LXX.) and shuddered; and He rose from the dead the third day, and
conversed with the disciples, and fulfilled all the Economy, and when
the forty days were full, ascended into the heavens, and sitteth on the
right hand of the Father, and is coming in the last day of the
resurrection in the glory of the Father, to render to every one
according to his works.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p43"></span>And in the Holy Ghost, whom the
Only-begotten of God Himself, Jesus Christ, had promised to send to the
race of men, the Paraclete, as it is written, ‘I go to My Father, and I
will ask the Father, and He shall send unto you another Paraclete, even
the Spirit of Truth. He shall take of Mine and shall teach and bring to
your remembrance all things’ ([Job
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#026), [Job
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#014)<span
id="xxii.ii.i-p43.1"></span>).

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p44"></span>But whereas the term ‘essence,’ has been
adopted by the Fathers in simplicity, and gives offence as being
misconceived by the people, and is not contained in the Scriptures, it
has seemed good to remove it, that it be never in any case used of God
again, because the divine Scriptures nowhere use it of Father and Son.
But we say that the Son is like the Father in all things, as also the
Holy Scriptures say and teach <span id="fr_3476"></span>[3477](#fn_3476)
.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p46"></span>9. When this had been read, the
dishonesty of its framers was soon apparent. For on the Bishops
proposing that the Arian heresy should be anathematized together with
the other heresies too, and all assenting, Ursacius and Valens and those
with them refused; till in the event the Fathers condemned them, on the
ground that their confession had been written, not in sincerity, but for
the annulling of the acts of Nicæa, and the introduction instead of
their unhappy heresy. Marvelling then at the deceitfulness of their
language and their unprincipled intentions, the Bishops said: ‘Not as if
in need of faith have we come hither; for we have within us faith, and
that in soundness: but that we may put to shame those who gainsay the
truth and attempt novelties. If then ye have drawn up this formula, as
if now beginning to believe, ye are not so much as clergy, but are
starting with school; but if you meet us with the same views with which
we have come hither, let there be a general unanimity, and let us
anathematize the heresies, and preserve the teaching of the Fathers.
Thus pleas for Councils will not longer circulate about, the Bishops at
Nicæa having anticipated them once for all, and done all that was
needful for the Catholic Church <span
id="fr_3477"></span>[3478](#fn_3477) .’ However, even then, in spite of
this general agreement of the Bishops, still the above-mentioned
refused. So at length the whole Council, condemning them as ignorant and
deceitful men, or rather as heretics, gave their suffrages in behalf of
the Nicene Council, and gave judgment all of them that it was enough;
but as to the forenamed Ursacius and Valens, Germinius, Auxentius,
Gaius, and Demophilus, they pronounced them to be heretics, deposed them
as not really Christians, but Arians, and wrote against them in Latin
what has been translated in its substance into Greek, thus:—

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p48"></span>10. Copy of an Epistle from the Council
to Constantius Augustus <span id="fr_3478"></span>[3479](#fn_3478) .

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p50"></span>We believe that what was formerly
decreed was brought about both by God’s command and by order of your
piety. For we the bishops, from all the Western cities, assembled
together at Ariminum, both that the Faith of the Catholic Church might
be made known, and that gainsayers might be detected. For, as we have
found after long deliberation, it appeared desirable to adhere to and
maintain to the end, that faith which, enduring from antiquity, we have
received as preached by the prophets, the Gospels, and the Apostles
through our Lord Jesus Christ, Who is Keeper of your Kingdom and Patron
of your power. For it appeared wrong and unlawful to make any change in
what was rightly and justly defined, and what was resolved upon in
common at Nicæa along with the Emperor your father, the most glorious
Constantine,—the doctrine and spirit of which \[definition\] went abroad
and was proclaimed in the hearing and understanding of all men. For it
alone was the conqueror and destroyer of the heresy of Arius, by which
not that only but the other heresies <span
id="fr_3479"></span>[3480](#fn_3479) also were destroyed, to which of a
truth it is perilous to add, and full of danger to minish aught from it,
since if either be done, our enemies will be able with impunity to do
whatever they will. Accordingly Ursacius and Valens, since they had been
<span id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.i-Page_455"></span>from of old abettors and sympathisers of
the Arian dogma, were properly declared separate from our communion, to
be admitted to which they asked to be allowed a place of repentance and
pardon for the transgressions of which they were conscious, as the
documents drawn up by them testify. By which means forgiveness and
pardon on all charges has been obtained. Now the time of these
transactions was when the council was assembled at Milan <span
id="fr_3480"></span>[3481](#fn_3480) , the presbyters of the Roman
Church being also present. But knowing at the same time that Constantine
of worthy memory had with all accuracy and deliberation published the
Faith then drawn up; when he had been baptized by the hands of men, and
had departed to the place which was his due, \[we think it\] unseemly to
make a subsequent innovation and to despise so many saints, confessors,
martyrs, who compiled and drew up this decree; who moreover have
continued to hold in all matters according to the ancient law of the
Church; whose faith God has imparted even to the times of your reign
through our Master Jesus Christ, through whom also it is yours to reign
and rule over the world in our day <span
id="fr_3481"></span>[3482](#fn_3481) . Once more then the pitiful men of
wretched mind with lawless daring have announced themselves as the
heralds of an impious opinion, and are attempting to upset every summary
of truth. For when according to your command the synod met, those men
laid bare the design of their own deceitfulness. For they attempted in a
certain unscrupulous and disorderly manner to propose to us an
innovation, having found as accomplices in this plot Germinius,
Auxentius <span id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482) , and Gaius, the
stirrers up of strife and discord, whose teaching by itself has gone
beyond every pitch of blasphemy. But when they perceived that we did not
share their purpose, nor agree with their evil mind, they transferred
themselves to our council, alleging that it might be advisable to
compile something instead. But a short time was enough to expose their
plans. And lest the Churches should have a recurrence of these
disturbances, and a whirl of discord and confusion throw everything into
disorder, it seemed good to keep undisturbed the ancient and reasonable
institutions, and that the above persons should be separated from our
communion. For the information therefore of your clemency, we have
instructed our legates to acquaint you with the judgment of the Council
by our letter, to whom we have given this special direction, to
establish the truth by resting their case upon the ancient and just
decrees; and they will also assure your piety that peace would not be
accomplished by the removal of those decrees as Valens and Ursacius
alleged. For how is it possible for peace-breakers to bring peace? on
the contrary, by their means strife and confusion will arise not only in
the other cities, but also in the Church of the Romans. On this account
we ask your clemency to regard our legates with favourable ears and a
serene countenance and not to suffer aught to be abrogated to the
dishonour of the dead; but allow us to abide by what has been defined
and laid down by our forefathers, who, we venture to say, we trust in
all things acted with prudence and wisdom and the Holy Spirit; because
by these novelties not only are the faithful made to disbelieve, but the
infidels also are embittered <span id="fr_3483"></span>[3484](#fn_3483)
. We pray also that you would give orders that so many Bishops who are
detained abroad, among whom are numbers who are broken with age and
poverty, may be enabled to return to their own country, lest the
Churches suffer, as being deprived of their Bishops. This, however, we
ask with earnestness, that nothing be innovated upon existing creeds,
nothing withdrawn; but that all remain incorrupt which has continued in
the times of your Father’s piety and to the present time; and that you
will not permit us to be harassed, and estranged from our sees; but that
the Bishops may in quiet give themselves always to prayers and worship,
which they do always offer for your own safety and for your reign, and
for peace, which may the Divinity bestow on you for ever. But our
legates are conveying the subscriptions and titles of the Bishops, and
will also inform your piety from the Holy Scriptures themselves.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p56"></span>11. *Decree of the Council* <span
id="fr_3484"></span>[3485](#fn_3484) .

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p58"></span>As far as it was fitting and possible,
dearest brethren, the general Council and the holy Church have had
patience, and have generously displayed the Church’s forbearance towards
Ursacius and Valens, Gaius, Germinius, and Auxentius; who by so often
changing what they had believed, have troubled all the Churches, and
still are endeavouring to foist their heretical spirit upon the faith of
the orthodox. For they wish to annul the formulary passed at Nicæa,
which was framed against the Arian heresy. They have presented to us
besides a creed drawn up by themselves from without, and utterly alien
to the most holy Church; which we could not lawfully receive. Even
before this, and now, have they been pronounced heretics and gainsayers
by us, whom we have not admitted to our communion, but condemned and
deposed them in their presence by our voices. Now then, what seems good
to you, again declare, that each one’s vote may be ratified by his
subscription.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p59"></span>The Bishops answered with one accord, It
seems good that the aforenamed heretics should be condemned, that the
Catholic faith may remain in peace.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p60"></span>Matters at Ariminum then had this speedy
issue; for there was no disagreement there, but all of them with one
accord both put into writing what they decided upon, and deposed the
Arians <span id="fr_3485"></span>[3486](#fn_3485) .

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p62"></span>12. Meanwhile the transactions in
Seleucia the Rugged were as follows: it was in the month called by the
Romans September, by the Egyptians Thoth, and by the Macedonians
Gorpiæus, and the day of the month according to the Egyptians the
16th <span id="fr_3486"></span>[3487](#fn_3486) , upon which all the
members of the Council assembled together. And there were present about
a hundred and sixty; and whereas there were many who were accused among
them, and their accusers were crying out against them, Acacius, and
Patrophilus, and Uranius of Tyre, and Eudoxius, who usurped the Church
of Antioch, and Leontius <span id="fr_3487"></span>[3488](#fn_3487) ,
and Theodotus <span id="fr_3488"></span>[3489](#fn_3488) , and Evagrius,
and <span id="page_456">p. 456</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.i-Page_456"></span>Theodulus, and George who has been driven
from the whole world <span id="fr_3489"></span>[3490](#fn_3489) , adopt
an unprincipled course. Fearing the proofs which their accusers had to
shew against them, they coalesced with the rest of the Arian party (who
were mercenaries in the cause of irreligion for this purpose, and were
ordained by Secundus, who had been deposed by the great Council), the
Libyan Stephen, and Seras, and Polydeuces, who were under accusation
upon various charges, next Pancratius, and one Ptolemy a Meletian <span
id="fr_3490"></span>[3491](#fn_3490) . And they made a pretence <span
id="fr_3491"></span>[3492](#fn_3491) of entering upon the question of
faith, but it was clear they were doing so from fear of their accusers;
and they took the part of the heresy, till at length they were divided
among themselves. For, whereas those with Acacius and his fellows lay
under suspicion and were very few, the others were the majority;
therefore Acacius and his fellows, acting with the boldness of
desperation, altogether denied the Nicene formula, and censured the
Council, while the others, who were the majority, accepted the whole
proceedings of the Council, except that they complained of the word
‘Coessential,’ as obscure and so open to suspicion. When then time
passed, and the accusers pressed, and the accused put in pleas, and
thereby were led on further by their irreligion and blasphemed the Lord,
thereupon the majority of Bishops became indignant <span
id="fr_3492"></span>[3493](#fn_3492) , and deposed Acacius, Patrophilus,
Uranius, Eudoxius, and George the contractor <span
id="fr_3493"></span>[3494](#fn_3493) , and others from Asia, Leontius,
and Theodosius, Evagrius and Theodulus, and excommunicated Asterius,
Eusebius, Augarus, Basilicus, Phœbus, Fidelius, Eutychius, and Magnus.
And this they did on their non-appearance, when summoned to defend
themselves on charges which numbers preferred against them. And they
decreed that so they should remain, until they made their defence and
cleared themselves of the offences imputed to them. And after
despatching the sentence pronounced against them to the diocese of each,
they proceeded to Constantius, the most irreligious <span
id="fr_3494"></span>[3495](#fn_3494) Augustus, to report to him their
proceedings, as they had been ordered. And this was the termination of
the Council in Seleucia.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p72"></span>13. Who then but must approve of the
conscientious conduct of the Bishops at Ariminum? who endured such
labour of journey and perils of sea, that by a sacred and canonical
resolution they might depose the Arians, and guard inviolate the
definitions of the Fathers. For each of them deemed that, if they undid
the acts of their predecessors, they were affording a pretext to their
successors to undo what they themselves then were enacting <span
id="fr_3495"></span>[3496](#fn_3495) . And who but must condemn the
fickleness of Eudoxius, Acacius, and their fellows, who sacrifice the
honour due to their own fathers to partizanship and patronage of the
Ario-maniacs <span id="fr_3496"></span>[3497](#fn_3496) ? for what
confidence can be placed in their acts, if the acts of their fathers be
undone? or how call they them fathers and themselves successors, if they
set about impeaching their judgment? and especially what can Acacius say
of his own master, Eusebius, who not only gave his subscription in the
Nicene Council, but even in a letter <span
id="fr_3497"></span>[3498](#fn_3497) signified to his flock, that that
was true faith, which the Council had declared? for, if he explained
himself in that letter in his own way <span
id="fr_3498"></span>[3499](#fn_3498) , yet he did not contradict the
Council’s terms, but even charged it upon the Arians, that their
position that the Son was not before His generation, was not even
consistent with His being before Mary. What then will they proceed to
teach the people who are under their teaching? that the Fathers erred?
and how are they themselves to be trusted by those, whom they teach to
disobey their Teachers? and with what eyes too will they look upon the
sepulchres of the Fathers whom they now name heretics? And why do they
defame the Valentinians, Phrygians, and Manichees, yet give the name of
saint to those whom they themselves suspect of making parallel
statements? or how can they any longer be Bishops, if they were ordained
by persons whom they accuse of heresy <span
id="fr_3499"></span>[3500](#fn_3499) ? But if their sentiments were
wrong and their writings se<span id="page_457">p. 457</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.i-Page_457"></span>duced the world, then let their memory
perish altogether; when, however, you cast out their books, go and cast
out their remains too from the cemeteries, so that one and all may know
that they are seducers, and that you are parricides.

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p78"></span>14. The blessed Apostle approves of the
Corinthians because, he says, ‘ye remember me in all things, and keep
the traditions as I delivered them to you’ ([1 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002)<span id="xxii.ii.i-p78.1"></span>);
but they, as entertaining such views of their predecessors, will have
the daring to say just the reverse to their flocks: ‘We praise you not
for remembering your fathers, but rather we make much of you, when you
hold not their traditions.’ And let them go on to accuse their own
unfortunate birth, and say, ‘We are sprung not of religious men but of
heretics.’ For such language, as I said before, is consistent in those
who barter their Fathers’ fame and their own salvation for Arianism, and
fear not the words of the divine proverb, ‘There is a generation that
curseth their father’ ([Prov. 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#011),
[Exod. 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017)<span
id="xxii.ii.i-p78.2"></span>), and the threat lying in the Law against
such. They then, from zeal for the heresy, are of this obstinate temper;
you, however, be not troubled at it, nor take their audacity for truth.
For they dissent from each other, and, whereas they have revolted from
their Fathers, are not of one and the same mind, but float about with
various and discordant changes. And, as quarrelling with the Council of
Nicæa, they have held many Councils themselves, and have published a
faith in each of them, and have stood to none <span
id="fr_3500"></span>[3501](#fn_3500) , nay, they will never do
otherwise, for perversely seeking, they will never find that Wisdom
which they hate. I have accordingly subjoined portions both of Arius’s
writings and of whatever else I could collect, of their publications in
different Councils; whereby you will learn to your surprise with what
object they stand out against an Ecumenical Council and their own
Fathers without blushing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3449"></span>[451:3450](2040393.htm#fr_3449) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p6"></span> \[On the Prefects, see Gibbon, ch.
xvii., and Gwatkin, pp. 272–281.\]

<span id="fn_3450"></span>[451:3451](2040393.htm#fr_3450) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p7"></span> \[Cf. *Hist. Ar.* 74, D.C.B. ii. 661.\]
At a later date he approached very nearly to Catholicism.

<span id="fn_3451"></span>[451:3452](2040393.htm#fr_3451) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p8"></span> \[See *Prolegg.* ch. ii. §3 (1), and, on
the Arian leaders at this time, §8 (2).\]

<span id="fn_3452"></span>[451:3453](2040393.htm#fr_3452) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p9"></span> Cf. *de Decr.* §2.

<span id="fn_3453"></span>[451:3454](2040393.htm#fr_3453) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p10"></span> *Infr.* §12, note.

<span id="fn_3454"></span>[451:3455](2040393.htm#fr_3454) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p12"></span> Cf. Ammianus, *Hist.* xxi. 16.
Eusebius. *Vit. Const.* ii. 61.

<span id="fn_3455"></span>[452:3456](2040393.htm#fr_3455) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p14"></span> Cf. *Orat.* ii. §34. And Hilary *de
Syn.* 91; *ad Const.* ii. 7.

<span id="fn_3456"></span>[452:3457](2040393.htm#fr_3456) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p15"></span> Cf. Hil. *ad Const.* ii. 4, 5.

<span id="fn_3457"></span>[452:3458](2040393.htm#fr_3457) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p16"></span> Cf. Tertull. *de Præscr.* 37; Hil. *de
Trin.* vi. 21; Vincent. Lir. *Commonit.* 24; Jerom. *in Lucif.* 27;
August. *de Bapt. contr. Don.* iii. 3.

<span id="fn_3458"></span>[452:3459](2040393.htm#fr_3458) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p17"></span> \[Cf. *Hist. Ar.* §§52, 66, 76, 44, and
Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2), c. 2, and §6 (1).\]

<span id="fn_3459"></span>[452:3460](2040393.htm#fr_3459) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p18"></span> ‘He who speaketh of his own, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p18.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p18.2"></span>κ τῶν ἰδίων</span>,
speaketh a lie.’ Athan. *contr. Apoll.* i. fin…The Simonists,
Dositheans, &c.…each privately (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p18.4"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p18.5"></span>δίως</span>) and separately has brought in a
private opinion.’ Hegesippus, ap Euseb. *Hist.* iv. 22. Sophronius at
Seleucia cried out, ‘If to publish day after day our own private (ἰδίαν)
will, be a profession of faith, accuracy of truth will fail us.’ Socr.
ii. 40.

<span id="fn_3460"></span>[452:3461](2040393.htm#fr_3460) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p20"></span> Vid. *supr. Orat.* iii. §47.

<span id="fn_3461"></span>[452:3462](2040393.htm#fr_3461) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p21"></span> Cf. Tertull. *Præscr*. 29; Vincent,
*Comm.* 24; Greg. Naz. *ad Cledon Ep.* 102, p. 97.

<span id="fn_3462"></span>[452:3463](2040393.htm#fr_3462) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p23"></span> Cf. D.C.A. i. 588 *sqq*.

<span id="fn_3463"></span>[453:3464](2040393.htm#fr_3463) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p24.1"></span>πρόδρομος</span>, præcursor, is almost a
received word for the predicted apostasy or apostate (vid. note on S.
Cyril’s *Cat.* xv. 9), but the distinction was not always carefully
drawn between the apostate and the Antichrist. \[Cf. both terms applied
to Constantius, *Hist. Ar. passim,* and by Hilary and Lucifer.\]

<span id="fn_3464"></span>[453:3465](2040393.htm#fr_3464) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p24.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p25"></span> At Seleucia Acacius said, ‘If the
Nicene faith has been altered once and many times since, no reason why
we should not dictate another faith now.’ Eleusius the Semi-Arian
answered, ‘This Council is called, not to learn what it does not know,
not to receive a faith which it does not possess, but walking in the
faith of the fathers’ (meaning the Council of the Dedication. <span
class="c10"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p25.2"></span>a.d.</span> 341. vid.
*infr.* §22), ‘it swerves not from it in life or death.’ On this
Socrates (*Hist.* ii. 40) observes, ‘How call you those who met at
Antioch Fathers, O Eleusius, you who deny *their* Fathers,’ &c.

<span id="fn_3465"></span>[453:3466](2040393.htm#fr_3465) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p25.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p26.1"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p26.2"></span>λίγοι τινές</span>, says Pope Julius,
*supr.* p. 118, cf. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p26.4"></span>τινές</span>, p. 225.

<span id="fn_3466"></span>[453:3467](2040393.htm#fr_3466) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p26.6"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p27"></span> *Infr.* §9, note.

<span id="fn_3467"></span>[453:3468](2040393.htm#fr_3467) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p29"></span> Ad *Ep. Æg.* 10.

<span id="fn_3468"></span>[453:3469](2040393.htm#fr_3468) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p30"></span> Vid. *de Decr.* init. and §4. We shall
have abundant instances of the Arian changes as this Treatise proceeds.
Cf. Hilary *contr. Constant.* 23. Vincent. *Comm.* 20.

<span id="fn_3469"></span>[453:3470](2040393.htm#fr_3469) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p31"></span> Vid. *de Decr.* 1. note.

<span id="fn_3470"></span>[453:3471](2040393.htm#fr_3470) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p32"></span> Vid. *de Decr.* 32, note.

<span id="fn_3471"></span>[453:3472](2040393.htm#fr_3471) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p34"></span> Cf. the opinion of Nectarius and
Sisinnius. Socr. v. 10.

<span id="fn_3472"></span>[453:3473](2040393.htm#fr_3472) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p36"></span> \[On Demophilus and Gaius see D.C.B. i.
812, 387 (20); on Auxentius, *ad Afr.* note 9.\]

<span id="fn_3473"></span>[454:3474](2040393.htm#fr_3473) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p37"></span> \[See Prolegg. ch. ii. §8 (2), and
Introd. to this Tract.\]

<span id="fn_3474"></span>[454:3475](2040393.htm#fr_3474) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p39"></span> 8th Confession, or 3rd Sirmian, of 359,
vid. §29, *infr.*

<span id="fn_3475"></span>[454:3476](2040393.htm#fr_3475) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p40"></span> May 22, 359, Whitsun-Eve.

<span id="fn_3476"></span>[454:3477](2040393.htm#fr_3476) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p45"></span> On the last clause, see Prolegg. *ubi
supra.*

<span id="fn_3477"></span>[454:3478](2040393.htm#fr_3477) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p47"></span> \[Cf. *Tom. ad. Ant.* 5, Soz. iii.
12.\]

<span id="fn_3478"></span>[454:3479](2040393.htm#fr_3478) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p49"></span> Cf. Socr. ii. 39; Soz. iv. 10; Theod.
*H. E.* ii. 19; Niceph. i. 40. The Latin original is preserved by
Hilary, *Fragm.* viii., but the Greek is followed here, as stated *supr.
Introd.*

<span id="fn_3479"></span>[454:3480](2040393.htm#fr_3479) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p51"></span> The Hilarian Latin is much briefer
here.

<span id="fn_3480"></span>[455:3481](2040393.htm#fr_3480) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p52"></span> 347.

<span id="fn_3481"></span>[455:3482](2040393.htm#fr_3481) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p53"></span> The whole passage is either much
expanded by Athan., or much condensed by Hilary.

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[455:3483](2040393.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p54"></span> Auxentius, omitted in Hilary’s copy. A
few words are wanting in the Latin in the commencement of one of the
sentences which follow. \[See above, note 3.\]

<span id="fn_3483"></span>[455:3484](2040393.htm#fr_3483) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p55"></span> The Greek here mistranslates
‘credulitatem’ as though it were ‘crudelitatem.’ The original sense is
the heathen are kept back from believing.

<span id="fn_3484"></span>[455:3485](2040393.htm#fr_3484) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p57"></span> This Decree is also preserved in
Hilary, who has besides preserved the ‘Catholic Definition’ of the
Council, in which it professes its adherence to the Creed of Nicæa, and,
in opposition to the Sirmian Confession which the Arians had proposed,
acknowledges in particular both the word and the meaning of ‘substance:’
‘substantiæ nomen et rem, a multis sanctis Scripturis insinuatam
mentibus nostris, obtinere debere sui firmitatem.’ *Fragm.* vii. 3.
\[The decree is now re-translated from the Greek.\]

<span id="fn_3485"></span>[455:3486](2040393.htm#fr_3485) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p61"></span> \[On the subsequent events at Ariminum,
see Prolegg. *ubi supra.*\]

<span id="fn_3486"></span>[455:3487](2040393.htm#fr_3486) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p63"></span> i.e. Sep. 14, 359 (Egyptian leap-year.)
Gorpiæus was the first month of the Syro-Macedonic year among the
Greeks, dating according to the era of the Seleucidæ. The original
transactions at Ariminum had at this time been finished as much as two
months, and its deputies were waiting for Constantius at Constantinople.

<span id="fn_3487"></span>[455:3488](2040393.htm#fr_3487) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p64"></span> \[Of Tripolis, D.C.B. iii. 688 (3).\]

<span id="fn_3488"></span>[455:3489](2040393.htm#fr_3488) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p65"></span> \[‘Theodosius’ *infr.*\]

<span id="fn_3489"></span>[456:3490](2040393.htm#fr_3489) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p65.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p66"></span> There is little to observe of these
Acacian Bishops in addition to \[the names and sees in Epiph. *Hær.*
lxxiii. 26\] except that George is the Cappadocian, the notorious
intruder into the see of S. Athanasius. \[For his expulsion see Fest.
*Ind.* xxx, and on the composition of the council, see Gwatkin, note G,
p. 190.\]

<span id="fn_3490"></span>[456:3491](2040393.htm#fr_3490) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p66.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p67"></span> The Meletian schismatics of Egypt had
formed an alliance with the Arians from the first. Cf. *Ep. Æg.* 22.
vid. also *Hist. Arian.* 31, 78. After Sardica the Arians attempted a
coalition with the Donatists of Africa. Aug. *contr. Cresc.* iii. 38.

<span id="fn_3491"></span>[456:3492](2040393.htm#fr_3491) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p67.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p68"></span> Acacius had written to the Semi-Arian
Macedonius of Constantinople in favour of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p68.2"></span>κατὰ πάντα ὅμοιον</span>, and of the Son’s
being <span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p68.4"></span>τῆς αὐτῆς
οὐσίας</span>, and this the Council was aware of. Soz. iv. 22. Acacius
made answer that no one ancient or modern was ever judged by his
writings. Socr. ii. 40.

<span id="fn_3492"></span>[456:3493](2040393.htm#fr_3492) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p68.6"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p69"></span> They also confirmed the Semi-Arian
Confession of the Dedication, 341. of which *infr.* §22. After this the
Acacians drew up another Confession, which Athan. has preserved, *infr.*
§29. in which they persist in their rejection of all but Scripture
terms. This the Semi-Arian majority rejected, and proceeded to depose
its authors.

<span id="fn_3493"></span>[456:3494](2040393.htm#fr_3493) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p70"></span> Pork contractor to the troops, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p70.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p70.3"></span>ποδέκτην</span>, *Hist.
Arian.* 75. vid. Naz. *Orat.* 21. 16.

<span id="fn_3494"></span>[456:3495](2040393.htm#fr_3494) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p70.5"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p71"></span> \[Cf. *supr.* pp. 237, 267.\]

<span id="fn_3495"></span>[456:3496](2040393.htm#fr_3495) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p73"></span> *Supr.* §5, note 1.

<span id="fn_3496"></span>[456:3497](2040393.htm#fr_3496) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p74"></span> On the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p74.2"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p74.3"></span>Αρειομανῖται</span>, Gibbon observes, ‘The
ordinary appellation with which Athanasius and his followers chose to
compliment the Arians, was that of Ariomanites,’ ch. xxi. note 61.
Rather, the name originally was a state title, injoined by Constantine,
vid. Petav. *de Trin.* i. 8 fin. Naz. *Orat.* p. 794. note e. \[Petavius
states this, but without proof.\] Several meanings are implied in this
title; the real reason for it was the fanatical fury with which it
spread and maintained itself; and hence the strange paronomasia of
Constantine, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p74.5"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p74.6"></span>Αρὲς ἄρειε</span>, with an allusion to Hom.
*Il.* v. 31. A second reason, or rather sense, of the appellation was
that, denying the Word, they have forfeited the gift of reason, e.g.
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p74.8"></span>τῶν ᾽Αρειομανιτῶν
τὴν ἀλογίαν</span>. *de Sent. Dion.* init. 24 fin. *Orat.* ii. §32, iii.
§63. \[The note, which is here much condensed, gives profuse
illustrations of this figure of speech.\]

<span id="fn_3497"></span>[456:3498](2040393.htm#fr_3497) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p74.10"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p75"></span> Vid. *supr.* pp. 152, 74.

<span id="fn_3498"></span>[456:3499](2040393.htm#fr_3498) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p76.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p76.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.i-p76.3"></span>ἠθέλησεν</span>. vid. also *de Decr.* §3.
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p76.5"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p76.6"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.i-p76.7"></span>ἠθέλησαν</span>. *ad Ep.
Æg.* 5.

<span id="fn_3499"></span>[456:3500](2040393.htm#fr_3499) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p76.9"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p77"></span> §5, note 1.

<span id="fn_3500"></span>[457:3501](2040393.htm#fr_3500) <span
id="xxii.ii.i-p78.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.i-p79"></span> *Ad Ep. Æg.* 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: History of Arian Opinions.](2040394)
