[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040408)  [Next](2040410) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.i"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.i-Page_500"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>B.—The Festal Letters, and Their
Index,</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p2.1"></span>Or Chronicon Athanasianum.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p4.1"></span>The</span> latter document is from the hand,
it would seem, of the original collector of the Easter Letters of
Athanasius (yet see *infr*. note 6a). He gives, in a paragraph
corresponding to each Easter in the episcopate of Athanasius, a summary
of the calendar data for the year, a notice of the most important
events, and especially particulars as to the Letter for the Easter in
question, viz., Whether any peculiar circumstances attended its
publication, and whether for some reason the ordinary Letter was
omitted.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p5"></span>The variations of practice which had
rendered the Paschal Feast a subject of controversy from very early
times (see *Dict. Christ. Antiq.* <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p5.1"></span>Easter</span>) had given rise to the custom
of the announcement of Easter at a convenient interval beforehand by
circular letters. In the third century the Bishops of Alexandria issued
such letters (e.g. Dionysius in Eus. *H. E.* vii. 20), and at the
Council of Nicæa, where the Easter question was dealt with (*ad Afros.
2*), the Alexandrian see was requested to undertake the duty of
announcing the correct date to the principal foreign Churches as well as
to its own suffragan sees. (This is doubted in the learned article <span
class="c10"><span id="xxv.iii.i-p5.2"></span>Paschal Letters</span>
D.C.A. p. 1562, but the statement of Cyril. Alex. in his ‘Prologus
Paschalis’ is express: cf. Ideler 2, 259. The only doubt is, whether the
real reference is to *Sardica,* see *Index* xv. and *Ep*. 18.) This was
probably due to the astronomical learning for which Alexandria was
famous <span id="fr_3811"></span>[3812](#fn_3811) . At any rate we have
fragments of the Easter letters of Dionysius and of Theophilus, and a
collection of the Letters of Cyril <span
id="fr_3812"></span>[3813](#fn_3812) .

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p8"></span>The Easter letters of Athanasius were,
until 1842, only known to us by allusions in Jerome (*de V. illustr.*
87) and others, and by fragments in Cosmas Indicopleustes purporting to
be taken from the 2nd, 5th, 6th, 22nd, 24th, 28th, 29th, 40th, and 45th.
Cardinal Mai had also shortly before the discovery of the ‘Corpus’
unearthed a minute fragment of the 13th. But in 1842 Archdeacon Tattam
brought home from the Monastery of the Theotokos in the desert of Skete
a large number of Syriac <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p8.1"></span>mss.</span>, which for over a century
European scholars had been vainly endeavouring to obtain. Among these,
when deposited in the British Museum, Cureton discovered a large
collection of the Festal Letters of Athanasius, with the ‘Index,’ thus
realising the suspicion of Montfaucon (Migne xxvi.) that the lost
treasure might be lurking in some Eastern monastery. Another consignment
of <span class="c10"><span id="xxv.iii.i-p8.2"></span>mss.</span> from
the same source produced some further portions, which were likewise
included in the translation revised for the present volume <span
id="fr_3813"></span>[3814](#fn_3813) .

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p10"></span>(1) *Number of Festal Letters of
Athanasius.*—This question, which is of first-rate importance for the
chronology of the period, must be regarded as settled, at any rate until
some discovery which shall revolutionise all existing data. The number
45, which was the maximum known to antiquity <span
id="fr_3814"></span>[3815](#fn_3814) , is confirmed by the Index, and by
the fact that the citations from Cosmas (see above) tally with the order
of the Letters in this Syriac version in every case where the letter is
preserved entire, while Letter 39, preserved by a different writer, also
tallies with the reference to it in the Index. It is therefore
unassailably established on our existing evidence that the last Easter
letter of Ath. was his ‘45th,’ in other words that 45 is the *full or
normal* number of his festal letters. This clinches the reckoning of the
*Index* and *Hist. Aceph.* that he was bishop for 45 Easters (329–373
inclusive), i.e. for parts of 46 years (328–373 inclusive). Moreover it
corroborates, and is rivetted firm by, the statement of Cyril. Alex.
*Ep.* 1, that Athan. graced the see of Alexandria ‘fully 46 years.’ ‘Il
le dit en voulant faire son eloge: de sorte qu’il y a tout lieu de
croire qu’il n’a point passé les 46 ans: car *pour peu qu’il fust entré
dans la* 47me *année,* S. Cyrille auroit *dû naturellement luy donner*
47 *ans* <span id="fr_3815"></span>[3816](#fn_3815) .’ So Tillemont
(viii. 719), whose opinion is all the more valuable from the fact that
he is unable to harmonise it with his date for the accession of Ath.,
and accordingly forgets, p. 720 (*sub. fin.*), what he has said on the
previous page.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p13"></span>But we observe that many of the 45
Letters are represented in the ‘corpus’ by blanks. This is doubtless
often the result of accidental loss. But the Index informs us that in
several years, owing to his adversities, ‘the Pope was unable to write.’
This however may be fairly understood to refer to the usual public or
circular letter. Often when unable to write this, he sent a few cordial
lines to some friend (*Letter* 12) or to the clergy (17, 18) or people
(29? see notes there) of Alexandria, in order that the true Easter might
be kept (cf. the Arian blunder in 340, *Ind.* xii, with the note to
Serapion *Letter* 12 from Rome). But occasionally the Index is either
corrupt or mistaken, e.g. No. xiii, where the Pope is stated to have
written no letter, while yet the ‘Corpus’ contains one, apparently
entire and of the usual public kind. We may therefore still hope for
letters or fragments for any of the ‘missing’ years.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p14"></span><span id="page_501">p. 501</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.i-Page_501"></span>(2) The Festal Letters are fully worthy
to rank with any extant writings of Athanasius. The same warmth, vigour,
and simplicity pervades them as we find elsewhere in his writings,
especially in such gems as the letter to Dracontius (*Ep*. 49). Their
interest, however (apart from chronology), is mainly personal and
practical. Naturally the use and abuse of Fast and Festival occupy a
prominent place throughout. Repeatedly he insists on the joyfulness of
Christian feasts, and on the fact that they are typical of, and intended
to colour, the whole period of the Christian’s life. We gather from
*Ep*. 12 that Lent was kept less strictly in Egypt than in some other
Christian countries. He insists not only upon fasting, but upon purity
and charity, especially toward the poor (*Ep*. 1. 11, cf. *Ep*. 47. 4,
&c.). We trace the same ready command of Scripture, the same grave
humour in the unexpected turn given to some familiar text (*Ep*. 39) as
we are used to in Athanasius. The Eucharist is a feeding upon the Word
(4. 3), and to be prepared for by amendment of life, repentance, and
confession of sin (i.e. to God, *Ep*. 7. 10). Of special importance is
the Canon of Holy Scripture in *Ep*. 39, on which see Prolegg. ch. iv §
4.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p15"></span>It should be observed that the interval
before Easter at which notice was given varied greatly. Some letters
(e.g. 1, 2, 20) by a natural figure of speech, refer to the Feast as
actually come; but others (17, 18) were certainly written as early as
the preceding Easter. Letter 4 was written not long before Lent, but was
(§ 1) unusually late. The statement of Cassian referred to below (note
to *Ep*. 17) is therefore incorrect at any rate for our period.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p16"></span>(3) *The Index to the Festal
Letters*.—This chronicle, so constantly referred to throughout this
volume, is of uncertain date, but probably (upon internal evidence) only
‘somewhat later’ (Hefele, *E. Tr.* vol. ii. p. 50) than Athanasius
himself. Its special value is in the points where it agrees with the
*Hist. Aceph.* (*supr*. Prolegg. ch. v.), where we recognise the
accredited reckoning of the Alexandrian Church as represented by Cyril
and Proterius (see Tillem. *ubi supr*.). The writer undoubtedly makes
occasional slips (cf. *Index* iii. with Letter iv. and p. 512, note 1,
*Index* xiii. with Letter <span id="fr_3816"></span>[3817](#fn_3816)
xiii.!), and the text would be a miracle if it had come down to us
uncorrupt (see notes *passim*): but on the main dates he is consistent
with himself, with the *Chron. Aceph.* and (so far as they come in
contact) with the notices of the Alexandrian bishops above mentioned.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p18"></span>The writer’s method, however, must be
attended to if we are to avoid a wrong impression as to his accuracy.
*Firstly*, his year is not the Julian but the Egyptian year (*infr*.
Table C) from Aug. 29 to Aug. 28. Each year is designated by the *new*
consuls who come into office in the fifth month. Secondly, in each year
he takes a leading event or events, round which he groups antecedent or
consequent facts, which often belong to other years. Two or three
examples will make this clear. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p18.1"></span>α</span>) Year Aug. 30, 335–Aug. 28, 336:
leading event, exile of Athanasius (he reaches CP. Oct. 30, 335, leaves
for Gaul \[Feb. 7\], both in the same Egyptian year). Antecedent: His
departure for Tyre July 11, 335, at end of *previous Egyptian Year*.
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.i-p18.2"></span>β</span>) The
‘eventful’ year Aug. 337–Aug. 338: leading event, triumphant return of
Athanasius from Gaul, Oct. 21, 337. Antecedent: death of Constantine on
previous 22nd of May (i.e. 337 <span
id="fr_3817"></span>[3818](#fn_3817) ). (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p19.2"></span>γ</span>) Year 342–3: leading event, Council
of Sardica (summons issued, at any rate, before end of Aug. 343).
Consequent events: temporary collapse of Arian party and recantation of
Ursacius and Valens (344–347? Further examples in Gwatkin, *Studies*, p.
105). Bearing this in mind, the discriminating student will derive most
important help from the study of the Index: when its data agree with
those derived from other good sources, they must be allowed first-rate
authority. This is the principle followed in the Prolegomena (ch. v.)
and throughout this volume. On the main points in dispute, as strewn
above, we have to reckon with a compact uniform chronological system,
checked and counter-checked by careful calculations (*Hist. Aceph.*),
and transmitted by two independent channels; in agreement, moreover, as
concerns the prior and posterior limits, with the reckoning adopted by
the successors of Athanasius in the see.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p20"></span>N.B.—The *translation* of the Index and
Festal Letters is revised by Miss Payne Smith from that contained in the
Oxford ‘Library of the Fathers.’ A German translation by Larsow was
published at Berlin 1852. The Latin Version (from an Italian
translation) of Card. Mai is in Migne, xxvi. 1351 sqq.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p21"></span>The following Tables bear specially on
the Festal Index.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p22"></span>Table C. *The Egyptian Year.*

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p23"></span>After the final settlement of Egypt by
Augustus as a province of the Roman Empire, the use of the Julian form
of computation was established in Alexandria, the first day of the new
Calendar being fixed to the 28th of August, the 1st of Thot of the year
in which the innovation took place; from which period, six, instead of
five, supplementary days were added at the end of every fourth year; so
that the form of the Alexandrian year was as follows. *The months from
Phamenoth* 5 ([Mar. 1](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#000)<span
id="xxv.iii.i-p23.1"></span>) *onwards are unaffected by leap-year*.

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p24"></span>Thot

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p25"></span>29 August

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p26"></span>Pharmuthi

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p27"></span>27 March

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p28"></span>Paophi

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p29"></span>28 September

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p30"></span>Pachon

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p31"></span>26 April

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p32"></span>Athyr

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p33"></span>28 October

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p34"></span>Paoni (Payni)

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p35"></span>26 May

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p36"></span>Choiak

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p37"></span>27 November

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p38"></span>Epiphi

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p39"></span>25 June

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p40"></span>Tybi

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p41"></span>27 December

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p42"></span>Mesori

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p43"></span>25 July

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p44"></span>Mechir

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p45"></span>26 January

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p46"></span>Epagomena

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p47"></span>24 August

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p48"></span>Phamenoth

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p49"></span>25 February

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p50"></span>N.B.—In leap-years, the *Diocletian*
year (see p. 503, note 4) began on the previous Aug. 30, which was
accordingly the First of Thot, owing to the additional ‘epagomenon’
which preceded it. Accordingly all the months *to Phamenoth inclusive*
begin a day late. Then, the Julian intercalary day coming in as Feb. 29,
Pharmuthi and the succeeding months begin as shewn above. (See Ideler,
vol. I, pp. 161, 164, also 140, 142.)

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p51"></span><span id="page_502">p. 502</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.i-Page_502"></span>Table D. *Of the Chronological
Information Given in the Index to the Paschal Letters.*

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p52"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p53"></span>N.B.—The Year of our Lord, the Golden
Numbers, and Dominical Letter, and the date of Easter according to the
Modern Reckoning, are added. The age of the Moon on Easter-day is
apparently given from observations or reckoned by some lost system (see
*Index* x. xxii.); in about one case out of three it varies from the
modern reckoning, perhaps once or twice from corruption of text. The
Epact is a day too little for 342, 344, 361, 362, 363 (see Galle in
Larsow;. *F.B.* 48, *sqq.*).

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p54"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p54.1"></span>Easter Day.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p55"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p55.1"></span>Number of Letter.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p56"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p56.1"></span>Year of Diocl.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p57"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p57.1"></span>Year of our Lord.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p58"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p58.1"></span>Egyptian Calendar.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p59"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p59.1"></span>Roman Calendar.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p60"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p60.1"></span>Modern Reckon-ing.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p61"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p61.1"></span>Day of Lunar Month.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p62"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p62.1"></span>Epact (age of Moon on Mar. 22<span
id="xxv.iii.i-p62.2"></span>).</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p63"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p63.1"></span>Sunday Letter and Concur-rentes.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p64"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p64.1"></span>Indictn.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p65"></span><span class="c130"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p65.1"></span>Golden Num-bers.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p66"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p66.1"></span>…</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p67"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p67.1"></span>44</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p68"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p68.1"></span>328</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p69"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p69.1"></span>19 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p70"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p70.1"></span>XVIII Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p71"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p71.1"></span>14 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p72"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p72.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p73"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p73.1"></span>25</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p74"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p74.1"></span>1 F</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p75"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p75.1"></span>1</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p76"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p76.1"></span>6</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p77"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p77.1"></span>I</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p78"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p78.1"></span>45</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p79"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p79.1"></span>329</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p80"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p80.1"></span>11 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p81"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p81.1"></span>VIII Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p82"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p82.1"></span>6 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p83"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p83.1"></span>22</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p84"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p84.1"></span>6</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p85"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p85.1"></span>2 E</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p86"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p86.1"></span>2</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p87"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p87.1"></span>7</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p88"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p88.1"></span>II</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p89"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p89.1"></span>46</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p90"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p90.1"></span>330</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p91"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p91.1"></span>24 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p92"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p92.1"></span>XIII Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p93"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p93.1"></span>19 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p94"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p94.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p95"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p95.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p96"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p96.1"></span>3 D</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p97"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p97.1"></span>3</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p98"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p98.1"></span>8</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p99"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p99.1"></span>III</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p100"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p100.1"></span>47</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p101"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p101.1"></span>331</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p102"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p102.1"></span>16 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p103"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p103.1"></span>III Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p104"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p104.1"></span>11 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p105"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p105.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p106"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p106.1"></span>28</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p107"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p107.1"></span>4 C</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p108"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p108.1"></span>4</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p109"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p109.1"></span>9</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p110"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p110.1"></span>IV</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p111"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p111.1"></span>48</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p112"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p112.1"></span>332</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p113"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p113.1"></span>7 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p114"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p114.1"></span>IV Non. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p115"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p115.1"></span>2 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p116"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p116.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p117"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p117.1"></span>9</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p118"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p118.1"></span>6 A</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p119"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p119.1"></span>5</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p120"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p120.1"></span>10</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p121"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p121.1"></span>V</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p122"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p122.1"></span>49</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p123"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p123.1"></span>333</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p124"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p124.1"></span>20 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p125"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p125.1"></span>XVI I Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p126"></span> <span
id="fr_3818"></span>[3819](#fn_3818) <span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p127.2"></span>15 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p128"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p128.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p129"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p129.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p130"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p130.1"></span>7 G</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p131"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p131.1"></span>6</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p132"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p132.1"></span>11</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p133"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p133.1"></span>VI</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p134"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p134.1"></span>50</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p135"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p135.1"></span>334</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p136"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p136.1"></span>12 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p137"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p137.1"></span>VII Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p138"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p138.1"></span>7 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p139"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p139.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p140"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p140.1"></span>1</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p141"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p141.1"></span>1 F</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p142"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p142.1"></span>7</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p143"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p143.1"></span>12</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p144"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p144.1"></span>VII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p145"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p145.1"></span>51</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p146"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p146.1"></span>335</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p147"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p147.1"></span>4 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p148"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p148.1"></span>III Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p149"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p149.1"></span>30 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p150"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p150.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p151"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p151.1"></span>12</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p152"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p152.1"></span>2 E</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p153"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p153.1"></span>8</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p154"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p154.1"></span>13</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p155"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p155.1"></span>VIII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p156"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p156.1"></span>52</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p157"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p157.1"></span>336</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p158"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p158.1"></span>23 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p159"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p159.1"></span>XIV Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p160"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p160.1"></span>18 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p161"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p161.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p162"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p162.1"></span>23</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p163"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p163.1"></span>4 C</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p164"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p164.1"></span>9</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p165"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p165.1"></span>14</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p166"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p166.1"></span>IX</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p167"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p167.1"></span>53</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p168"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p168.1"></span>337</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p169"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p169.1"></span>8 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p170"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p170.1"></span>III Non. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p171"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p171.1"></span>3 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p172"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p172.1"></span>16</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p173"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p173.1"></span>4</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p174"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p174.1"></span>5 B</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p175"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p175.1"></span>10</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p176"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p176.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p177"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p177.1"></span>X</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p178"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p178.1"></span>54</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p179"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p179.1"></span>338</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p180"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p180.1"></span>30 Phamth.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p181"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p181.1"></span>VII Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p182"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p182.1"></span>26 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p183"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p183.1"></span>18½</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p184"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p184.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p185"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p185.1"></span>6 A</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p186"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p186.1"></span>11</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p187"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p187.1"></span>16</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p188"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p188.1"></span>XI</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p189"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p189.1"></span>55</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p190"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p190.1"></span>339</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p191"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p191.1"></span>20 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p192"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p192.1"></span>XVII Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p193"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p193.1"></span>15 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p194"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p194.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p195"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p195.1"></span>26</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p196"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p196.1"></span>7 G</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p197"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p197.1"></span>12</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p198"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p198.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p199"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p199.1"></span>XII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p200"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p200.1"></span>56</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p201"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p201.1"></span>340</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p202"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p202.1"></span>4 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p203"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p203.1"></span>III Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p204"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p204.1"></span>30 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p205"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p205.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p206"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p206.1"></span>7</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p207"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p207.1"></span>2 E</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p208"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p208.1"></span>13</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p209"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p209.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p210"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p210.1"></span>XIII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p211"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p211.1"></span>57</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p212"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p212.1"></span>341</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p213"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p213.1"></span>24 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p214"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p214.1"></span>XIII Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p215"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p215.1"></span>19 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p216"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p216.1"></span>16</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p217"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p217.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p218"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p218.1"></span>3 D</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p219"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p219.1"></span>14</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p220"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p220.1"></span>19</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p221"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p221.1"></span>XIV</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p222"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p222.1"></span>58</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p223"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p223.1"></span>342</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p224"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p224.1"></span>16 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p225"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p225.1"></span>III Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p226"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p226.1"></span>11 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p227"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p227.1"></span>16</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p228"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p228.1"></span>29</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p229"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p229.1"></span>4 C</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p230"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p230.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p231"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p231.1"></span>1</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p232"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p232.1"></span>XV</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p233"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p233.1"></span>59</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p234"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p234.1"></span>343</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p235"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p235.1"></span>1 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p236"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p236.1"></span>VI Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p237"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p237.1"></span>27 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p238"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p238.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p239"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p239.1"></span>11</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p240"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p240.1"></span>5 B</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p241"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p241.1"></span>1</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p242"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p242.1"></span>2</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p243"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p243.1"></span>XVI</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p244"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p244.1"></span>60</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p245"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p245.1"></span>344</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p246"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p246.1"></span>20 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p247"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p247.1"></span>XVII Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p248"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p248.1"></span>15 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p249"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p249.1"></span>19</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p250"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p250.1"></span>21</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p251"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p251.1"></span>7 G</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p252"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p252.1"></span>2</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p253"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p253.1"></span>3</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p254"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p254.1"></span>XVII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p255"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p255.1"></span>61</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p256"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p256.1"></span>345</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p257"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p257.1"></span>12 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p258"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p258.1"></span>VII Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p259"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p259.1"></span>7 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p260"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p260.1"></span>19</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p261"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p261.1"></span>3</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p262"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p262.1"></span>1 F</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p263"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p263.1"></span>3</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p264"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p264.1"></span>4</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p265"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p265.1"></span>XVIII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p266"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p266.1"></span>62</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p267"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p267.1"></span>346</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p268"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p268.1"></span>4 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p269"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p269.1"></span>III Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p270"></span> <span
id="fr_3819"></span>[3820](#fn_3819) <span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p271.2"></span>30 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p272"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p272.1"></span>21</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p273"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p273.1"></span>14</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p274"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p274.1"></span>2 E</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p275"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p275.1"></span>4</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p276"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p276.1"></span>5</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p277"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p277.1"></span>XIX</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p278"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p278.1"></span>63</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p279"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p279.1"></span>347</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p280"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p280.1"></span>17 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p281"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p281.1"></span>Prid. Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p282"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p282.1"></span>12 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p283"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p283.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p284"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p284.1"></span>25</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p285"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p285.1"></span>3 D</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p286"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p286.1"></span>5</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p287"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p287.1"></span>6</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p288"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p288.1"></span>XX</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p289"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p289.1"></span>64</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p290"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p290.1"></span>348</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p291"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p291.1"></span>8 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p292"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p292.1"></span>III Non. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p293"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p293.1"></span>3 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p294"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p294.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p295"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p295.1"></span>6</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p296"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p296.1"></span>5 B</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p297"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p297.1"></span>6</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p298"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p298.1"></span>7</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p299"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p299.1"></span>XXI</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p300"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p300.1"></span>65</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p301"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p301.1"></span>349</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p302"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p302.1"></span>30 Phamth.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p303"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p303.1"></span>VII Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p304"></span> <span
id="fr_3820"></span>[3821](#fn_3820) <span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p305.2"></span>26 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p306"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p306.1"></span>19</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p307"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p307.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p308"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p308.1"></span>6 A</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p309"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p309.1"></span>7</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p310"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p310.1"></span>8</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p311"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p311.1"></span>XXII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p312"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p312.1"></span>66</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p313"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p313.1"></span>350</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p314"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p314.1"></span>13 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p315"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p315.1"></span>VI Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p316"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p316.1"></span>8 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p317"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p317.1"></span>19</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p318"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p318.1"></span>28</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p319"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p319.1"></span>7 G</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p320"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p320.1"></span>8</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p321"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p321.1"></span>9</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p322"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p322.1"></span>XXIII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p323"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p323.1"></span>67</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p324"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p324.1"></span>351</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p325"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p325.1"></span>5 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p326"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p326.1"></span>Prid. Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p327"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p327.1"></span>31 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p328"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p328.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p329"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p329.1"></span>9</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p330"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p330.1"></span>1 F</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p331"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p331.1"></span>9</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p332"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p332.1"></span>10</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p333"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p333.1"></span>XXIV</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p334"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p334.1"></span>68</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p335"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p335.1"></span>352</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p336"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p336.1"></span>24 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p337"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p337.1"></span>XIII Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p338"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p338.1"></span>19 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p339"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p339.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p340"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p340.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p341"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p341.1"></span>3 D</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p342"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p342.1"></span>10</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p343"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p343.1"></span>11</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p344"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p344.1"></span>XXV</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p345"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p345.1"></span>69</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p346"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p346.1"></span>353</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p347"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p347.1"></span>16 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p348"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p348.1"></span>III Id April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p349"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p349.1"></span>11 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p350"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p350.1"></span>21</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p351"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p351.1"></span>1</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p352"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p352.1"></span>4 C</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p353"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p353.1"></span>11</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p354"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p354.1"></span>12</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p355"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p355.1"></span>XXVI</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p356"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p356.1"></span>70</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p357"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p357.1"></span>354</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p358"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p358.1"></span>1 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p359"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p359.1"></span>VI Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p360"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p360.1"></span>27 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p361"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p361.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p362"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p362.1"></span>12</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p363"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p363.1"></span>5 B</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p364"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p364.1"></span>12</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p365"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p365.1"></span>13</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p366"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p366.1"></span>XXVII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p367"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p367.1"></span>71</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p368"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p368.1"></span>355</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p369"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p369.1"></span>21 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p370"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p370.1"></span>XVI Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p371"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p371.1"></span>16 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p372"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p372.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p373"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p373.1"></span>23</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p374"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p374.1"></span>6 A</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p375"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p375.1"></span>13</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p376"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p376.1"></span>14</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p377"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p377.1"></span>XXVIII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p378"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p378.1"></span>72</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p379"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p379.1"></span>356</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p380"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p380.1"></span>12 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p381"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p381.1"></span>VII Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p382"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p382.1"></span>7 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p383"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p383.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p384"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p384.1"></span>4</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p385"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p385.1"></span>1 F</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p386"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p386.1"></span>14</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p387"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p387.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p388"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p388.1"></span>XXIX</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p389"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p389.1"></span>73</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p390"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p390.1"></span>357</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p391"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p391.1"></span>27 Phamth.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p392"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p392.1"></span>X Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p393"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p393.1"></span>23 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p394"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p394.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p395"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p395.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p396"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p396.1"></span>2 E</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p397"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p397.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p398"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p398.1"></span>16</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p399"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p399.1"></span>XXX</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p400"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p400.1"></span>74</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p401"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p401.1"></span>358</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p402"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p402.1"></span>17 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p403"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p403.1"></span>Prid Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p404"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p404.1"></span>12 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p405"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p405.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p406"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p406.1"></span>26</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p407"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p407.1"></span>3 D</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p408"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p408.1"></span>1</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p409"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p409.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p410"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p410.1"></span>XXXI</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p411"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p411.1"></span>75</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p412"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p412.1"></span>359</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p413"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p413.1"></span>9 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p414"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p414.1"></span>Prid. Non. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p415"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p415.1"></span>4 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p416"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p416.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p417"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p417.1"></span>7</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p418"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p418.1"></span>4 C</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p419"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p419.1"></span>2</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p420"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p420.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p421"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p421.1"></span>XXXII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p422"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p422.1"></span>76</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p423"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p423.1"></span>360</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p424"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p424.1"></span>28 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p425"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p425.1"></span>IX Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p426"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p426.1"></span>23 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p427"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p427.1"></span>21</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p428"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p428.1"></span>18</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p429"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p429.1"></span>6 A</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p430"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p430.1"></span>3</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p431"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p431.1"></span>19</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p432"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p432.1"></span>XXXIII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p433"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p433.1"></span>77</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p434"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p434.1"></span>361</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p435"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p435.1"></span>13 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p436"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p436.1"></span>VI Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p437"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p437.1"></span>8 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p438"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p438.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p439"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p439.1"></span>29</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p440"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p440.1"></span>7 G</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p441"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p441.1"></span>4</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p442"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p442.1"></span>1</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p443"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p443.1"></span>XXXIV</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p444"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p444.1"></span>78</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p445"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p445.1"></span>362</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p446"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p446.1"></span>5 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p447"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p447.1"></span>Prid. Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p448"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p448.1"></span>31 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p449"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p449.1"></span>25</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p450"></span> <span
id="fr_3821"></span>[3822](#fn_3821) <span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p451.2"></span>10</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p452"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p452.1"></span>1 F</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p453"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p453.1"></span>5</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p454"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p454.1"></span>2</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p455"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p455.1"></span>XXXV</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p456"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p456.1"></span>79</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p457"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p457.1"></span>363</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p458"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p458.1"></span>25 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p459"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p459.1"></span>XII Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p460"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p460.1"></span>20 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p461"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p461.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p462"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p462.1"></span>21</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p463"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p463.1"></span>2 E</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p464"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p464.1"></span>6</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p465"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p465.1"></span>3</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p466"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p466.1"></span>XXXVI</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p467"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p467.1"></span>80</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p468"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p468.1"></span>364</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p469"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p469.1"></span>9 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p470"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p470.1"></span>Prid. Non. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p471"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p471.1"></span>4 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p472"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p472.1"></span>16</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p473"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p473.1"></span>3</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p474"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p474.1"></span>4 C</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p475"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p475.1"></span>7</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p476"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p476.1"></span>4</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p477"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p477.1"></span>XXXVII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p478"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p478.1"></span>81</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p479"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p479.1"></span>365</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p480"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p480.1"></span>1 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p481"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p481.1"></span>VI Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p482"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p482.1"></span>27 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p483"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p483.1"></span>19</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p484"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p484.1"></span>14</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p485"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p485.1"></span>5 B</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p486"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p486.1"></span>8</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p487"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p487.1"></span>5</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p488"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p488.1"></span>XXXVIII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p489"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p489.1"></span>82</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p490"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p490.1"></span>366</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p491"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p491.1"></span>21 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p492"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p492.1"></span>XVI Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p493"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p493.1"></span>16 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p494"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p494.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p495"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p495.1"></span>25</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p496"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p496.1"></span>6 A</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p497"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p497.1"></span>9</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p498"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p498.1"></span>6</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p499"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p499.1"></span>XXXIX</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p500"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p500.1"></span>83</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p501"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p501.1"></span>367</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p502"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p502.1"></span>6 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p503"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p503.1"></span>Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p504"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p504.1"></span>1 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p505"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p505.1"></span>16</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p506"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p506.1"></span>6</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p507"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p507.1"></span>7 G</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p508"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p508.1"></span>10</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p509"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p509.1"></span>7</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p510"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p510.1"></span>XL</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p511"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p511.1"></span>84</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p512"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p512.1"></span>368</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p513"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p513.1"></span>25 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p514"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p514.1"></span>XII Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p515"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p515.1"></span>20 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p516"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p516.1"></span>16</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p517"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p517.1"></span>17</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p518"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p518.1"></span>2 E</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p519"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p519.1"></span>11</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p520"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p520.1"></span>8</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p521"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p521.1"></span>XLI</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p522"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p522.1"></span>85</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p523"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p523.1"></span>369</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p524"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p524.1"></span>17 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p525"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p525.1"></span>Prid. Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p526"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p526.1"></span>12 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p527"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p527.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p528"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p528.1"></span>28</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p529"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p529.1"></span>3 D</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p530"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p530.1"></span>12</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p531"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p531.1"></span>9</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p532"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p532.1"></span>XLII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p533"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p533.1"></span>86</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p534"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p534.1"></span>370</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p535"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p535.1"></span>2 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p536"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p536.1"></span>V Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p537"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p537.1"></span>28 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p538"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p538.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p539"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p539.1"></span>9</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p540"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p540.1"></span>4 C</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p541"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p541.1"></span>13</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p542"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p542.1"></span>10</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p543"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p543.1"></span>XLIII</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p544"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p544.1"></span>87</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p545"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p545.1"></span>371</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p546"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p546.1"></span>22 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p547"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p547.1"></span>XV Kal. Mai</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p548"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p548.1"></span>17 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p549"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p549.1"></span>16</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p550"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p550.1"></span>20</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p551"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p551.1"></span>5 B</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p552"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p552.1"></span>14</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p553"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p553.1"></span>11</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p554"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p554.1"></span>XLIV</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p555"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p555.1"></span>88</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p556"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p556.1"></span>372</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p557"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p557.1"></span>13 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p558"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p558.1"></span>VI Id. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p559"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p559.1"></span>8 April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p560"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p560.1"></span>19</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p561"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p561.1"></span>1</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p562"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p562.1"></span>7 G</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p563"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p563.1"></span>15</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p564"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p564.1"></span>12</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p565"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p565.1"></span>XLV</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p566"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p566.1"></span>89</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p567"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p567.1"></span>373</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p568"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p568.1"></span>5 Pharm.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p569"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p569.1"></span>Prid. Kal. April</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p570"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p570.1"></span>31 March</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p571"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p571.1"></span>21</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p572"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p572.1"></span>12</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p573"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p573.1"></span>1 F</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p574"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p574.1"></span>1</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p575"></span><span class="c65"><span
id="xxv.iii.i-p575.1"></span>13</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3811"></span>[500:3812](2040409.htm#fr_3811) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p6"></span> So Leo Magnus (*Ep. ad Marcian. Imp.*)
‘apud Ægyptios huius supputationis antiquitus tradita peritia.’

<span id="fn_3812"></span>[500:3813](2040409.htm#fr_3812) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p7"></span> We trace differences of opinion in spite
of the authority of the Alexandrian Pope in ‘Index’ xii, xv, xxi, and
*Ep.* 18.

<span id="fn_3813"></span>[500:3814](2040409.htm#fr_3813) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p9"></span> Further details in Migne, P.G. xxvi.
1339 *sqq.* and Preface (by Williams?) to Oxford Transl. of *Fest. Epp.*
(Parker, 1854.)

<span id="fn_3814"></span>[500:3815](2040409.htm#fr_3814) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p11"></span> The very late Arabic Life of Ath. alone
gives 47 (Migne xxv. p. ccli.), a statement which we may safely ignore
in view of the general character of the document which is ‘crowded with
incredible trivialities and follies’ (Montf.), outbidding by far the
‘unparalleled rubbish’ (id.) of the worst of the Greek biographies (see
Migne xxv. p. liv. *sq.*).

<span id="fn_3815"></span>[500:3816](2040409.htm#fr_3815) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p12"></span> The italics are ours. Cf. Rufin. *H.
E.* ii. 3, ‘xlvi *anno* sacerdotii sui.’

<span id="fn_3816"></span>[501:3817](2040409.htm#fr_3816) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p17"></span> Some phenomena might suggest (Hefele,
ii. 88, note) that the *Index* was originally prefixed to another
collection of the letters, and was copied by a collector or transcriber
of our present corpus; cf. *Index* xiii., note 17b, and p. 527, note 1.

<span id="fn_3817"></span>[501:3818](2040409.htm#fr_3817) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p19"></span> Misunderstood by Hefele, vol. ii. p. 88
(*E. Tra*.).

<span id="fn_3818"></span>[502:3819](2040409.htm#fr_3818) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p127"></span> According to the usual Antegregorian
rule, Easter would fall on April 22.

<span id="fn_3819"></span>[502:3820](2040409.htm#fr_3819) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p270.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p271"></span> According to the usual rule, Easter
would fall on March 23; see *Letter* 18, note 3.

<span id="fn_3820"></span>[502:3821](2040409.htm#fr_3820) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p304.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p305"></span> According to rule, Easter would fall
on April 23, which perhaps was the day really observed, as it agrees
with the age of the moon; but see note on *Index* No. xxi.

<span id="fn_3821"></span>[502:3822](2040409.htm#fr_3821) <span
id="xxv.iii.i-p450.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.i-p451"></span> Read Moon 20, Epact 11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index.](2040410)
