[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040151)  [Next](2040153.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.lv"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.lv-p1"></span> §55. *Summary of foregoing. Cessation of
pagan oracles, &c.: propagation of the faith. The true King has come
forth and silenced all usurpers.*

<span id="vii.ii.lv-p2"></span>This, then, after what we have so far
said, it is right for you to realize, and to take as the sum of what we
have already stated, and to marvel at exceedingly; namely, that since
the Saviour has come among us, idolatry not only has no longer
increased, but what there was is diminishing and gradually coming to an
end: and not only does the wisdom of the Greeks no longer advance, but
what there is is now fading away: and demons, so far from cheating any
more by illusions and prophecies and magic arts, if they so much as dare
to make the attempt, are put to shame by the sign of the Cross. 2. And
to sum the matter up: behold how the Saviour’s doctrine is everywhere
increasing, while all idolatry and everything opposed to the faith of
Christ is daily dwindling, and losing power, and falling. And thus
beholding, worship the Saviour, “Who is above all” and mighty, even God
the Word; and condemn those who are being worsted and done away by Him.
3. For as, when the sun is come, darkness no longer prevails, but if any
be still left anywhere it is driven away; so, now that the divine
Appearing of the Word of God is come, the darkness of the idols prevails
no more, and all parts of the world in every direction are illumined by
His teaching. 4. And as, when a king is reigning in some country without
appearing but keeps at home in his own house, often some disorderly
persons, abusing his retirement, proclaim themselves; and each of them,
by assuming the character, imposes on the simple as king, and so men are
led astray by the name, hearing that there is a king, but not seeing
him, if for no other reason, because they cannot enter the house; but
when the real king comes forth and appears, then the disorderly
impostors are exposed by his presence, while men, seeing the real king,
desert those who previously led them astray: 5. in like manner, the evil
spirits formerly used to deceive men, investing themselves with God’s
honour; but when the Word of God appeared in a body, and made known to
us His own Father, then at length the deceit of the evil spirits is done
away and stopped, while men, turning their eyes to the true God, Word of
the Father, are deserting the idols, and now coming to know the true
God. 6. Now this is a proof that Christ is God the Word, and the Power
of God. For whereas human things cease, and the Word of Christ abides,
it is clear to all eyes that what ceases is temporary, but that He Who
abides is God, and the true Son of God, His only-begotten Word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Search then, the Scriptures, if you can, and so fill up this
sketch. Learn to look for the Second Advent and Judgment.](2040153.md)
