[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040351)  [Next](2040353.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p1.2"></span>Objections to the
Foregoing Proof</span>. *Whether, in the generation of the Son, God made
One that was already, or One that was not.*

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p2"></span>22 (*continued*). <span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p2.1"></span>Ranking</span> Him among
these, according to the teaching of Eusebius, and accounting Him such as
the things which come into being through Him, Arius and his fellows
revolted from the truth, and used, when they commenced this heresy, to
go about with dishonest phrases which they had got together; nay, up to
this time some of them <span id="fr_1967"></span>[1968](#fn_1967.md) , when
they fall in <span id="page_320">p. 320</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-Page_320"></span>with boys in the market-place,
question them, not out of divine Scripture, but thus, as if bursting
with ‘the abundance of their heart <span
id="fr_1968"></span>[1969](#fn_1968.md) ;’—‘He who is, did He make him who
was not, from that which was \[not\], or him who was? therefore did He
make the Son, whereas He was, or whereas He was not <span
id="fr_1969"></span>[1970](#fn_1969.md) ?’ And again, ‘Is the Unoriginate
one or two?’ and ‘Has He free will, and yet does not alter at His own
choice, as being of an alterable nature? for He is not as a stone to
remain by Himself unmoveable.’ Next they turn to silly women, and
address them in turn in this womanish language; ‘Hadst thou a son before
bearing? now, as thou hadst not, so neither was the Son of God before
His generation.’ In such language do the disgraceful men sport and
revel, and liken God to men, pretending to be Christians, but changing
God’s glory ‘into an image made like to corruptible man <span
id="fr_1970"></span>[1971](#fn_1970.md) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p7"></span>23. Words so senseless and dull
deserved no answer at all; however, lest their heresy appear to have any
foundation, it may be right, though we go out of the way for it, to
refute them even here, especially on account of the silly women who are
so readily deceived by them. When they thus speak, they should have
inquired of an architect, whether he can build without materials; and if
he cannot, whether it follows that God could not make the universe
without materials <span id="fr_1971"></span>[1972](#fn_1971.md) . Or they
should have asked every man, whether he can be without place; and if he
cannot, whether it follows that God is in place, that so they may be
brought to shame even by their audience. Or why is it that, on hearing
that God has a Son, they deny Him by the parallel of themselves;
whereas, if they hear that He creates and makes, no longer do they
object their human ideas? they ought in creation also to entertain the
same, and to supply God with materials, and so deny Him to be Creator,
till they end in grovelling with Manichees. But if the bare idea of God
transcends such thoughts, and, on very first hearing, a man believes and
knows that He is in being, not as we are, and yet in being as God, and
creates not as man creates, but yet creates as God, it is plain that He
begets also not as men beget, but begets as God. For God does not make
man His pattern; but rather we men, for that God is properly, and alone
truly <span id="fr_1972"></span>[1973](#fn_1972.md) , Father of His Son,
are also called fathers of our own children; for of Him ‘is every
fatherhood in heaven and earth named <span
id="fr_1973"></span>[1974](#fn_1973.md) .’ And their positions, while
unscrutinized, have a shew of sense; but if any one scrutinize them by
reason, they will be found to incur much derision and mockery.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p11"></span>24. For first of all, as to their
first question, which is such as this, how dull and vague it is! they do
not explain who it is they ask about, so as to allow of an answer, but
they say abstractedly, ‘He who is,’ ‘him who is not.’ Who then ‘is,’ and
what ‘are not,’ O Arians? or who ‘is,’ and who ‘is not?’ what are said
‘to be,’ what ‘not to be?’ for He that is, can make things which are
not, and which are, and which were before. For instance, carpenter, and
goldsmith, and potter, each, according to his own art, works upon
materials previously existing, making what vessels he pleases; and the
God of all Himself, having taken the dust of the earth existing and
already brought to be, fashions man; that very earth, however, whereas
it was not once, He has at one time made by His own Word. If then this
is the meaning of their question, the creature on the one hand plainly
was not before its origination, and men, on the other, work the existing
material; and thus their reasoning is inconsequent, since both ‘what is’
becomes, and ‘what is not’ becomes, as these instances shew. But if they
speak concerning God and His Word, let them complete their question and
then ask, Was the God, ‘who is,’ ever without Reason? and, whereas He is
Light, was He ray-less? or was He always Father of the Word? Or again in
this manner. Has the Father ‘who is’ made the Word ‘who is not,’ or has
He ever with Him His Word, as the proper offspring of His substance?
This will shew them that they do but presume and venture on sophisms
about God and Him who is from Him. Who indeed can bear to hear them say
that God was ever without Reason? this is what they fall into a second
time, though endeavouring in vain to escape it and to hide it with their
sophisms. Nay, one would fain not hear them disputing at all, that God
was not always <span id="page_321">p. 321</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-Page_321"></span>Father, but became so afterwards
(which is necessary for their fantasy, that His Word once was not),
considering the number of the proofs already adduced against them; while
John besides says, ‘The Word was <span
id="fr_1974"></span>[1975](#fn_1974.md) ,’ and Paul again writes, ‘Who
being the brightness of His glory <span
id="fr_1975"></span>[1976](#fn_1975.md) ,’ and, ‘Who is over all, God
blessed for ever. Amen <span id="fr_1976"></span>[1977](#fn_1976.md) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p15"></span>25. They had best have been silent;
but since it is otherwise, it remains to meet their shameless question
with a bold retort <span id="fr_1977"></span>[1978](#fn_1977.md) . Perhaps
on seeing the counter absurdities which beset themselves, they may cease
to fight against the truth. After many prayers <span
id="fr_1978"></span>[1979](#fn_1978.md) then that God would be gracious to
us, thus we might ask them in turn; God who is, has He so become,
whereas He was not? or is He also before His coming into being? whereas
He is, did He make Himself, or is He of nothing, and being nothing
before, did He suddenly appear Himself? Unseemly is such an enquiry,
both unseemly and very blasphemous, yet parallel with theirs; for the
answer they make abounds in irreligion. But if it be blasphemous and
utterly irreligious thus to inquire about God, it will be blasphemous
too to make the like inquiries about His Word. However, by way of
exposing a question so senseless and so dull, it is necessary to answer
thus:—whereas God is, He was eternally; since then the Father is ever,
His Radiance ever is, which is His Word. And again, God who is, hath
from Himself His Word who also is; and neither hath the Word been added,
whereas He was not before, nor was the Father once without Reason. For
this assault upon the Son makes the blasphemy recoil upon the Father; as
if He devised for Himself a Wisdom, and Word, and Son from without <span
id="fr_1979"></span>[1980](#fn_1979.md) ; for whichever of these titles you
use, you denote the offspring from the Father, as has been said. So that
this their objection does not hold; and naturally; for denying the Logos
they in consequence ask questions which are illogical. As then if a
person saw the sun, and then inquired concerning its radiance, and said,
‘Did that which is make that which was, or that which was not,’ he would
be held not to reason sensibly, but to be utterly mazed, because he
fancied what is from the Light to be external to it, and was raising
questions, when and where and whether it were made; in like manner, thus
to speculate concerning the Son and the Father and thus to inquire, is
far greater madness, for it is to conceive of the Word of the Father as
external to Him, and to idly call the natural offspring a work, with the
avowal, ‘He was not before His generation.’ Nay, let them over and above
take this answer to their question;—The Father who was, made the Son who
was, for ‘the Word was made flesh <span
id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980.md) ;’ and, whereas He was Son of God,
He made Him in consummation of the ages also Son of Man, unless
forsooth, after the Samosatene, they affirm that He did not even exist
at all, till He became man.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p20"></span>26. This is sufficient from us in
answer to their first question. And now on your part, O Arians,
remembering your own words, tell us whether He who was needed one who
was not for the framing of the universe, or one who was? You said that
He made for Himself His Son out of nothing, as an instrument whereby to
make the universe. Which then is superior, that which needs or that
which supplies the need? or does not each supply the deficiency of the
other? You rather prove the weakness of the Maker, if He had not power
of Himself to make the universe, but provided for Himself an instrument
from without <span id="fr_1981"></span>[1982](#fn_1981.md) , as carpenter
might do or shipwright, unable to work anything without adze and saw!
Can anything be more irreligious? yet why should one dwell on its
heinousness, when enough has gone before to shew that their doctrine is
a mere fantasy?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[319:1968](2040352.htm#fr_1967.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p3"></span> This miserable procedure, of making
sacred and mysterious subjects a matter of popular talk and debate,
which is a sure mark of heresy, had received a great stimulus about this
time by the rise of the Anomœans. Eusebius’s testimony to the
profaneness which attended Arianism upon its rise will be given *de
Syn.* 2, note 1. The Thalia is another instance of it. S. Alexander
speaks of the interference, even judicial, in its behalf against
himself, of disobedient women, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p3.2"></span>δι᾽ ἐντυχίας γυναικαρίων ἀτακτων ἃ
ἠπάτησαν</span>, and of the busy and indecent gadding about of the
younger, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p3.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p3.5"></span>κ τοῦ περιτροχάζειν πᾶσαν ἀγυιὰν
ἀσέμνως</span>. ap. Theod. *H. E.* i. 3. p. 730, also p. 747; also of
the men’s buffoon conversation, p. 731. Socrates says that ‘in the
Imperial Court, the officers of the bedchamber held disputes with the
women, and in the city in every house there was a war of dialectics.’
*Hist.* ii. 2. This mania raged especially in Constantinople, and S.
Gregory Naz. speaks of ‘Jezebels in as thick a crop as hemlock in a
field.’ *Orat.* 35. 3, cf. *de Syn.* 13, n. 4. He speaks of the heretics
as ‘aiming at one thing only, how to make good or refute points of
argument,’ making ‘every market-place resound with their words, and
spoiling every entertainment with their trifling and offensive talk.’
*Orat.* 27. 2. The most remarkable testimony of the kind though not
concerning Constantinople, is given by S. Gregory Nyssen, and often
quoted, ‘Men of yesterday and the day before, mere mechanics, off-hand
dogmatists in theology, servants too and slaves that have been flogged,
runaways from servile work, are solemn with us and philosophical about
things incomprehensible.…With such the whole city is full; its smaller
gates, forums, squares, thoroughfares; the clothes-venders, the
money-lenders, the victuallers. Ask about pence, and he will discuss the
Generate and Ingenerate; inquire the price of bread, he answers, Greater
is the Father, and the Son is subject; say that a bath would suit you,
and he defines that the Son is out of nothing.’ t. 2. p. 898.

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[320:1969](2040352.htm#fr_1968.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p3.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p4"></span> [Matt. xii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1969"></span>[320:1970](2040352.htm#fr_1969.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p5"></span> This objection is found in Alex. *Ep.
Encycl.* 2. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p5.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p5.3"></span>ὢν θεὸς τὸν μὴ ὄντα ἐκ τοῦ μὴ
ὄντος</span>. Again, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p5.5"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p5.6"></span>ντα γεγέννηκε ἢ οὐκ ὄντα</span>. Greg.
*Orat.* 29. 9. who answers it. Pseudo-Basil. *contr. Eunom.* iv. p. 281.
2. Basil calls the question <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p5.8"></span>πολυθρύλλητον</span>, *contr. Eunom.* ii.
14. It will be seen to be but the Arian formula of ‘He was not before
His generation,’ in another shape; being but this, that the very fact of
His being begotten or a Son, implies a beginning, that is, a time when
He was not: it being by the very force of the words absurd to say that
‘God begat Him that *was,*’ or to deny that ‘God begat Him that was
*not.*’ For the symbol, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p5.10"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν γεννήθῃ</span>, vid.
*Excursus* B. at the end of this Discourse.

<span id="fn_1970"></span>[320:1971](2040352.htm#fr_1970.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p5.12"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p6"></span> [Rom. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#023.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p6.1"></span>, and §2.

<span id="fn_1971"></span>[320:1972](2040352.htm#fr_1971.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p8"></span> *De Decr.* § 11, esp. note 6.

<span id="fn_1972"></span>[320:1973](2040352.htm#fr_1972.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p9"></span> *De Decr.* 31, note 5

<span id="fn_1973"></span>[320:1974](2040352.htm#fr_1973.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p10"></span> [Eph. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1974"></span>[321:1975](2040352.htm#fr_1974.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p12"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1975"></span>[321:1976](2040352.htm#fr_1975.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p13"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[321:1977](2040352.htm#fr_1976.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p14"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[321:1978](2040352.htm#fr_1977.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p16"></span> Vid. Basil, *contr. Eunom.* ii. 17.

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[321:1979](2040352.htm#fr_1978.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p17"></span> This cautious and reverent way of
speaking is a characteristic of S. Athanasius, *ad Serap.* i. 1. vid.
ii. init. *ad Epict.* 13 fin. *ad Max.* init. *contr. Apoll.* i. init.
‘I must ask another question, bolder, yet with a religious intention; be
propitious, O Lord, &c.’ *Orat.* iii. 63, cf. *de Decr.* 12, note 8, 15,
note 6, *de Syn.* 51, note 4.

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[321:1980](2040352.htm#fr_1979.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p18"></span> *De Decr.* 25, note 2.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[321:1981](2040352.htm#fr_1980.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p19"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[321:1982](2040352.htm#fr_1981.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p21.1"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.vii-p21.2"></span>ργανον</span>, *de Decr.* 7, n. 6, *de
Syn.* 27, note 11. This was alleged by Arius, *Socr.* i. 6. and by
Eusebius, *Eccles. Theol.* i. 8. supr. *Ep. Eus.,* and by the Anomœans,
supr. *de Decr.* 7, note 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Objections Continued. Whether we may decide the question by the
parallel of human sons, which are born later than their parents. No, for
the force of the analogy lies in the idea of connaturality. Time is not
involved in the idea of Son, but is adventitious to it, and does not
attach to God, because He is without parts and passions. The titles Word
and Wisdom guard our thoughts of Him and His Son from this
misconception. God not a Father, as a Creator, in posse from eternity,
because creation does not relate to the essence of God, as generation
does.](2040353.md)
