[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040352)  [Next](2040354) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p1.2"></span>Objections
Continued</span>. *Whether we may decide the question by the parallel of
human sons, which are born later than their parents. No, for the force
of the analogy lies in the idea of connaturality. Time is not involved
in the idea of Son, but is adventitious to it, and does not attach to
God, because He is without parts and passions. The titles Word and
Wisdom guard our thoughts of Him and His Son from this misconception.
God not a Father, as a Creator, in posse from eternity, because creation
does not relate to the essence of God, as generation does.*

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p2"></span>26. (*continued*). <span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p2.1"></span>Nor</span> is answer
needful to their other very simple and foolish inquiry, which they put
to silly women; or none besides that which has been already given,
namely, that it is not suitable to measure divine generation by the
nature of men. However, that as before they may pass judgment on
themselves, it is well to meet them on the same ground, thus:—Plainly,
if they inquire of parents concerning their son, let them consider
whence is the child which is begotten. For, granting <span
id="page_322">p. 322</span> <span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-Page_322"></span>the
parent had not a son before his begetting, still, after having him, he
had him, not as external or as foreign, but as from himself, and proper
to his essence and his exact image, so that the former is beheld in the
latter, and the latter is contemplated in the former. If then they
assume from human examples that generation implies time, why not from
the same infer that it implies the Natural and the Proper <span
id="fr_1982"></span>[1983](#fn_1982) , instead of extracting
serpent-like from the earth only what turns to poison? Those who ask of
parents, and say, ‘Had you a son before you begot him?’ should add, ‘And
if you had a son, did you purchase him from without as a house or any
other possession?’ And then you would be answered, ‘He is not from
without, but from myself. For things which are from without are
possessions, and pass from one to another; but my son is from me, proper
and similar to my essence, not become mine from another, but begotten of
me; wherefore I too am wholly in him, while I remain myself what I
am <span id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983) .’ For so it is; though
the parent be distinct in time, as being man, who himself has come to be
in time, yet he too would have had his child ever coexistent with him,
but that his nature was a restraint and made it impossible. For Levi too
was already in the loins of his great-grandfather, before his own actual
generation, or that of his grandfather. When then the man comes to that
age at which nature supplies the power, immediately, with nature,
unrestrained, he becomes father of the son from himself.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p5"></span>27. Therefore, if on asking parents
about children, they get for answer, that children which are by nature
are not from without, but from their parents, let them confess in like
manner concerning the Word of God, that He is simply from the Father.
And if they make a question of the time, let them say what is to
restrain God—for it is necessary to prove their irreligion on the very
ground on which their scoff is made—let them tell us, what is there to
restrain God from being always Father of the Son; for that what is
begotten must be from its father is undeniable. Moreover, they will pass
judgment on themselves in attributing <span
id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984) such things to God, if, as they
questioned women on the subject of time, so they inquire of the sun
concerning its radiance, and of the fountain concerning its issue. They
will find that these, though an offspring, always exist with those
things from which they are. And if parents, such as these, have in
common with their children nature and duration, why, if they suppose God
inferior to things that come to be <span
id="fr_1985"></span>[1986](#fn_1985) , do they not openly say out their
own irreligion? But if they do not dare to say this openly, and the Son
is confessed to be, not from without, but a natural offspring from the
Father, and that there is nothing which is a restraint to God (for not
as man is He, but more than the sun, or rather the God of the sun), it
follows that the Word is from Him and is ever co-existent with Him,
through whom also the Father caused that all things which were not
should be. That then the Son comes not of nothing but is eternal and
from the Father, is certain even from the nature of the case; and the
question of the heretics to parents exposes their perverseness; for they
confess the point of nature, and now have been put to shame on the point
of time.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p8"></span>28. As we said above, so now we
repeat, that the divine generation must not be compared to the nature of
men, nor the Son considered to be part of God, nor the generation to
imply any passion whatever; God is not as man; for men beget passibly,
having a transitive nature, which waits for periods by reason of its
weakness. But with God this cannot be; for He is not composed of parts,
but being impassible and simple, He is impassibly and indivisibly Father
of the Son. This again is strongly evidenced and proved by divine
Scripture. For the Word of God is His Son, and the Son is the Father’s
Word and Wisdom; and Word and Wisdom is neither creature nor part of Him
whose Word He is, nor an offspring passibly begotten. Uniting then the
two titles, Scripture speaks <span id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-Page_323"></span>of ‘Son,’ in order to herald the
natural and true offspring of His essence; and, on the other hand, that
none may think of the Offspring humanly, while signifying His essence,
it also calls Him Word, Wisdom, and Radiance; to teach us that the
generation was impassible, and eternal, and worthy of God. <span
id="fr_1986"></span>[1987](#fn_1986) What affection then, or what part
of the Father is the Word and the Wisdom and the Radiance? So much may
be impressed even on these men of folly; for as they asked women
concerning God’s Son, so <span id="fr_1987"></span>[1988](#fn_1987) let
them inquire of men concerning the Word, and they will find that the
word which they put forth is neither an affection of them nor a part of
their mind. But if such be the word of men, who are passible and
partitive, why speculate they about passions and parts in the instance
of the immaterial and indivisible God, that under pretence of
reverence <span id="fr_1988"></span>[1989](#fn_1988) they may deny the
true and natural generation of the Son? Enough was said above to shew
that the offspring from God is not an affection; and now it has been
shewn in particular that the Word is not begotten according to
affection. The same may be said of Wisdom; God is not as man; nor must
they here think humanly of Him. For, whereas men are capable of wisdom,
God partakes in nothing, but is Himself the Father of His own Wisdom, of
which whoso partake are given the name of wise. And this Wisdom too is
not a passion, nor a part, but an Offspring proper to the Father.
Wherefore He is ever Father, nor is the character of Father adventitious
to God, lest He seem alterable; for if it is good that He be Father, but
has not ever been Father, then good has not ever been in Him.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p12"></span>29. But, observe, say they, God was
always a Maker, nor is the power of framing adventitious to Him; does it
follow then, that, because He is the Framer of all, therefore His works
also are eternal, and is it wicked to say of them too, that they were
not before origination? Senseless are these Arians; for what likeness is
there between Son and work, that they should parallel a father’s with a
maker’s function? How is it that, with that difference between offspring
and work, which has been shewn, they remain so ill-instructed? Let it be
repeated then, that a work is external to the nature, but a son is the
proper offspring of the essence; it follows that a work need not have
been always, for the workman frames it when he will; but an offspring is
not subject to will, but is proper to the essence <span
id="fr_1989"></span>[1990](#fn_1989) . And a man may be and may be
called Maker, though the works are not as yet; but father he cannot be
called, nor can he be, unless a son exist. And if they curiously inquire
why God, though always with the power to make, does not always make
(though this also be the presumption of madmen, for ‘who hath known the
mind of the Lord, or who hath been His Counsellor?’ or how ‘shall the
thing formed say to’ the potter, ‘why didst thou make me thus <span
id="fr_1990"></span>[1991](#fn_1990) ?’ however, not to leave even a
weak argument unnoticed), they must be told, that although God always
had the power to make, yet the things originated had not the power of
being eternal <span id="fr_1991"></span>[1992](#fn_1991) . For they are
out of nothing, and therefore were not before their origination; but
things which were not before their origination, how could these coexist
with the ever-existing God? Wherefore God, looking to what was good for
them, then made them all when He saw that, when originated, they were
able to abide. And as, though He was able, even from the beginning in
the time of Adam, or Noah, or Moses, to send His own Word, yet He sent
Him not until the consummation of the ages (for this He saw to be good
for the whole creation), so also things originated did He make when He
would, and as was good for them. But the Son, not being <span
id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-Page_324"></span>a
work, but proper to the Father’s offspring, always is; for, whereas the
Father always is, so what is proper to His essence must always be; and
this is His Word and His Wisdom. And that creatures should not be in
existence, does not disparage the Maker; for He hath the power of
framing them, when He wills; but for the offspring not to be ever with
the Father, is a disparagement of the perfection of His essence.
Wherefore His works were framed, when He would, through His Word; but
the Son is ever the proper offspring of the Father’s essence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[322:1983](2040353.htm#fr_1982) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p3"></span> Supr. *de Decr.* 6. The question
was, *What* was that sense of Son which would apply to the Divine
Nature? The Catholics said that its essential meaning *could* apply,
viz. consubstantiality, whereas the point of posteriority to the Father
depended on a condition, *time,* which could not exist in the instance
of God. ib. 10. The Arians on the other hand said, that to suppose a
true Son, was to think of God irreverently, as implying division,
change, &c. The Catholics replied that the notion of materiality was
quite as foreign from the Divine Essence as time, and as the Divine
Sonship was eternal, so was it also clear both of imperfection or
extension.

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[322:1984](2040353.htm#fr_1983) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p4"></span> It is from expressions such as this
that the Greek Fathers have been accused of tritheism. The truth is,
every illustration, as being incomplete on one or other side of it,
taken by itself, tends to heresy. The title Son by itself suggests a
second God, as the title Word a mere attribute, and the title Instrument
a creature. All heresies are partial views of the truth, and are wrong,
not so much in what they say, as in what they deny. The truth, on the
other hand, is a positive and comprehensive doctrine, and in consequence
necessarily mysterious and open to misconception. vid. *de Syn.* 41,
note 1. When Athan, implies that the Eternal Father is in the Son,
though remaining what He is, as a man in his child, he is intent only
upon the point of the Son’s connaturality and equality, which the Arians
denied. Cf. *Orat.* iii. §5; Ps.-Ath. *Dial.* i. (Migne xxviii. 1144
C.). S. Cyril even seems to deny that each individual man may be
considered a separate substance except as the Three Persons are such
(*Dial.* i. p. 409); and S. Gregory Nyssen is led to say that, strictly
speaking, the abstract *man*, which is predicated of separate
individuals, is still one, and this with a view of illustrating the
Divine Unity. *ad Ablab.* t. 2. p. 449. vid. Petav. *de Trin.* iv. 9.

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[322:1985](2040353.htm#fr_1984) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p6"></span> \[But see *Or.* iii. 65, note 2.\]

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[322:1986](2040353.htm#fr_1985) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p7"></span> S. Athanasius’s doctrine is, that,
God containing in Himself all perfection, whatever is excellent in one
created thing above another, is found in its perfection in Him. If then
such generation as radiance from light is more perfect than that of
children from parents, that belongs, and transcendently, to the
All-perfect God.

<span id="fn_1986"></span>[323:1987](2040353.htm#fr_1986) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p9"></span> This is a view familiar to the
Fathers, viz. that in this consists our Lord’s Sonship, that He is the
Word, or as S. Augustine says, Christum ideo Filium quia Verbum. Aug.
*Ep.* 120. 11. Cf. *de Decr.* §17. ‘If I speak of Wisdom, I speak of His
offspring;’ Theoph. *ad Autolyc.* i. 3. ‘The Word, the genuine Son of
Mind;’ Clem. *Protrept.* p. 58. Petavius discusses this subject
accurately with reference to the distinction between Divine Generation
and Divine Procession. *de Trin.* vii. 14.

<span id="fn_1987"></span>[323:1988](2040353.htm#fr_1987) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p10"></span> *Orat.* iii. 67.

<span id="fn_1988"></span>[323:1989](2040353.htm#fr_1988) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p11"></span> Heretics have frequently assigned
reverence as the cause of their opposition to the Church; and if even
Arius affected it, the plea may be expected in any other. ‘O stultos et
impios metus,’ says S. Hilary, ‘et irreligiosam de Deo sollicitudinem.’
*de Trin.* iv. 6. It was still more commonly professed in regard to the
Catholic doctrine of the Incarnation. Cf. *Acta Archelai* \[Routh.
*Rell.* v. 169\]. August. *contr. Secund.* 9, *contr. Faust.* xi. 3. As
the Manichees denied our Lord a body, so the Apollinarians denied Him a
rational soul, still under pretence of reverence because, as they said,
the soul was necessarily sinful. Leontius makes this their main
argument, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p11.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p11.3"></span>νοῦς ἁμαρτητικός ἐστι</span>. *de Sect.*
iv. p. 507. vid. also Greg. Naz. *Ep.* 101. *ad Cledon.* p. 89; Athan.
*in Apoll.* i. 2. 14. Epiph. *Ancor.* 79. 80. Athan., &c., call the
Apollinarian doctrine Manichæan in consequence. vid. in *Apoll.* ii. 8.
9. &c. Again, the Eranistes in Theodoret, who advocates a similar
doctrine, will not call our Lord *man.* *Eranist.* ii. p. 83. Eutyches,
on the other hand, would call our Lord *man,* but refused to admit His
human *nature,* and still with the same profession. Leon. *Ep.* 21. 1
fin. ‘Forbid it,’ he says at Constantinople, ‘that I should say that the
Christ was of two natures, or should discuss the nature, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p11.5"></span>φυσιολογεῖν</span>,
of my God.’ *Concil.* t. 2. p. 157 \[Act. *prima conc. Chalc.* t. iv.
1001 ed. Col.\] A modern argument for Universal Restitution takes a like
form; ‘Do not *we* shrink from the notion of another’s being sentenced
to eternal punishment; and are we more merciful than God?’ vid. <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p11.7"></span>[Matt.
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p11.9"></span>.

<span id="fn_1989"></span>[323:1990](2040353.htm#fr_1989) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p13"></span> Vid. *Orat.* iii. §59, &c.

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[323:1991](2040353.htm#fr_1990) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p14"></span> [Rom.
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034), [Rom.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p14.1"></span>[Rom. xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p14.3"></span>; ib. ix. 20.

<span id="fn_1991"></span>[323:1992](2040353.htm#fr_1991) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p15"></span> Athan.’s argument is as follows:
that, as it is of the essence of a son to be ‘connatural’ with the
father, so is it of the essence of a creature to be of ‘nothing,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p15.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p15.3"></span>ξ οὐκ ὄντων</span>;
therefore, while it was *not* impossible ‘from the nature of the case,’
for Almighty God to be always Father, it *was* impossible for the same
reason that He should be always a Creator. vid. infr. §58: where he
takes, ‘They shall perish,’ in the Psalm, not as a fact but as the
definition of the *nature* of a creature. Also ii. §1, where he says,
‘It is proper to creatures and works to have said of them, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p15.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p15.6"></span>ξ οὐκ ὄντων</span>
and <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.viii-p15.7"></span>οὐκ ἦν
πρὶν γεννηθῇ</span>.’ vid. Cyril. *Thesaur.* 9. p. 67. *Dial.* ii. p.
460. on the question of being a Creator in *posse,* vid. supra, *Ep.
Eus*. 11 note 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Objections Continued. Whether is the Unoriginate one or two?
Inconsistent in Arians to use an unscriptural word; necessary to define
its meaning. Different senses of the word. If it means 'without Father,'
there is but One Unoriginate; if 'without beginning or creation,' there
are two. Inconsistency of Asterius. 'Unoriginate' a title of God, not in
contrast with the Son, but with creatures, as is 'Almighty,' or 'Lord of
powers.' 'Father' is the truer title, as not only Scriptural, but
implying a Son, and our adoption as sons.](2040354)
