[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040376)  [Next](2040378.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p1.2"></span>Texts Explained;
Twelfthly</span>, <span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p1.3"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p1.4"></span>[Matthew xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p1.5"></span>; [John xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p1.6"></span></span>, <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p1.7"></span>&c.</span> *Arian inferences are against
the Regula Fidei, as before.* <span id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-Page_423"></span>*He wept and the like, as man. Other
texts prove Him God. God could not fear. He feared because His flesh
feared.*

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p2"></span>54. Therefore as, when the flesh
advanced, He is said to have advanced, because the body was His own, so
also what is said at the season of His death, that He was troubled, that
He wept, must be taken in the same sense <span
id="fr_3167"></span>[3168](#fn_3167.md) . For they, going up and down <span
id="fr_3168"></span>[3169](#fn_3168.md) , as if thereby recommending their
heresy anew, allege; “Behold, ‘He wept,’ and said, ‘Now is My soul
troubled,’ and He besought that the cup might pass away; how then, if He
so spoke, is He God, and Word of the Father?” Yea, it is written that He
wept, O God’s enemies, and that He said, ‘I am troubled,’ and on the
Cross He said, ‘Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani,’ that is, ‘My God, My God,
why hast Thou forsaken Me?’ and He besought that the cup might pass
away <span id="fr_3169"></span>[3170](#fn_3169.md) . Thus certainly it is
written; but again I would ask you (for the same rejoinder must of
necessity be made to each of your objections <span
id="fr_3170"></span>[3171](#fn_3170) .md), If the speaker is mere man, let
him weep and fear death, as being man; but if He is the Word in
flesh <span id="fr_3171"></span>[3172](#fn_3171.md) (for one must not be
reluctant to repeat), whom had He to fear being God? or wherefore should
He fear death, who was Himself Life, and was rescuing others from death?
or how, whereas He said, ‘Fear not him that kills the body <span
id="fr_3172"></span>[3173](#fn_3172.md) ,’ should He Himself fear? And how
should He who said to Abraham, ‘Fear not, for I am with thee,’ and
encouraged Moses against Pharaoh, and said to the son of Nun, ‘Be
strong, and of a good courage <span id="fr_3173"></span>[3174](#fn_3173.md)
,’ Himself feel terror before Herod and Pilate? Further, He who succours
others against fear (for ‘the Lord,’ says Scripture, ‘is on my side, I
will not fear what man shall do unto me <span
id="fr_3174"></span>[3175](#fn_3174) ’.md), did He fear governors, mortal
men? did He who Himself was come against death, feel terror of death? Is
it not both unseemly and irreligious to say that He was terrified at
death or hades, whom the keepers of the gates of hades <span
id="fr_3175"></span>[3176](#fn_3175.md) saw and shuddered? But if, as you
would hold, the Word was in terror wherefore, when He spoke long before
of the conspiracy of the Jews, did He not flee, nay said when actually
sought, ‘I am He?’ for He could have avoided death, as He said, ‘I have
power to lay down My life, and I have power to take it again;’ and ‘No
one taketh it from Me <span id="fr_3176"></span>[3177](#fn_3176.md) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p13"></span>55. But these affections were not
proper to the nature of the Word, as far as He was Word; but in the
flesh which was thus affected was the Word, O Christ’s enemies and
unthankful Jews! For He said not all this prior to the flesh; but when
the ‘Word became flesh,’ and has become man, then is it written that He
said this, that is, humanly. Surely He of whom this is written was He
who raised Lazarus from the dead, and made the water wine, and
vouchsafed sight to the man born blind, and said, ‘I and My Father are
one <span id="fr_3177"></span>[3178](#fn_3177.md) .’ If then they make His
human attributes a ground for low thoughts concerning the Son of God,
nay consider Him altogether man from the earth, and not <span
id="fr_3178"></span>[3179](#fn_3178.md) from heaven, wherefore not from His
divine works recognise the Word who is in the Father, and henceforward
renounce their self-willed <span id="fr_3179"></span>[3180](#fn_3179.md)
irreligion? For they are given to see, how He who did the works is the
same as He who shewed that His body was passible by His permitting <span
id="fr_3180"></span>[3181](#fn_3180.md) it to weep and hunger, and to shew
other properties of a body. For while by means of such He made it known
that, though God impassible, He had taken a passible flesh; yet from the
works He shewed Himself the Word of God, who had afterwards become man,
saying, Though ye believe not Me, beholding Me clad in a human body, yet
believe the works, that ye may know that “I am in the Father, and the
Father in Me. <span id="fr_3181"></span>[3182](#fn_3181.md) ” ‘And Christ’s
enemies seem to me to shew plain shamelessness and blasphemy;’ for, when
they hear ‘I and the Father are one <span
id="fr_3182"></span>[3183](#fn_3182.md) ,’ they violently distort the
sense, and separate the unity of the Father and the Son; but reading of
His tears or sweat or sufferings, they do not advert to His body, but on
account of these rank in the creation Him by whom the creation was made.
What then is left for them to differ from the Jews in? for as the Jews
blasphemously ascribed God’s works to Beelzebub, so also will these,
ranking with the creatures the Lord who wrought those works, undergo the
same condemnation as theirs without mercy.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p20"></span>56. But they ought, when they hear
‘I and the Father are one,’ to see in Him the oneness of the Godhead and
the propriety of the Father’s Essence; and again when they hear, ‘He
wept’ and the like, to say that these are proper to the body; especially
since on each side they have an intelligible ground, viz. that this is
written as of God and that with reference <span id="page_424">p.
424</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-Page_424"></span>to His manhood. For
in the incorporeal, the properties of body had not been, unless He had
taken a body corruptible and mortal <span
id="fr_3183"></span>[3184](#fn_3183.md) ; for mortal was Holy Mary, from
whom was His body. Wherefore of necessity when He was in a body
suffering, and weeping, and toiling, these things which are proper to
the flesh, are ascribed to Him together with the body. If then He wept
and was troubled, it was not the Word, considered as the Word, who wept
and was troubled, but it was proper to the flesh; and if too He besought
that the cup might pass away, it was not the Godhead that was in terror,
but this affection too was proper to the manhood. And that the words
‘Why hast Thou forsaken Me?’ are His, according to the foregoing
explanations (though He suffered nothing, for the Word was impassible),
is notwithstanding declared by the Evangelists; since the Lord became
man, and these things are done and said as from a man, that He might
Himself lighten <span id="fr_3184"></span>[3185](#fn_3184.md) these very
sufferings of the flesh, and free it from them <span
id="fr_3185"></span>[3186](#fn_3185.md) . Whence neither can the Lord be
forsaken by the Father, who is ever in the Father, both before He spoke,
and when He uttered this cry. Nor is it lawful to say that the Lord was
in terror, at whom the keepers of hell’s gates shuddered <span
id="fr_3186"></span>[3187](#fn_3186.md) and set open hell, and the graves
did gape, and many bodies of the saints arose and appeared to their own
people <span id="fr_3187"></span>[3188](#fn_3187.md) . Therefore be every
heretic dumb, nor dare to ascribe terror to the Lord whom death, as a
serpent, flees, at whom demons tremble, and the sea is in alarm; for
whom the heavens are rent and all the powers are shaken. For behold when
He says, ‘Why hast Thou forsaken Me?’ the Father shewed that He was ever
and even then in Him; for the earth knowing its Lord <span
id="fr_3188"></span>[3189](#fn_3188.md) who spoke, straightway trembled,
and the vail was rent, and the sun was hidden, and the rocks were torn
asunder, and the graves, as I have said, did gape, and the dead in them
arose; and, what is wonderful, they who were then present and had before
denied Him, then seeing these signs, confessed that ‘truly He was the
Son of God <span id="fr_3189"></span>[3190](#fn_3189.md) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p28"></span>57. And as to His saying, ‘If it be
possible, let the cup pass,’ observe how, though He thus spake, He
rebuked <span id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190.md) Peter, saying, ‘Thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men.’ For
He willed <span id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191.md) what He deprecated,
for therefore had He come; but His was the willing (for for it He came),
but the terror belonged to the flesh. Wherefore as man He utters this
speech also, and yet both were said by the Same, to shew that He was
God, willing in Himself, but when He had become man, having a flesh that
was in terror. For the sake of this flesh He combined His own will with
human weakness <span id="fr_3192"></span>[3193](#fn_3192.md) , that
destroying this affection He might in turn make man undaunted in face of
death. Behold then a thing strange indeed! He to whom Christ’s enemies
impute words of terror, He by that so-called <span
id="fr_3193"></span>[3194](#fn_3193.md) tenor renders men undaunted and
fearless. And so the Blessed Apostles after Him from such words of His
conceived so great a contempt of death, as not even to care for those
who questioned them, but to answer, ‘We ought to obey God rather than
men <span id="fr_3194"></span>[3195](#fn_3194.md) .’ And the other Holy
Martyrs were so bold, as to think that they were rather passing to life
than undergoing death. Is it not extravagant then, to admire the courage
of the servants of the Word, yet to say that the Word Himself was in
terror, through whom they despised death? But from that most enduring
purpose and courage of the Holy Martyrs is shewn, that the Godhead was
not in terror, but the Saviour took away our terror. For as He abolished
death by death, and by human means all human evils, so by this so-called
terror did He remove our terror, and brought about that never more
should men fear death. His word and deed go together. For human were the
sayings, ‘Let the cup pass,’ and ‘Why hast Thou forsaken Me?’ and divine
the act whereby the Same did cause the sun to fail and the dead to rise.
Again He said humanly, ‘Now is My soul troubled;’ and He said divinely,
‘I have power to lay down My life, and power to take it again <span
id="fr_3195"></span>[3196](#fn_3195.md) .’ For to be troubled was proper
<span id="page_425">p. 425</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-Page_425"></span>to the flesh, and to have power to
lay down His life <span id="fr_3196"></span>[3197](#fn_3196.md) and take it
again, when He will, was no property of men but of the Word’s power. For
man dies, not by his own power, but by necessity of nature and against
his will; but the Lord, being Himself immortal, but having a mortal
flesh, had power, as God, to become separate from the body and to take
it again, when He would. Concerning this too speaks David in the Psalm,
‘Thou shalt not leave My soul in hades, neither shalt Thou suffer Thy
Holy One to see corruption <span id="fr_3197"></span>[3198](#fn_3197.md) .’
For it beseemed that the flesh, corruptible as it was, should no longer
after its own nature remain mortal, but because of the Word who had put
it on, should abide incorruptible. For as He, having come in our body,
was conformed to our condition, so we, receiving Him, partake of the
immortality that is from Him.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p37"></span>58. Idle then is the excuse for
stumbling, and petty the notions concerning the Word, of these
Ario-maniacs, because it is written, ‘He was troubled,’ and ‘He wept.’
For they seem not even to have human feeling, if they are thus ignorant
of man’s nature and properties; which do but make it the greater wonder,
that the Word should be in such a suffering flesh, and neither prevented
those who were conspiring against Him, nor took vengeance of those who
were putting Him to death, though He was able, He who hindered some from
dying, and raised others from the dead. And He let His own body suffer,
for therefore did He come, as I said before, that in the flesh He might
suffer, and thenceforth the flesh might be made impassible and
immortal <span id="fr_3198"></span>[3199](#fn_3198.md) , and that, as we
have many times said, contumely and other troubles might determine upon
Him and come short of others after Him, being by Him annulled utterly;
and that henceforth men might for ever abide <span
id="fr_3199"></span>[3200](#fn_3199.md) incorruptible, as a temple of the
Word <span id="fr_3200"></span>[3201](#fn_3200.md) . Had Christ’s enemies
thus dwelt on these thoughts, and recognised the ecclesiastical scope as
an anchor for the faith, they would not have made shipwreck of the
faith, nor been so shameless as to resist those who would fain recover
them from their fall, and to deem those as enemies who are admonishing
them to be religious <span id="fr_3201"></span>[3202](#fn_3201.md) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3167"></span>[423:3168](2040377.htm#fr_3167.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>διανοί& 139·</span>, §26 *et passim.*

<span id="fn_3168"></span>[423:3169](2040377.htm#fr_3168.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p4.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p4.2"></span>νω καὶ κάτω</span>, vid. *de Decr.* 14,
n. 1; *Or.* ii. 34, n. 5.

<span id="fn_3169"></span>[423:3170](2040377.htm#fr_3169.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p5"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>[John xi.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#035.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p5.3"></span>; xii. 27; [Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p5.4"></span>; [Mark xv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#034.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p5.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_3170"></span>[423:3171](2040377.htm#fr_3170.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p5.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p6"></span> Cf. ii. 80.

<span id="fn_3171"></span>[423:3172](2040377.htm#fr_3171.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p7"></span> §53, n. 2.

<span id="fn_3172"></span>[423:3173](2040377.htm#fr_3172.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p8"></span> [Luke xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#004.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3173"></span>[423:3174](2040377.htm#fr_3173.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p9"></span> [Gen.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001.md), [Gen.
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#024.md), [Exod.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#012.md), [Josh.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#006.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p9.1"></span>[Gen. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p9.3"></span>; xxvi. 24; [Exod. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#012.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p9.4"></span>, &c.; [Josh. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#006.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p9.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_3174"></span>[423:3175](2040377.htm#fr_3174.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p9.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p10"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3175"></span>[423:3176](2040377.htm#fr_3175.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p11"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p11.1"></span>[Job xxxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#017.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p11.3"></span>. LXX.; *De Syn.* 8, below, §56.

<span id="fn_3176"></span>[423:3177](2040377.htm#fr_3176.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p11.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p12"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p12.1"></span>[John xviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#005.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p12.3"></span>; x. 18.

<span id="fn_3177"></span>[423:3178](2040377.htm#fr_3177.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p14"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3178"></span>[423:3179](2040377.htm#fr_3178.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p15.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p15.2"></span>νθρωπον ὅλον</span>, *Orat.* iv. 35 fin.

<span id="fn_3179"></span>[423:3180](2040377.htm#fr_3179.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p16.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p16.2"></span>δίαν</span>, *Orat.* i. 52 fin.

<span id="fn_3180"></span>[423:3181](2040377.htm#fr_3180.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p17"></span> This our Lord’s suspense or
permission, at His will, of the operations of His manhood is a great
principle in the doctrine of the Incarnation. Cf. Theophylact, *in Joh*.
xi. 34. And Cyril, *fragm. in Joan.* p. 685. Leon. *Ep.* 35, 3. Aug. *in
Joan.* xlix. 18. vid. note on §57, *sub. fin.* The Eutychians perverted
this doctrine, as if it implied that our Lord was not subject to the
laws of human nature, and that He suffered *merely* ‘by permission of
the Word.’ Leont. *ap. Canis.* t. i. p. 563. In like manner Marcion or
Manes said that His ‘flesh appeared from heaven in resemblance, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p17.2"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p17.3"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p17.4"></span>ἠθέλησεν</span>.’
Athan. *contr. Apoll.* ii. 3.

<span id="fn_3181"></span>[423:3182](2040377.htm#fr_3181.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p17.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p18"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p18.1"></span>[John x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p18.3"></span>; xiv. 10.

<span id="fn_3182"></span>[423:3183](2040377.htm#fr_3182.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p19"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3183"></span>[424:3184](2040377.htm#fr_3183.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p21"></span> *Or.* i. 43, 44, notes; ii. 66, n.
7. *Serm. Maj. de Fid.* 9. Tertull. *de Carn. Chr.* 6.

<span id="fn_3184"></span>[424:3185](2040377.htm#fr_3184.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p22"></span> §44, nn. 2, 6.

<span id="fn_3185"></span>[424:3186](2040377.htm#fr_3185.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p23"></span> ii. 56, n. 5.

<span id="fn_3186"></span>[424:3187](2040377.htm#fr_3186.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p24"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p24.1"></span>[Job xxxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#017.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p24.3"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_3187"></span>[424:3188](2040377.htm#fr_3187.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p24.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p25"></span> Vid. [Matt.
27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052.md),
[53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#053.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p25.1"></span>, similar passage *supr.* p. 88.

<span id="fn_3188"></span>[424:3189](2040377.htm#fr_3188.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p26.1"></span>δεσποτὴν</span>, §14, &c.

<span id="fn_3189"></span>[424:3190](2040377.htm#fr_3189.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p27"></span> Vid. [Matt. xxvii.
54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p27.1"></span>. Vid. *Or.* ii. 16; 35, n. 2. Cf. Leo’s
Tome (*Ep.* 28.) 4. Nyssen, *contr. Eunom.* iv. p. 161. Ambros. *Epist.*
i. 46. n. 7. vid. Hil. *Trin.* x. 48. Also vid. Athan. *Sent. D.* fin.
*Serm. Maj. de Fid.* 24.

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[424:3191](2040377.htm#fr_3190.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p29"></span> [Matt. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p29.1"></span>, cf. §§40, 41.

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[424:3192](2040377.htm#fr_3191.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p30"></span> \[The human will of the Saviour is
in absolute harmony with the Divine, though psychologically distinct.\]
Cf. Anast. *Hodeg.* i. p. 12.

<span id="fn_3192"></span>[424:3193](2040377.htm#fr_3192.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p31"></span> It is observable that, as elsewhere
we have seen Athan. speak of the *nature* of the Word, and of, not the
*nature* of man as united to Him, but of *flesh, humanity,* &c. (vid.
*Or.* ii. 45, n. 2.) so here, instead of speaking of two wills, he
speaks of the Word’s *willing* and human *weakness, terror,* &c. In
another place he says still more pointedly, ‘The *will* was of the
Godhead alone; since the whole *nature* of the Word was manifested in
the second Adam’s *human form* and visible *flesh.’* *contr. Apoll*. ii.
10. Cf. S. Leo on the same passage: ‘The first request is one of
infirmity, the second of power; the first He asked in our \[character\],
the second in His own.…The inferior will give way to the superior,’ &c.
*Serm.* 56, 2. vid. a similar passage in Nyssen. *Antirrh. adv. Apol.*
32. vid. also 31. An obvious objection may be drawn from such passages,
as if the will ‘of the flesh’ were represented as contrary (vid.
foregoing note) to the will of the Word. The whole of our Lord’s prayer
is offered by Him as man, because it is a prayer; the first part is not
from Him as man, but the second, which corrects it, from Him as God
\[i.e. the first part is not human *as contrasted* with the second\];
but the former part is from the sinless infirmity of our nature, the
latter from His human will expressing its acquiescence in His Father’s,
that is, in His Divine Will. ‘His Will,’ says S. Greg. Naz. ‘was not
contrary to God, being all deified, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p31.2"></span>θεωθὲν ὅλον</span>.’

<span id="fn_3193"></span>[424:3194](2040377.htm#fr_3193.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p32.1"></span>νομιζομένῃ</span>, vid. *Orat.* i. 10.

<span id="fn_3194"></span>[424:3195](2040377.htm#fr_3194.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p33"></span> [Acts v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3195"></span>[424:3196](2040377.htm#fr_3195.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p34"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p34.1"></span>[John xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p34.3"></span>; x. 18.

<span id="fn_3196"></span>[425:3197](2040377.htm#fr_3196.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p34.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p35"></span> This might be taken as an
illustration of the ut voluit *supr. Or.* i. 44, n. 11. And so the
expressions in the Evangelists, ‘Into Thy hands I *commend* My Spirit,’
‘He *bowed the head,*’ ‘He *gave up* the ghost,’ are taken to imply that
His death was His free act. vid. Ambros. *in loc. Luc.* Hieron. *in loc.
Matt.* also Athan. *Serm. Maj. de Fid.* 4. It is Catholic doctrine that
our Lord, as man, submitted to death of His free will, and not as
obeying an express command of the Father. Cf. S. Chrysostom on [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p35.2"></span>. Theophylact. *in Hebr*. xii. 2; Aug.
*de Trin.* iv. 16.

<span id="fn_3197"></span>[425:3198](2040377.htm#fr_3197.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p36"></span> [Ps. xvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3198"></span>[425:3199](2040377.htm#fr_3198.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p38"></span> *Or.* ii. 65, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3199"></span>[425:3200](2040377.htm#fr_3199.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p39"></span> Ib. 69, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3200"></span>[425:3201](2040377.htm#fr_3200.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p40"></span> §53.

<span id="fn_3201"></span>[425:3202](2040377.htm#fr_3201.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.vii-p41"></span> Thus ends the exposition of texts,
which forms the body of these Orations. It is remarkable that he ends as
he began, with reference to the ecclesiastical scope, or *Regula Fidei,*
which has so often come under our notice, vid. *Or.* ii. 35. n. 2. 44,
n. 1, as if distinctly to tell us, that Scripture did not so force its
meaning on the individual as to dispense with an interpreter, and as if
his own deductions were not to be viewed merely in their own logical
power, great as that power often is, but as under the authority of the
Catholic doctrines which they subserve. Vid. *Or.* iii. 18, n. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Objections continued, as in Chapters vii.--x. Whether the Son is
begotten of the Father's will? This virtually the same as whether once
He was not? and used by the Arians to introduce the latter question. The
Regula Fidei answers it at once in the negative by contrary texts. The
Arians follow the Valentinians in maintaining a precedent will; which
really is only exercised by God towards creatures. Instances from
Scripture. Inconsistency of Asterius. If the Son by will, there must be
another Word before Him. If God is good, or exist, by His will, then is
the Son by His will. If He willed to have reason or wisdom, then is His
Word and Wisdom at His will. The Son is the Living Will, and has all
titles which denote connaturality. That will which the Father has to the
Son, the Son has to the Father. The Father wills the Son and the Son
wills the Father.](2040378.md)
