[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040234)  [Next](2040236.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> 60. And this is so, for once again he
was sitting on the mountain, and looking up saw in the air some one
being borne upwards, and there was much joy among those who met him.
Then wondering and deeming a company of that kind to be blessed, he
prayed to learn what this might be. And immediately a voice came to him:
‘This is the soul of Amun, the monk at Nitria.’ Now Amun had persevered
in the discipline up to old age; and the distance from Nitria to the
mountain where Antony was, was thirteen days’ journey. The companions of
Antony therefore, seeing the old man amazed, asked to learn, and heard
that Amun was just dead <span id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104.md) . And
he was well known, for he had stayed there very often, and many signs
had been wrought by his means. And this is one of them. Once when he had
need to cross the river called Lycus (now it was the season of the
flood), he asked his comrade Theodorus to remain at a distance, that
they should not see one another naked as they swam the water. Then when
Theodorus was departed he again felt ashamed even to see himself naked.
While, therefore, he was pondering filled with shame, on a sudden he was
borne over to the other side. Theodorus, therefore, himself being a good
man, approached, and seeing Amun across first without a drop of water
falling from him, enquired how he had got over. And when he saw that
Amun was unwilling to tell him, he held him by the feet and declared
that he would not let him go before he had learned it from him. So Amun
seeing the determination of Theodorus especially from what he had said,
and having asked him to tell no man before his death, told him that he
had been carried and placed on the further side. And that he had not
even set foot on the water, nor was that possible for man, but for the
Lord alone and those whom He permits, as He did for the great apostle
Peter <span id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105.md) . Theodorus therefore
told this after the death of Amun. And the monks to whom Antony spoke
concerning Amun’s death marked the day; and when the brethren came up
from Nitria thirty days after, they enquired of them and learned that
Amun had fallen asleep at that day and hour in which the old man had
seen his soul borne upwards. And both these and the others marvelled at
the purity of Antony’s soul, how he had immediately learned that which
was taking place at a distance of thirteen days’ journey, and had seen
the soul as it was taken up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[212:1105](2040235.htm#fr_1104.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xxiv-p2"></span> The same story is told (by Bede in his
Life) of St. Cuthbert, who saw the soul of St. Aidan being carried to
heaven. Amun was probably the recipient of the letter, No. 48 in this
volume.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[212:1106](2040235.htm#fr_1105.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> [Matt. xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#028.md)<span id="xvi.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sections 61, 62](2040236.md)
