[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040290)  [Next](2040292.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxvi-p1"></span> 26. *How Athanasius acted when this
took place.*

<span id="xviii.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>Now why did they form this plot
against me, and treacherously lay an ambush to take me, when it was in
their power to enforce the order by a written declaration? The command
of an Emperor is wont to give great boldness to those entrusted with it;
but their desire to act secretly made the suspicion stronger that they
had received no command. And did I require anything so very absurd? Let
your Majesty’s candour decide. Will not every one say, that such a
demand was reasonable for a Bishop to make? You know, for you have read
the Scriptures, how great an offence it is for a Bishop to desert his
Church, and to neglect the flocks of God. For the absence of the
Shepherd gives the wolves an opportunity to attack the sheep. And this
was what the Arians and all the other heretics desired, that during my
absence they might find an opportunity to entrap the people into
impiety. If then I had fled, what defence could I have made before the
true Bishops? or rather before Him Who has committed to me His flock? He
it is Who judges the whole earth, the true King of all, our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Son of God. Would not every one have rightly charged me with
neglect of my people? Would not your Piety have blamed me, and have
justly asked, ‘After you had returned under the authority of our
letters, why did you withdraw without such authority, and desert your
people?’ Would not the people themselves at the day of judgment have
reasonably imputed to me this neglect of them, and have said, ‘He that
had the oversight of us fled, and we were neglected, there being no one
to put us in mind of our duty?’ When they said this, what could I have
answered? Such a complaint was made by Ezekiel against the Pastors of
old <span id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357.md) ; and the blessed Apostle
Paul, knowing this, has charged every one of us through his disciple,
saying, ‘Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee,
with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery <span
id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358.md) .’ Fearing this, I wished not to
flee, but to receive your commands, if indeed such was the will of your
Piety. But I never obtained what I so reasonably requested, and now I am
falsely accused before you; for I resisted no commands of your Piety;
nor will I now attempt to return to Alexandria, until your Grace shall
desire it. This I say beforehand, lest the slanderers should again make
this a pretence for accusing me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[248:1358](2040291.htm#fr_1357.md) <span
id="xviii.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxvi-p3"></span> [Ez. xxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002.md)<span
id="xviii.ii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>, &c.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[248:1359](2040291.htm#fr_1358.md) <span
id="xviii.ii.xxvi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxvi-p4"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md)<span
id="xviii.ii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Athanasius leaves Alexandria to go to Constantius, but is stopped
by the news of the banishment of the Bishops.](2040292.md)
