[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040193)  [Next](2040195.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Documents connected
with the Council of Tyre.*

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p2"></span>71. Thus ended the conspiracy. The
Meletians were repulsed and covered with shame; but notwithstanding this
Eusebius and his fellows still did not remain quiet, for it was not for
the Meletians but for Arius and his fellows, that they cared, and they
were afraid lest, if the proceedings of the former should be stopped,
they should no longer find persons to play the parts <span
id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690.md) , by whose assistance they might bring
in that heresy. They therefore again stirred up the Meletians, and
persuaded the Emperor to give orders that a Council should be held
afresh at Tyre, and Count Dionysius was despatched thither, and a
military guard was given to Eusebius and his fellows. Macarius also was
sent as a prisoner to Tyre under a guard of soldiers; and the Emperor
wrote to me, and laid a peremptory command upon me, so that, however
unwilling, I set out. The whole conspiracy may be understood from the
letters which the Bishops of Egypt wrote; but it will be necessary to
relate how it was contrived by them in the outset, that so may be
perceived the malice and wickedness that was exercised against me. There
are in Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, nearly one hundred Bishops; none of
whom laid anything to my charge; none of the Presbyters found any fault
with me; none of the people spoke aught against me; but it was the
Meletians who were ejected by Peter, and the Arians, that divided the
plot between them, while the one party claimed to themselves the right
of accusing me, the other of sitting in judgment on the case. I objected
to Eusebius and his fellows as being my enemies on account of the
heresy; next, I shewed in the following manner that the person who was
called my accuser was not a Presbyter at all. When Meletius was admitted
into communion (would that he had never been so admitted <span
id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691) !.md) the blessed Alexander who knew his
craftiness required of him a schedule of the Bishops whom he said he had
in Egypt, and of the presbyters and deacons that were in Alexandria
itself, and if he had any in the country district. This the Pope
Alexander has done, lest Meletius, having received the freedom of the
Church, should tender <span id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692.md) many, and
thus continually, by a fraudulent procedure, foist upon us whomsoever he
pleased. Accordingly he has made out the following schedule of those in
Egypt.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p6"></span>A schedule presented by Meletius to
the Bishop Alexander.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p7"></span>I, Meletius of Lycopolis, Lucius of
Antinopolis, Phasileus of Hermopolis, Achilles of Cusæ, Ammonius of
Diospolis.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p8"></span>In Ptolemais, Pachymes of Tentyræ.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p9"></span>In Maximianopolis, Theodorus of
Coptus.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p10"></span>In Thebais, Cales of Hermethes,
Colluthus of Upper Cynopolis, Pelagius of Oxyrynchus, Peter of
Heracleopolis, Theon of Nilopolis, Isaac <span
id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693.md) of Letopolis, Heraclides of
Niciopolis <span id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694.md) , Isaac of
Cleopatris, Melas of Arsenoitis.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p13"></span>In Heliopolis, Amos of Leontopolis,
Ision of Athribis.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p14"></span>In Pharbethus, Harpocration of
Bubastus, Moses of Phacusæ, Callinicus <span
id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695.md) of Pelusium, Eudæmon of Tanis <span
id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696.md) , Ephraim of Thmuis.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p17"></span>In Sais, Hermæon of Cynopolis and
Busiris, Soterichus of Sebennytus, Pininuthes of Phthenegys, Cronius of
Metelis, Agathammon of the district of Alexandria.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p18"></span>In Memphis, John who was ordered by
the Emperor to be with the Archbishop <span
id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697.md) . These are those of Egypt.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p20"></span>And the Clergy that he had in
Alexandria were Apollonius Presbyter, Irenæus Presbyter, Dioscorus
Presbyter, Tyrannus Presbyter. And Deacons; Timotheus Deacon, Antinous
Deacon, Hephæstion Deacon. And Macarius Presbyter of Parembole <span
id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p22"></span>72. These Meletius presented
actually in person <span id="fr_699"></span>[700](#fn_699.md) to the Bishop
Alexander, but he made no mention of the person called Ischyras, nor
ever <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_138"></span>professed at all that he had any
Clergy in the Mareotis. Notwithstanding our enemies did not desist from
their attempts, but still he that was no Presbyter was feigned to be
one, for there was the Count ready to use compulsion towards us, and
soldiers were hurrying us about. But even then the grace of God
prevailed: for they could not convict Macarius in the matter of the cup;
and Arsenius, whom they reported to have been murdered by me, stood
before them alive and shewed the falseness of their accusation. When
therefore they were unable to convict Macarius, Eusebius and his
fellows, who became enraged that they had lost the prey of which they
had been in pursuit, persuaded the Count Dionysius, who is one of them,
to send to the Mareotis, in order to see whether they could not find out
something there against the Presbyter, or rather that they might at a
distance patch up their plot as they pleased in our absence: for this
was their aim. However,—when we represented that the journey to the
Mareotis was a superfluous undertaking (for that they ought not to
pretend that statements were defective which they had been employed upon
so long, and ought not now to defer the matter; for they had said
whatever they thought they could say, and now being at a loss what to
do, they were making pretences); or if they must needs go to the
Mareotis, that at least the suspected parties should not be sent,—the
Count was convinced by my reasoning, with respect to the suspected
persons; but they did anything rather than what I proposed, for the very
persons whom I objected against on account of the Arian heresy, these
were they who promptly went off, viz. Diognius, Maris, Theodorus,
Macedonius, Ursacius, and Valens. Again, letters were written to the
Prefect of Egypt and a military guard was provided; and, what was
remarkable and altogether most suspicious, they caused Macarius the
accused party to remain behind under a guard of soldiers, while they
took with them the accuser <span id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700.md) . Now
who after this does not see through this conspiracy? Who does not
clearly perceive the wickedness of Eusebius and his fellows? For if a
judicial enquiry must needs take place in the Mareotis, the accused also
ought to have been sent thither. But if they did not go for the purpose
of such an enquiry, why did they take the accuser? It was enough that he
had not been able to prove the fact. But this they did in order that
they might carry on their designs against the absent Presbyter, whom
they could not convict when present, and might concoct a plan as they
pleased. For when the Presbyters of Alexandria and of the whole district
found fault with them because they were there by themselves, and
required that they too might be present at their proceedings (for they
said that they knew both the circumstances of the case, and the history
of the person named Ischyras), they would not allow them; and although
they had with them Philagrius the Prefect of Egypt <span
id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701.md) , who was an apostate, and heathen
soldiers, during an enquiry which it was not becoming even for
Catechumens to witness, they would not admit the Clergy, lest there as
well as at Tyre there might be those who would expose them.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p26"></span>73. But in spite of these
precautions they were not able to escape detection: for the Presbyters
of the City and of the Mareotis, perceiving their evil designs,
addressed to them the following protest.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p27"></span>To Theognius, Maris, Macedonius,
Theodorus, Ursacius, and Valens, the Bishops who have come from Tyre,
these from the Presbyters and Deacons of the Catholic Church of
Alexandria under the most reverend Bishop Athanasius.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p28"></span>It was incumbent upon you when you
came hither and brought with you the accuser, to bring also the
Presbyter Macarius; for trials are appointed by Holy Scripture to be so
constituted, that the accuser and accused may stand up together. But
since neither you brought Macarius, nor our most reverend Bishop
Athanasius came hither with you, we claimed for ourselves the right of
being present at the investigation, that we might see that the enquiry
was conducted impartially, and might ourselves be convinced of the
truth. But when you refused to allow this, and wished, in company only
with the Prefect of Egypt and the accuser, to do whatever you pleased,
we confess that we saw a suspicion of evil in the affair, and perceived
that your coming was only the act of a cabal and a conspiracy. Wherefore
we address to you this letter, to be a testimony before a genuine
Council, that it may be known to all men, that you have carried on an
*ex parte* proceeding and for your own ends, and have desired nothing
else but to form a conspiracy against us. A copy of this, lest it should
be kept secret by you, we have handed in to Palladius also the
Controller <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702.md) of Augustus. For what
you have already done causes us to suspect you, and to <span
id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_139"></span>reckon on the like conduct from you
hereafter.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p30"></span>I Dionysius Presbyter have handed in
this letter. Alexander Presbyter, Nilaras Presbyter, Longus Presbyter,
Aphthonius Presbyter, Athanasius Presbyter, Amyntius Presbyter, Pistus
Presbyter, Plution Presbyter, Dioscorus Presbyter, Apollonius Presbyter,
Sarapion Presbyter, Ammonius Presbyter, Gaius Presbyter, Rhinus
Presbyter, Æthales Presbyter.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p31"></span>Deacons; Marcellinus Deacon,
Appianus Deacon, Theon Deacon, Timotheus Deacon, a second Timotheus
Deacon.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p32"></span>74. This is the letter, and these
the names of the Clergy of the city; and the following was written by
the Clergy of the Mareotis, who know the character of the accuser, and
who were with me in my visitation.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p33"></span>To the holy Council of blessed
Bishops of the Catholic Church, all the Presbyters and Deacons of the
Mareotis send health in the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p34"></span>Knowing that which is written,
‘Speak that thine eyes have seen,’ and, ‘A false witness shall not be
unpunished <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703.md) ’, we testify what we
have seen, especially since the conspiracy which has been formed against
our Bishop Athanasius has made our testimony necessary. We wonder how
Ischyras ever came to be reckoned among the number of the Ministers of
the Church, which is the first point we think it necessary to mention.
Ischyras never was a Minister of the Church; but when formerly he
represented himself to be a Presbyter of Colluthus, he found no one to
believe him, except only his own relations <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704.md) . For he never had a Church, nor was
ever considered a Clergyman by those who lived but a short distance from
his village, except only, as we said before, by his own relations. But,
notwithstanding he assumed this designation, he was deposed in the
presence of our Father Hosius at the Council which assembled at
Alexandria <span id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705.md) , and was admitted to
communion as a layman, and so he continued subsequently, having fallen
from his falsely reputed rank of presbyter. Of his character we think it
unnecessary to speak, as all men have it in their power to become
acquainted therewith. But since he has falsely accused our Bishop
Athanasius of breaking a cup and overturning a table, we are necessarily
obliged to address you on this point. We have said already that he never
had a Church in the Mareotis; and we declare before God as our witness,
that no cup was broken, nor table overturned by our Bishop, nor by any
one of those who accompanied him; but all that is alleged respecting
this affair is mere calumny. And this we say, not as having been absent
from the Bishop, for we are all with him when he makes his visitation of
the Mareotis, and he never goes about alone, but is accompanied by all
of us Presbyters and Deacons, and by a considerable number of the
people. Wherefore we make these assertions as having been present with
him in every visitation which he has made amongst us, and testify that
neither was a cup ever broken, nor table overturned, but the whole story
is false, as the accuser himself also witnesses under his own hand <span
id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706.md) . For when, after he had gone off with
Meletians, and had reported these things against our Bishop Athanasius,
he wished to be admitted to communion, he was not received, although he
wrote and confessed under his own hand that none of these things were
true, but that he had been suborned by certain persons to say so.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p39"></span>75. Wherefore also Theognius,
Theodorus, Maris, Macedonius, Ursacius, Valens, and their fellows came
into the Mareotis, and when they found that none of these things were
true, but it was likely to be discovered that they had framed a false
accusation against our Bishop Athanasius, Theognius and his fellows
being themselves his enemies, caused the relations of Ischyras and
certain Arian madmen to say whatever they wished. For none of the people
spoke against the Bishop; but these persons, through fear of Philagrius
the Prefect of Egypt, and by threats and with the support of the Arian
madmen, accomplished whatever they desired. For when we came to disprove
the calumny, they would not permit us, but cast us out, while they
admitted whom they pleased to a participation in their schemes, and
concerted matters with them, influencing them by fear of the Prefect
Philagrius. Through his means they prevented us from being present, that
we might discover whether those who were suborned by them were members
of the Church or Arian madmen. And you also, dearly beloved Fathers,
know, as you teach us, that the testimony of enemies avails nothing.
That what we say is the truth the handwriting <span
id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707.md) of Ischyras testifies, as do also the
facts themselves, because when we were conscious that no such thing as
was pretended had taken place, they took with them Philagrius, that
through fear of the sword and by threats they might frame whatever plots
they wished. These things we testify as in the presence of God; we make
these assertions as knowing <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_140"></span>that there will be a judgment held by
God; desiring indeed all of us to come to you, but being content with
certain of our number, so that the letters may be instead of the
presence of those who have not come.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p41"></span>I, Ingenius Presbyter, pray you
health in the Lord, beloved fathers. Theon Presbyter, Ammonas P.,
Heraclius P., Boccon P., Tryphon P., Peter P., Hierax P., Sarapion P.,
Marcus P., Ptollarion P., Gaius P., Dioscorus P., Demetrius P., Thyrsus
P.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p42"></span>Deacons; Pistus Deacon, Apollos D.,
Serras D., Pistus D., Polynicus D., Ammonius D., Maurus D., Hephæstus
D., Apollos D., Metopas D., Apollos D., Serapas D., Meliphthongus D.,
Lucius D., Gregoras D.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p43"></span>76. *The same to the Controller, and
to Philagrius, at that time Prefect of Egypt.*

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p44"></span>To Flavius Philagrius, and to
Flavius Palladius, Ducenary <span id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708.md) ,
Officer of the Palace, and Controller, and to Flavius Antoninus,
Commissary of Provisions, and Centenary of my lords the most illustrious
Prefects of the sacred Prætorium, these from the Presbyters and Deacons
of the Mareotis, a nome of the Catholic Church which is under the most
Reverend Bishop Athanasius, we address this testimony by those whose
names are underwritten:—

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p46"></span>Whereas Theognius, Maris,
Macedonius, Theodorus, Ursacius, and Valens, as if sent by all the
Bishops who assembled at Tyre, came into our Diocese alleging that they
had received orders to investigate certain ecclesiastical affairs, among
which they spoke of the breaking of a cup of the Lord, of which
information was given them by Ischyras, whom they brought with them, and
who says that he is a Presbyter, although he is not,—for he was ordained
by the Presbyter Colluthus who pretended to the Episcopate, and was
afterwards ordered by a whole Council, by Hosius and the Bishops that
were with him, to take the place of a Presbyter, as he was before; and
accordingly all that were ordained by Colluthus resumed the same rank
which they held before, and so Ischyras himself proved to be a
layman,—and the church which he says he has, never was a church at all,
but a quite small private house belonging to an orphan boy of the name
of Ision;—for this reason we have offered this testimony, adjuring you
by Almighty God, and by our Lords Constantine Augustus, and the most
illustrious Cæsars his sons, to bring these things to the knowledge of
their piety. For neither is he a Presbyter of the Catholic Church nor
does he possess a church, nor has a cup ever been broken, but the whole
story is false and an invention.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p47"></span>Dated in the Consulship of Julius
Constantius the most illustrious Patrician <span
id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709.md) , brother of the most religious
Emperor Constantine Augustus, and of Rufinus Albinus, most illustrious
men, on the tenth day of the month Thoth <span
id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p50"></span>These were the letters of the
Presbyters.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p51"></span>77. The following also are the
letters and protests of the Bishops who came with us to Tyre, when they
became aware of the conspiracy and plot.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p52"></span>To the Bishops assembled at Tyre,
most honoured Lords, those of the Catholic Church who have come from
Egypt with Athanasius send greeting in the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p53"></span>We suppose that the conspiracy which
has been formed against us by Eusebius, Theognius, Maris, Narcissus,
Theodorus, Patrophilus, and their fellows is no longer uncertain. From
the very beginning we all demurred, through our fellow-minister
Athanasius, to the holding of the enquiry in their presence, knowing
that the presence of even one enemy only, much more of many, is able to
disturb and injure the hearing of a cause. And you also yourselves know
the enmity which they entertain, not only towards us, but towards all
the orthodox, how that for the sake of the madness of Arius, and his
impious doctrine, they direct their assaults, they form conspiracies
against all. And when, being confident in the truth, we desired to shew
the falsehood, which the Meletians had employed against the Church,
Eusebius and his fellows endeavoured by some means or other to interrupt
our representations, and strove eagerly to set aside our testimony,
threatening those who gave an honest judgment, and insulting others, for
the sole purpose of carrying out the design they had against us. Your
godly piety, most honoured Lords, was probably ignorant of their
conspiracy, but we suppose that it has now been made manifest. For
indeed they have themselves plainly disclosed it; for they desired to
send to the Mareotis those of their party who are suspected by us, so
that, while we were absent and remained here, they might disturb the
people and accomplish what they wished. They knew <span id="page_141">p.
141</span> <span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_141"></span>that the Arian
madmen, and Colluthians <span id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711.md) and
Meletians, were enemies of the Catholic Church and therefore they were
anxious to send them, that in the presence of our enemies they might
devise against us whatever schemes they pleased. And those of the
Meletians who are here, even four days previously (as they knew that
this enquiry was about to take place), despatched at evening certain of
their party, as couriers, for the purpose of collecting Meletians out of
Egypt into the Mareotis, because there were none at all there, and
Colluthians and Arian madmen, from other parts, and to prepare them to
speak against us. For you also know that Ischyras himself confessed
before you, that he had not more than seven persons in his congregation.
When therefore we heard that, after they had made what preparations they
pleased against us, and had sent these suspected persons, they were
going about to each of you, and requiring your subscriptions, in order
that it might appear as if this had been done with the consent of you
all; for this reason we hastened to write to you, and to present this
our testimony; declaring that we are the objects of a conspiracy under
which we are suffering by and through them, and demanding that having
the fear of God in your minds, and condemning their conduct in sending
whom they pleased without our consent, you would refuse your
subscriptions, lest they pretend that those things are done by you,
which they are contriving only among themselves. Surely it becomes those
who are in Christ, not to regard human motives, but to prefer the truth
before all things. And be not afraid of their threatenings, which they
employ against all, nor of their plots, but rather fear God. If it was
at all necessary that persons should be sent to the Mareotis, we also
ought to have been there with them, in order that we might convict the
enemies of the Church, and point out those who were aliens, and that the
investigation of the matter might be impartial. For you know that
Eusebius and his fellows contrived that a letter should be presented, as
coming from the Collutians, the Meletians, and Arians, and directed
against us: but it is evident that these enemies of the Catholic Church
speak nothing that is true concerning us, but say everything against us.
And the law of God forbids an enemy to be either a witness or a judge.
Wherefore as you will have to give an account in the day of judgment,
receive this testimony, and recognising the conspiracy which has been
framed against us, beware, if you are requested by them, of doing
anything against us, and of taking part in the designs of Eusebius and
his fellows. For you know, as we said before, that they are our enemies,
and you are aware why Eusebius of Cæsarea became such last year <span
id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712.md) . We pray that you may be in health,
greatly beloved Lords.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p56"></span>78. To the most illustrious Count
Flavius Dionysius, from the Bishops of the Catholic Church in Egypt who
have come to Tyre.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p57"></span>We suppose that the conspiracy which
has been formed against us by Eusebius, Theognius, Maris, Narcissus,
Theodorus, Patrophilus and their fellows, is no longer uncertain. From
the very beginning we all demurred, through our fellow-minister
Athanasius, to the holding of the enquiry in their presence, knowing
that the presence of even one enemy only, much more of many, is able to
disturb and injure the hearing of a cause. For their enmity is manifest
which they entertain, not only towards us, but also towards all the
orthodox, because they direct their assaults, they form conspiracies
against all. And when, being confident in the truth, we desired to shew
the falsehood which the Meletians had employed against the Church,
Eusebius and his fellows endeavoured by some means or other to interrupt
our representations, and strove eagerly to set aside our testimony,
threatening those who gave an honest judgment and insulting others, for
the sole purpose of carrying out the design they had against us. Your
goodness was probably ignorant of the conspiracy which they have formed
against us, but we suppose that it has now been made manifest. For
indeed they have themselves plainly disclosed it; for they desired to
send to the Mareotis those of their party who are suspected by us, so
that, while we were absent and remained here, they might disturb the
people and accomplish what they wished. They knew that Arian madmen,
Colluthians, and Meletians were enemies of the Church, and therefore
they were anxious to send them, that in the presence of our enemies,
they might devise against us whatever schemes they pleased. And those of
the Meletians who are here, even four days previously (as they knew that
this enquiry was about to take place), despatched at evening two
individuals of their own party, as couriers, for the purpose of
collecting Meletians out of Egypt into the Mareotis, because there were
none at all there, and Colluthians, and Arian madmen, from other <span
id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_142"></span>parts, and to prepare them to speak
against us. And your goodness knows that he himself confessed before
you, that he had not more than seven persons in his congregation. When
therefore we heard that, after they had made what preparations they
pleased against us, and had sent these suspected persons, they were
going about to each of the Bishops and requiring their subscriptions, in
order that it might appear that this was done with the consent of them
all; for this reason we hastened to refer the matter to your honour, and
to present this our testimony, declaring that we are the objects of a
conspiracy, under which we are suffering by and through them, and
demanding of you that having in your mind the fear of God, and the pious
commands of our most religious Emperor, you would no longer tolerate
these persons, but condemn their conduct in sending whom they pleased
without our consent.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p58"></span>I Adamantius Bishop have subscribed
this letter, Ischyras, Ammon, Peter, Ammonianus, Tyrannus, Taurinus,
Sarapammon, Ælurion, Harpocration, Moses, Optatus, Anubion, Saprion,
Apollonius, Ischyrion, Arbæthion, Potamon, Paphnutius, Heraclides,
Theodorus, Agathammon, Gaius, Pistus, Athas, Nicon, Pelagius, Theon,
Paninuthius, Nonnus, Ariston, Theodorus, Irenæus, Blastammon, Philippus,
Apollos, Dioscorus, Timotheus of Diospolis, Macarius, Heraclammon,
Cronius, Myis, Jacobus, Ariston, Artemidorus, Phinees, Psais,
Heraclides.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p59"></span>Another from the same.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p60"></span>79. The Bishops of the Catholic
Church who have come from Egypt to Tyre, to the most illustrious Count
Flavius Dionysius.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p61"></span>Perceiving that many conspiracies
and plots are being formed against us through the machinations of
Eusebius, Narcissus, Flacillus, Theognius, Maris, Theodorus,
Patrophilus, and their fellows (against whom we wished at first to enter
an objection, but were not permitted), we are constrained to have
recourse to the present appeal. We observe also that great zeal is
exerted in behalf of the Meletians, and that a plot is laid against the
Catholic Church in Egypt in our persons. Wherefore we present this
letter to you, beseeching you to bear in mind the Almighty Power of God,
who defends the kingdom of our most religious and godly Emperor
Constantine, and to reserve the hearing of the affairs which concern us
for the most religious Emperor himself. For it is but reasonable, since
you were commissioned by his Majesty, that you should reserve the matter
for him upon our appealing to his piety. We can no longer endure to be
the objects of the treacherous designs of the fore-mentioned Eusebius
and his fellows, and therefore we demand that the case be reserved for
the most religious and God-beloved Emperor, before whom we shall be able
to set forth our own and the Church’s just claims. And we are convinced
that when his piety shall have heard our cause, he will not condemn us.
Wherefore we again adjure you by Almighty God, and by our most religious
Emperor, who, together with the children of his piety, has thus ever
been victorious <span id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713.md) and prosperous
these many years, that you proceed no further, nor suffer yourselves to
move at all in the Council in relation to our affairs, but reserve the
hearing of them for his piety. We have likewise made the same
representations to my Lords the orthodox Bishops.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p63"></span>80. Alexander <span
id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714.md) , Bishop of Thessalonica, on receiving
these letters, wrote to the Count Dionysius as follows.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p65"></span>The Bishop Alexander to my master
Dionysius.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p66"></span>I see that a conspiracy has
evidently been formed against Athanasius; for they have determined, I
know not on what grounds, to send all those to whom he has objected,
without giving any information to us, although it was agreed that we
should consider together who ought to be sent. Take care therefore that
nothing be done rashly (for they have come to me in great alarm, saying
that the wild beasts have already roused themselves, and are going to
rush upon them; for they had heard it reported, that John had sent
certain <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715) .md), lest they be
beforehand with us, and concoct what schemes they please. For you know
that the Colluthians who are enemies of the Church, and the Arians, and
Meletians, are all of them leagued together, and are able to work much
evil. Consider therefore what is best to be done, lest some mischief
arise, and we be subject to censure, as not having judged the matter
fairly. Great suspicions are also entertained of these persons, lest, as
being devoted to the Meletians, they should go through those Churches
whose Bishops are here <span id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716.md) , and
raise an alarm amongst them, and so disorder the whole of Egypt. For
they see that this is already taking place to a great extent.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p69"></span>Accordingly the Count Dionysius
wrote to Eusebius and his fellows as follows.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p70"></span>81. This is what I have already
mentioned to my lords, Flacillus <span id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717.md)
and his fellows, that Athanasius has come forward and complained <span
id="page_143">p. 143</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_143"></span>that those very persons have been
sent whom he objected to; and crying out that he has been wronged and
deceived. Alexander the lord of my soul <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718.md) has also written to me on the subject;
and that you may perceive that what his Goodness has said is reasonable,
I have subjoined his letter to be read by you. Remember also what I
wrote to you before: I impressed upon your Goodness, my lords, that the
persons who were sent ought to be commissioned by the general vote and
decision of all. Take care therefore lest our proceedings fall under
censure, and we give just grounds of blame to those who are disposed to
find fault with us. For as the accuser’s side ought not to suffer any
oppression, so neither ought the defendant’s. And I think that there is
no slight ground of blame against us, when my lord Alexander evidently
disapproves of what we have done.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p73"></span>82. While matters were proceeding
thus we withdrew from them, as from an assembly of treacherous men <span
id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719.md) , for whatsoever they pleased they
did, whereas there is no man in the world but knows that *ex parte*
proceedings cannot stand good. This the divine law determines; for when
the blessed Apostle was suffering under a similar conspiracy and was
brought to trial, he demanded, saying, ‘The Jews from Asia ought to have
been here before thee, and object, if they had aught against me <span
id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720.md) .’ On which occasion Festus also, when
the Jews wished to lay such a plot against him, as these men have now
laid against me, said, ‘It is not the manner of Romans to deliver any
man to die, before that he which is accused have the accuser face to
face, and have licence to answer for himself concerning the crime laid
against him <span id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721.md) .’ But Eusebius and
his fellows both had the boldness to pervert the law, and have proved
more unjust even than those wrong-doers. For they did not proceed
privately at the first, but when in consequence of our being present
they found themselves weak, then they straightway went out, like the
Jews, and took counsel together alone, how they might destroy us and
bring in their heresy, as those others demanded Barabbas. For this
purpose it was, as they have themselves confessed, that they did all
these things.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p77"></span>83. Although these circumstances
were amply sufficient for our vindication, yet in order that the
wickedness of these men and the freedom of the truth might be more fully
exhibited, I have not felt averse to repeat them again, in order to shew
that they have acted in a manner inconsistently with themselves, and as
men scheming in the dark have fallen foul of their own friends, and
while they desired to destroy us have like insane persons wounded
themselves. For in their investigation of the subject of the Mysteries,
they questioned Jews, they examined Catechumens <span
id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722.md) ; ‘Where were you,’ they said, ‘when
Macarius came and overturned the Table?’ They answered, ‘We were
within;’ whereas there could be no oblation if Catechumens were present.
Again, although they had written word everywhere, that Macarius came and
overthrew everything, while the Presbyter was standing and celebrating
the Mysteries, yet when they questioned whomsoever they pleased, and
asked them, ‘Where was Ischyras when Macarius rushed in?’ those persons
answered that he was lying sick in a cell. Well, then, he that was lying
was not standing, nor was he that lay sick in his cell offering the
oblation. Besides whereas Ischyras said that certain books had been
burnt by Macarius, they who were suborned to give evidence, declared
that nothing of the kind had been done, but that Ischyras spoke falsely.
And what is most remarkable, although they had again written word
everywhere, that those who were able to give evidence had been concealed
by us, yet these persons made their appearance, and they questioned
them, and were not ashamed when they saw it proved on all sides that
they were slanderers, and were acting in this matter clandestinely, and
according to their pleasure. For they prompted the witnesses by signs,
while the Prefect threatened them, and the soldiers pricked them with
their swords; but the Lord revealed the truth, and shewed them to be
slanderers. Therefore also they concealed the minutes of their
proceedings, which they retained themselves, and charged those who wrote
them to put out of sight, and to commit to no one whomsoever. But in
this also they were disappointed; for the person who wrote them was
Rufus, who is now public executioner in the Augustalian <span
id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723.md) prefecture, and is able to testify to
the truth of this; and Eusebius and his fellows sent them to Rome by the
hands of their own friends, and Julius the Bishop transmitted them to
me. And now they are mad, because we obtained and read what they wished
to conceal.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p80"></span>84. As such was the character of
their machinations, so they very soon shewed plainly the reasons of
their conduct. For when they went away, they took the Arians with them
to Jerusalem, and there admitted them to communion, having sent out a
letter concerning <span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_144"></span>them, part <span
id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724.md) of which, and the beginning, is as
follows.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p82"></span>The holy Council by the grace of God
assembled at Jerusalem, to the Church of God which is in Alexandria, and
to the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, in all Egypt, the Thebais,
Libya, Pentapolis, and throughout the world, sends health in the Lord.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p83"></span>Having come together out of
different Provinces to a great meeting which we have held for the
consecration of the Martyry <span id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725.md) of
the Saviour, which has been appointed to the service of God the King of
all and of His Christ, by the zeal of our most God-beloved Emperor
Constantine, the grace of God hath afforded us more abundant rejoicing
of heart; which our most God-beloved Emperor himself hath occasioned us
by his letters, wherein he hath stirred us up to do that which is right,
putting away all envy from the Church of God, and driving far from us
all malice, by which the members of God have been heretofore torn
asunder, and that we should with simple and peaceable minds receive
Arius and his fellows, whom envy, that enemy of all goodness, has caused
for a season to be excluded from the Church. Our most religious Emperor
has also in his letter testified to the correctness of their faith,
which he has ascertained from themselves, himself receiving the
profession of it from them by word of mouth, and has now made manifest
to us by subjoining to his own letters the men’s orthodox opinion in
writing.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p85"></span>85. Every one that hears of these
things must see through their treachery. For they made no concealment of
what they were doing; unless perhaps they confessed the truth without
wishing it. For if I was the hindrance to the admittance of Arius and
his fellows into the Church, and if they were received while I was
suffering from their plots, what other conclusion can be arrived at,
than that these things were done on their account, and that all their
proceedings against me, and the story which they fabricated about the
breaking of the cup and the murder of Arsenius, were for the sole
purpose of introducing impiety into the Church, and of preventing their
being condemned as heretics? For this was what the Emperor threatened
formerly in his letters to me. And they were not ashamed to write in the
manner they did, and to affirm that those persons whom the whole
Ecumenical Council anathematized held orthodox sentiments. And as they
undertook to say and do anything without scruple, so they were not
afraid to meet together ‘in a corner,’ in order to overthrow, as far as
was in their power, the authority of so great a Council.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p86"></span>Moreover, the price which they paid
for false testimony yet more fully manifests their wickedness and
impious intentions. The Mareotis, as I have already said, is a country
district of Alexandria, in which there has never been either a Bishop or
a Chorepiscopus <span id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726.md) ; but the
Churches of the whole district are subject to the Bishop of Alexandria,
and each Presbyter has under his charge one of the largest villages,
which are about ten or more in number <span
id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727.md) . Now the village in which Ischyras
lives is a very small one, and possesses so few inhabitants, that there
has never been a church built there, but only in the adjoining village.
Nevertheless, they determined, contrary to ancient usage <span
id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728.md) , to nominate a Bishop for this place,
and not only so, but even to appoint one, who was not so much as a
Presbyter. Knowing as they did the unusual nature of such a proceeding,
yet being constrained by the promises they had given in return for his
false impeachment of me, they submitted even to this, lest that
abandoned person, if he were ungratefully treated by them, should
disclose the truth, and thereby shew the wickedness of Eusebius and his
fellows. Notwithstanding this he has no church, nor a people to obey
him, but is scouted by them all, like a dog <span
id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729.md) , although they have even caused the
Emperor to write to the Receiver-General (for everything is in their
power), commanding that a church should be built for him, that being
possessed of that, his statement may appear credible about the cup and
the table. They caused him immediately to be nominated a Bishop also,
because if he were without a church, and not even a Presbyter, he would
appear to be a false accuser, and a fabricator of the whole matter. At
any rate he has no people, and even his own relations are not obedient
to him, and as the name which he retains is an empty one, so also the
following letter is ineffectual, which he keeps, making a display of it
as an exposure of the utter <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_145"></span>wickedness of himself and of Eusebius
and his fellows.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p91"></span>*The Letter of the
Receiver-General.* <span id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730.md)

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p93"></span>Flavius Hemerius sends health to the
Tax-collector of the Mareotis.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p94"></span>Ischyras the Presbyter having
petitioned the piety of our Lords, Augusti and Cæsars, that a Church
might be built in the district of Irene, belonging to Secontarurus <span
id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731.md) , their divinity has commanded that
this should be done as soon as possible. Take care therefore, as soon as
you receive the copy of the sacred Edict, which with all due veneration
is placed above, and the Reports which have been formed before my
devotion, that you quickly make an abstract of them, and transfer them
to the Order book, so that the sacred command may be put in execution.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p96"></span>86. While they were thus plotting
and scheming, I went up <span id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732.md) and
represented to the Emperor the unjust conduct of Eusebius and his
fellows, for he it was who had commanded the Council to be held, and his
Count presided at it. When he heard my report, he was greatly moved, and
wrote to them as follows.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p98"></span>Constantine, Victor <span
id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733.md) , Maximus, Augustus, to the Bishops
assembled at Tyre.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p100"></span>I know not what the decisions are
which you have arrived at in your Council amidst noise and tumult: but
somehow the truth seems to have been perverted in consequence of certain
confusions and disorders, in that you, through your mutual
contentiousness, which you are resolved should prevail, have failed to
perceive what is pleasing to God. However, it will rest with Divine
Providence to disperse the mischiefs which manifestly are found to arise
from this contentious spirit, and to shew plainly to us, whether you,
while assembled in that place, have had any regard for the truth, and
whether you have made your decisions uninfluenced by either favour or
enmity. Wherefore I wish you all to assemble with all speed before my
piety in order that you may render in person a true account of your
proceedings.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p101"></span>The reason why I have thought good
to write thus to you, and why I summon you before me by letter, you will
learn from what I am going to say. As I was entering on a late occasion
our all-happy home of Constantinople, which bears our name (I chanced at
the time to be on horseback), on a sudden the Bishop Athanasius, with
certain others whom he had with him, approached me in the middle of the
road, so unexpectedly, as to occasion me much amazement. God, who
knoweth all things, is my witness, that I should have been unable at
first sight even to recognise him, had not some of my attendants, on my
naturally inquiring of them, informed me both who it was, and under what
injustice he was suffering. I did not however enter into any
conversation with him at that time, nor grant him an interview; but when
he requested to be heard I was refusing, and all but gave orders for his
removal; when with increasing boldness he claimed only this favour, that
you should be summoned to appear, that he might have an opportunity of
complaining before me in your presence, of the ill-treatment he has met
with. As this appeared to me to be a reasonable request, and suitable to
the times, I willingly ordered this letter to be written to you, in
order that all of you, who constituted the Council which was held at
Tyre, might hasten without delay to the Court <span
id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734.md) of my clemency, so as to prove by
facts that you had passed an impartial and uncorrupt judgment. This, I
say, you must do before me, whom not even you will deny to be a true
servant of God.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p103"></span>For indeed through my devotion to
God, peace is preserved everywhere, and the Name of God is truly
worshipped even by the barbarians, who have hitherto been ignorant of
the truth. And it is manifest, that he who is ignorant of the truth,
does not know God either. Nevertheless, as I said before, even the
barbarians have now come to the knowledge of God, by means of me, His
true servant <span id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735.md) , and have learned
to fear Him Whom they perceive from actual facts to be my shield and
protector everywhere. And from this chiefly they have come to know God,
Whom they fear through the dread which they have of me. But we, who are
supposed to set forth (for I will not say to guard) the holy mysteries
of His Goodness, we, I say, engage in nothing but what tends to
dissension and hatred, and, in short, whatever contributes to the
destruction of mankind. But hasten, as I said before, and all of you
with all speed come to us, being persuaded that I shall endeavour with
all my might to amend what is amiss, so that those things specially may
be preserved and firmly established in the law of God, to which no blame
nor dishonour may attach; while the enemies of the law, who under
pretence of His holy Name bring in manifold and divers blasphemies,
shall be <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_146"></span>scattered abroad, and entirely
crushed, and utterly destroyed.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p105"></span>87. When Eusebius and his fellows
read this letter, being conscious of what they had done, they prevented
the rest of the Bishops from going up, and only themselves went, viz.
Eusebius, Theognius, Patrophilus, the other Eusebius, Ursacius, and
Valens. And they no longer said anything about the cup and Arsenius (for
they had not the boldness to do so), but inventing another accusation
which concerned the Emperor himself, they declared before him, that
Athanasius had threatened that he would cause the corn to be withheld
which was sent from Alexandria to his own home <span
id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736.md) . The Bishops Adamantius, Anubion,
Agathammon, Arbethion, and Peter, were present and heard this. It was
proved also by the anger of the Emperor; for although he had written the
preceding letter, and had condemned their injustice, as soon as he heard
such a charge as this, he was immediately incensed, and instead of
granting me a hearing, he sent me away into Gaul. And this again shews
their wickedness further; for when the younger Constantine, of blessed
memory, sent me back home, remembering what his father had written <span
id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737.md) , he also wrote as follows.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p108"></span>Constantine Cæsar, to the people of
the Catholic Church of the city of Alexandria.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p109"></span>I suppose that it has not escaped
the knowledge of your pious minds, that Athanasius, the interpreter of
the adorable Law, was sent away into Gaul for a time, with the intent
that, as the savageness of his bloodthirsty and inveterate enemies
persecuted him to the hazard of his sacred life, he might thus escape
suffering some irremediable calamity, through the perverse dealing of
those evil men. In order therefore to escape this, he was snatched out
of the jaws of his assailants, and was ordered to pass some time under
my government, and so was supplied abundantly with all necessaries in
this city, where he lived, although indeed his celebrated virtue,
relying entirely on divine assistance, sets at nought the sufferings of
adverse fortune. Now seeing that it was the fixed intention of our
master Constantine Augustus, my Father, to restore the said Bishop to
his own place, and to your most beloved piety, but he was taken away by
that fate which is common to all men, and went to his rest before he
could accomplish his wish; I have thought proper to fulfil that
intention of the Emperor of sacred memory which I have inherited from
him. When he comes to present himself before you, you will learn with
what reverence he has been treated. Indeed it is not wonderful, whatever
I have done on his behalf; for the thoughts of your longing desire for
him, and the appearance of so great a man, moved my soul, and urged me
thereto. May Divine Providence continually preserve you, beloved
brethren.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p110"></span>Dated from Treveri the 15th before
the Calends of July <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738.md) .

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p112"></span>88. This being the reason why I was
sent away into Gaul, who, I ask again, does not plainly perceive the
intention of the Emperor, and the murderous spirit of Eusebius and his
fellows, and that the Emperor had done this in order to prevent their
forming some more desperate scheme? for he listened to them in
simplicity <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739.md) . Such were the
practices of Eusebius and his fellows, and such their machinations
against me. Who that has witnessed them will deny that nothing has been
done in my favour out of partiality, but that that great number of
Bishops both individually and collectively wrote as they did in my
behalf and condemned the falsehood of my enemies justly, and in
accordance with the truth? Who that has observed such proceedings as
these will deny that Valens and Ursacius had good reason to condemn
themselves, and to write <span id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740.md) as they
did, to accuse themselves when they repented, choosing rather to suffer
shame for a short time, than to undergo the punishment of false accusers
for ever and ever <span id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741.md) ?

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p116"></span>89. Wherefore also my blessed
fellow-ministers, acting justly and according to the laws of the Church,
while certain affirmed that my case was doubtful, and endeavoured to
compel them to annul the sentence which was passed in my favour, have
now endured all manner of sufferings, and have chosen rather to be
banished than to see the judgment of so many Bishops reversed. Now if
those genuine Bishops had withstood by words only those who plotted
against me, and wished to undo all that had been done in my behalf; or
if they had been ordinary men, and not the <span id="page_147">p.
147</span> <span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-Page_147"></span>Bishops of
illustrious cities, and the heads of great Churches, there would have
been room to suspect that in this instance they too had acted
contentiously and in order to gratify me. But when they not only
endeavoured to convince by argument, but also endured banishment, and
one of them is Liberius, Bishop of Rome, (for although he did not
endure <span id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742.md) to the end the sufferings
of banishment, yet he remained in his exile for two years, being aware
of conspiracy formed against us), and since there is also the great
Hosius, together with the Bishops of Italy, and of Gaul, and others from
Spain, and from Egypt, and Libya, and all those from Pentapolis (for
although for a little while, through fear of the threats of Constantius,
he seemed not to resist them <span id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743.md) yet
the great violence and tyrannical power exercised by Constantius, and
the many insults and stripes inflicted upon him, proved that it was not
because he gave up my cause, but through the weakness of old age, being
unable to bear the stripes, that he yielded to them for a season),
therefore I say, it is altogether right that all, as being fully
convinced, should hate and abominate the injustice and the violence
which they have used towards me; especially as it is well known that I
have suffered these things on account of nothing else but the Arian
impiety.

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p119"></span>90. Now if anyone wishes to become
acquainted with my case, and the falsehood of Eusebius and his fellows,
let him read what has been written in my behalf, and let him hear the
witnesses, not one, or two, or three, but that great number of Bishops;
and again let him attend to the witnesses of these proceedings, Liberius
and Hosius, and their fellows, who when they saw the attempts made
against us, chose rather to endure all manner of sufferings than to give
up the truth, and the judgment which had been pronounced in our favour.
And this they did with an honourable and righteous intention, for what
they suffered proves to what straits the other Bishops were reduced. And
they are memorials and records against the Arian heresy, and the
wickedness of false accusers, and afford a pattern and model for those
who come after, to contend for the truth unto death <span
id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744.md) , and to abominate the Arian heresy
which fights against Christ, and is a forerunner of Antichrist, and not
to believe those who attempt to speak against me. For the defence put
forth, and the sentence given, by so many Bishops of high character, are
a trustworthy and sufficient testimony in our behalf.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_690"></span>[137:691](2040194.htm#fr_690.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p3"></span> Cf. §17, note 1.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[137:692](2040194.htm#fr_691.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p4"></span> Cf. §59.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[137:693](2040194.htm#fr_692.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p5"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>πωλήσ</span>: i.e. palm them off on the
church. Cf. Lat. *venditare.*\]

<span id="fn_693"></span>[137:694](2040194.htm#fr_693.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p11"></span> Cf. §64.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[137:695](2040194.htm#fr_694.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p12"></span> Cf. §64.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[137:696](2040194.htm#fr_695.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p15"></span> Cf. §60.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[137:697](2040194.htm#fr_696.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p16"></span> Cf. §60.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[137:698](2040194.htm#fr_697.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p19"></span> \[The ‘archbishop’ is Meletius;
this is the first occurrence of the word; it evidently has not its later
fixed sense. The historical allusion is obscure.\]

<span id="fn_698"></span>[137:699](2040194.htm#fr_698.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p21"></span> A village on the Mareotic lake.
vid. Socr. iv. 23. Athan Opp. ed. Pat. t. 3. p. 86–89.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[137:700](2040194.htm#fr_699.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p23"></span> \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1) *sub.
fin.* and ch. v. §3a.\]

<span id="fn_700"></span>[138:701](2040194.htm#fr_700.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p24"></span> Supr. §13.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[138:702](2040194.htm#fr_701.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p25"></span> Cf. *Encycl.* §3.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[138:703](2040194.htm#fr_702.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p29"></span> Curiosus; the Curiosi (in curis
agendis) were properly the overseers of the public roads, Du Cange in
voc., but they became in consequence a sort of imperial spy and were
called the Emperor’s eyes. Gothofr. *in Cod. Theod.* t. 2. p. 194. ed.
1665. Constantius confined them to the school of the Agentes in rebus
(infr. *Apol. ad Const.* §10.), under the Master of the Offices.
Gothoft. *ibid.* p. 192.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[139:704](2040194.htm#fr_703.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p35"></span> [Prov.
19.5](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#005.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p35.1"></span>[Prov. xxv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#007.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p35.3"></span>, LXX, xix. 5.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[139:705](2040194.htm#fr_704.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p35.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p36"></span> Cf. §12.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[139:706](2040194.htm#fr_705.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p37"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p37.2"></span>a.d.</span> 324.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[139:707](2040194.htm#fr_706.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p38"></span> *Supr.* §64.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[139:708](2040194.htm#fr_707.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p40.1"></span>χείρ</span>, *infr. Apol. ad Const.*
§11.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[140:709](2040194.htm#fr_708.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p45"></span> On the different kinds of
Ducenaries, vid. Gothofr. in *Cod. Theod.* XI. vii. 1. Here, as in
Euseb. *Hist.* vii. 30. the word stands for a Procurator, whose annual
pay amounted to 200 sestertia, vid. Salmas. *Hist. Aug.* t. l. p. 533.
In like manner a Centenary is one who receives 100.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[140:710](2040194.htm#fr_709.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p48"></span> The title Patrician was revived by
Constantine as a personal distinction. It was for life, and gave
precedence over all the great officers of state except the Consul. It
was usually bestowed on favourites, or on ministers as a reward of
services. Gibbon, *Hist.* ch. 17. This Julius Constantius, who was the
father of Julian, was the first who bore the title, with L. Optatus, who
had been consul the foregoing year. Illustrissimus was the highest of
the three ranks of honour. *ibid.*

<span id="fn_710"></span>[140:711](2040194.htm#fr_710.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p49"></span> \[Sep. 8. 335 <span
class="c10"><span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p49.2"></span>a.d.</span> See note
on leap-year at the end of the table of Egyptian months, below, Introd.
to *Letters.*\]

<span id="fn_711"></span>[141:712](2040194.htm#fr_711.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p54"></span> Colluthus formed a schism on the
doctrine that God was not the cause of any sort of evil, e.g. did not
inflict pain and suffering. Though a Priest, he took on himself to
ordain, even to the Priesthood \[§12\]. St. Alexander even seems to
imply that he did so for money. Theod. *H. E.* i. 3. \[Prolegg. ch. ii.
§2.\]

<span id="fn_712"></span>[141:713](2040194.htm#fr_712.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p55"></span> \[Ath. had refused to attend a
synod at Cæsarea, <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p55.2"></span>a.d.</span> 334. See Thdt. *H. E.* i.
28, Prolegg. ch. ii. §4. and D.C.B. ii. 315 b.\]

<span id="fn_713"></span>[142:714](2040194.htm#fr_713.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p62"></span> Cf. Euseb. *v. Const.* ii. 48.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[142:715](2040194.htm#fr_714.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p64"></span> Cf. §16.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[142:716](2040194.htm#fr_715.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p67"></span> Cf. §§17, 65, 70.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[142:717](2040194.htm#fr_716.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p68"></span> At Tyre.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[142:718](2040194.htm#fr_717.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p71"></span> Perhaps president of the Council,
cf. §20. \[But see Prolegg. ch. ii. §5.\]

<span id="fn_718"></span>[143:719](2040194.htm#fr_718.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p72"></span> i.e. my beloved lord.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[143:720](2040194.htm#fr_719.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p74"></span> [Jer. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#002.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[143:721](2040194.htm#fr_720.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p75"></span> <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p75.1"></span>[Acts
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#019.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p75.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[143:722](2040194.htm#fr_721.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p75.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p76"></span> [Acts xxv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#016.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[143:723](2040194.htm#fr_722.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p78"></span> Vid. §46.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[143:724](2040194.htm#fr_723.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p79"></span> Vid. *Encyc.* §3, p. 43, note 2.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[144:725](2040194.htm#fr_724.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p81"></span> Vid. *de Syn.* §21.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[144:726](2040194.htm#fr_725.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p84"></span> \[i.e. Church, see D.C.A. *s.v.*
Martyrium.\]

<span id="fn_726"></span>[144:727](2040194.htm#fr_726.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p87"></span> That Chorepiscopi were real
Bishops, vid. Bevereg. in Conc. Ancyr. Can. 13. Routh in Conc. Neocæs.
Can. 13. referring to Rhabanus Maurus. Thomassin on the other hand
denies that they were Bishops, *Discipl. Eccl.* i. 2. c. 1. \[see D.C.A.
s.v.\]

<span id="fn_727"></span>[144:728](2040194.htm#fr_727.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p88"></span> Ten under each Presbyter. Vales ad
Socr. *Hist.* i. 27. Ten altogether, Montfaucon in loc. with more
probability; and so Tillemont, vol. 8. p. 20. \[Six villages are
mentioned *supr.* §64, *fin.*\]

<span id="fn_728"></span>[144:729](2040194.htm#fr_728.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p89"></span> It was against the Canon of
Sardica, and doubtless against ancient usage, to ordain a Bishop for so
small a village, vid. Bingham, Antiqu. II. xii., who, however, maintains
by instances, that at least small towns might be sees. Also it was
against usage that a layman, as Ischyras, should be made a Bishop. ibid.
x. 4, &c. St. Hilary, however, makes him a Deacon. *Fragm.* ii. 16.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[144:730](2040194.htm#fr_729.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p90"></span> Dogs without owners, and almost in
a wild state, abound, as is well known, in Eastern cities; vid. <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p90.2"></span>[Ps.
59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p90.4"></span>; [2 Kings
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#035.md),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#036.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p90.5"></span>. and for the view taken in Scripture of
dogs, vid. Bochart, *Hieroz.* ii. 56 \[and Dict. Bib. s.v.\].

<span id="fn_730"></span>[145:731](2040194.htm#fr_730.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p92"></span> Catholicus, §14, *Apol. Const.*
§10. \[The mention, below, of ‘Augusti and Cæsars’ makes 337 the
earliest likely date for this letter.\]

<span id="fn_731"></span>[145:732](2040194.htm#fr_731.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p95"></span> Cf. §17. note 7. \[Prolegg. ch. ii.
§4.\]

<span id="fn_732"></span>[145:733](2040194.htm#fr_732.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p97"></span> Cf. §9.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[145:734](2040194.htm#fr_733.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p99"></span> Euseb. *v. Const.* ii. 48.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[145:735](2040194.htm#fr_734.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p102"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p102.1"></span>στρατόπεδον</span>, §70. note 6.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[145:736](2040194.htm#fr_735.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p104"></span> “Once in an entertainment, at
which he (Constantine) received Bishops, he made the remark that he too
was a Bishop; using pretty much these words in my hearing, ‘You are
Bishops of matters within the Church, I am appointed by God to be Bishop
of matters external to it.” Euseb. *Vit. Const.* iv. 24.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[146:737](2040194.htm#fr_736.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p106"></span> Constantinople.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[146:738](2040194.htm#fr_737.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p107"></span> \[See Bright, *Hist. Writ.* p.
xii. note 3, and on the date of this letter, Prolegg. ch. v. §3 b, and
note 6 below.\]

<span id="fn_738"></span>[146:739](2040194.htm#fr_738.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p111"></span> June 17. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p111.2"></span>a.d.</span> 337 \[see Gwatk. *Stud.,*
136\].

<span id="fn_739"></span>[146:740](2040194.htm#fr_739.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p112.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p113"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p113.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p113.2"></span>πήκουσε γὰρ ἁπλῶς</span>. Montfaucon in
Onomast. (Athan. t. 2. ad calc.) points out some passages in his author,
where <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p113.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p113.5"></span>πακούειν</span>, like <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p113.7"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p113.8"></span>πακούειν</span>,
means “to answer.” vid. *Apol. Const.* §16 init. *Orat.* iii. 27 fin.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[146:741](2040194.htm#fr_740.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p113.10"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p114"></span> Cf. §58.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[146:742](2040194.htm#fr_741.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p115"></span> Here ends the second part of the
Apology, as is evident by turning back to §58. (supr. p. 130) to which
this paragraph is an allusion. The express object of the second part was
to prove, what has now been proved by documents, that Valens and
Ursacius did but succumb to plain facts which they could not resist. It
is observable too from this passage that the Apology was written before
their relapse, i.e. before <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p115.2"></span>a.d.</span> 351 or 352. The remaining
two sections are often after 357, as they mention the fall of Liberius
and Hosius, and speak of Constantius in different language from any
which has been found above. \[Introd. to *Apol. Const.* and *Hist.
Ar.*\]

<span id="fn_742"></span>[147:743](2040194.htm#fr_742.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p117"></span> See *Hist. Ar.* §41.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[147:744](2040194.htm#fr_743.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p117.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p118"></span> Cf. *Apol. Fug.;* §5, and *Hist.
Ar.* §45.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[147:745](2040194.htm#fr_744.md) <span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p120"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
4.28](../../../bib/apo/sir004.htm#028.md)<span
id="xiii.ii.ii.ii-p120.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additional Note on Apol. C. Arianos, §50.](2040195.md)
