[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040252)  [Next](2040254.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.xlii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xlii-p1"></span> 89. It is worth while that I should
relate, and that you, as you wish it, should hear what his death was
like. For this end of his is worthy of imitation. According to his
custom he visited the monks in the outer mountain, and having learned
from Providence that his own end was at hand, he said to the brethren,
‘This is my last visit to you which I shall make. And I shall be
surprised if we see each other again in this life. At length the time of
my departure is at hand, for I am near a hundred and five years old.’
And when they heard it they wept, and embraced, and kissed the old man.
But he, as though sailing from a foreign city to his own, spoke
joyously, and exhorted them ‘Not to grow idle in their labours, nor to
become faint in their training, but to live as though dying daily. And
as he had said before, zealously to guard the soul from foul thoughts,
eagerly to imitate the Saints, and to have nought to do with the
Meletian <span id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span
id="xvi.ii.xlii-Page_220"></span>schismatics, for you know their wicked
and profane character. Nor have any fellowship with the Arians, for
their impiety is clear to all. Nor be disturbed if you see the judges
protect them, for it shall cease, and their pomp is mortal and of short
duration. Wherefore keep yourselves all the more untainted by them, and
observe the traditions of the fathers, and chiefly the holy faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ, which you have learned from the Scripture, and of
which you have often been put in mind by me.’

<span id="xvi.ii.xlii-p2"></span>90. But when the brethren were urging
him to abide with them and there to die, he suffered it not for many
other reasons, as he showed by keeping silence, and especially for
this:—The Egyptians are wont to honour with funeral rites, and to wrap
in linen cloths at death the bodies of good men, and especially of the
holy martyrs; and not to bury them underground, but to place them on
couches, and to keep them in their houses, thinking in this to honour
the departed. And Antony often urged the bishops to give commandment to
the people on this matter. In like manner he taught the laity and
reproved the women, saying, ‘that this thing was neither lawful nor holy
at all. For the bodies of the patriarchs and prophets are until now
preserved in tombs, and the very body of the Lord was laid in a tomb,
and a stone was laid upon it, and hid it until He rose on the third
day <span id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141.md) .’ And thus saying, he
showed that he who did not bury the bodies of the dead after death
transgressed the law, even though they were sacred. For what is greater
or more sacred than the body of the Lord? Many therefore having heard,
henceforth buried the dead underground, and gave thanks to the Lord that
they had been taught rightly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[220:1142](2040253.htm#fr_1141.md) <span
id="xvi.ii.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xlii-p3"></span> Cf. [John
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#041.md), [Matt.
27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060.md)<span
id="xvi.ii.xlii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 91](2040254.md)
