[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040113)  [Next](2040115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xvii-p1"></span> §17. *How the Incarnation did not
limit the ubiquity of the Word, nor diminish His Purity. (Simile of the
Sun.)*

<span id="vii.ii.xvii-p2"></span>For He was not, as might be imagined,
circumscribed in the body, nor, while present in the body, was He absent
elsewhere; nor, while He moved the body, was the universe left void of
His working and Providence; but, thing most marvellous, Word as He was,
so far from being contained by anything, He rather contained all things
Himself; and just as while present in the whole of Creation, He is at
once distinct in being from the universe, and present in all things by
His own power,—giving order to all things, and over all and in all
revealing His own providence, and giving life to each thing and all
things, including the whole without being included, but being in His own
Father alone wholly and in every respect,—2. thus, even while present in
a human body and Himself quickening it, He was, without inconsistency,
quickening the universe as well, and was in every process of nature, and
was outside the whole, and while known from the body by His works, He
was none the less manifest from the working of the universe as well. 3.
Now, it is the function of soul to behold even what is outside its own
body, by acts of thought, without, however, working outside its own
body, or moving by its presence things remote from the body. Never, that
is, does a man, by thinking of things at a distance, by that fact either
move or displace them; nor if a man were to sit in his own house and
reason about the heavenly bodies, would he by that fact either move the
sun or make the heavens revolve. But he sees that they move and have
their being, without being actually able to influence them. 4. Now, the
Word of God in His man’s nature was not like that; for He was not bound
to His body, but rather was Himself wielding it, so that He was not only
in it, but was actually in everything, and while external to the
universe, abode in His Father only. 5. And this was the wonderful thing
that He was at once walking as man, and as the Word was quickening all
things, and as the Son was dwelling with His Father. So that not even
when the Virgin bore Him did He suffer any change, nor by being in the
body was \[His glory\] dulled: but, on the contrary, He sanctified the
body also. 6. For not even by being in the universe does He share in its
nature, but all things, on the contrary, are quickened and sustained by
Him. 7. For if the sun too, which was made by Him, and which we see, as
it revolves in the heaven, is not defiled <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) by touching the bodies upon earth, nor
is it put out by darkness, but on the contrary itself illuminates and
cleanses them also, much less was the all-holy Word of God, Maker and
Lord also of the sun, defiled by being made known in the body; on the
contrary, being incorruptible, He quickened and cleansed the body also,
which was in itself mortal: “who <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248)
did,” for so it says, “no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_247"></span>[45:248](2040114.htm#fr_247) <span
id="vii.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xvii-p3"></span> Cf. St. Aug. *de Fid. et Symb.* 10,
Rufin. *in Symb. Apost.* 12. So also Tertull. *adv. Marc.* ‘Quodcunque
induerit ipse dignum fecit.’

<span id="fn_248"></span>[45:249](2040114.htm#fr_248) <span
id="vii.ii.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="vii.ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the Word and Power of God works in His human actions: by
casting out devils, by Miracles, by His Birth of the Virgin.](2040115)
