[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040422)  [Next](2040424.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>Letter XIV</span>.—*(For 342.) Coss.
Augustus Constantius III, Constans II, Præf. the same Longinus; Indict.
xv; Easter-day iii Id. Apr., xvi Pharmuthi; Æra Dioclet. 58.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p2.1"></span>The</span> gladness of our feast, my
brethren, is always near at hand, and never fails those who wish to
celebrate it <span id="fr_4401"></span>[4402](#fn_4401.md) . For the Word
is near, Who is all things on our behalf, even our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who, having promised that His habitation with us should be perpetual, in
<span id="page_542">p. 542</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-Page_542"></span>virtue thereof cried, saying, ‘Lo,
I am with you all the days of the world <span
id="fr_4402"></span>[4403](#fn_4402.md) .’ For as He is the Shepherd, and
the High Priest, and the Way and the Door, and everything at once to us,
so again, He is shewn to us as the Feast, and the Holy day, according to
the blessed Apostle; ‘Our Passover, Christ, is sacrificed <span
id="fr_4403"></span>[4404](#fn_4403.md) .’ He it was who was expected, He
caused a light to shine at the prayer of the Psalmist, who said, ‘My
Joy, deliver me from those who surround me <span
id="fr_4404"></span>[4405](#fn_4404.md) ;’ this being indeed true
rejoicing, this being a true feast, even deliverance from wickedness,
whereto a man attains by thoroughly adopting an upright conversation,
and being approved in his mind of godly submission towards God <span
id="fr_4405"></span>[4406](#fn_4405.md) . For thus the saints all their
lives long were like men rejoicing at a feast. One found rest in prayer
to God, as blessed David <span id="fr_4406"></span>[4407](#fn_4406.md) ,
who rose in the night, not once but seven times. Another gave glory in
songs of praise, as great Moses, who sang a song of praise for the
victory over Pharaoh, and those task-masters <span
id="fr_4407"></span>[4408](#fn_4407.md) . Others performed worship with
unceasing diligence, like great Samuel and blessed Elijah; who have
ceased from their course, and now keep the feast in heaven, and rejoice
in what they formerly learnt through shadows, and from the types
recognise the truth.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p10"></span>2. But what sprinklings shall we
now employ, while we celebrate the feast? Who will be our guide, as we
haste to this festival? None can do this, my beloved, but Him Whom you
will name with me, even our Lord Jesus Christ Who said, ‘I am the Way.’
For it is He Who, according to the blessed John, ‘taketh away the sin of
the world <span id="fr_4408"></span>[4409](#fn_4408.md) .’ He purifies our
souls, as Jeremiah the prophet says in a certain place, ‘Stand in the
ways and see, and enquire, and look which is the good path, and ye shall
find in it cleansing for your souls <span
id="fr_4409"></span>[4410](#fn_4409.md) .’ Of old time, the blood of
he-goats and the ashes of a heifer, sprinkled upon those who were
unclean, were fit only to purify the flesh <span
id="fr_4410"></span>[4411](#fn_4410.md) ; but now, through the grace of God
the Word, every man is thoroughly cleansed. Following Him, we may, even
here, as on the threshold of the Jerusalem which is above, meditate
beforehand on the feast which is eternal, as also the blessed Apostles,
together following the Saviour Who was their Leader, have now become
teachers of a like grace, saying, ‘Behold, we have left all, and
followed Thee <span id="fr_4411"></span>[4412](#fn_4411.md) .’ For the
following of the Lord, and the feast which is of the Lord, is not
accomplished by words only, but by deeds, every enactment of laws and
every command involving a distinct performance. For as great Moses, when
administering the holy laws, exacted a promise from the people <span
id="fr_4412"></span>[4413](#fn_4412.md) , respecting the practice of them,
so that having promised, they might not neglect them, and be accused as
liars, thus also, the celebration of the least of the Passover raises no
question, and demands no reply; but when the word is given, the
performance of it follows, for He saith, ‘And the children of Israel
shall keep the Passover <span id="fr_4413"></span>[4414](#fn_4413.md) ;’
intending that there should be a ready performance of the commandment,
while the command should aid its execution. But respecting these
matters, I have confidence in your wisdom, and your care for
instruction. Such points as these have been touched upon by us often and
in various Letters.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p17"></span>3. But now, which is above all
things most necessary, I wish to remind you, and myself with you, how
that the command would have us come to the Paschal feast not profanely
and without preparation, but with sacramental and doctrinal rites, and
prescribed observances, as indeed we learn from the historical account,
‘A man who is of another nation, or bought with money, or uncircumcised,
shall not eat the Passover <span id="fr_4414"></span>[4415](#fn_4414.md) .’
Neither should it be eaten in ‘any’ house, but He commands it to be done
in haste; inasmuch as before we groaned and were made sad by the bondage
to Pharaoh, and the commands of the task-masters. For when in former
time the children of Israel acted in this way, they were counted worthy
to receive the type, which existed for the sake of this feast, nor is
the feast now introduced on account of the type. As also the Word of
God, when desirous of this, said to His disciples, ‘With desire I have
desired to eat this Passover with you <span
id="fr_4415"></span>[4416](#fn_4415.md) .’ Now that is a wonderful account,
for a man might have seen them at that time girded as for a procession
or a dance, and going out with staves, and sandals, and unleavened
bread. These things, which took place before in shadows, were typical.
But now the Truth is nigh unto us, ‘the Image of the invisible God <span
id="fr_4416"></span>[4417](#fn_4416.md) ,’ our Lord Jesus Christ, the true
Light, Who instead of a staff, is our sceptre, instead of unleavened
bread, is the bread which came down from heaven, Who, instead of
sandals, hath furnished us with the preparation of the Gospel <span
id="fr_4417"></span>[4418](#fn_4417.md) , and Who, to speak briefly, by all
these hath guided us to His Father. And if enemies afflict us and
persecute us, He again, instead of Moses, will encourage us with better
words, saying, ‘Be of <span id="page_543">p. 543</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-Page_543"></span>good cheer; I have overcome the
wicked one <span id="fr_4418"></span>[4419](#fn_4418.md) .’ And if after we
have passed over the Red Sea heat should again vex us or some bitterness
of the waters befall us, even thence again the Lord will appear to us,
imparting to us of His sweetness, and His life-giving fountain, saying,
‘If any man thirst, let him come to Me, and drink <span
id="fr_4419"></span>[4420](#fn_4419.md) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p24"></span>4. Why therefore do we tarry, and
why do we delay, and not come with all eagerness and diligence to the
feast, trusting that it is Jesus who calleth us? Who is all things for
us, and was laden in ten thousand ways for our salvation; Who hungered
and thirsted for us, though He gives us food and drink in His saving
gifts <span id="fr_4420"></span>[4421](#fn_4420.md) . For this is His
glory, this the miracle of His divinity, that He changed our sufferings
for His happiness. For, being life, He died that He might make us alive,
being the Word, He became flesh, that He might instruct the flesh in the
Word, and being the fountain of life, He thirsted our thirst, that
thereby He might urge us to the feast, saying, ‘If any man thirst, let
him come to Me, and drink <span id="fr_4421"></span>[4422](#fn_4421.md) .’
At that time, Moses proclaimed the beginning of the feast, saying, ‘This
month is the beginning of months to you <span
id="fr_4422"></span>[4423](#fn_4422.md) .’ But the Lord, Who came down in
the end of the ages <span id="fr_4423"></span>[4424](#fn_4423.md) ,
proclaimed a different day, not as though He would abolish the law, far
from it, but that He should establish the law, and be the end of the
law. ‘For Christ is the end of the law to every one that believeth in
righteousness;’ as the blessed Paul saith, ‘Do we make void the law by
faith? far from it: we rather establish the law <span
id="fr_4424"></span>[4425](#fn_4424.md) .’ Now these things astonished even
the officers who were sent by the Jews, so that wondering they said to
the Pharisees, ‘No man ever thus spake <span
id="fr_4425"></span>[4426](#fn_4425.md) .’ What was it then that astonished
those officers, or what was it which so affected the men as to make them
marvel? It was nothing but the boldness and authority of our Saviour.
For when of old time prophets and scribes studied the Scriptures, they
perceived that what they read did not refer to themselves, but to
others. Moses, for instance, ‘A prophet will the Lord raise up unto you
of your brethren, like unto me; to him hearken in all that he commands
you.’ Isaiah again, ‘Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and
ye shall call his name Emmanuel <span
id="fr_4426"></span>[4427](#fn_4426.md) .’ And others prophesied in
different and various ways, concerning the Lord. But by the Lord, of
Himself, and of no other, were these things prophesied; to Himself He
limited them all, saying, ‘If any man thirst, let him come to Me <span
id="fr_4427"></span>[4428](#fn_4427.md) ’—not to any other person, but to
‘Me.’ A man may indeed hear from those concerning My coming, but he must
not henceforth drink from others, but from Me.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p33"></span>5. Therefore let us also, when we
come to the feast, no longer come as to old shadows, for they are
accomplished, neither as to common feasts, but let us hasten as to the
Lord, Who is Himself the feast <span
id="fr_4428"></span>[4429](#fn_4428.md) , not looking upon it as an
indulgence and delight of the belly, but as a manifestation of virtue.
For the feasts of the heathen are full of greediness, and utter
indolence, since they consider they celebrate a feast when they are
idle <span id="fr_4429"></span>[4430](#fn_4429.md) ; and they work the
works of perdition when they feast. But our feasts consist in the
exercise of virtue and the practice of temperance; as the prophetic word
testifies in a certain place, saying, ‘The fast of the fourth, and the
fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the
tenth \[month\], shall be to the house of Judah for gladness, and
rejoicing, and for pleasant feasts <span
id="fr_4430"></span>[4431](#fn_4430.md) .’ Since therefore this occasion
for exercise is set before us, and such a day as this is come, and the
prophetic voice has gone forth that the feast shall be celebrated, let
us give all diligence to this good proclamation, and like those who
contend on the race course, let us vie with each other in observing the
purity of the fast <span id="fr_4431"></span>[4432](#fn_4431.md) , by
watchfulness in prayers, by study of the Scriptures, by distributing to
the poor, and let us be at peace with our enemies. Let us bind up those
who are scattered abroad, banish pride, and return to lowliness of mind,
being at peace with all men, and urging the brethren unto love. Thus
also the blessed Paul was often engaged in fastings and watchings, and
was willing to be accursed for his brethren. Blessed David again, having
humbled himself by fastings, used boldness, saying, ‘O Lord my God, if I
have done this, if there is any iniquity in my hands, if I have repaid
those who dealt evil with me, then may I fall from my enemies as a vain
man <span id="fr_4432"></span>[4433](#fn_4432.md) .’ If we do these things,
we shall conquer death; and receive an earnest <span
id="fr_4433"></span>[4434](#fn_4433.md) of the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p40"></span>6. We begin the holy Easter feast
on the tenth of Pharmuthi (April 5), desisting from the holy fasts on
the fifteenth of the same month Pharmuthi (April 10), on the evening of
the seventh day. And let us keep the holy feast on the sixteenth of the
same month Pharmuthi (April 11); adding one by one \[the days\] till the
holy Pentecost, passing on to which, as through a succession of feasts,
let us keep the festival to the Spirit, Who is even <span
id="page_544">p. 544</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-Page_544"></span>now near us, in Jesus Christ,
through Whom and with Whom to the Father be glory and dominion for ever
and ever. Amen.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p41"></span>The fifteenth and sixteenth are
wanting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4401"></span>[541:4402](2040423.htm#fr_4401.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p3"></span> Cf. *Letter* v. 1.

<span id="fn_4402"></span>[542:4403](2040423.htm#fr_4402.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p4"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p4.1"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p4.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4403"></span>[542:4404](2040423.htm#fr_4403.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p5"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4404"></span>[542:4405](2040423.htm#fr_4404.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p6"></span> [Ps. xxxi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p6.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4405"></span>[542:4406](2040423.htm#fr_4405.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p7"></span> Cf. *Letter* iii. 2.

<span id="fn_4406"></span>[542:4407](2040423.htm#fr_4406.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p8"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p8.1"></span>[Ps.
19:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#062.md),
[164](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#164.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p8.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4407"></span>[542:4408](2040423.htm#fr_4407.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p9"></span> [Exod.
xv](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#000.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4408"></span>[542:4409](2040423.htm#fr_4408.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p11"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p11.1"></span>[John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p11.3"></span>; i. 29.

<span id="fn_4409"></span>[542:4410](2040423.htm#fr_4409.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p12"></span> [Jer. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4410"></span>[542:4411](2040423.htm#fr_4410.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p13"></span> [Heb. ix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4411"></span>[542:4412](2040423.htm#fr_4411.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p14"></span> [Mark x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#028.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4412"></span>[542:4413](2040423.htm#fr_4412.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p15"></span> [Exod. xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4413"></span>[542:4414](2040423.htm#fr_4413.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p16"></span> [Exod.
12.47](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#047.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4414"></span>[542:4415](2040423.htm#fr_4414.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p18"></span> [Exod.
12.43-48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#043.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4415"></span>[542:4416](2040423.htm#fr_4415.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p19"></span> [Luke xxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4416"></span>[542:4417](2040423.htm#fr_4416.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p20"></span> [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4417"></span>[542:4418](2040423.htm#fr_4417.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p21"></span> [Eph. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4418"></span>[543:4419](2040423.htm#fr_4418.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p22"></span> [John
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033.md), [1 John
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p22.1"></span>[John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p22.3"></span>; cf. [1 John ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p22.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4419"></span>[543:4420](2040423.htm#fr_4419.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p22.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p23"></span> [John
7.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4420"></span>[543:4421](2040423.htm#fr_4420.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p25"></span> Cf. *supr.* p. 88.

<span id="fn_4421"></span>[543:4422](2040423.htm#fr_4421.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p26"></span> [John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4422"></span>[543:4423](2040423.htm#fr_4422.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p27"></span> [Exod. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4423"></span>[543:4424](2040423.htm#fr_4423.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p28"></span> [Heb. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4424"></span>[543:4425](2040423.htm#fr_4424.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p29"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p29.1"></span>[Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p29.3"></span>; iii. 31.

<span id="fn_4425"></span>[543:4426](2040423.htm#fr_4425.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p30"></span> [John vii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#046.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4426"></span>[543:4427](2040423.htm#fr_4426.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p31"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p31.1"></span>[Deut. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p31.3"></span>; [Is. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p31.4"></span>. These two texts are also quoted
together in *Orat.* i. §54.

<span id="fn_4427"></span>[543:4428](2040423.htm#fr_4427.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p31.6"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p32"></span> [John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4428"></span>[543:4429](2040423.htm#fr_4428.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p34"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4429"></span>[543:4430](2040423.htm#fr_4429.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p35"></span> Cf. *Letter* vii. 3.

<span id="fn_4430"></span>[543:4431](2040423.htm#fr_4430.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p36"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p36.1"></span>[Zech. viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#019.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p36.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4431"></span>[543:4432](2040423.htm#fr_4431.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p36.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p37"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. ix.
24-27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4432"></span>[543:4433](2040423.htm#fr_4432.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p38"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p38.1"></span>[Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p38.3"></span>; [Ps.
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#004.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p38.4"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_4433"></span>[543:4434](2040423.htm#fr_4433.md) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p38.6"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p39"></span> Syr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p39.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p39.2"></span>Αῤ& 191·αβών</span>. Cf. <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p39.3"></span>[Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014.md)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xii-p39.5"></span>, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XVII](2040424.md)
