[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040052)  [Next](2040054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.viii-p1"></span> §8. *The origin of idolatry is
similar. The soul, materialised by forgetting God, and engrossed in
earthly things, makes them into gods. The race of men descends into a
hopeless depth of delusion and superstition.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.viii-p2"></span>Now the soul of mankind, not satisfied
with the devising of evil, began by degrees to venture upon what is
worse still. For having experience of diversities of pleasures, and girt
about with oblivion of things divine; being pleased moreover and having
in view the passions of the body, and nothing but things present and
opinions about them, ceased to think that anything existed beyond what
is seen, or that anything was good save things temporal and bodily;
<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="vi.ii.i.viii-Page_8"></span>so
turning away and forgetting that she was in the image of the good God,
she no longer, by the power which is in her, sees God the Word after
whose likeness she is made; but having departed from herself, imagines
and feigns what is not. 2. For hiding, by the complications of bodily
lusts, the mirror which, as it were, is in her, by which alone she had
the power of seeing the Image of the Father, she no longer sees what a
soul ought to behold, but is carried about by everything, and only sees
the things which come under the senses. Hence, weighted with all fleshly
desire, and distracted among the impressions of these things, she
imagines that the God Whom her understanding has forgotten is to be
found in bodily and sensible things, giving to things seen the name of
God, and glorifying only those things which she desires and which are
pleasant to her eyes. 3. Accordingly, evil is the cause which brings
idolatry in its train; for men, having learned to contrive evil, which
is no reality in itself, in like manner feigned for themselves as gods
beings that had no real existence. Just, then, as though a man had
plunged into the deep, and no longer saw the light, nor what appears by
light, because his eyes are turned downwards, and the water is all above
him; and, perceiving only the things in the deep, thinks that nothing
exists beside them, but that the things he sees are the only true
realities; so the men of former time, having lost their reason, and
plunged into the lusts and imaginations of carnal things, and forgotten
the knowledge and glory of God, their reasoning being dull, or rather
following unreason, made gods for themselves of things seen, glorifying
the creature rather than the Creator <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) , and deifying the works rather than
the Master, God, their Cause and Artificer. 4. But just as, according to
the above simile, men who plunge into the deep, the deeper they go down,
advance into darker and deeper places, so it is with mankind. For they
did not keep to idolatry in a simple form, nor did they abide in that
with which they began; but the longer they went on in their first
condition, the more new superstitions they invented: and, not satiated
with the first evils, they again filled themselves. with others,
advancing further in utter shamefulness, and surpassing themselves in
impiety. But to this the divine Scripture testifies when it says, “When
the wicked cometh unto the depth of evils, he despiseth <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[8:116](2040053.htm#fr_115) <span
id="vi.ii.i.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.viii-p3"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="vi.ii.i.viii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[8:117](2040053.htm#fr_116) <span
id="vi.ii.i.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.viii-p4"></span> <span
id="vi.ii.i.viii-p4.1"></span>[Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii.i.viii-p4.3"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The various developments of idolatry: worship of the heavenly
bodies, the elements, natural objects, fabulous creatures, personified
lusts, men living and dead. The case of Antinous, and of the deified
Emperors.](2040054)
