[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040449)  [Next](2040451) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Letter LIII</span>.—*Second
Letter <span id="fr_4655"></span>[4656](#fn_4655) to Monks.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p5"></span>Athanasius, Archbishop <span
id="fr_4656"></span>[4657](#fn_4656) of Alexandria, to the Solitaries.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p7"></span>Athanasius to those who practise a
solitary life, and are settled in faith in God, most beloved brethren,
greeting in the Lord.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p8"></span>I thank the Lord who hath given to
you to believe in Him, that ye too may have with the saints eternal
life. But because there are certain persons who hold with Arius and go
about the monasteries with no other object save that under colour of
visiting you, and returning from us they may deceive the simple; whereas
there are certain who, while they affirm that they do not hold with
Arius, yet compromise themselves and worship with his party; I have been
compelled, at the instance of certain most sincere brethren, to write at
once in order that keeping faithfully and without guile the pious faith
which God’s grace works in you, you may not give occasion of scandal to
the brethren. For when any sees you, the faithful in Christ, associate
and communicate with such people, \[or worshipping along with them\],
certainly they will think it a matter of indifference and will fall into
the mire of irreligion. Lest, then, this should happen, be pleased,
beloved, to shun those who hold the impiety \[of Arius\], and moreover
to avoid those who, while they pretend not to hold with Arius, yet
worship with the impious. And we are specially bound to fly from the
communion of men whose opinions we hold in execration. \[If then any
come to you, and, as blessed John <span
id="fr_4657"></span>[4658](#fn_4657) says, brings with him right
doctrine, say to him, All hail, and receive such an one as a brother.\]
But if any pretend that he confesses the right faith, but appear to
communicate with those others, exhort him to abstain from such
communion, and if he promise to do so, treat him as a brother, but if he
persist in a contentious spirit, him avoid. \[I might greatly lengthen
my letter, adding from the divine Scriptures the outline of this
teaching. But since, being wise men, you can anticipate those who write,
and rather, being intent upon self-denial, are fit to instruct others
also, I have dictated a short letter, as from one loving friend to
others, in the confidence\] that living as you do you will preserve a
pure and sincere faith, and that those persons, seeing that you do not
join with them in worship, will derive benefit, fearing lest they be
accounted as impious, and as those who hold with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4655"></span>[564:4656](2040450.htm#fr_4655) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p2"></span> This short letter, like those to
Lucifer, was printed at first in Latin, evidently the almost servile
rendering of a Greek original. The latter was discovered by Montfaucon
after the completion of the Benedictine edition, and printed in his
‘Nova Collectio Patrum’ (1706). (Migne xxvi. 1185.)

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p3"></span>The date is fixed *a parte post* in
an interesting manner. We read in the Life of Pachomius, §88 (the story
is also found in the Coptic documents in the collection of Zoega p. 36),
that when Duke Artemius came to the monastery of Pabau in search of
Athanasius, the steward of the community replied, ‘Although Athanasius
is our Father under God, we have never seen his face.’ The Duke answered
by a request for the prayers of the brethren before he left. The ‘abbat
Psarphi’ replied that the ‘Father’ had forbidden the monks to pray with
strangers who consorted with the Arians,—a clear allusion to the letter
before us. Now Duke Artemius was in search of Athanasius in 359–60
(*Fest. Ind.*). Accordingly our letter was issued before that date.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p4"></span>The Greek text is evidently
imperfect: the square brackets in the translation denote passages
supplied from the Latin. The first part of the letter (down to the words
‘along with’…) is preserved in a contemporary inscription (Boeckh.
C.I.G. iv. 8607) on the walls of an ancient Egyptian tomb at
Abd-el-Kurna, which in those later days had become a monastic cell. The
remainder is effaced. (See Fialon, p. 134, who has failed to notice the
identity of the inscription with our present letter.)

<span id="fn_4656"></span>[564:4657](2040450.htm#fr_4656) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p6"></span> This first heading is from the
inscription mentioned above, note 1, and is important as recording a
very early use of the title ‘archbishop.’ See also *Letter* 55, note 1,
*supr.* p. 137, note 6, and *Epiph*. vol. ii. p. 188 c (Migne).

<span id="fn_4657"></span>[564:4658](2040450.htm#fr_4657) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p9"></span> [2 John
10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Serapion, concerning the death of Arius.](2040451)
