[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040095)  [Next](2040097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="vii.i-Page_31"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to the Treatise</span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="vii.i-p2.1"></span>on the</span>

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="vii.i-p3.1"></span>Incarnation of the Word.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="vii.i-p5.1"></span>The</span> tract ‘against the Gentiles’ leaves
the reader face to face with the necessity of restoration by the Divine
Word as the remedy for corrupt human nature. How this necessity is met
in the Incarnation is shewn in the pages which follow. The general
design of the second tract is to illustrate and confirm the doctrine of
the Incarnation by shewing (1) its necessity and end, (2) the congruity
of its details, (3) its truth, as against the objections of Jews and
Gentiles, (4) its result. He begins by a review (recapitulating *c.
Gent.* 2–7) of the doctrine of creation and of man’s place therein. The
abuse by man of his special Privilege had resulted in its loss. By
foregoing the Divine Life, man had entered upon a course of endless
undoing, of progressive decay, from which none could rescue him but the
original bestower of his life (2–7). Then follows a description in
glowing words of the Incarnation of the Divine Word and of its efficacy
against the plague of corruption (8–10). With the *Divine Life*, man had
also received, in the *knowledge of God*, the conscious reflex of the
Divine Likeness, the faculty of reason in its highest exercise. This
knowledge their moral fall dimmed and perverted. Heeding not even the
means by which God sought to remind them of Himself, they fell deeper
and deeper into materialism and superstition. To restore the effaced
likeness the presence of the Original was requisite. Accordingly,
condescending to man’s sense-bound intelligence—lest men should have
been created in vain in the Image of God—the Word took Flesh and became
an object of Sense, that through the Seen He might reveal the Invisible
(11–16).

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>Having dwelt (17–19) upon the meaning and
purpose of the Incarnation, he proceeds to speak of the Death and
Resurrection of the Incarnate Word. He, Who alone could renew the
handiwork and restore the likeness and give afresh the knowledge of God,
must needs, in order to pay the debt which all had incurred (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p6.1"></span>τὸ παρὰ πάντων
ὀφειλόμενον</span>), die in our stead, offering the sacrifice on behalf
of all, so as to rise again, as our first-fruits, from the grave (20–32,
note especially §20). After speaking of the especial fitness of the
Cross, once the instrument of shame, now the trophy of victory, and
after meeting some difficulties connected with the manner of the Lord’s
Death, he passes to the Resurrection. He shews how Christ by His triumph
over the grave changed (27) the relative ascendancy of Death and Life:
and how the Resurrection with its momentous train of consequences,
follows of necessity (31) from the Incarnation of Him in Whom was Life.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>The two main divisions of contemporary
unbelief are next combated. In either case the root of the difficulty is
moral; with the Greeks it is a frivolous cynicism, with the Jews,
inveterate obstinacy. The latter (33–40) are confuted, firstly, by their
own Scriptures, which predict both in general and in detail the coming
of Jesus Christ. Also, the old Jewish polity, both civil and religious,
has passed away, giving place to the Church of Christ.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>Turning to the Greeks (41–45), and assuming
that they allow the existence of a per<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>
<span id="vii.i-Page_32"></span>vading Spirit, whose presence is the
sustaining principle of all things, he challenges them to reject,
without inconsistency, the Union of that Spirit, the Logos (compare St.
Augustine *Conf*. VII. ix.), with one in particular of the many
constituents of that Universe wherein he already dwells. And since man
alone (43. 3) of the creatures had departed from the order of his
creation, it was man’s nature that the Word united to Himself, thus
repairing the breach between the creature and the Creator at the very
point where it had occurred.

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>God did not restore man by a mere fiat (44)
because, just as repentance on man’s part (7) could not eradicate his
disease, so such a fiat on God’s part would have amounted to the
annihilation of human nature as it was, and the creation of a fresh
race. Man’s definite disorder God met with a specific remedy, overcoming
death with life. Thus man has been enabled once more to shew forth, in
common with the rest of Creation, the handiwork and glory of his Maker.

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>Athanasius then confronts the Greeks, as he
had the Jews, with facts. Since the coming of Christ, paganism, popular
and philosophic, had been falling into discredit and decay. The
impotence and rivalries of the philosophic teachers, the local and
heterogeneous character, the low moral ideals of the old worships, are
contrasted with the oneness and inspiring power of the religion of the
Crucified. Such are the two, the dying and the living systems; it
remains for him who will to taste and see what that life is which is the
gift of Christ to them that follow Him (46–end).

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>The purpose of the tract, in common with the
*contra Gentes*, being to commend the religion of Christ to acceptance,
the argument is concerned more with the Incarnation as a living fact,
and with its place in the scheme of God’s dealing with man, than with
its analysis as a theological doctrine. He does not enter upon the
question, fruitful of controversy in the previous century at Alexandria,
but soon to burst forth into furious debate, of the Sonship of the Word
and of His relation to God the Father. Still less does he touch the
Christological questions which arose with the decline of the Arian
tempest, questions associated with the names of Apollinarius, Theodore,
Cyril, Nestorius, Eutyches, Theodoret, and Dioscorus. But we feel
already that firm grasp of soteriological principles which mark him out
as the destined conqueror of Arianism, and which enabled him by a sure
instinct to anticipate unconsciously the theological difficulties which
troubled the Church for the century after his death. It is the broad
comprehensive treatment of the subject in its relation to God, human
nature, and sin, that gives the work its interest to readers of the
present day. In strong reaction from modern or medieval theories of
Redemption, which to the thoughtful Christian of to-day seem arbitrary,
or worse, it is with relief that men find that from the beginning it was
not so; that the theology of the early Church interpreted the great
Mystery of godliness in terms which, if short of the fulness of the
Pauline conception, are yet so free from arbitrary assumptions, so true
to human nature as the wisest of men know it, so true to the worthiest
and grandest ideas of God (see below, p. 33 *ad fin*.). The *de
Incarnatione*, then, is perhaps more appreciated in our day than at any
date since the days of its writer.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>It may therefore be worth while to devote a
word or two to some peculiarities incidental to its aim and method. We
observe first of all how completely the power of the writer is absorbed
in the subject under discussion. It is therefore highly precarious to
infer anything from his silence even on points which might seem to
require explanation in the course of his argument. Not a word is said of
the doctrine of the Trinity, nor of the Holy Spirit; this directly
follows from the purpose of the work, in accordance with the general
truth that while the Church preaches Christ to the World, the Office and
Personality of the Spirit belongs to her inner life. The teaching of the
tract with regard to the constitution of man is another case in point.
It might appear (§3, cf. 11. 2, 13. 2) that Athanasius ascribed the
reasonable soul of man, and his immortality after death, not to the
constitution of human nature as such, but to the grace superadded to it
by the Creator (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p12.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p12.2"></span>τοῦ κατ᾽ εἰκόνα χάρις</span>), <span
id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span id="vii.i-Page_33"></span>a grace which
constituted men <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p12.3"></span>λογικοί</span> (3. 4) by virtue of the power of
the Logos, and which, *if not forfeited by sin*, involved the privilege
of immortality. We have, then, to carefully consider whether Athanasius
held, or meant to suggest, that man is by nature, and apart from union
with God, (1) rational, or (2) immortal. If we confine our view to the
treatise before us, there would be some show of reason in answering both
questions in the negative; and with regard to immortality this has been
recently done by an able correspondent of *The Times* (April 9, 1890).

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span>But that Athanasius held the essential
rationality and immortality of the soul is absolutely clear, if only
from *c. Gent.* 32 and 33. We have, then, to find an explanation of his
language in the present treatise. With regard to immortality, it should
be observed (1) that the language employed (in 4. 5, where <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p13.1"></span>κενωθῆναι τοῦ εἶναι
ἀεί</span> is explained by <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p13.2"></span>τὸ διαλυθέντας μένειν ἐν τῷ θανάτῳ καὶ τῇ
φθόρᾳ</span>) suggests a *continued condition,* and therefore something
short of annihilation, although not worthy of the name of existence or
life,—(2) that even in the worst of men the image of God is defaced, but
not effaced (14. 1, &c.), and that even when grace is lost (7. 4), man
cannot be as though the contact with the divine had never taken
place;—(3) that in this work, as by St. Paul in [1 Cor.
xv](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#000)<span id="vii.i-p13.3"></span>., the
final destiny of the wicked is passed over (but for the general
reference 56. 3) in silence. It may be added (4) that Athanasius puts
together *all* that separates man from irrational creatures without
clearly drawing the line between what belongs to the natural man and
what to the <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p13.4"></span>κατ᾽
εἰκόνα χάρις</span>. The subject of eschatology is nowhere dealt with in
full by Athanasius; while it is quite certain (*c. Gent*. 33) that he
did not share the inclination of some earlier writers (see D.C.B. ii. p.
192) toward the idea of conditional immortality, there is also no reason
to think that he held with the Universalism of Origen, Gregory of Nyssa
and others (see Migne, Patr. Gr. xxvii. p. 1404 A, also 1384 C, where
‘the unfortunate Origen’s’ opinions seem to be rejected, but with an
implied deprecation of harsh judgment). As to his view of the essential
rationality of man (see *c. Gent*. 32) the consideration (4) urged above
once more applies (compare the discussion in Harnack, *Dg*. ii. 146
sqq.). Yet he says that man left to himself can have no idea of God at
all (11. 1), and that this would deprive him of any claim to be
considered a rational being (ib. 2). The apparent inconsistency is
removed if we understand that man may be rational potentially (as all
men are) and yet not rational in the sense of exercising reason (which
is the case with very many). In other words, grace gives not the faculty
itself, but its integrity, the latter being the result not of the mere
psychological existence of the faculty, but of the reaction upon it of
its highest and adequate object. (The same is true to a great extent of
the doctrine of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p13.5"></span>πνεῦμα</span> in the New Testament.)

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>A somewhat similar caution is necessary with
regard to the analogy drawn out (41, &c.) between the Incarnation and
the Union of the Word with the Universe. The treatise itself (17. 1,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p14.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p14.2"></span>κτὸς κατ᾽ οὐσίαν</span>, and
see notes on 41) supplies the necessary corrective in this case. It may
be pointed out here that the real difference between Athanasius and the
neo-Platonists was not so much upon the Union of the Word with any
created Substance, which they were prepared to allow, as upon the
*exclusive* Union of the Word with Man, in Contrast to His essential
distinctness from the Universe. This difference goes back to the
doctrine of Creation, which was fixed as a great gulf between the
Christian and the Platonist view of the Universe. The relation of the
latter to the Word is fully discussed in the third part of the *contra
Gentes*, the teaching of which must be borne in mind while reading the
forty-first and following chapters of the present treatise.

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span>Lastly, the close relation between the
doctrine of Creation and that of Redemption marks off the Soteriology of
this treatise from that of the middle ages and of the Reformation.
Athanasius does not leave out of sight the idea of satisfaction for a
debt. To him also the Cross was the central purpose (20. 2, cf. 9. 1, 2,
&c.) of His Coming. But the idea of *Restoration* is most prominent in
his determination of the necessity of the Incarnation. <span
id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="vii.i-Page_34"></span>God could have
wiped out our guilt, had He so pleased, by a word (44): but human nature
required to be healed, restored, recreated. This (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p15.2"></span>νακτίσαι</span>) is the
foremost of the three ideas (7. 5) which sum up his account of the
*‘dignus* tanto *Vindice nodus* <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190)
.

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span>The *translation* which follows is that
printed in 1885 (D. Nutt, second edition, 1891) by the editor of this
volume, with a very few changes (chiefly 2. 2, 8. 4, 34. 2, 44. 7, 8):
it was originally made for the purpose of lectures at Oxford
(1879–1882), and the *analytical headings* now prefixed to each chapter
are extracted verbatim from notes made for the same course of lectures.
The *notes* have mostly appeared either in the former edition of the
translation, or appended to the Greek text published (D. Null, 1882) by
the translator. A few, however, have now been added, including some
references to the *Sermo Major*, which borrows wholesale from the
present treatise (Prolegg. ch. III. §1. 37). Two other English
translations have appeared, the one (Parker, 1880) previous, the other
(Religious Tract Society, n.d.) subsequent to that of the present
translator. The *text* followed is that of the Benedictine editors, with
a few exceptions. Of those that at all affect the sense, 43.6 (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p17.1"></span>καὶ τὸ σῶμα</span>) and 51.
2 (<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p17.2"></span>κατὰ τῆς
εἰδ·</span>) are due to Mr. Marriott (*Analecta Christiana*, Oxf. 1844).
For the others (13. 2, omission of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p17.3"></span>μή</span>, 28. 3, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p17.4"></span>κατὰ τοῦ πύρος</span> rejecting conjectures of
Montf. and Marriott, 42. 6, omission of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.i-p17.5"></span>πεποιηκέναι</span> 57. 3, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p17.6"></span>καὶ τὰ</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.i-p17.7"></span>τὰ καί</span>) the present
editor is alone responsible.

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="vii.i-p18.1"></span>Synopsis of the Treatise.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span> ————————————

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="vii.i-p20.1"></span>Page</span>

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span>§1.

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span>*Introduction*. The Redemptive work of the
Word based on His initial relation to the Creature.

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span>36

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="vii.i-p24.1"></span>FIRST PART</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="vii.i-p24.2"></span>The Incarnation of the Word.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span>§§2, 3.

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span>Doctrine of Creation:

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span>(1) Three erroneous views (2) rejected:

<span id="vii.i-p28"></span>The Epicurean (materialistic) as failing to
recognize a differentiating Principle.

<span id="vii.i-p29"></span>36

<span id="vii.i-p30"></span>The Platonic (matter pre-existent) as not
satisfying the idea of God

<span id="vii.i-p31"></span>37

<span id="vii.i-p32"></span>The Gnostic (dualistic) as contradictory to
Scripture

<span id="vii.i-p33"></span>37

<span id="vii.i-p34"></span>(2) The true doctrine (3) and its
application to the Creation of Man

<span id="vii.i-p35"></span>37

<span id="vii.i-p36"></span>This directly brings us to a

<span id="vii.i-p37"></span>§§4–10.

<span id="vii.i-p38"></span>First Reason for the Incarnation:

<span id="vii.i-p39"></span>By departing from the Word, men lost the
Principle of Life, and were wasting away (4, 5)

<span id="vii.i-p40"></span>38

<span id="vii.i-p41"></span>God could neither avert nor suffer this (6)

<span id="vii.i-p42"></span>39

<span id="vii.i-p43"></span>The latter would argue weakness, the former
changeableness (7) on God’s part

<span id="vii.i-p44"></span>39

<span id="vii.i-p45"></span>The Word alone could solve this dilemma (7.
4). This done by His becoming man (8) and dying for us all (9).
Reasonableness, and results of this (10)

<span id="vii.i-p46"></span>40

<span id="vii.i-p47"></span>§§11–16.

<span id="vii.i-p48"></span>Second Reason for the Incarnation:

<span id="vii.i-p49"></span>In departing from the Word, men had also
lost the Principle of Reason, by which they knew God. In spite of God’s
witness to Himself, they were sunk into superstition and mental
degradation (11, 12)

<span id="vii.i-p50"></span>42

<span id="vii.i-p51"></span>How none but the Word could remedy this (13,
14)

<span id="vii.i-p52"></span>43

<span id="vii.i-p53"></span>How He actually did so (15, 16). The
Incarnation, a revelation of the Invisible Godhead

<span id="vii.i-p54"></span>44

<span id="vii.i-p55"></span>(§§17, 18 explain this in further detail)

<span id="vii.i-p56"></span>45

<span id="vii.i-p57"></span><span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="vii.i-Page_35"></span>§19.

<span id="vii.i-p58"></span>Transition to Second Part:

<span id="vii.i-p59"></span>The Incarnation an irresistible revelation
of God. This is especially true of the Death of Christ.

<span id="vii.i-p60"></span>46

<span id="vii.i-p61"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="vii.i-p61.1"></span>SECOND PART</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="vii.i-p61.2"></span>The Death and Resurrection of Christ</span>.

<span id="vii.i-p62"></span>*His Death*:

<span id="vii.i-p63"></span>§20.

<span id="vii.i-p64"></span>1.—Why necessary

<span id="vii.i-p65"></span>47

<span id="vii.i-p66"></span>§§21–25.

<span id="vii.i-p67"></span>2.—Why death by Crucifixion—

<span id="vii.i-p68"></span>a.—Why public, and not natural, but at the
hands of others (21–23)

<span id="vii.i-p69"></span>47

<span id="vii.i-p70"></span>b.—Why not of His own choosing (24)

<span id="vii.i-p71"></span>49

<span id="vii.i-p72"></span>c.—Why the Cross, of all deaths (25)

<span id="vii.i-p73"></span>49

<span id="vii.i-p74"></span>His rising again:

<span id="vii.i-p75"></span>§26.

<span id="vii.i-p76"></span>1.—Why on the third day

<span id="vii.i-p77"></span>50

<span id="vii.i-p78"></span>§27.

<span id="vii.i-p79"></span>2.—Changed relation of Death to mankind

<span id="vii.i-p80"></span>50

<span id="vii.i-p81"></span>§§28–32.

<span id="vii.i-p82"></span>3.—Reality of His Resurrection—This:

<span id="vii.i-p83"></span>a.—To be tested by Experience (28)

<span id="vii.i-p84"></span>51

<span id="vii.i-p85"></span>b.—Implied by its visible effects (29–31. 3)

<span id="vii.i-p86"></span>51

<span id="vii.i-p87"></span>c.—Involved in the Nature of the Incarnate
Word (31. 4)

<span id="vii.i-p88"></span>53

<span id="vii.i-p89"></span>d.—Confirmed by what we see; as is the case
with all truth about the unseen God (32. 1–5)

<span id="vii.i-p90"></span>53

<span id="vii.i-p91"></span>Summary of what is thus proved to be true
(32. 6)

<span id="vii.i-p92"></span>53

<span id="vii.i-p93"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="vii.i-p93.1"></span>THIRD PART</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="vii.i-p93.2"></span>Refutation of Contemporary Unbelief.</span>

<span id="vii.i-p94"></span>§§33–40.

<span id="vii.i-p95"></span>A.—*Refutation of Jews*:

<span id="vii.i-p96"></span>§§33–39.

<span id="vii.i-p97"></span>1.—*From principles admitted by them*—i.e.,
from prophecies relating to the Messiah

<span id="vii.i-p98"></span>54

<span id="vii.i-p99"></span>(§39 forms the step to the next section)

<span id="vii.i-p100"></span>57

<span id="vii.i-p101"></span>§40.

<span id="vii.i-p102"></span>2.—*From facts*: cessation of the Jewish
dispensation, as foretold by Daniel

<span id="vii.i-p103"></span>57

<span id="vii.i-p104"></span>§§41–55.

<span id="vii.i-p105"></span>B.—*Refutation of Gentiles*:

<span id="vii.i-p106"></span>§§41–45.

<span id="vii.i-p107"></span>1.—*From principles admitted by them*–

<span id="vii.i-p108"></span>§§41, 42.

<span id="vii.i-p109"></span>a.—The Word, whose existence contemporary
philosophy allowed, might reasonably be supposed to unite Himself to
some particular nature: consequently, to human nature

<span id="vii.i-p110"></span>58

<span id="vii.i-p111"></span>§43.

<span id="vii.i-p112"></span>b.—Reasons for His Union with Man in
particular

<span id="vii.i-p113"></span>59

<span id="vii.i-p114"></span>§44.

<span id="vii.i-p115"></span>c.—Reasons why man should not be restored
by a mere fiat

<span id="vii.i-p116"></span>60

<span id="vii.i-p117"></span>§45.

<span id="vii.i-p118"></span>d.—Results of the Scheme actually adopted

<span id="vii.i-p119"></span>61

<span id="vii.i-p120"></span>§§46–55.

<span id="vii.i-p121"></span>2.—*Refutation of Gentiles from facts*—

<span id="vii.i-p122"></span>§§46–50.

<span id="vii.i-p123"></span>a.—Discredit and decay, since the coming of
Christ, of philosophic and popular paganism

<span id="vii.i-p124"></span>61

<span id="vii.i-p125"></span>§§51, 52.

<span id="vii.i-p126"></span>b.—Influence of Christian morals on Society

<span id="vii.i-p127"></span>64

<span id="vii.i-p128"></span>§53.

<span id="vii.i-p129"></span>c.—Influence of Christ on the individual

<span id="vii.i-p130"></span>65

<span id="vii.i-p131"></span>§§54, 55.

<span id="vii.i-p132"></span>d.—Nature and glory of Christ’s Work:
summary of His victory over paganism

<span id="vii.i-p133"></span>65

<span id="vii.i-p134"></span>§§56, 57.

<span id="vii.i-p135"></span>CONCLUSION: the enquirer referred to the
Scriptures. Indispensable moral conditions of the investigation of
Spiritual Truth

<span id="vii.i-p136"></span>66

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_190"></span>[34:191](2040096.htm#fr_190) <span
id="vii.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span> The corrections were made before he could
obtain the essay carefully and gratefully used, but his text is
defective, especially and text of Sievers (*Zeitsch. Hist. Theol.*
1868), where he now from the accidental omission of one of the
key-clauses of the finds them nearly all anticipated. Sievers’
discussion has been whole (§17).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Incarnation of the Word.](2040097)
