[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040025)  [Next](2040027.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p1"></span> §2. *Athanasius as an Author. Style and
Characteristics.*

<span id="v.iii.ii-p2"></span>Athanasius was not an author by choice.
With the exception of the early apologetic tracts all the writings that
he has left were drawn from him by the stress of theological controversy
or by the necessities of his work as a Christian pastor. We have no
systematic doctrinal treatise, no historical monograph from his pen,
although his writings are rich in materials for history and dogmatics
alike. The exception to this is in the exegetical remains, especially
those on the Psalms, which (*supra*, No. 45, *sqq*.) imply something
more than occasional work, some intention of systematic composition. For
this, a work congenial to one who was engaged in preaching, his long
intervals of quiet at Alexandria (especially 328–335, 346–356, 365–373)
may well have given him leisure. But on the whole, his writings are
those of a man of powerful mind indeed and profound theological
training, but still of a man of action. The style of Athanasius is
accordingly distinguished from that of many older and younger
contemporaries (Eusebius, Gregory Naz., &c.) by its inartificiality.
This was already observed by Erasmus, who did not know many of his best
works, but who notes his freedom from the harshness of Tertullian, the
exaggeration of Jerome, the laboured style of Hilary, the overloaded
manner of Augustine and Chrysostom, the imitation of the Attic orators
so conspicuous in Gregory; ‘sed totus est in explicanda re.’ That is
true. Athanasius never writes for effect, but merely to make his meaning
plain and impress it on others. This leads to his principal fault,
namely his constant self-repetition (see p. 47, note 6); even in
apologising for this he repeats the offence. The praise by Photius
(quoted below, Introd. to *Orat*.) of his <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.2"></span>πέριττον</span> seems to apply to his freedom
not from repetition but from extravagance, or studied brilliancy. This
simplicity led Philostorgius, reflecting the false taste of his age, to
pronounce Athanasius a child as compared with Basil, Gregory, or
Apollinarius. To a modern reader the manliness of his character is
reflected in the unaffected earnestness of his style. Some will admire
him most when, in addressing a carefully calculated appeal to an
emperor, he models his periods on Demosthenes *de Corona* (see p. 237).
To others the unrestrained utterance of the real man, in such a gem of
feeling and character as the Letter (p. 557) to Dracontius, will be
worth more than any studied apology. With all his occasional repetition,
with all the feebleness of the Greek language of that day as an
instrument of expression, if we compare it with the Greek of Thucydides
or Plato, Athanasius writes with nerve and keenness, even with a silent
but constant underflow of humour. His style is not free from Latinisms;
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iii.ii-p2.3"></span>πρέδα</span> (=
præda) in the *Encycl*., <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.4"></span>βετερᾶνος</span> (= veteranus), <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iii.ii-p2.5"></span>βῆλον</span> (= velum),
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iii.ii-p2.6"></span>μάγιστρος</span>,
&c., are barbarisms belonging to the later decadence of Greek, but not
without analogy even in the earliest Christian Literature. <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iii.ii-p2.7"></span>ξυνωρίς</span> is used in
an unusual sense, p. 447. <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.8"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.9"></span>Αρειομανῖται</span> seems to be coined by
himself; <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.10"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.11"></span>καθήκων, ἀποξενίζειν, ἐπακούειν</span> (=
answer), <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.12"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iii.ii-p2.13"></span>γκυκλεῖν</span>, &c., are Alexandrinisms (see
Fialon, p. 289). On the whole, no man was ever less of a stylist, while
at the same time making the fullest use of the resources furnished by
the language at his command. When he wrote, seven centuries of decay had
passed over the language of Thucydides, the tragedians, Plato and the
Orators. The Latin Fathers of the day had at their disposal a language
only two centuries or so past its prime. The heritage of Thucydides had
passed through Tacitus to the Latin prose writers of the silver age. The
Latin of Tertullian, Cyprian, Jerome, Augustin, Leo, with all its
mannerisms and often false antithesis and laboured epigram, was yet a
terse incisive weapon compared with the patristic Greek. But among the
Greek Fathers Athanasius is the most readable, simply because his style
is natural and direct, because it reflects the man rather than the age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Personal characteristics (see Stanley's Eastern Church, Lect.
vii.).](2040027.md)
