[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040127)  [Next](2040129.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxxi-p1"></span> §31. *If Power is the sign of life,
what do we learn from the impotence of idols, for good or evil, and the
constraining power of Christ and of the Sign of the Cross? Death and the
demons are by this proved to have lost their sovereignty. Coincidence of
the above argument from facts with that from the Personality of Christ.*

<span id="vii.ii.xxxi-p2"></span>But they who disbelieve in the
Resurrection <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="vii.ii.xxxi-Page_53"></span>afford a strong proof against
themselves, if instead of all the spirits and the gods worshipped by
them casting out Christ, Who, they say, is dead, Christ on the contrary
proves them all to be dead. 2. For if it be true that one dead can exert
no power, while the Saviour does daily so many works, drawing men to
religion, persuading to virtue, teaching of immortality, leading on to a
desire for heavenly things, revealing the knowledge of the Father,
inspiring strength to meet death, shewing Himself to each one, and
displacing the godlessness of idolatry, and the gods and spirits of the
unbelievers can do none of these things, but rather shew themselves dead
at the presence of Christ, their pomp being reduced to impotence and
vanity; whereas by the sign of the Cross all magic is stopped, and all
witchcraft brought to nought, and all the idols are being deserted and
left, and every unruly pleasure is checked, and every one is looking up
from earth to heaven: Whom is one to pronounce dead? Christ, that is
doing so many works? But to work is not proper to one dead. Or him that
exerts no power at all, but lies as it were without life? which is
essentially proper to the idols and spirits, dead as they are. 3. For
the Son of God is <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md) “living and
active,” and works day by day, and brings about the salvation of all.
But death is daily proved to have lost all his power, and idols and
spirits are proved to be dead rather than Christ, so that henceforth no
man can any longer doubt of the Resurrection of His body. 4. But he who
is incredulous of the Resurrection of the Lord’s body would seem to be
ignorant of the power of the Word and Wisdom of God. For if He took a
body to Himself at all, and—in reasonable consistency, as our argument
shewed— appropriated it as His own, what was the Lord to do with it? or
what should be the end of the body when the Word had once descended upon
it? For it could not but die, inasmuch as it was mortal, and to be
offered unto death on behalf of all: for which purpose it was that the
Saviour fashioned it for Himself. But it was impossible for it to remain
dead, because it had been made the temple of life. Whence, while it died
as mortal, it came to life again by reason of the Life in it; and of its
Resurrection the works are a sign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_279"></span>[53:280](2040128.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxxi-p3"></span> [Heb. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.ii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: But who is to see Him risen, so as to believe? Nay, God is ever
invisible and known by His works only: and here the works cry out in
proof. If you do not believe, look at those who do, and perceive the
Godhead of Christ. The demons see this, though men be blind. Summary of
the argument so far.](2040129.md)
