[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040411)  [Next](2040413) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c8"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>I. Festal Letters.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p2.1"></span>Letter I.</span>—*For 329. Easter-day xi
Pharmuthi; viii Id. April; Ær. Dioclet. 45; Coss. Constantinus Aug.
VIII. Constantinus Cæs. IV; Præfect. Septimius Zenius; Indict. II.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>Of Fasting, and Trumpets, and
Feasts.</span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>Come</span>, my beloved, the season calls
us to keep the feast. Again, ‘the Sun of Righteousness <span
id="fr_3883"></span>[3884](#fn_3883) , causing His divine beams to rise
upon us, proclaims beforehand the time of the feast, in which, obeying
Him, we ought to celebrate it, lest when the time has passed by,
gladness likewise may pass us by. For discerning the time is one of the
duties most urgent on us, for the practice of virtue; so that the
blessed Paul, when instructing his disciple, teaches him to observe the
time, saying, ‘Stand (ready) in season, and out of season <span
id="fr_3884"></span>[3885](#fn_3884) ’—that knowing both the one and the
other, he might do things befitting the season, and avoid the blame of
unseasonableness. For thus the God of all, after the manner of wise
Solomon <span id="fr_3885"></span>[3886](#fn_3885) , distributes
everything in time and season, to the end that, in due time, the
salvation of men should be everywhere spread abroad. Thus the ‘Wisdom of
God <span id="fr_3886"></span>[3887](#fn_3886) ,’ our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ, not out of season, but in season, ‘passed upon holy souls,
fashioning the friends of God and the prophets <span
id="fr_3887"></span>[3888](#fn_3887) ;’ so that although very many were
praying for Him, and saying, ‘O that the salvation of God were come out
of Sion <span id="fr_3888"></span>[3889](#fn_3888) !’—the Spouse also,
as it is written in the Song of Songs, was praying and saying, ‘O that
Thou wert my sister’s son, that sucked the breasts of my mother <span
id="fr_3889"></span>[3890](#fn_3889) !’ that Thou wert like the children
of men, and wouldest take upon Thee human passions for our
sake!—nevertheless, the God of all, the Maker of times and seasons, Who
knows our affairs better than we do, while, as a good physician, He
exhorts to obedience in season—the only one in which we may be healed—so
also does He send Him not unseasonably, but seasonably, saying, ‘In an
acceptable time have I heard Thee, and in the day of salvation I have
helped Thee <span id="fr_3890"></span>[3891](#fn_3890) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p13"></span>2. And, on this account, the blessed
Paul, urging us to note this season, wrote, saying, ‘Behold, now is the
accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation <span
id="fr_3891"></span>[3892](#fn_3891) .’ At set seasons also He called
the children of Israel to the Levitical feasts by Moses, saying, ‘Three
times in a year ye shall keep a feast to Me <span
id="fr_3892"></span>[3893](#fn_3892) ’ (one of which, my beloved, is
that now at hand), the trumpets of the priests sounding and urging its
observance; as the holy Psalmist commanded, saying, ‘Blow with the
trumpet in the new moon, on the \[solemn\] day of your feast <span
id="fr_3893"></span>[3894](#fn_3893) .’ Since this sentence enjoins upon
us to blow both on the new moons, and on the solemn <span
id="fr_3894"></span>[3895](#fn_3894) <span id="page_507">p. 507</span>
<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-Page_507"></span>days, He hath made a solemn day
of that in which the light of the moon is perfected in the full; which
was then a type, as is this of the trumpets. At one time, as has been
said, they called to the feasts; at another time to fasting and to war.
And this was not done without solemnity, nor by chance, but this sound
of the trumpets was appointed, so that every man should come to that
which was proclaimed. And this ought to be learned not merely from me,
but from the divine Scriptures, when God was revealed to Moses, and
said, as it is written in the book of Numbers; ‘And the Lord spake unto
Moses, saying, Make to thee two trumpets; of silver shalt thou make
them, and they shall be for thee to call the congregation <span
id="fr_3895"></span>[3896](#fn_3895) ;’—very properly for those who here
love Him. So that we may know that these things had reference to the
time of Moses—yea, were to be observed so long as the shadow lasted, the
whole being appointed for use, ‘till the time of reformation <span
id="fr_3896"></span>[3897](#fn_3896) .’ ‘For’ (said He) ‘if ye shall go
out to battle in your land against your enemies that rise up against
you <span id="fr_3897"></span>[3898](#fn_3897) ’ (for such things as
these refer to the land, and no further), ‘then ye shall proclaim with
the trumpets, and shall be remembered before the Lord, and be delivered
from your enemies.’ Not only in wars did they blow the trumpet, but
under the law, there was a festal trumpet also. Hear him again, going on
to say, ‘And in the day of your gladness, and in your feasts, and your
new moons, ye shall blow with the trumpets <span
id="fr_3898"></span>[3899](#fn_3898) .’ And let no man think it a light
and contemptible matter, if he hear the law command respecting trumpets;
it is a wonderful and fearful thing. For beyond any other voice or
instrument, the trumpet is awakening and terrible; so Israel received
instruction by these means, because he was then but a child. But in
order that the proclamation should not be thought merely human, being
superhuman, its sounds resembled those which were uttered when they
trembled before the mount <span id="fr_3899"></span>[3900](#fn_3899) ;
and they were reminded of the law that was then given them, and kept it.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p23"></span>3. For the law was admirable, and
the shadow was excellent, otherwise, it would not have wrought fear, and
induced reverence in those who heard; especially in those who at that
time not only heard but saw these things. Now these things were typical,
and done as in a shadow. But let us pass on to the meaning, and
henceforth leaving the figure at a distance, come to the truth, and look
upon the priestly trumpets of our Saviour, which cry out, and call us,
at one time to war, as the blessed Paul saith; ‘We wrestle not with
flesh and blood, but with principalities, with powers, with the rulers
of this dark world, with wicked spirits in heaven <span
id="fr_3900"></span>[3901](#fn_3900) .’ At another time the call is made
to virginity, and self-denial, and conjugal harmony, saying, To virgins,
the things of virgins; and to those who love the way of abstinence, the
things of abstinence; and to those who are married <span
id="fr_3901"></span>[3902](#fn_3901) , the things of an honourable
marriage; thus assigning to each its own virtues and an honourable
recompense. Sometimes the call is made to fasting, and sometimes to a
feast. Hear again the same \[Apostle\] blowing the trumpet, and
proclaiming, ‘Christ our Passover is sacrificed; therefore let us keep
the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and
wickedness <span id="fr_3902"></span>[3903](#fn_3902) .’ If thou
wouldest listen to a trumpet much greater than all these, hear our
Saviour saying; ‘In that last and great day of the feast, Jesus stood
and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and
drink <span id="fr_3903"></span>[3904](#fn_3903) .’ For it became the
Saviour not simply to call us to a feast, but to ‘the great feast;’ if
only we will be prepared to hear, and to conform to the proclamation of
every trumpet.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p28"></span>4. For since, as I before said,
there are divers proclamations, listen, as in a figure, to the prophet
blowing the trumpet; and further, having turned to the truth, be ready
for the announcement of the trumpet, for he saith, ‘Blow ye the trumpet
in Sion: sanctify a fast <span id="fr_3904"></span>[3905](#fn_3904) .’
This is a warning trumpet, and commands with great earnestness, that
when we fast, we should hallow the fast. For not all those who call upon
God, hallow God, since there are some who defile Him; yet not Him—that
is impossible—but their own mind concerning Him; for He is holy, and has
pleasure in the saints <span id="fr_3905"></span>[3906](#fn_3905) . And
therefore the blessed Paul accuses those who dishonour God;
‘Transgressors of the law dishonour God <span
id="fr_3906"></span>[3907](#fn_3906) .’ So then, to make a separation
from those who pollute the fast, he saith here, ‘sanctify a fast.’ For
many, crowding to the fast, pollute themselves in the thoughts of their
hearts, sometimes by doing evil against their brethren, sometimes by
daring to defraud. And, to mention nothing else, there are many who
exalt themselves above their neighbours, thereby causing great mischief.
For the boast of fasting did no good to the Pharisee, although he fasted
twice in the week <span id="fr_3907"></span>[3908](#fn_3907) , only
because he exalted himself against the publican. In the same manner the
Word blamed <span id="page_508">p. 508</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-Page_508"></span>the children of Israel on account of
such a fast as this, exhorting them by Isaiah the Prophet, and saying,
‘This is not the fast and the day that I have chosen, that a man should
humble his soul; not even if thou shouldest bow down thy neck like a
hook, and shouldest strew sackcloth and ashes under thee; neither thus
shall ye call the fast acceptable <span
id="fr_3908"></span>[3909](#fn_3908) .’ That we may be able to shew what
kind of persons we should be when we fast, and of what character the
fast should be, listen again to God commanding Moses, and saying, as it
is written in Leviticus <span id="fr_3909"></span>[3910](#fn_3909) ,
‘And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, In the tenth day of this seventh
month, there shall be a day of atonement; a convocation, and a holy day
shall it be to you; and ye shall humble your souls, and offer whole
burnt-offerings unto the Lord.’ And afterwards, that the law might be
defined on this point, He proceeds to say; ‘Every soul that shall not
humble itself, shall be cut off from the people <span
id="fr_3910"></span>[3911](#fn_3910) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p36"></span>5. Behold, my brethren, how much a
fast can do, and in what manner the law commands us to fast. It is
required that not only with the body should we fast, but with the soul.
Now the soul is humbled when it does not follow wicked opinions, but
feeds on becoming virtues. For virtues and vices are the food of the
soul, and it can eat either of these two meats, and incline to either of
the two, according to its own will. If it is bent toward virtue, it will
be nourished by virtues, by righteousness, by temperance, by meekness,
by fortitude, as Paul saith; ‘Being nourished by the word of truth <span
id="fr_3911"></span>[3912](#fn_3911) .’ Such was the case with our Lord,
who said, ‘My meat is to do the will of My Father which is in
heaven <span id="fr_3912"></span>[3913](#fn_3912) .’ But if it is not
thus with the soul, and it inclines downwards, it is then nourished by
nothing but sin. For thus the Holy Ghost, describing sinners and their
food, referred to the devil when He said, ‘I have given him to be meat
to the people of Æthiopia <span id="fr_3913"></span>[3914](#fn_3913) .’
For this is the food of sinners. And as our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, being heavenly bread, is the food of the saints, according to
this; ‘Except ye eat My flesh, and drink My blood <span
id="fr_3914"></span>[3915](#fn_3914) ;’ so is the devil the food of the
impure, and of those who do nothing which is of the light, but work the
deeds of darkness. Therefore, in order to withdraw and turn them from
vices, He commands them to be nourished with the food of virtue; namely,
humbleness of mind, lowliness to endure humiliations, the acknowledgment
of God. For not only does such a fast as this obtain pardon for souls,
but being kept holy, it prepares the saints, and raises them above the
earth.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p41"></span>6. And indeed that which I am about
to say is wonderful, yea it is of those things which are very
miraculous; yet not far from the truth, as ye may be able to learn from
the sacred <span id="fr_3915"></span>[3916](#fn_3915) writings. That
great man Moses, when fasting, conversed with God, and received the law.
The great and holy Elijah, when fasting, was thought worthy of divine
visions, and at last was taken up like Him who ascended into heaven. And
Daniel, when fasting, although a very young man, was entrusted with the
mystery, and he alone understood the secret things of the king, and was
thought worthy of divine visions. But because the length of the fast of
these men was wonderful, and the days prolonged, let no man lightly fall
into unbelief; but rather let him believe and know, that the
contemplation of God, and the word which is from Him, suffice to nourish
those who hear, and stand to them in place of all food. For the angels
are no otherwise sustained than by beholding at all times the face of
the Father, and of the Saviour who is in heaven. And thus Moses, as long
as he talked with God, fasted indeed bodily, but was nourished by divine
words. When he descended among men, and God was gone up from him, he
suffered hunger like other men. For it is not said that he fasted longer
than forty days—those in which he was conversing with God. And,
generally, each one of the saints has been thought worthy of similar
transcendent nourishment.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p43"></span>7. Wherefore, my beloved, having our
souls nourished with divine food, with the Word, and according to the
will of God, and fasting bodily in things external, let us keep this
great and saving feast as becomes us. Even the ignorant Jews received
this divine food, through the type, when they ate a lamb in the
passover. But not understanding the type, even to this day they eat the
lamb, erring in that they are without the city and the truth. As long as
Judæa and the city existed, there were a type, and a lamb, and a shadow,
since the law thus commanded <span id="fr_3916"></span>[3917](#fn_3916)
: These things shall not be done in another city; but in the land of
Judæa, and in no place without \[the land of Judæa\]. And besides this,
the law commanded them to offer whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices,
there being no other altar than that in Jerusalem. For on this account,
in that city alone was there an altar and temple built, and in no other
city were they permitted <span id="page_509">p. 509</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-Page_509"></span>to perform these rites, so that when
that city should come to an end, then those things that were figurative
might also be done away.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p45"></span>8. Now observe; that city, since the
coming of our Savior, has had an end, and all the land of the Jews has
been laid waste; so that from the testimony of these things (and we need
no further proof, being assured by our own eyes of the fact) there must,
of necessity, be an end of the shadow. And not from me should these
things be learned, but the sacred voice of the prophet foretold, crying;
‘Behold upon the mountains the feet of Him that bringeth good tidings,
and publisheth peace <span id="fr_3917"></span>[3918](#fn_3917) ;’ and
what is the message he published, but that which he goes on to say to
them, ‘Keep thy feasts, O Judah; pay to the Lord thy vows. For they
shall no more go to that which is old; it is finished; it is taken away:
He is gone up who breathed upon the face, and delivered thee from
affliction <span id="fr_3918"></span>[3919](#fn_3918) .’ Now who is he
that went up? a man may say to the Jews, in order that even the boast of
the shadow may be done away; neither is it an idle thing to listen to
the expression, ‘It is finished; he is gone up who breathed.’ For
nothing was finished before he went up who breathed. But as soon as he
went up, it was finished. Who was he then, O Jews, as I said before? If
Moses, the assertion would be false; for the people were not yet come to
the land in which alone they were commanded to perform these rites. But
if Samuel, or any other of the prophets, even in that case there would
be a perversion of the truth; for hitherto these things were done in
Judæa, and the city was standing. For it was necessary that while that
stood, these things should be performed. So that it was none of these,
my beloved, who went up. But if thou wouldest hear the true matter, and
be kept from Jewish fables, behold our Saviour who went up, and
‘breathed upon the face, and said to His disciples, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost <span id="fr_3919"></span>[3920](#fn_3919) .’ For as soon as these
things were done, everything was finished, for the altar was broken, and
the veil of the temple was rent; and although the city was not yet laid
waste, the abomination was ready to sit in the midst of the temple, and
the city and those ancient ordinances to receive their final
consummation.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p49"></span>9. Since then we have passed beyond
that time of shadows, and no longer perform rites under it, but have
turned, as it were, unto the Lord; ‘for the Lord is the Spirit, and
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty <span
id="fr_3920"></span>[3921](#fn_3920) ;’—as we hear the sacred trumpet,
no longer slaying a material lamb, but that true Lamb that was slain,
even our Lord Jesus Christ; ‘Who was led as a sheep to the slaughter,
and was dumb as a lamb before her shearers <span
id="fr_3921"></span>[3922](#fn_3921) ;’ being purified by His precious
blood, which speaketh better things than that of Abel, having our feet
shod with the preparation of the Gospel, holding in our hands the rod
and staff of the Lord, by which that saint was comforted, who said <span
id="fr_3922"></span>[3923](#fn_3922) , ‘Thy rod and Thy staff they
comfort me;’ and to sum up, being in all respects prepared, and careful
for nothing, because, as the blessed Paul saith, ‘The Lord is at
hand <span id="fr_3923"></span>[3924](#fn_3923) ;’ and as our Saviour
saith, ‘In an hour when we think not, the Lord cometh;—Let us keep the
Feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and
wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
Putting off the old man and his deeds, let us put on the new man <span
id="fr_3924"></span>[3925](#fn_3924) , which is created in God,’ in
humbleness of mind, and a pure conscience; in meditation of the law by
night and by day. And casting away all hypocrisy and fraud, putting far
from us all pride and deceit, let us take upon us love towards God and
towards our neighbour, that being new \[creatures\], and receiving the
new wine, even the Holy Spirit, we may properly keep the feast, even the
month of these new \[fruits\] <span id="fr_3925"></span>[3926](#fn_3925)
.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p56"></span>10. We <span
id="fr_3926"></span>[3927](#fn_3926) begin the holy fast on the fifth
day of Pharmuthi (March 31), and adding to it according to the number of
those six holy and great days, which are the symbol of the creation of
this world, let us rest and cease (from fasting) on the tenth day of the
same Pharmuthi (April 5), on the holy sabbath of the week. And when the
first day of the holy week dawns and rises upon us, on the eleventh day
of the same month (April 6), from which again we count all the seven
weeks one by one, let us keep feast on the holy day of Pentecost—on that
which was at one time to the Jews, typically, the feast of weeks, in
which they granted forgiveness and settlement of debts; and indeed that
day was one of deliverance in every respect. Let us keep the feast on
the first day of the great week, as a symbol of the world to come, in
which we here receive a pledge that we shall have everlasting life
hereafter. Then having passed <span id="page_510">p. 510</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-Page_510"></span>hence, we shall keep a perfect feast
with Christ, while we cry out and say, like the saints, ‘I will pass to
the place of the wondrous tabernacle, to the house of God; with the
voice of gladness and thanksgiving, the shouting of those who
rejoice <span id="fr_3927"></span>[3928](#fn_3927) ;’ whence pain and
sorrow and sighing have fled, and upon our heads gladness and joy shall
have come to us! May we be judged worthy to be partakers in these
things.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p59"></span>11. Let us remember the poor, and
not forget kindness to strangers; above all, let us love God with all
our soul, and might, and strength, and our neighbour as ourselves. So
may we receive those things which the eye hath not seen, nor the ear
heard, and which have not entered into the heart of man, which God hath
prepared for those that love Him <span
id="fr_3928"></span>[3929](#fn_3928) , through His only Son, our Lord
and Saviour, Jesus Christ; through Whom, to the Father alone, by the
Holy Ghost, be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p61"></span>Salute one another with a kiss. All
the brethren who are with me salute you.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p62"></span>Here endeth the first Festal Letter
of holy Athanasius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3883"></span>[506:3884](2040412.htm#fr_3883) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p5"></span> [Mal. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3884"></span>[506:3885](2040412.htm#fr_3884) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p6"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p6.1"></span>. The due celebration of the feast is
spoken of as producing a permanent beneficial effect on the Christian.
Cf. *Letter* 4.

<span id="fn_3885"></span>[506:3886](2040412.htm#fr_3885) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p7"></span> [Eccl. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>. Cf. S. Cyril. *Homil. Pasch.* V.

<span id="fn_3886"></span>[506:3887](2040412.htm#fr_3886) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p8"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3887"></span>[506:3888](2040412.htm#fr_3887) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p9"></span> [Wisd. vii.
27](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#027)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3888"></span>[506:3889](2040412.htm#fr_3888) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p10"></span> [Ps. xiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3889"></span>[506:3890](2040412.htm#fr_3889) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p11"></span> [Song of Sol.
8.1](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3890"></span>[506:3891](2040412.htm#fr_3890) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p12"></span> [Isa. xlix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3891"></span>[506:3892](2040412.htm#fr_3891) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p14"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3892"></span>[506:3893](2040412.htm#fr_3892) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p15"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p15.1"></span>[Exod. xxiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p15.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3893"></span>[506:3894](2040412.htm#fr_3893) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p15.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p16"></span> [Ps.
81:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#003), [Num.
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p16.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p16.3"></span>, cf. [Num. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p16.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3894"></span>[506:3895](2040412.htm#fr_3894) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p16.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p17"></span> Or *appointed,* and so *passim.*

<span id="fn_3895"></span>[507:3896](2040412.htm#fr_3895) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p18"></span> [Num.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3896"></span>[507:3897](2040412.htm#fr_3896) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p19"></span> [Heb. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3897"></span>[507:3898](2040412.htm#fr_3897) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p20"></span> [Numb. x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3898"></span>[507:3899](2040412.htm#fr_3898) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p21"></span> [Num.
10.10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3899"></span>[507:3900](2040412.htm#fr_3899) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p22"></span> [Exod. xix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3900"></span>[507:3901](2040412.htm#fr_3900) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p24"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3901"></span>[507:3902](2040412.htm#fr_3901) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p25"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#002),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3902"></span>[507:3903](2040412.htm#fr_3902) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p26"></span> [1 Cor.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3903"></span>[507:3904](2040412.htm#fr_3903) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p27"></span> [John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3904"></span>[507:3905](2040412.htm#fr_3904) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p29"></span> [Joel ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3905"></span>[507:3906](2040412.htm#fr_3905) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p30"></span> [Ps. xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3906"></span>[507:3907](2040412.htm#fr_3906) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p31"></span> [Rom. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3907"></span>[507:3908](2040412.htm#fr_3907) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p32"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p32.1"></span>[Luke xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p32.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3908"></span>[508:3909](2040412.htm#fr_3908) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p32.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p33"></span> [Is. lviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3909"></span>[508:3910](2040412.htm#fr_3909) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p34"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p34.1"></span>[Levit. xxiii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#026)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p34.3"></span>, *sq.*

<span id="fn_3910"></span>[508:3911](2040412.htm#fr_3910) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p34.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p35"></span> [Lev.
23.29](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#029)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3911"></span>[508:3912](2040412.htm#fr_3911) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p37"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3912"></span>[508:3913](2040412.htm#fr_3912) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p38"></span> [John iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3913"></span>[508:3914](2040412.htm#fr_3913) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p39"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p39.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_3914"></span>[508:3915](2040412.htm#fr_3914) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p40"></span> [John vi.
53](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#053)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3915"></span>[508:3916](2040412.htm#fr_3915) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p42"></span> The word in the Syriac is
‘priestly.’ But in this and in other places, it appears to be for the
Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p42.2"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p42.3"></span>Ιερός</span>. Cf. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p42.5"></span>τὰ ἱερὰ
γράμματα</span>. [2 Tim. iii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p42.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_3916"></span>[508:3917](2040412.htm#fr_3916) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p44"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p44.1"></span>[Deut.
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#011),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p44.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3917"></span>[509:3918](2040412.htm#fr_3917) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p46"></span> [Nah. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3918"></span>[509:3919](2040412.htm#fr_3918) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p47"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p47.1"></span>[Nah. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p47.3"></span>; ii. 1, LXX.

<span id="fn_3919"></span>[509:3920](2040412.htm#fr_3919) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p47.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p48"></span> [John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3920"></span>[509:3921](2040412.htm#fr_3920) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p50"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p50.1"></span>[2 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p50.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3921"></span>[509:3922](2040412.htm#fr_3921) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p50.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p51"></span> [Is. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3922"></span>[509:3923](2040412.htm#fr_3922) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p52"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3923"></span>[509:3924](2040412.htm#fr_3923) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p53"></span> [Phil. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3924"></span>[509:3925](2040412.htm#fr_3924) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p54"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p54.1"></span>[Luke xii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#040)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p54.3"></span>; [1 Cor. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p54.4"></span>; [Ephes. iv.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p54.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_3925"></span>[509:3926](2040412.htm#fr_3925) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p54.6"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p55"></span> Alluding to <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p55.1"></span>[Deut. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p55.3"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_3926"></span>[509:3927](2040412.htm#fr_3926) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57"></span> We should not have much difficulty
in fixing upon many of the phrases and expressions used by S. Athan.
towards the close of his Epistles, by referring to the concluding
sentences in the Paschal Letters of S. Cyril, who seems herein to have
closely imitated his illustrious predecessor in the Patriarchate. The
Syriac translator must frequently have had before him the following
expressions: <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.3"></span>ρχόμενοι τῆς ἁγίας
τεσσαρακοστῆς</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.4"></span>—</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.6"></span>πισυνάπτοντες</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.7"></span>—</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.8"></span>συνάπτοντες
ἐξῆς</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.9"></span>—</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.10"></span>περιλύοντες τὰς νηστείας</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.11"></span>—</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.12"></span>καταπαύοντες τὰς
νηστείας</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.13"></span>—</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.14"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.15"></span>σπέρᾳ βαθεί& 139· σαββάτου</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.16"></span>—</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.17"></span>τῇ ἐπιφωσκούσῃ
κυριακῇ</span>.

<span id="fn_3927"></span>[510:3928](2040412.htm#fr_3927) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p57.18"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p58"></span> [Ps. xlii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3928"></span>[510:3929](2040412.htm#fr_3928) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p60"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p60.1"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p60.3"></span>; [Is. lxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.i-p60.4"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: For 330. Easter-day xxiv Pharmuthi; xiii Kal. Mai; Æra Dioclet.
46; Coss. Gallicianus, Valerius Symmachus; Præfect, Magninianus; Indict.
iii.](2040413)
