[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040451)  [Next](2040453) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Letter LV</span>.—*Letter to Rufinianus.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p2"></span>To our lord, son, and most desired
fellow-minister Rufinianus <span id="fr_4664"></span>[4665](#fn_4664) .
Athanasius greeting in the Lord.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p4"></span>You write what is proper for a beloved
son to write to a father: accordingly, I embraced you when you came near
me in writing, most desired Rufinianus. And I, though I might write to
you as a son both in the opening and the middle and the close,
refrained, lest my commendation and testimony should be made known by
writing. For you are my letter, as it is written <span
id="fr_4665"></span>[4666](#fn_4665) , known and read in the heart. That
you then are in such case, believe, yea believe. I address you, and
invite you to write. For by doing so you afford me the highest
gratification. But since in an honourable and church-like spirit, such
as becomes your piety, you ask me about those who were drawn away by
necessity but not corrupted by error, and wish me to write what
resolution has been come to about them, whether in synods or elsewhere;
know, most desired Lord, that to begin with <span
id="fr_4666"></span>[4667](#fn_4666) , when violence was ceased, a
synod <span id="fr_4667"></span>[4668](#fn_4667) has been held, bishops
from foreign parts being present; while others have been held by our
fellow-ministers resident in Greece, as well as by those in Spain and
Gaul <span id="fr_4668"></span>[4669](#fn_4668) : and the same decision
was come to here and everywhere, namely, in the case of those who had
fallen and been leaders of impiety, to pardon them upon their
repentance, but not to give them the position of clergy: but in the case
of men not deliberate in impiety, but drawn away by necessity and
violence, that they should not only receive pardon, but should occupy
the position of clergy: the more so, in that they offered a plausible
defence, and what had happened seemed due to a certain special
purpose <span id="fr_4669"></span>[4670](#fn_4669) . For they assured us
that they had not gone over to impiety; but lest certain most impious
persons should be elected and ruin the Churches they elected rather to
acquiesce in the violence and to bear the burden, than to lose the
people. But in saying this, they appeared to us to say what was
plausible; for they alleged in excuse Aaron the brother of Moses, who in
the wilderness acquiesced in the people’s transgression; and that he had
had as his excuse the danger of the people returning to Egypt and
abiding in idolatry. For there was reason in the view, that if they
remained <span id="page_567">p. 567</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-Page_567"></span>in the wilderness they might cease
from their impiety: but if they went into Egypt they would become ruined
and increase the impiety in their midst. For this reason, then, they
have been allowed to rank as clergy, those who had been deceived and
suffered violence being pardoned. I give this information to your piety
in the confidence that you will both accept <span
id="fr_4670"></span>[4671](#fn_4670) what has been resolved upon, and
not charge those who assembled, as I have said, with remissness. But be
good enough to read it to the clergy and laity under you, that they may
be informed, and may not blame you for being thus minded about such
persons. For it would not be fitting for me to write, when your piety is
able to do so, and to announce our mind with regard to them, and carry
out all that remains to be done. Thanks to the Lord that filled
you <span id="fr_4671"></span>[4672](#fn_4671) with all utterance and
with all knowledge. Let then those that repent openly anathematise by
name the error of Eudoxius and Euzoius. For they blasphemed still, and
wrote that He was a creature, ringleaders of the Arian heresy. But let
them confess the faith confessed by the fathers at Nicæa, and that they
put no other synod before that one. Greet the brotherhood with you. That
with us greets you in the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4664"></span>[566:4665](2040452.htm#fr_4664) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p3"></span> This letter (Migne xxvi. 1180) deals
with one of the questions which occupied the council of 362 (*supr.* p.
481), and was probably written not long after, although the contents
furnish no precise terminus *ad quem.* The personality and see of
Rufinianus are uncertain. The latter must have been distant from
Alexandria: the Coptic documents call him ‘Rufinus the archbishop,’
which seems to place him outside Egypt. The mention of Eudoxius and
Euzoius *sub. fin.* possibly points to Syria. I suspect that he is the
‘Lucinianus’ associated with ‘Eusebius’ (of Vercellæ?) in the little
fragment (4) quoted in note 7 below, which comes from a letter of Ath.
dealing with the same subject. The Coptic ‘Acts’ of Revillout, p. 462
(as referred to *supr.* p. 188) give part of a letter of Rufinianus
himself, which shews that the correspondence of which our letter is the
principal relic bore on the Christological decision of the Council of
362: ‘Sound is the idea of perfection for the Divinity, as for the
Economy of the Manhood: Sound is the doctrine of the Divinity in a
single essence. Pure, and wholesome for the souls of the faithful, is
the Confession of the Holy Triad. Perfect then is the Economy of the
Manhood of the Saviour, and Perfect is His Soul also; nothing is lacking
to Him. It is thus that It was manifested to us.’

<span id="fn_4665"></span>[566:4666](2040452.htm#fr_4665) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p5"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#002)<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4666"></span>[566:4667](2040452.htm#fr_4666) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p6"></span> Immediately after the death of
Constantius.

<span id="fn_4667"></span>[566:4668](2040452.htm#fr_4667) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p7"></span> At Alexandria, <span
class="c10"><span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p7.2"></span>a.d.</span> 362, see
above p. 481.

<span id="fn_4668"></span>[566:4669](2040452.htm#fr_4668) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p7.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p8"></span> These unnamed councils are all
connected with the general return of the exiled orthodox bishops on
Julian’s accession. They are possibly the same as are referred to again
in the opening of the letter to Epict. below, p. 570.

<span id="fn_4669"></span>[566:4670](2040452.htm#fr_4669) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p9.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span>

<span id="fn_4670"></span>[567:4671](2040452.htm#fr_4670) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p10"></span> ‘Do you, then, who confess all this,
abstain, I pray, from condemning those who confess the same. But explain
the words they use, nor, ignoring the latter, repel their authors. Nay,
entreat and advise them, that they be willing to come to one mind.’ *ad
Eus. Lucin.,* &c., *supr.* note 1.

<span id="fn_4671"></span>[567:4672](2040452.htm#fr_4671) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p11"></span> [1 Cor. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.x-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Emperor Jovian.](2040453)
