[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040146)  [Next](2040148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.l"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.l-p1"></span> §50. *Impotence and rivalries of the
Sophists put to shame by the Death of Christ. His Resurrection
unparalleled even in Greek legend.*

<span id="vii.ii.l-p2"></span>Many before this Man have been kings and
tyrants of the world, many are on record who have been wise men and
magicians, among the Chaldæans and Egyptians and Indians; which of
these, I say, not after death, but while still alive, was ever able so
far to prevail as to fill the whole earth with his teaching and reform
so great a multitude from the superstition of idols, as our Saviour has
brought over from idols to Himself? 2. The philosophers of the Greeks
have composed many works with plausibility and verbal skill; what
result, then, have they exhibited so great as has the Cross of Christ?
For the refinements they taught were plausible enough till they died;
but even the influence they seemed to have <span id="page_64">p.
64</span> <span id="vii.ii.l-Page_64"></span>while alive was subject to
their mutual rivalries; and they were emulous, and declaimed against one
another. 3. But the Word of God, most strange fact, teaching in meaner
language, has cast into the shade the choice sophists; and while He has,
by drawing all to Himself, brought their schools to nought, He has
filled His own churches; and the marvellous thing is, that by going down
as man to death, He has brought to nought the sounding utterances of the
wise <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) concerning idols. 4. For
whose death ever drove out demons? or whose death did demons ever fear,
as they did that of Christ? For where the Saviour’s name is named, there
every demon is driven out. Or who has so rid men of the passions of the
natural man, that whoremongers are chaste, and murderers no longer hold
the sword, and those who were formerly mastered by cowardice play the
man? 5. And, in short, who persuaded men of barbarous countries and
heathen men in divers places to lay aside their madness, and to mind
peace, if it be not the Faith of Christ and the Sign of the Cross? Or
who else has given men such assurance of immortality, as has the Cross
of Christ, and the Resurrection of His Body? 6. For although the Greeks
have told all manner of false tales, yet they were not able to feign a
Resurrection of their idols,—for it never crossed their mind, whether it
be at all possible for the body again to exist after death. And here one
would most especially accept their testimony, inasmuch as by this
opinion they have exposed the weakness of their own idolatry, while
leaving the possibility open to Christ, so that hence also He might be
made known among all as Son of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_341"></span>[64:342](2040147.htm#fr_341) <span
id="vii.ii.l-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.l-p3"></span> *e.g.* Iamblichus, &c., cf. Introd. to
*c. Gent.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The new virtue of continence. Revolution of Society, purified and
pacified by Christianity.](2040148)
