[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040144)  [Next](2040146.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xlviii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xlviii-p1"></span> §48. *Further facts. Christian
continence of virgins and ascetics. Martyrs. The power of the Cross
against demons and magic. Christ by His Power shews Himself more than a
man, more than a magician, more than a spirit. For all these are totally
subject to Him. Therefore He is the Word of God.*

<span id="vii.ii.xlviii-p2"></span>Now these arguments of ours do not
amount merely to words, but have in actual experience a witness to their
truth. 2. For let him that will, go up and behold the proof of virtue in
the virgins of Christ and in the young men that practise holy
chastity <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md) , and the assurance of
immortality in so great a band of His martyrs. 3. And let him come who
would test by experience what we have now said, and in the very presence
of the deceit of demons and the imposture of oracles and the marvels of
magic, let him use the Sign of that Cross which is laughed at among
them, and he shall see how by its means demons fly, oracles cease, all
magic and witchcraft is brought to nought. 4. Who, then, and how great
is this Christ, <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="vii.ii.xlviii-Page_63"></span>Who by His own Name and Presence casts
into the shade and brings to nought all things on every side, and is
alone strong against all, and has filled the whole world with His
teaching? Let the Greeks tell us, who are pleased to laugh, and blush
not. 5. For if He is a man, how then has one man exceeded the power of
all whom even themselves bold to be gods, and convicted them by His own
power of being nothing? But if they call Him a magician, how can it be
that by a magician all magic is destroyed, instead of being confirmed?
For if He conquered particular magicians, or prevailed over one only, it
would be proper for them to hold that He excelled the rest by superior
skill; 6. but if His Cross has won the victory over absolutely all
magic, and over the very name of it, it must be plain that the Saviour
is not a magician, seeing that even those demons who are invoked by the
other magicians fly from Him as their Master. 7. Who He is, then, let
the Greeks tell us, whose only serious pursuit is jesting. Perhaps they
might say that He, too, was a demon, and hence His strength. But say
this as they will, they will have the laugh against them, for they can
once more be put to shame by our former proofs. For how is it possible
that He should be a demon who drives the demons out? 8. For if He simply
drove out particular demons, it might properly be held that by the chief
of demons He prevailed against the lesser, just as the Jews said to Him
when they wished to insult Him. But if, by His Name being named, all
madness of the demons is uprooted and chased away, it must be evident
that here, too, they are wrong, and that our Lord and Saviour Christ is
not, as they think, some demoniacal power. 9. Then, if the Saviour is
neither a man simply, nor a magician, nor some demon, but has by His own
Godhead brought to nought and cast into the shade both the doctrine
found in the poets and the delusion of the demons and the wisdom of the
Gentiles, it must be plain and will be owned by all, that this is the
true Son of God, even the Word and Wisdom and Power of the Father from
the beginning. For this is why His works also are no works of man, but
are recognised to be above man, and truly God’s works, both from the
facts in themselves, and from comparison with \[the rest of\] mankind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_340"></span>[62:341](2040145.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xlviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xlviii-p3"></span> Cf. *Hist. Arian.* 25, *Apol.
Const.* 33.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His Birth and Miracles. You call Asclepius, Heracles, and
Dionysus gods for their works. Contrast their works with His, and the
wonders at His death, &c.](2040146.md)
