[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040200)  [Next](2040202) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>.—*Two senses of the word
Son, 1. adoptive; 2. essential; attempts of Arians to find a third
meaning between these; e.g. that our Lord only was created immediately
by God (Asterius’s view), or that our Lord alone partakes the Father.
The second and true sense; God begets as He makes, really; though His
creation and generation are not like man’s; His generation independent
of time; generation implies an internal, and therefore an eternal, act
in God; explanation of* <span id="xiv.ii.iii-p1.2"></span>*[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p1.3"></span>*.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p2"></span>6. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>They</span> say then what the others held
and dared to maintain before them; “Not always <span id="page_154">p.
154</span> <span id="xiv.ii.iii-Page_154"></span>Father, not always Son;
for the Son was not before His generation, but, as others, came to be
from nothing; and in consequence God was not always Father of the Son;
but, when the Son came to be and was created, then was God called His
Father. For the Word is a creature and a work, and foreign and unlike
the Father in essence; and the Son is neither by nature the Father’s
true Word, nor His only and true Wisdom; but being a creature and one of
the works, He is improperly <span id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775)
called Word and Wisdom; for by the Word which is in God was He made, as
were all things. Wherefore the Son is not true God <span
id="fr_776"></span>[777](#fn_776) .”

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p5"></span>Now it may serve to make them understand
what they are saying, to ask them first this, what in fact a son is, and
of what is that name significant <span id="fr_777"></span>[778](#fn_777)
. In truth, Divine Scripture acquaints us with a double sense of this
word:—one which Moses sets before us in the Law, ‘When ye shall hearken
to the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep all His commandments which I
command thee this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the Lord
thy God, ye are children of the Lord your God <span
id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778) ;’ as also in the Gospel, John says,
‘But as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons
of God <span id="fr_779"></span>[780](#fn_779) :’—and the other sense,
that in which Isaac is son of Abraham, and Jacob of Isaac, and the
Patriarchs of Jacob. Now in which of these two senses do they understand
the Son of God that they relate such fables as the foregoing? for I feel
sure they will issue in the same irreligion with Eusebius and his
fellows.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p9"></span>If in the first, which belongs to those
who gain the name by grace from moral improvement, and receive power to
become sons of God (for this is what their predecessors said), then He
would seem to differ from us in nothing; no, nor would He be
Only-begotten, as having obtained the title of Son as others from His
virtue. For granting what they say, that, whereas His qualifications
were fore-known <span id="fr_780"></span>[781](#fn_780) , He therefore
received grace from the first, the name, and the glory of the name, from
His very first beginning, still there will be no difference between Him
and those who receive the name after their actions, so long as this is
the ground on which He as others has the character of son. For Adam too,
though he received grace from the first, and upon his creation was at
once placed in paradise, differed in no respect either from Enoch, who
was translated thither after some time from his birth on his pleasing
God, or from the Apostle, who likewise was caught up to Paradise after
his actions; nay, not from him who once was a thief, who on the ground
of his confession, received a promise that he should be forthwith in
paradise.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p11"></span>7. When thus pressed, they will perhaps
make an answer which has brought them into trouble many times already;
“We consider that the Son has this prerogative over others, and
therefore is called Only-begotten, because He alone was brought to be by
God alone, and all other things were created by God through the
Son <span id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781) .” Now I wonder who it
was <span id="fr_782"></span>[783](#fn_782) that suggested to you so
futile and novel an idea as that the Father alone wrought with His own
hand the Son alone, and that all other things were brought to be by the
Son as by an under-worker. If for the toil’s sake God was content with
making the Son only, instead of making all things at once, this is an
irreligious thought, especially in those who know the words of Esaias,
‘The everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth,
hungereth not, neither is weary; there is no searching of His
understanding <span id="fr_783"></span>[784](#fn_783) .’ Rather it is He
who gives strength to the hungry, and through His Word refreshes the
labouring <span id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784) . Again, it is
irreligious to suppose that He disdained, as if a humble task, to form
the creatures Himself which came after the Son; for there is no pride in
that God, who goes down with Jacob into Egypt, and for Abraham’s sake
corrects Abim<span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-Page_155"></span>elek because of Sara, and speaks face to
face with Moses, himself a man, and descends upon Mount Sinai, and by
His secret grace fights for the people against Amalek. However, you are
false even in this assertion, for ‘He made us, and not we
ourselves <span id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785) .’ He it is who
through His Word made all things small and great, and we may not divide
the creation, and says this is the Father’s, and this the Son’s, but
they are of one God, who uses His proper Word as a Hand <span
id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786) , and in Him does all things. This God
Himself shews us, when He says, ‘All these things hath My Hand
made <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787) ;’ while Paul taught us as
he had learned <span id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788) , that ‘There is
one God, from whom all things; and one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom
all things <span id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789) .’ Thus He, always as
now, speaks to the sun and it rises, and commands the clouds and it
rains upon one place; and where it does not rain, it is dried up. And He
bids the earth yield her fruits, and fashions Jeremias <span
id="fr_790"></span>[791](#fn_790) in the womb. But if He now does all
this, assuredly at the beginning also He did not disdain to make all
things Himself through the Word; for these are but parts of the whole.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p22"></span>8. But let us suppose that the other
creatures could not endure to be wrought by the absolute Hand of the
Unoriginate <span id="fr_791"></span>[792](#fn_791) and therefore the
Son alone was brought into being by the Father alone, and other things
by the Son as an underworker and assistant, for this is what Asterius
the sacrificer <span id="fr_792"></span>[793](#fn_792) has written, and
Arius has transcribed <span id="fr_793"></span>[794](#fn_793) and
bequeathed to his own friends, and from that time they use this form of
words, broken reed as it is, being ignorant, the bewildered men, how
brittle it is. For if it was impossible for things originate to bear the
hand of God, and you hold the Son to be one of their number, how was He
too equal to this formation by God alone? and if a Mediator became
necessary that things originate might come to be, and you hold the Son
to be originated, then must there have been some medium before Him, for
His creation; and that Mediator himself again being a creature, it
follows that he too needed another Mediator for his own constitution.
And though we were to devise another, we must first devise his Mediator,
so that we shall never come to an end. And thus a Mediator being ever in
request, never will the creation be constituted, because nothing
originate, as you say, can bear the absolute hand of the
Unoriginate <span id="fr_794"></span>[795](#fn_794) . And if, on your
perceiving the extravagance of this, you begin to say that the Son,
though a creature, was made capable of being made by the Unoriginate,
then it follows that other things also, though originated, are capable
of being wrought immediately by the Unoriginate; for the Son too is but
a creature in your judgment, as all of them. And accordingly the
origination of the Word is superfluous, according to your irreligious
and futile imagination, God being sufficient for the immediate formation
of all things, and all things originate being capable of sustaining His
absolute hand.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p27"></span>These irreligious men then having so
little mind amid their madness, let us see whether this particular
sophism be not even more irrational than the others. Adam was created
alone by God alone through the Word; yet no one would say that Adam had
any prerogative over other men, or was different from those who came
after him, granting that he alone was made and fashioned by God alone,
and we all spring from Adam, and consist according to succession of the
race, so long as he was fashioned from the earth as others, and at first
not being, afterwards came to be.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p28"></span>9. But though we were to allow some
prerogative to the Protoplast as having been deemed worthy of the hand
of God, still it must be one of honour not of nature. For he came of the
earth, as other men; and the hand which then fashioned Adam, is also
both now and ever fashioning and giving entire consistence to those who
come after him. And God Himself declares this to Jeremiah, as I said
before; ‘Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee <span
id="fr_795"></span>[796](#fn_795) ;’ and so He says of all, ‘All those
things hath My hand made <span id="fr_796"></span>[797](#fn_796) ;’ and
again by Isaiah, ‘Thus saith the Lord, thy redeemer, and He that formed
thee from the womb, I am the Lord that maketh all things; that
stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by
Myself <span id="fr_797"></span>[798](#fn_797) .’ And David, knowing
this, says in the Psalm, ‘Thy hands have made me and fashioned me <span
id="fr_798"></span>[799](#fn_798) ;’ and he who says in Isaiah, ‘Thus
saith the Lord who formed me from the womb to be His servant <span
id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799) ,’ signifies the same. Therefore, in
respect of nature, he differs nothing from us though he precede us in
time, so long as we all consist and are created by the same hand. If
then these be your thoughts, O Arians, about <span id="page_156">p.
156</span> <span id="xiv.ii.iii-Page_156"></span>the Son of God too,
that thus He subsists and came to be, then in your judgment He will
differ nothing on the score of nature from others, so long as He too was
not, and came to be, and the name was by grace united to Him in His
creation for His virtue’s sake. For He Himself is one of those, from
what you say, of whom the Spirit says in the Psalms, ‘He spake the word,
and they were made; He commanded, and they were created <span
id="fr_800"></span>[801](#fn_800) .’ If so, who was it by whom God gave
command <span id="fr_801"></span>[802](#fn_801) for the Son’s creation?
for a Word there must be by whom God gave command, and in whom the works
are created; but you have no other to shew than the Word you deny,
unless indeed you should devise again some new notion.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p36"></span>“Yes,” they will say, “we have
another;” (which indeed I formerly heard Eusebius and his fellows use),
“on this score do we consider that the Son of God has a prerogative over
others, and is called Only-begotten, because He alone partakes the
Father, and all other things partake the Son.” Thus they weary
themselves in changing and in varying their phrases like colours <span
id="fr_802"></span>[803](#fn_802) ; however, this shall not save them
from an exposure, as men that are of the earth, speaking vainly, and
wallowing in their own conceits as in mire.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p38"></span>10. For if He were called God’s Son,
and we the Son’s sons, their fiction were plausible; but if we too are
said to be sons of that God, of whom He is Son, then we too partake the
Father <span id="fr_803"></span>[804](#fn_803) , who says, ‘I have
begotten and exalted children <span id="fr_804"></span>[805](#fn_804) .’
For if we did not partake Him, He had not said, ‘I have begotten;’ but
if He Himself begat us, no other than He is our Father <span
id="fr_805"></span>[806](#fn_805) . And, as before, it matters not,
whether the Son has something more and was made first, but we something
less, and were made afterwards, as long as we all partake, and are
called sons, of the same Father <span id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806)
. For the more or less does not indicate a different nature; but
attaches to each according to the practice of virtue; and one is placed
over ten cities, another over five; and some sit on twelve thrones
judging the twelve tribes of Israel; and others hear the words, ‘Come,
ye blessed of My Father,’ and, ‘Well done, good and faithful
servant <span id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) .’ With such ideas,
however, no wonder they imagine that of such a Son God was not always
Father, and such a Son was not always in being, but was generated from
nothing as a creature, and was not before His generation; for such an
one is other than the True Son of God.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p44"></span>But to persist in such teaching does
not consist with piety <span id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) , for it
is rather the tone of thought of Sadducees and the Samosatene <span
id="fr_809"></span>[810](#fn_809) ; it remains then to say that the Son
of God is so called according to the other sense, in which Isaac was son
of Abraham; for what is naturally begotten from any one and does not
accrue to him from without, that in the nature of things is a son, and
that is what the name implies <span id="fr_810"></span>[811](#fn_810) .
Is then the Son’s generation one of human affection? (for this perhaps,
as their predecessors <span id="fr_811"></span>[812](#fn_811) , they too
will be ready to object in their ignorance;)—in no wise; for God is not
as man, nor men as God. Men were created of matter, and that passible;
but God is immaterial and incorporeal. And if so be the same terms are
used of God and man in divine Scripture, yet the clear-sighted, as Paul
enjoins, will study it, and thereby discriminate, and dispose of what is
written according to the nature of each subject, and avoid any confusion
of sense, so as neither to conceive of the things of God in a human way,
nor to ascribe the things of man to God <span
id="fr_812"></span>[813](#fn_812) . <span id="page_157">p. 157</span>
<span id="xiv.ii.iii-Page_157"></span>For this were to mix wine with
water <span id="fr_813"></span>[814](#fn_813) , and to place upon the
altar strange fire with that which is divine.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p51"></span>11. For God creates, and to create is
also ascribed to men; and God has being, and men are said to be, having
received from God this gift also. Yet does God create as men do? or is
His being as man’s being? Perish the thought; we understand the terms in
one sense of God, and in another of men. For God creates, in that He
calls what is not into being, needing nothing thereunto; but men work
some existing material, first praying, and so gaining the wit to make,
from that God who has framed all things by His proper Word. And again
men, being incapable of self-existence, are enclosed in place, and
consist in the Word of God; but God is self-existent, enclosing all
things, and enclosed by none; within all according to His own goodness
and power, yet without all in His proper nature <span
id="fr_814"></span>[815](#fn_814) . As then men create not as God
creates, as their being is not such as God’s being, so men’s generation
is in one way, and the Son is from the Father in another <span
id="fr_815"></span>[816](#fn_815) . For the offspring of men are
portions of their fathers, since the very nature of bodies is not
uncompounded, but in a state of flux <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816) , and composed of parts; and men lose
their substance in begetting, and again they gain substance from the
accession of food. And on this account men in their time become fathers
of many children; but God, being without parts, is Father of the Son
without partition or passion; for there is neither effluence <span
id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817) of the Immaterial, nor influx from
without, as among men; and being uncompounded in nature, He is Father of
One Only Son. This is why He is Only-begotten, and alone in the Father’s
bosom, and alone is acknowledged by the Father to be from Him, saying,
‘This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased <span
id="fr_818"></span>[819](#fn_818) .’ And He too is the Father’s Word,
from which may be understood the impassible and impartitive nature of
the Father, in that not even a human word is begotten with passion or
partition, much less the Word of God <span
id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819) . Wherefore also He sits, as Word, at
the Father’s right hand; for where the Father is, there also is His
Word; but we, as His works, stand in judgment before Him; and, while He
is adored, because He is Son of the adorable Father, we adore,
confessing Him Lord and God, because we are creatures and other than He.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p58"></span>12. The case being thus, let who will
among them consider the matter, so that one may abash them by the
following question; Is it right to say that what is God’s offspring and
proper to Him is out of nothing? or is it reasonable in the very idea,
that what is from God has accrued to Him, that a man should dare to say
that the Son is not always? For in this again the generation of the Son
exceeds and transcends the thoughts of man, that we become fathers of
our own children in time, since we ourselves first were not and then
came into being; but God, in that He ever is, is ever Father of the
Son <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820) . And the origination <span
id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span id="xiv.ii.iii-Page_158"></span>of
mankind is brought home to us from things that are parallel; but, since
‘no one knoweth the Son but the Father, and no one knoweth the Father
but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him <span
id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821) ,’ therefore the sacred writers to
whom the Son has revealed Him, have given us a certain image from things
visible, saying, ‘Who is the brightness of His glory, and the Expression
of His Person <span id="fr_822"></span>[823](#fn_822) ;’ and again, ‘For
with Thee is the well of life, and in Thy light shall we see light <span
id="fr_823"></span>[824](#fn_823) ;’ and when the Word chides Israel, He
says, ‘Thou hast forsaken the Fountain of wisdom <span
id="fr_824"></span>[825](#fn_824) ;’ and this Fountain it is which says,
‘They have forsaken Me the Fountain of living waters <span
id="fr_825"></span>[826](#fn_825) .’ And mean indeed and very dim is the
illustration <span id="fr_826"></span>[827](#fn_826) compared with what
we desiderate; but yet it is possible from it to understand something
above man’s nature, instead of thinking the Son’s generation to be on a
level with ours. For who can even imagine that the radiance of light
ever was not, so that he should dare to say that the Son was not always,
or that the Son was not before His generation? or who is capable of
separating the radiance from the sun, or to conceive of the fountain as
ever void of life, that he should madly say, ‘The Son is from nothing,’
who says, ‘I am the life <span id="fr_827"></span>[828](#fn_827) ,’ or
‘alien to the Father’s essence,’ who, says, ‘He that hath seen Me, hath
seen the Father <span id="fr_828"></span>[829](#fn_828) ?’ for the
sacred writers wishing us thus to understand, have given these
illustrations; and it is unseemly and most irreligious, when Scripture
contains such images, to form ideas concerning our Lord from others
which are neither in Scripture, nor have any religious bearing.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p68"></span>13. Therefore let them tell us, from
what teacher or by what tradition they derived these notions concerning
the Saviour? “We have read,” they will say, “in the Proverbs, ‘The Lord
created me a beginning of His ways unto His works <span
id="fr_829"></span>[830](#fn_829) ;’” this Eusebius and his fellows used
to insist on <span id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) , and you write me
word, that the present men also, though overthrown and confuted by an
abundance of arguments, still were putting about in every quarter this
passage, and saying that the Son was one of the creatures, and reckoning
Him with things originated. But they seem to me to have a wrong
understanding of this passage also; for it has a religious and very
orthodox sense, which had they understood, they would not have
blasphemed the Lord of glory. For on comparing what has been above
stated with this passage, they will find a great difference between
them <span id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) . For what man of right
understanding does not perceive, that what are created and made are
external to the maker; but the Son, as the foregoing argument has shewn,
exists not externally, but from the Father who begat Him? for man too
both builds a house and begets a son, and no one would reverse things,
and say that the house or the ship were begotten by the builder <span
id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) , but the son was created and made by
him; nor again that the house was an image of the maker, but the son
unlike him who begat him; but rather he will confess that the son is an
image of the father, but the house a work of art, unless his mind be
disordered, and he beside himself. Plainly, divine Scripture, which
knows better than any the nature of everything, says through Moses, of
the creatures, ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth <span id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833) ;’ but of the Son it
introduces not another, but the Father Himself saying, ‘I have begotten
Thee from the womb before the morning star <span
id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) ;’ and again, ‘Thou art My Son, this
day have I begotten Thee <span id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) .’ And
the Lord says of Himself in the Proverbs, ‘Before all the hills He
begets me <span id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) ;’ and concerning
things originated and created John speaks, ‘All things were made by
Him <span id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) ;’ but preaching of the
Lord, he says, ‘The Only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the
Father, He declared Him <span id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) .’ If
then son, therefore not creature; if creature, not son; for great is the
difference between them, and son and creature cannot be the same, unless
His essence be considered to be at once from God, and external to God.

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p79"></span>14. ‘Has then the passage no meaning?’
for this, like a swarm of gnats, they are droning about us <span
id="fr_839"></span>[840](#fn_839) . No surely, it is not without
meaning, but has a very apposite one; for it is true to say that the Son
was created too, but this took place when He became man; for creation
<span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-Page_159"></span>belongs to man. And any one may find
this sense duly given in the divine oracles, who, instead of accounting
their study a secondary matter, investigates the time and
characters <span id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) , and the object, and
thus studies and ponders what he reads. Now as to the season spoken of,
he will find for certain that, whereas the Lord always is, at length in
fulness of the ages He became man; and whereas He is Son of God, He
became Son of man also. And as to the object he will understand, that,
wishing to annul our death, He took on Himself a body from the Virgin
Mary; that by offering this unto the Father a sacrifice for all, He
might deliver us all, who by fear of death were all our life through
subject to bondage <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) . And as to
the character, it is indeed the Saviour’s, but is said of Him when He
took a body and said, ‘The Lord created me a beginning of His ways unto
His works <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) .’ For as it properly
belongs to God’s Son to be everlasting. and in the Father’s bosom, so on
His becoming man, the words befitted Him, ‘The Lord created me.’ For
then it is said of Him, as also that He hungered, and thirsted, and
asked where Lazarus lay, and suffered, and rose again <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) . And as, when we hear of Him as Lord
and God and true Light, we understand Him as being from the Father, so
on hearing, ‘The Lord created,’ and ‘Servant,’ and ‘He suffered,’ we
shall justly ascribe this, not to the Godhead, for it is irrelevant, but
we must interpret it by that flesh which He bore for our sakes: for to
it these things are proper, and this flesh was none other’s than the
Word’s. And if we wish to know the object attained by this, we shall
find it to be as follows: that the Word was made flesh in order to offer
up this body for all, and that we partaking of His Spirit, might be
deified <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) , a gift which we could
not otherwise have gained than by His clothing Himself in our created
body <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) , for hence we derive our
name of “men of God” and “men in Christ.” But as we, by receiving the
Spirit, do not lose our own proper substance, so the Lord, when made man
for us, and bearing a body, was no less God; for He was not lessened by
the envelopment of the body, but rather deified it and rendered it
immortal <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_775"></span>[154:776](2040201.htm#fr_775) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>καταχρηστικῶς</span>. This word is noticed
and protested against by Alexander, Socr. *Hist.* i. 6. p. 11 a. by the
Semiarians at Ancyra, Epiph. *Hær.* 73. n. 5. by Basil. *contr. Eunom.*
ii. 23. and by Cyril, *Dial.* ii. t. v. i. pp. 432, 3.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[154:777](2040201.htm#fr_776) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p4"></span> Vid. *Ep. Æg.* 12. *Orat.* i. §5. 6.
*de Synod*. 15, 16. Athanas. seems to have had in mind Socr. i. 6. p.
10, 11, or the like.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[154:778](2040201.htm#fr_777) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p6"></span> Vid. *Orat*. i. §38. The controversy
turned on the question what was meant by the word ‘Son.’ Though the
Arians would not allow with the Catholics that our Lord was Son *by
nature,* and maintained that the word implied *a beginning of
existence,* they did not dare to say that He was Son merely in the sense
in which we are sons, though, as Athan. contends, they necessarily
tended to this conclusion, directly they receded from the Catholic view.
Thus Arius said that He was a creature, ‘but not as one of the
creatures.’ *Orat.* ii. §19. Valens at Ariminum said the same, Jerom.
adv. *Lucifer*. 18. Hilary says, that not daring directly to deny that
He was God, the Arians merely asked ‘whether He was a Son.’ *de Trin.*
viii. 3. Athanasius remarks upon this reluctance to speak out,
challenging them to present ‘the heresy naked,’ *de Sent. Dionys.* 2.
*init*. ‘No one,’ he says elsewhere, ‘puts a light under a bushel; let
them shew the world their heresy naked.’ *Ep. Æg.* 18. vid. ibid. 10. In
like manner, Basil says that (though Arius was really like Eunomius, in
faith, *contr. Eunom.* i. 4) Aetius his master was the first to teach
openly (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p6.2"></span>φανερῶς</span>), that the Father’s substance
was unlike, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p6.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p6.5"></span>νόμοιος</span>, the Son’s. ibid. i. 1.
Epiphanius *Hær.* 76 p. 949. seems to say that the elder Arians held the
divine generation in a sense in which Aetius did not, that is, they were
not so consistent and definite as he. Athan. goes on to mention some of
the attempts of the Arians to find some theory short of orthodoxy, yet
short of that extreme heresy, on the other hand, which they felt ashamed
to avow.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[154:779](2040201.htm#fr_778) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p6.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p7"></span> <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>[Deut. xiii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#018)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p7.3"></span>;
xiv. 1.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[154:780](2040201.htm#fr_779) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p8"></span> [John. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[154:781](2040201.htm#fr_780) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p10"></span> Theod. *Hist.* i. 3.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[154:782](2040201.htm#fr_781) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p12"></span> This is celebrated as an explanation
of the Anomœans. vid. Basil. *contr. Eunom.* ii. 20, 21. though Athan.
speaks of it as belonging to the elder Arians. vid. Socr. *Hist.* i. 6.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[154:783](2040201.htm#fr_782) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p13"></span> i.e. what is your *authority?* is it
not a *novel,* and therefore a wrong doctrine? vid. infr. §13. *ad
Serap.* i. 3. Also *Orat.* i. §8. ‘Who ever *heard* such doctrine? or
*whence* or *from whom* did they hear it? who, *when they were under
catechising, spoke* thus to them? If they themselves confess that they
now hear it for the first time, they must grant that their heresy is
alien, and *not from the Fathers.*’ vid. ii. §34. and Socr. i. 6. p. 11
c.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[154:784](2040201.htm#fr_783) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p14"></span> [Is. xl.
28](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#028)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[154:785](2040201.htm#fr_784) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p15"></span> [Isa.
40.29](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#029)<span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="fn_785"></span>[155:786](2040201.htm#fr_785) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p16"></span> [Ps. c.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#000)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[155:787](2040201.htm#fr_786) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p17"></span> Vid. infr. §17 *Orat.* ii. §31. 71.
Irenæus calls the Son and Holy Spirit the Hands of God. *Hær.* iv.
*præf.* vid. also Hilar. *de Trin.* vii. 22. This image is in contrast
to that of *instrument,* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p17.2"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p17.3"></span>ργανον</span>, which the Arians would use
of the Son. vid. Socr. i. 6. p. 11, as implying He was external to God,
whereas the word Hand implies His consubstantiality with the Father.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[155:788](2040201.htm#fr_787) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p17.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p18"></span> [Is. lxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[155:789](2040201.htm#fr_788) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>μαθὼν ἐδίδασκεν</span>, implying the
traditional nature of the teaching. And so S. Paul himself, <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p19.3"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#003)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p19.5"></span>,
vid. for an illustration, supr. §5. init. also note 2.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[155:790](2040201.htm#fr_789) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p19.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p20"></span> <span id="xiv.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>[1
Cor. viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p20.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[155:791](2040201.htm#fr_790) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p21"></span> [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[155:792](2040201.htm#fr_791) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p23"></span> *Orat*. ii. §24. fin.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[155:793](2040201.htm#fr_792) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p24"></span> Vid. infr. 20. *Orat.* i. §31. ii.
§§24, 28. 37. 40. iii. §§2. 60. *de Synod* §§18. 19. \[Prolegg. ch. ii.
§3 (2) a.\]

<span id="fn_793"></span>[155:794](2040201.htm#fr_793) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p25"></span> Vid. also infr. §20. *de Synod.* §17.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[155:795](2040201.htm#fr_794) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p26"></span> Vid. infr. §24. *Orat.* i. §15. fin.
ii. §29. Epiph. *Hær.* 76. p. 951.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[155:796](2040201.htm#fr_795) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p29"></span> [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[155:797](2040201.htm#fr_796) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p30"></span> [Is. lxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[155:798](2040201.htm#fr_797) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p31"></span> [Isa.
44.24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024)<span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[155:799](2040201.htm#fr_798) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p32"></span> [Ps. cxix.
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#073)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[155:800](2040201.htm#fr_799) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p33"></span> [Is. xlix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[156:801](2040201.htm#fr_800) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p34"></span> <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p34.1"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p34.3"></span>
(LXX).

<span id="fn_801"></span>[156:802](2040201.htm#fr_801) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p34.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p35"></span> In like manner, ‘Men were made through
the Word, when the Father Himself *willed*.’ *Orat.* i. 63. ‘The Word
forms matter as injoined by, and ministering to, God.’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iii-p35.2"></span>προσταττόμενος καὶ
ὑπουργῶν</span>. ibid. ii. §22. *contr. Gent.* 46. vid. note on *Orat.*
ii. 22.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[156:803](2040201.htm#fr_802) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p37"></span> *ad Serap.* i. 3.

<span id="fn_803"></span>[156:804](2040201.htm#fr_803) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p39"></span> His argument is, that if the Son but
partook the Father in the sense in which we partake the Son, then the
Son would not impart to us the Father, but Himself, and would be a
separating as well as uniting medium between the Father and us; whereas
He brings us so near to the Father, that we are the Father’s children,
not His, and therefore He must be Himself one with the Father, or the
Father must be in Him with an incomprehensible completeness. vid. *de
Synod.* §51. *contr. Gent.* 46. fin. Hence S. Augustin says, ‘As the
Father has life in Himself, so hath He given also to the Son to have
life in Himself, *not by participating,* but in Himself. For we have not
life in ourselves, but in our God. But that Father, who has life in
Himself, begat a Son such, as to have life in Himself, not to become
partaker of life, but *to be Himself life; and of that life to make us
partakers.’* *Serm*. 127. *de Verb. Evang*. 9.

<span id="fn_804"></span>[156:805](2040201.htm#fr_804) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p40"></span> [Is. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_805"></span>[156:806](2040201.htm#fr_805) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p41"></span> ‘To say God is *wholly partaken,* is
the same as saying that *God begets.*’ *Orat.* i. §16. And in like
manner, our inferior participation involves such sonship as is
vouchsafed to us.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[156:807](2040201.htm#fr_806) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p42"></span> And so in *Orat.* ii. §19–22. ‘Though
the Son surpassed other things on a comparison, yet He were equally a
creature with them; for even in those things which are of a created
nature, we may find some things surpassing others. Star, for instance,
differs from star in glory, yet it does not follow that some are
sovereign, and others serve, &c.’ ii. §20. And so Gregory Nyssen *contr.
Eunom.* iii. p. 132 D. Epiph. *Hær.* 76. p. 970.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[156:808](2040201.htm#fr_807) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p43"></span> <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p43.1"></span>[Matt.
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#023),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p43.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[156:809](2040201.htm#fr_808) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p45"></span> i.e. since it is impossible they can
persist in evasions so manifest as these, nothing is left but to take
the other sense of the word.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[156:810](2040201.htm#fr_809) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p46"></span> Paul of Samosata \[see Prolegg. ch.
ii. §3 (2)a.\]

<span id="fn_810"></span>[156:811](2040201.htm#fr_810) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p47"></span> The force lies in the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iii-p47.2"></span>φύσει</span>,
‘naturally,’ which the Council expressed still more definitely by
‘essence.’ Thus Cyril says, ‘the term “Son” denotes the essential origin
from the Father.’ *Dial.* 5. p. 573. And Gregory Nyssen, ‘the title
“Son” does not simply express the being *from* another’ vid. infra.
§19.), but *relationship according to nature. contr. Eunom.* ii. p. 91.
Again S. Basil says, that Father is ‘a term of relationship,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iii-p47.4"></span>οἰκειώσεως</span>.
*contr. Eunom.* ii. 24. init. And hence he remarks, that we too are
properly, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p47.6"></span>κυρίως</span>, sons of God, as becoming
related to Him through works of the Spirit. ii. 23. So also Cyril, *loc.
cit.* Elsewhere S. Basil defines father ‘one who gives to another the
origin of being according to a nature like his own;’ and a son ‘one who
possesses the origin of being from another by generation,’ *contr. Eun.*
ii. 22. On the other hand, the Arians at the first denied that ‘by
nature there was any Son of God.’ Theod. *H. E.* i. 3. p. 732.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[156:812](2040201.htm#fr_811) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p47.8"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p48"></span> vid. Eusebius, in his *Letter, supr.*
p. 73 *sq.:* also Socr. *Hist.* i. 8. Epiphan. *Hær.* 69. n. 8 and 15.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[156:813](2040201.htm#fr_812) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p49"></span> One of the characteristic points in
Athanasius is his constant attention to the *sense* of doctrine, or the
*meaning* of writers, in preference to the words used. Thus he scarcely
uses the symbol <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p49.2"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p49.3"></span>μοούσιον</span>, one in substance,
throughout his *Orations,* and in the *de Synod.* acknowledges the
Semiarians as brethren. Hence infr. §18. he says, that orthodox doctrine
‘is revered by all though expressed in strange language, provided the
speaker means religiously, and wishes to convey by it a religious
sense.’ vid. also §21. He says, that Catholics are able to ‘speak
freely,’ or to expatiate, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p49.5"></span>παρρησιαζόμεθα</span>, ‘out of Divine
Scripture.’ *Orat.* i. §9. vid. *de Sent. Dionys.* §20. init. Again:
‘The devil spoke from Scripture, but was silenced by the Saviour; Paul
spoke from profane writers, yet, being a saint, he has a religious
meaning.’ *de Syn.* §39, also ad *Ep. Æg.* 8. Again, speaking of the
apparent contrariety between two Councils, ‘It were unseemly to make the
one conflict with the other, for all their members are fathers; and it
were profane to decide that these spoke well and those ill, for all of
them have slept in Christ.’ §43. also §47. Again: ‘Not the phrase, but
the meaning and the religious life, is the recommendation of the
faithful.’ ad *Ep. Æg.* §9.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[157:814](2040201.htm#fr_813) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p49.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p50"></span> vid. *Orat.* iii. §35, and [Isa. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p50.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[157:815](2040201.htm#fr_814) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p52"></span> Vid. also *Incarn.* §17. This contrast
is not commonly found in ecclesiastical writers, who are used to say
that God is present everywhere, in substance as well as by energy or
power. S. Clement, however, expresses himself still more strongly in the
same way, ‘In substance far off (for how can the originate come close to
the Unoriginate?), but most close in power, in which the universe is
embosomed.’ *Strom.* 2. *circ. init.* but the parenthesis explains his
meaning. Vid. Cyril. *Thesaur.* 6. p. 44. The common doctrine of the
Fathers is, that God is present everywhere in *substance.* Vid. Petav.
*de Deo,* iii. 8. and 9. It may be remarked, that S. Clement continues
‘*neither enclosing* nor enclosed.’

<span id="fn_815"></span>[157:816](2040201.htm#fr_815) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p53"></span> In Almighty God is the perfection and
first pattern of what is seen in shadow in human nature, according to
the imperfection of the subject matter; and this remark applies, as to
creation, so to generation. Athanasius is led to state this more
distinctly in another connection in *Orat.* i. §21. fin. ‘It belongs to
the Godhead alone, *that the Father is properly* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iii-p53.2"></span>κυρίως</span>) *Father,
and the Son properly* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p53.4"></span>κυρίως</span>) *Son;* and in Them and Them
only does it hold that the Father is ever Father, and the Son ever Son.’
Accordingly he proceeds, shortly afterwards, as in the text, to argue,
‘*For God does not make men His pattern,* but rather we men, for that
God *is properly* and alone truly Father of His own Son, are also called
fathers of our own children, for “of Him is every father-hood in heaven
and on earth named,”’ §23. The Semiarians at Ancyra quote the same text
for the same doctrine. Epiphan. *Hær.* 73. 5. As do Cyril in *Joan.* i.
p. 24. *Thesaur.* 32. p. 281. and Damascene *de Fid. Orth.* i. 8. The
same parallel, as existing between creation and generation is insisted
on by Isidor. Pel. *Ep.* iii. 355. Basil *contr. Eun.* iv. p. 280 A.,
Cyril *Thesaur.* 6. p. 43. Epiph. *Hær.* 69. 36. and Gregor. Naz.
*Orat.* 20. 9. who observes that God creates with a *word,* <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p53.6"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p53.8"></span>,
which evidently transcends human creations. Theodorus Abucara, with the
same object, draws out the parallel of life, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p53.10"></span>ζωὴ</span>, as Athan. that of being, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iii-p53.12"></span>εἶναι</span>. *Opusc.*
iii. p. 420–422.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[157:817](2040201.htm#fr_816) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p53.14"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p54"></span> Vid. *de Synod.* §51. *Orat.* i. §15,
16. ῥευστὴ. vid. *Orat.* i. §28. Bas. in *Eun.* ii. 23. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iii-p54.4"></span>ῥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iii-p54.5"></span>ύ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.iii-p54.6"></span>σιν</span>. Bas. in
*Eun.* ii. 6. Greg. Naz. *Orat.* 28, 22. Vid. *contr. Gentes,* §§41, 42;
where Athan. without reference to the Arian controversy, draws out the
contrast between the Godhead and human nature.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[157:818](2040201.htm#fr_817) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p54.8"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p55"></span> S. Cyril, *Dial.* iv. init. p. 505 E.
speaks of the θρυλλουμένη ἀποῤ& 191·οὴ, and disclaims it, *Thesaur.* 6.
p. 43. Athan. disclaims it, *Expos.* §1. *Orat.* i. §21. So does
Alexander, ap. Theod. *Hist.* i. 3. p. 743. On the other hand,
Athanasius quotes it in a passage which he adduces from Theognostus,
*infr.* §25. and from Dionysius, *de Sent. D.* §23. and Origen uses it,
*Periarchon,* i. 2. It is derived from <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p55.4"></span>[Wisd. vii.
25](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p55.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[157:819](2040201.htm#fr_818) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p55.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p56"></span> [Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[157:820](2040201.htm#fr_819) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p57"></span> The title ‘Word’ implies the ineffable
mode of the Son’s generation, as distinct from *material* parallels,
vid. Gregory Nyssen, *contr. Eunom.* iii. p. 107. Chrysostom in *Joan.
Hom.* 2. §4. Cyril Alex. *Thesaur.* 5. p. 37. Also it implies that there
is but *One* Son. vid. infr. §16. ‘As the Origin is one essence, so its
Word and Wisdom is one, essential and subsisting.’ *Orat.* iv. 1. fin.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[157:821](2040201.htm#fr_820) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p59"></span> ‘Man,’ says S. Cyril, ‘inasmuch as he
had a beginning of being, also has of necessity a beginning of
begetting, as what is from him is a thing generate, but.…if God’s
essence transcend time, or origin, or interval, His generation too will
transcend these; nor does it deprive the Divine Nature of the power of
generating, that it doth not this in time. For other than human is the
manner of divine generation; and together with God’s existing is His
generating implied, and the Son was in Him by generation, nor did His
generation precede His existence, but He was always, and that by
generation.’ *Thesaur.* v. p. 35.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[158:822](2040201.htm#fr_821) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p60"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[158:823](2040201.htm#fr_822) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p61"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[158:824](2040201.htm#fr_823) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p62"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[158:825](2040201.htm#fr_824) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p63"></span> [Bar. iii.
12](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#012)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[158:826](2040201.htm#fr_825) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p64"></span> [Jer. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p64.1"></span>.
Vid. *infr. passim.* All these titles, ‘Word, Wisdom, Light’ &c., serve
to guard the title ‘Son’ from any notions of parts or dimensions, e.g.
‘He is not composed of parts, but being impassible and single, He is
impassibly and indivisibly Father of the Son…for…the Word and Wisdom is
neither creature, nor part of Him Whose Word He is, nor an offspring
passibly begotten.’ *Orat.* i. §28.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[158:827](2040201.htm#fr_826) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p64.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p65"></span> *Ad Serap.* 20.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[158:828](2040201.htm#fr_827) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p66"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[158:829](2040201.htm#fr_828) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p67"></span> [John
14.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="fn_829"></span>[158:830](2040201.htm#fr_829) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p69"></span> <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p69.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p69.3"></span>,
and cf. *Orat.* ii. throughout.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[158:831](2040201.htm#fr_830) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p69.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p70"></span> Eusebius of Nicomedia quotes it in his
Letter to Paulinus, ap. Theodor. *Hist.* i. 5. And Eusebius of Cæsarea,
*Demonstr. Evang.* v. 1.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[158:832](2040201.htm#fr_831) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p71"></span> i.e. ‘Granting that the *primâ facie*
impression of this text is in favour of our Lord’s being a creature, yet
so many arguments have been already brought, and may be added, against
His creation, that we must interpret this text by them. It cannot mean
that our Lord was simply created, *because* we have already shewn that
He is not external to His Father.’

<span id="fn_832"></span>[158:833](2040201.htm#fr_832) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p72"></span> *Serap.* 2, 6. *Sent. Dion.* §4.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[158:834](2040201.htm#fr_833) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p73"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[158:835](2040201.htm#fr_834) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p74"></span> [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[158:836](2040201.htm#fr_835) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p75"></span> [Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[158:837](2040201.htm#fr_836) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p76"></span> <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p76.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p76.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[158:838](2040201.htm#fr_837) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p76.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p77"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[158:839](2040201.htm#fr_838) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p78"></span> [John
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="fn_839"></span>[158:840](2040201.htm#fr_839) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p80"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p80.1"></span>περιβομβοῦσιν</span>. So in *ad Afros.* 5.
init. And *Sent. D*. §19. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p80.3"></span>περιέρχονται περιβομβοῦντες</span>. And
Gregory Nyssen. *contr. Eun.* viii. p. 234 C. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p80.5"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p80.6"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p80.7"></span>ἂν τοὺς ἀπείρους ταῖς πλατωνικαῖς
καλλιφωνίαι περιβομβήσειεν</span>. vid. also <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p80.9"></span>περιέρχονται ὡς οἱ κάνθαροι</span>. *Orat.*
iii. fin.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[159:841](2040201.htm#fr_840) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p80.11"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p81"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p81.1"></span>πρόσωπα</span>. vid. *Orat.* i. §54. ii.
§8. *Sent. D.* 4. not *persons,* but *characters;* which must also be
considered the meaning of the word, *contr.* *Apoll.* ii. 2. and 10;
though it there approximates (even in phrase, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p81.3"></span>οὐκ ἐν διαιρέσεῖ προσώπων</span>) to its
ecclesiastical use, which seems to have been later. Yet persona occurs
in Tertull. *in Prax.* 27; it may be questioned, however, whether in any
genuine Greek treatise till the Apollinarians.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[159:842](2040201.htm#fr_841) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p81.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p82"></span> [Heb. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#015)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[159:843](2040201.htm#fr_842) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p83"></span> <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p83.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p83.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[159:844](2040201.htm#fr_843) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p83.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p84"></span> *Sent.* D. 9. *Orat.* 3, §§26–41.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[159:845](2040201.htm#fr_844) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p84.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p85"></span> \[See *de Incar*. §54. 3, and note.\]

<span id="fn_845"></span>[159:846](2040201.htm#fr_845) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p86"></span> *Orat.* 2, §70.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[159:847](2040201.htm#fr_846) <span
id="xiv.ii.iii-p86.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.iii-p87"></span> Cf. *Orat.* ii. 6. \[See also *de
Incar.* §17.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proof of the Catholic Sense of the Word Son. Power, Word or
Reason, and Wisdom, the names of the Son, imply eternity; as well as the
Father's title of Fountain. The Arians reply, that these do not formally
belong to the essence of the Son, but are names given Him; that God has
many words, powers, &c. Why there is but one Son and Word, &c. All the
titles of the Son coincide in Him.](2040202)
