[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040076)  [Next](2040078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p1"></span> §31. *Proof of the existence of the
rational soul. (1) Difference of man from the brutes. (2) Man’s power of
objective thought. Thought is to sense as the musician to his
instrument. The phenomena of dreams bear this out*.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p2"></span>Firstly, then, the rational nature of
the soul is strongly confirmed by its difference from irrational
creatures. For this is why common use gives them that name, because,
namely, the race of mankind is rational. 2. Secondly, it is no ordinary
proof, that man alone thinks of things external to himself, and reasons
about things not actually present, and exercises reflection, and chooses
by judgment the better of alternative reasonings. For the irrational
animals see only what is present, and are impelled solely by what meets
their eye, even if the consequences to them are injurious, while man is
not impelled toward what he sees merely, but judges by thought what he
sees with his eyes. Often for example his impulses are mastered by
reasoning; and his reasoning is subject to after-reflection. And every
one, if he be a friend of truth, perceives that the intelligence of
mankind is distinct from the bodily senses. 3. Hence, because it is
distinct, it acts as judge of the senses, and while they apprehend their
objects, the intelligence distinguishes, recollects, and shews them what
is best. For the sole function of the eye is to see, of the ears to
hear, of the mouth to taste, of the nostrils to apprehend smells, and of
the hands to touch. But what one ought to see and hear, what one ought
to touch, taste and smell, is a question beyond the senses, and
belonging to the soul and to the intelligence which resides in it. Why,
the hand is able to take hold of a sword-blade, and the mouth to taste
poison, but neither knows that these are injurious, unless the intellect
decide. 4. And the case, to look at it by aid of a simile, is like that
of a well-fashioned lyre in the hands of a skilled musician. For as the
strings of the lyre have each its proper note, high, low, or
intermediate, sharp or otherwise, yet their scale is indistinguishable
and their time not to be recognized, without the artist. For then only
is the scale manifest and the time right, when he that is holding the
lyre strikes the strings and touches each in tune. In like manner, the
senses being disposed in the body like a lyre, when the skilled
intelligence presides over them, then too the soul distinguishes and
knows what it is doing and how it is acting. 5. But this alone is
peculiar to mankind, and this is what is rational in the soul of
mankind, by means of which it differs from the brutes, and shews that it
is truly distinct from what is to be seen in the body. Often, for
example, when the body <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-Page_21"></span>is lying on the earth, man imagines and
contemplates what is in the heavens. Often when the body is quiet <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) , and at rest and asleep, man moves
inwardly, and beholds what is outside himself, travelling to other
countries, walking about, meeting his acquaintances, and often by these
means divining and forecasting the actions of the day. But to what can
this be due save to the rational soul, in which man thinks of and
perceives things beyond himself?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[21:147](2040077.htm#fr_146) <span
id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.ii-p3"></span> Cf. *Vit. Ant.* 34.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (3) The body cannot originate such phenomena; and in fact the
action of the rational soul is seen in its over-ruling the instincts of
the bodily organs.](2040078)
