[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040057)  [Next](2040059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.xiii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xiii-p1"></span> §13. *The folly of image worship and
its dishonour to art.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.xiii-p2"></span>Again, in worshipping things of wood
and stone, they do not see that, while they tread under foot and burn
what is in no way different, they call portions of these materials gods.
And what they made use of a little while ago, they carve and worship in
their folly, not seeing, nor at all considering that they are
worshipping, not gods, but the carver’s art. 2. For so long as the stone
is uncut and the wood unworked, they walk upon the one and make frequent
use of the other for their own purposes, even for those which are less
honourable. But when the artist has invested them with the proportions
of his own skill, and impressed upon the material the form of man or
woman, then, thanking the artist, they proceed to worship them as gods,
having bought them from the carver at a price. Often, moreover, the
image-maker, as though forgetting the work he has done himself, prays to
his own productions, and calls gods what just before he was paring and
chipping. 3. But it were better, if need to admire these things, to
ascribe it to the art of the skilled workman, and not to honour
productions in preference to their producer. For it is not the material
that has adorned the art, but the art that has adorned and deified the
material. Much juster were it, then, for them to worship the artist than
his productions, both because his existence was prior to that of the
gods produced by art, and because they have come into being in the form
he pleased to give them. But as it is, setting justice aside, and
dishonouring skill and art, they worship the products of skill and art,
and when the man is dead that made them, they honour his works as
immortal, whereas if they did not receive daily attention they would
certainly in time come to a natural end. 4. Or how could one fail to
pity them in this also, in that seeing, they worship them that cannot
see, and hearing, pray to them that cannot hear, and born with life and
reason, men as they are, call gods things which do not move at all, but
have not even life, and, strangest of all, in that they serve as their
masters beings whom they themselves keep under their own power? Nor
imagine that this is a mere statement of mine, nor that I am maligning
them; for the verification of all this meets the eyes, and whoever
wishes to do so may see the like.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Image worship condemned by Scripture.](2040059)
