[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040204)  [Next](2040206.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p1.2"></span>On the Arian Symbol “Unoriginate.”</span>
*This term afterwards adopted by them; and why; three senses of it. A
fourth sense. Unoriginate denotes God in contrast to His creatures, not
to His Son; Father the scriptural title instead; Conclusion.*

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p2"></span>28. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p2.1"></span>This</span> in fact was the reason, when the
unsound nature of their phrases had been exposed at that time, and they
were henceforth open to the charge of irreligion, that they proceeded to
borrow of the Greeks the term Unoriginate <span
id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945.md) , that, under shelter of it, they
might reckon among the things originated and the creatures, that Word of
God, by whom these very things came to be; so unblushing are they in
their irreligion, so obstinate in their blasphemies against the Lord. If
then this want of shame arises from ignorance of the term, they ought to
have learned of those who gave it them, and who have not scrupled to say
that even intellect, which they derive from Good, and the soul which
proceeds from intellect, though their respective origins be known, are
notwithstanding unoriginated, for they understand that by so saying they
do not disparage that first Origin of which the others come <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946.md) . This being the case, let them say
the like themselves, or else not speak at all of what they do not know.
But if they consider they are acquainted with the subject, then they
must be interrogated; for <span id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947.md) the
expression is not from divine Scripture <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948.md) , but they are contentious, as
elsewhere, for unscriptural positions. Just as I have related the reason
and sense, with which the Council and the Fathers before it defined and
published ‘of the essence,’ and ‘one in essence,’ agreeably to what
Scripture says of the Saviour; so now let them, if they can, answer on
their part what has led them to this unscriptural phrase, and in what
sense they call God Unoriginated? In truth, I am told <span
id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949.md) , that the name has <span
id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-Page_170"></span>different senses; philosophers say that
it means, first ‘what has not yet, but may, come to be;’ next, ‘what
neither exists, nor can come into being;’ and thirdly, ‘what exists
indeed, but was neither originated nor had origin of being, but is
everlasting and indestructible <span id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950.md)
.’ Now perhaps they will wish to pass over the first two senses, from
the absurdity which follows; for according to the first, things that
already have come to be, and things that are expected to come to be, are
unoriginated; and the second is more absurd still; accordingly they will
proceed to the third sense, and use the word in it; though here, in this
sense too, their irreligion will be quite as great. For if by
unoriginated they mean what has no origin of being, nor is originated or
created, but eternal, and say that the Word of God is contrary to this,
who comprehends not the craft of these foes of God? who but would
stone <span id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951.md) such madmen? for, when
they are ashamed to bring forward again those first phrases which they
fabled, and which were condemned, the wretches have taken another way to
signify them, by means of what they call unoriginate. For if the Son be
of things originate, it follows, that He too came to be from nothing;
and if He has an origin of being, then He was not before His generation;
and if He is not eternal, there was once when He was not <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952.md) .

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p11"></span>29. If these are their sentiments they
ought to signify their heterodoxy in their own phrases, and not to hide
their perverseness under the cloke of the Unoriginate. But instead of
this, the evil-minded men do all things with craftiness like their
father, the devil; for as he attempts to deceive in the guise of others,
so these have broached the term Unoriginate, that they might pretend to
speak piously of God, yet might cherish a concealed blasphemy against
the Lord, and under a veil might teach it to others. However, on the
detecting of this sophism, what remains to them? ‘We have found
another,’ say the evildoers; and then proceed to add to what they have
said already, that Unoriginate means what has no author of being, but
stands itself in this relation to things originated. Unthankful, and in
truth deaf to the Scriptures! who do everything, and say everything, not
to honour God, but to dishonour the Son, ignorant that he who dishonours
the Son, dishonours the Father. For first, even though they denote God
in this way, still the Word is not proved to be of things originated.
For again, as being an offspring of the essence of the Father, He is of
consequence with Him eternally. For this name of offspring does not
detract from the nature of the Word, nor does Unoriginated take its
sense from contrast with the Son, but with the things which come to be
through the Son; and as he who addresses an architect, and calls him
framer of house or city, does not under this designation allude to the
son who is begotten from him, but on account of the art and science
which he displays in his work, calls him artificer, signifying thereby
that he is not such as the things made by him, and while he knows the
nature of the builder, knows also that he whom he begets is other than
his works; and in regard to his son calls him father, but in regard to
his works, creator and maker; in like manner he who says in this sense
that God is unoriginate, names Him from His works, signifying, not only
that He is not originated, but that He is maker of things which are so;
yet is aware withal that the Word is other than the things originate,
and alone a proper offspring of the Father, through whom all things came
to be and consist <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953.md) .

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p13"></span>30. In like manner, when the Prophets
spoke of God as All-ruling, they did not so name Him, as if the Word
were included in that All; (for they knew that the Son was <span
id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span id="xiv.ii.vii-Page_171"></span>other
than things originated, and Sovereign over them Himself, according to
His likeness to the Father); but because He is Ruler over all things
which through the Son He has made, and has given the authority of all
things to the Son, and having given it, is Himself once more the Lord of
all things through the Word. Again, when they called God, Lord of the
powers <span id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954.md) , they said not this as
if the Word was one of those powers, but because while He is Father of
the Son, He is Lord of the powers which through the Son have come to be.
For again, the Word too, as being in the Father, is Lord of them all,
and Sovereign over all; for all things, whatsoever the Father hath, are
the Son’s. This then being the force of such titles, in like manner let
a man call God unoriginated, if it so please him; not however as if the
Word were of originated things, but because, as I said before, God not
only is not originated, but through His proper Word is He the maker of
things which are so. For though the Father be called such, still the
Word is the Father’s Image, and one in essence with Him; and being His
Image, He must be distinct from things originated, and from everything;
for whose Image He is, His property and likeness He hath: so that he who
calls the Father unoriginated and almighty, perceives in the
Unoriginated and the Almighty, His Word and His Wisdom, which is the
Son. But these wondrous men, and prompt for irreligion, hit upon the
term Unoriginated, not as caring for God’s honour, but from malevolence
towards the Saviour; for if they had regard to honour and reverent
language, it rather had been right and good to acknowledge and to call
God Father, than to give Him this name; for in calling God unoriginated,
they are, as I said before, calling Him from things which came to be,
and as a Maker only, that so they may imply the Word to be a work after
their own pleasure; but he who calls God Father, in Him withal signifies
His Son also, and cannot fail to know that, whereas there is a Son,
through this Son all things that came to be were created.

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p15"></span>31. Therefore it will be much more
accurate to denote God from the Son and to call Him Father, than to name
Him and call Him Unoriginated from His works only; for the latter term
refers to the works that have come to be at the will of God through the
Word, but the name of Father points out the proper offspring from His
essence. And whereas the Word surpasses things originated, by so much
and more also doth calling God Father surpass the calling Him
Unoriginated; for the latter is non-scriptural and suspicious, as it has
various senses; but the former is simple and scriptural, and more
accurate, and alone implies the Son. And ‘Unoriginated’ is a word of the
Greeks who know not the Son: but ‘Father’ has been acknowledged and
vouchsafed by our Lord; for He knowing Himself whose Son He was, said,
‘I in the Father and the Father in Me <span
id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955.md) ;’ and, ‘He that hath seen Me hath
seen the Father;’ and, ‘I and the Father are one <span
id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956.md) ;’ but nowhere is He found to call the
Father Unoriginated. Moreover, when He teaches us to pray, He says not,
‘When ye pray, say, O God Unoriginated,’ but rather, ‘When ye pray, say,
Our Father, which art in heaven <span id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957.md)
.’ And it was His Will, that the Summary of our faith should have the
same bearing. For He has bid us be baptized, not in the name of
Unoriginate and Originate, not into the name of Uncreate and Creature,
but into the name of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit <span
id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958.md) , for with such an initiation we too
are made sons verily <span id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959.md) , and using
the name of the Father, we acknowledge from that name <span
id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span id="xiv.ii.vii-Page_172"></span>the
Word in the Father. But if He wills that we should call His own Father
our Father, we must not on that account measure ourselves with the Son
according to nature, for it is because of the Son that the Father is so
called by us; for since the Word bore our body and came to be in us,
therefore by reason of the Word in us, is God called our Father. For the
Spirit of the Word in us names through us His own Father as ours, which
is the Apostle’s meaning when he says, ‘God hath sent forth the Spirit
of His Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father <span
id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960.md) .’

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p22"></span>32. But perhaps being refuted as
touching the term Unoriginate also, they will say according to their
evil nature, ‘It behoved, as regards our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ
also, to state from the Scriptures what is there written of Him, and not
to introduce non-scriptural expressions.’ Yes, it behoved, say I too;
for the tokens of truth are more exact as drawn from Scripture, than
from other sources <span id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961.md) ; but the ill
disposition and the versatile and crafty irreligion of Eusebius and his
fellows, compelled the Bishops, as I said before, to publish more
distinctly the terms which overthrew their irreligion; and what the
Council did write has already been shewn to have an orthodox sense,
while the Arians have been shewn to be corrupt in their phrases, and
evil in their dispositions. The term Unoriginate, having its own sense,
and admitting of a religious use, they nevertheless, according to their
own idea, and as they will, use for the dishonour of the Saviour, all
for the sake of contentiously maintaining, like giants <span
id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962.md) , their fight with God. But as they
did not escape condemnation when they adduced these former phrases, so
when they misconceive of the Unoriginated which in itself admits of
being used well and religiously, they were detected, being disgraced
before all, and their heresy everywhere proscribed. This then, as I
could, have I related, by way of explaining what was formerly done in
the Council; but I know that the contentious among Christ’s foes will
not be disposed to change even after hearing this, but will ever search
about for other pretences, and for others again after those. For as the
Prophet speaks, ‘If the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his
spots <span id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963.md) ’, then will they be
willing to think religiously, who have been instructed in irreligion.
Thou however, beloved, on receiving this, read it by thyself; and if
thou approvest of it, read it also to the brethren who happen to be
present, that they too on hearing it, may welcome the Council’s zeal for
the truth, and the exactness of its sense; and may condemn that of
Christ’s foes, the Arians, and the futile pretences, which for the sake
of their irreligious heresy they have been at the pains to frame among
themselves; because to God and the Father is due the glory, honour, and
worship with His co-existent Son and Word, together with the All-holy
and Life-giving Spirit, now and unto endless ages of ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_945"></span>[169:946](2040205.htm#fr_945.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p3.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p3.2"></span>γένητον</span>. Opportunity will occur for
noticing this celebrated word on *Orat.* i. 30–34. where the present
passage is partly rewritten, partly transcribed. Mention is also made of
it in the *De Syn.* 46, 47. Athanasius would seem to have been but
partially acquainted with the writings of the Anomœans, whose symbol it
was, and to have argued with them from the writings of the elder Arians,
who had also made use of it. \[On Newman’s unfortunate confusion of
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p3.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p3.5"></span>γένητον</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p3.7"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p3.8"></span>γέννητον</span>, see
Lightfoot, as quoted in the note on *Exp. Fid.* §1. Newman’s reasons are
stated in note 7 to *Orat.* i. 56.\]

<span id="fn_946"></span>[169:947](2040205.htm#fr_946.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p3.10"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p4"></span> Montfaucon quotes a passage from
Plato’s Phædrus, in which the human soul is called ‘unoriginate and
immortal \[246 a.\];’ but Athan. is referring to another subject, the
Platonic, or rather the Eclectic \[i.e. Neo-Platonic\] Trinity. Thus
Theodoret, ‘Plotinus, and Numenius, explaining the sense of Plato, say,
that he taught Three principles beyond time and eternal, Good,
Intellect, and the Soul of all,’ *de Affect.* *Cur.* ii. p. 750. And so
Plotinus himself, ‘It is as if one were to place Good as the centre,
Intellect like an immoveable circle round, and Soul a moveable circle,
and moveable by appetite.’ 4 *Ennead.* iv. c. 16. vid. Porphyry in
Cyril. *contr. Julian.* viii. t. ult. p. 271. vid. ibid. i. p. 32.
*Plot.* 3 *Ennead.* v. 2 and 3. Athan.’s testimony that the Platonists
considered their three <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p4.2"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p4.3"></span>ποστάσεις</span> all unoriginate is perhaps
a singular one. In 5 *Ennead.* iv. 1. Plotinus says what seems contrary
to it, <span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p4.5"></span>ἡ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p4.6"></span>δὲ ἀρχὴ
ἀγέννητος</span>, speaking of his <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p4.8"></span>τἀγαθόν</span>. Yet Plato, quoted by
Theodoret, ibid. p. 749, speaks of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p4.9"></span>εἴτε ἀρχὴν εἴτε ἀρχάς</span>.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[169:948](2040205.htm#fr_947.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p4.10"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p5.2"></span>πεὶ μάλισται, ὅτι μάλιστα</span>, *Orat.* 1.
§36. *de Syn.* §21. fin. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p5.4"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p5.5"></span>ταν μάλιστα</span>, *Apol. ad Const.* 23.
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p5.7"></span>καὶ
μάλιστα</span>, *de Syn.* §42, 54.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[169:949](2040205.htm#fr_948.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p5.9"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p6"></span> Cf. §18, n. 8.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[169:950](2040205.htm#fr_949.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p7"></span> And so *de Syn.* §46. ‘we have on
*careful inquiry* ascertained, &c.’ Again, ‘I have acquainted myself on
their account \[the Arians’\] with the meaning of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p7.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p7.3"></span>γένητον</span>.’ *Orat.*
i. §30. This is remarkable, for Athan. was a man of liberal education,
as his *Orat. contr. Gent.* and *de Incarn.* shew, especially, his
acquaintance with the Platonic philosophy. Sulpicius too speaks of him
as a jurisconsultus, Sacr. *Hist.* ii. 50. S. Gregory Naz. says, that he
gave some attention, but not much, to the subjects of general education,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p7.5"></span>τῶν
ἐγκυκλίων</span>, that he might not be altogether ignorant, of what he
nevertheless despised, *Orat.* 21. 6. In the same way S. Basil, whose
cultivation of mind none can doubt, speaks slightingly of his own
philosophical knowledge. He writes of his ‘neglecting his own weakness,
and being utterly unexercised in such disquisitions;’ *contr. Eunom.*
init. And so in *de Sp.* §5. he says, that ‘they who have given time’ to
vain philosophy, ‘divide causes into principal, cooperative,’ &c.
Elsewhere he speaks of having ‘expended much time on vanity, and wasted
nearly all his youth in the vain labour of pursuing the studies of that
wisdom which God has made foolishness,’ *Ep.* 223. 2. In truth,
Christianity has a philosophy of its own. Thus in the commencement of
his *Viæ Dux* Anastasius says, ‘It is a first point to be understood,
that the tradition of the Catholic Church does not proceed upon, or
follow, the philosophical definitions in all respects, and especially as
regards the mystery of Christ, and the doctrine of the Trinity, but a
certain rule of its own, evangelical and apostolical.’ p. 20.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[170:951](2040205.htm#fr_950.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p7.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p8"></span> Four senses of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p8.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p8.3"></span>γένητον</span> are
enumerated, *Orat.* i. §30. 1. What is not as yet, but is possible; 2.
what neither has been nor can be; 3. what exists, but has not come to be
from any cause; 4. what is not made, but is ever. Only two senses are
specified in the *de Syn.* §46. and in these the question really lies;
1. what is, but without a cause; 2. uncreate.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[170:952](2040205.htm#fr_951.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p8.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p9.1"></span>Βαλλέσθωσαν παρὰ πάντων</span>, *Orat.* ii.
§28. An apparent allusion to the punishment of blasphemy and idolatry
under the Jewish Law. vid. \[[Exod.
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013.md), [Exod.
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017.md)<span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p9.3"></span>[Ex. xix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013.md)<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p9.5"></span>.
and\] reference to [Ex. xxi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017.md)<span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p9.6"></span>, in §27, note 2. Thus, e.g. Nazianzen:
‘While I go up the mount with good heart, that I may become within the
cloud, and may hold converse with God, for so God bids; if there be any
Aaron, let him go up with me and stand near. And if there be any Nadab
or Abihu, or of the elders, let him go up, but stand far off, according
to the measure of his purification.…But if any one is an evil and savage
beast, and quite incapable of science and theology; let him stand off
still further, and depart from the mount: *or he will be stoned* and
crushed; for the wicked shall be miserably destroyed. For as stones for
the bestial are true words and strong. Whether he be leopard, let him
die spots and all,’ &c. &c. *Orat.* 28. 2.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[170:953](2040205.htm#fr_952.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p9.8"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p10"></span> The Arians argued that the word
*unoriginate* implied *originate* or *creature* as its correlative, and
therefore indirectly signified *Creator;* so that the Son being not
unoriginate, was not the Creator. Athan. answers, that in the use of the
word, whether there be a Son does not come into the question. As the
idea of Father and Son does not include creation, so that of creator and
creature does not include generation; and it would be as illogical to
infer that there are no creatures because there is a Son as that there
is no Son because there are creatures.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[170:954](2040205.htm#fr_953.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p12"></span> The whole of this passage is repeated
in *Orat.* i. 32. &c. vid. for this particular argument, Basil also,
*contr. Eunom.* i. 16.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[171:955](2040205.htm#fr_954.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p14"></span> i.e. of hosts.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[171:956](2040205.htm#fr_955.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p16"></span> <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p16.1"></span>[John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p16.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[171:957](2040205.htm#fr_956.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p17"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[171:958](2040205.htm#fr_957.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p18"></span> [Matt. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009.md)<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[171:959](2040205.htm#fr_958.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p19"></span> And so S. Basil, ‘Our faith was not in
Framer and Work, but in Father and Son were we sealed through the grace
in baptism.’ *contr. Eunom.* ii. 22. And a somewhat similar passage
occurs *Orat.* ii. §41.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[171:960](2040205.htm#fr_959.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.1"></span>υἱοποιούμεθα ἀληθῶς</span>. This strong
term ‘truly’ or ‘verily’ seems taken from such passages as speak of the
‘grace and truth’ of the Gospel, [John i.
12-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012.md)<span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.3"></span>. Again S. Basil says, that we are sons,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.5"></span>κυρίως</span>,
‘properly,’ and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.7"></span>πρώτως</span> ‘primarily,’ in opposition to
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.8"></span>τροπικῶς</span>,
‘figuratively,’ *contr. Eunom.* ii. 23. S. Cyril too says, that we are
sons ‘naturally’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.10"></span>φυσικῶς</span> as well as <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.11"></span>κατὰ χάριν</span>,
vid. Suicer *Thesaur.* v. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.13"></span>υἱ& 231·ς</span>. i. 3. Of these words,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.14"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.15"></span>ληθῶς, φυσικῶς,
κυρίως</span>, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.17"></span>πρώτως</span>, the first two are commonly
reserved for our Lord; e.g. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.19"></span>τὸν ἀληθῶς υἱ& 232·ν</span>, *Orat.* ii.
§37. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.21"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.22"></span>μεῖς υἱοὶ, οὐκ ὡς ἐκεῖνος φύσει καὶ
ἀληθεία</span>, iii. §19. Hilary seems to deny us the title of ‘proper’
sons; *de Trin.* xii. 15; but his ‘proprium’ is a translation of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.24"></span>ἴ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.25"></span>διον</span>, not <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.26"></span>κυρίως</span>. And
when Justin says of Christ <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.28"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.29"></span>μόνος λεγόμενος κυρίως υἱ& 232·ς</span>,
*Apol.* ii. 6. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.31"></span>κυρίως</span> seems to be used in
reference to the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.32"></span>κύριος</span>, Lord, which he has just
been using, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.34"></span>κυριολογεῖν</span> being sometimes used by
him as others in the sense of ‘naming as Lord,’ like <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.36"></span>θεολογεῖν</span>. vid.
*Tryph.* 56. There is a passage in Justin’s *ad Græc.* 21. where he (or
the writer) when speaking of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.38"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.39"></span>γώ εἰμι ὁ ὣν</span>, uses the word in the
same ambiguous sense; <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.41"></span>οὐδὲν γὰρ ὄνομα ἐπὶ θεοῦ κυριολογεῖσθαι
δυνατὸν</span>, 21; as if <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.43"></span>κύριος</span>, the Lord, by which ‘I am’
is translated, were a sort of symbol of that proper name of God which
cannot be given. But to return; the true doctrine then is, that, whereas
there is a primary and secondary sense in which the word Son is used,
primary when it has its formal meaning of continuation of nature, and
secondary when it is used nominally, or for an external resemblance to
the first meaning, it is applied to the regenerate, not in the secondary
sense, but in the primary. S. Basil and S. Gregory Nyssen consider Son
to be ‘a term of *relationship* according to *nature*’ (vid. supr. §10,
note 1.), also Basil *in Psalm* xxviii. 1. The actual presence of the
Holy Spirit in the regenerate in *substance* (vid. Cyril, *Dial.* 7. p.
638.) constitutes this relationship of nature; and hence after the words
quoted from S. Cyril in the beginning of the note, in which he says,
that we are sons, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.45"></span>φυσικῶς</span>, he proceeds, ‘naturally,
because *we are in Him,* and in Him alone.’ vid. Athan.’s words which
follow in the text at the end of §31. And hence Nyssen lays down, as a
received truth, that ‘to none does the term “proper,” <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.47"></span>κυριώτατον</span>,
apply, but to one in whom the name responds with truth to the nature,’
*contr. Eunom.* iii. p. 123. And he also implies, p. 117, the intimate
association of our sonship with Christ’s, when he connects together
regeneration with our Lord’s eternal generation, neither being <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.49"></span>διὰ πάθους</span>, or,
of the will of the flesh. If it be asked, what the *distinctive* words
are which are incommunicably the Son’s, since so much is man’s, it is
obvious to answer, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.51"></span>ἴ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.52"></span>διος υἱ& 232·ς</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.53"></span>μονογενὴς</span>,
which are in Scripture, and the symbols ‘of the essence,’ and ‘one in
essence,’ of the Council; and this is the value of the Council’s
phrases, that, while they guard the Son’s divinity, they allow full
scope, without risk of entrenching on it, to the Catholic doctrine of
the fulness of the Christian privileges. vid. supr. §19, note.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[172:961](2040205.htm#fr_960.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p20.55"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p21"></span> [Gal. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006.md)<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[172:962](2040205.htm#fr_961.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p23"></span> Cf. *contr. Gent.* init. *Incarn.* 57.
*ad Ep. Æg.* 4. *Vit. Ant.* 16. And *passim* in Athan.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[172:963](2040205.htm#fr_962.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p24"></span> And so, *Orat.* ii. §32, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.vii-p24.2"></span>κατὰ τοὺς μυθευομένους
γίγαντας</span>. And so Nazianzen, *Orat.* 43. 26. speaking of the
disorderly Bishops during the Arian ascendancy. Also Socr. v. 10.
Sometimes the Scripture giants are spoken of, sometimes the
mythological.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[172:964](2040205.htm#fr_963.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.vii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p25"></span> [Jer. xiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023.md)<span id="xiv.ii.vii-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Defence of Dionysius. (De Sententia Dionysii.)](2040206.md)
