[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040388)  [Next](2040390) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p1"></span> *§§26–36. That the Son is the
Co-existing Word, argued from the New Testament. Texts from the Old
Testament continued; especially* <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p1.1"></span>*[Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p1.2"></span>.
Besides, the Word in Old Testament may be Son in New, as Spirit in Old
Testament is Paraclete in New. Objection from* <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p1.3"></span>*[Acts x.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p1.4"></span>; answered by parallels, such as* <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p1.5"></span>*[1 Cor. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005)<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p1.6"></span>.
[Lev. ix. 7](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p1.7"></span>. &c. Necessity of the Word’s taking
flesh, viz. to sanctify, yet without destroying, the flesh.*

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p2"></span>26. But that the Son has no beginning
of being, but before He was made man was ever with the Father, John
makes clear in his first Epistle, writing thus: ‘That which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which
we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life; and
the Life was manifested, and we have seen it; and we bear witness and
declare unto you that Eternal Life, which was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us <span id="fr_3386"></span>[3387](#fn_3386) .’ While
he says here that ‘the Life,’ not ‘became,’ but ‘was with the Father,’
in the end of his Epistle he says the Son is the Life, writing, ‘And we
are in Him that is True, even in His Son, Jesus Christ; this is the True
God and Eternal Life <span id="fr_3387"></span>[3388](#fn_3387) .’ But
if the Son is the Life, and the Life was with the Father, and if the Son
was with the Father, and the same Evangelist says, ‘And the Word was
with God <span id="fr_3388"></span>[3389](#fn_3388) ,’ the Son must be
the Word, which is ever with the Father. And as the ‘Son’ is ‘Word,’ so
‘God’ must be ‘the Father.’ Moreover, the Son, according to John, is not
merely ‘God’ but ‘True God;’ for according to the same Evangelist, ‘And
the Word was God;’ and the Son said, ‘I am the Life <span
id="fr_3389"></span>[3390](#fn_3389) .’ Therefore the Son is the Word
and Life which is with the Father. And again, what is said in the same
John, ‘The Only-begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father <span
id="fr_3390"></span>[3391](#fn_3390) ,’ shews that the Son was ever. For
whom John calls Son, Him David mentions in the Psalm as God’s Hand <span
id="fr_3391"></span>[3392](#fn_3391) , saying, ‘Why stretchest Thou not
forth Thy Right Hand out of Thy bosom <span
id="fr_3392"></span>[3393](#fn_3392) ?’ Therefore if the Hand is in
<span id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-Page_444"></span>the bosom, and the Son in the bosom,
the Son will be the Hand, and the Hand will be the Son, through whom the
Father made all things; for it is written, ‘Thy Hand made all these
things,’ and ‘He led out His people with His Hand <span
id="fr_3393"></span>[3394](#fn_3393) ;’ therefore through the Son. And
if ‘this is the changing of the Right Hand of the Most Highest,’ and
again, ‘Unto the end, concerning the things that shall be changed, a
song for My Well-beloved <span id="fr_3394"></span>[3395](#fn_3394) ;’
the Well-beloved then is the Hand that was changed; concerning whom the
Divine Voice also says, ‘This is My Beloved Son.’ This ‘My Hand’ then is
equivalent to ‘This My Son.’

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p12"></span>27. But since there are
ill-instructed men who, while resisting the doctrine of a Son, think
little of the words, ‘From the womb before the morning star I begat
Thee <span id="fr_3395"></span>[3396](#fn_3395) ;’ as if this referred
to His relation to Mary, alleging that He was born of Mary ‘before the
morning star,’ for that to say ‘womb’ could not refer to His relation
towards God, we must say a few words here. If then, because the ‘womb’
is human, therefore it is foreign to God, plainly ‘heart’ too has a
human meaning <span id="fr_3396"></span>[3397](#fn_3396) , for that
which has heart has womb also. Since then both are human, we must deny
both, or seek to explain both. Now as a word is from the heart, so is an
offspring from the womb; and as when the heart of God is spoken of, we
do not conceive of it as human, so if Scripture says ‘from the womb,’ we
must not take it in a corporeal sense. For it is usual with divine
Scripture to speak and signify in the way of man what is above man. Thus
speaking of the creation it says, ‘Thy hands made me and fashioned me,’
and, ‘Thy hand made all these things,’ and, ‘He commanded and they were
created <span id="fr_3397"></span>[3398](#fn_3397) .’ Suitable then is
its language about everything; attributing to the Son ‘propriety’ and
‘genuineness,’ and to the creation ‘the beginning of being.’ For the one
God makes and creates; but Him He begets from Himself, Word or Wisdom.
Now ‘womb’ and ‘heart’ plainly declare the proper and the genuine; for
we too have this from the womb; but our works we make by the hand.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p16"></span>28. What means then, say they,
‘Before the morning star?’ I would answer, that if ‘Before the morning
star’ shews that His birth from Mary was wonderful, many others besides
have been born before the rising of the star. What then is said so
wonderful in His instance, that He should record it as some choice
prerogative <span id="fr_3398"></span>[3399](#fn_3398) , when it is
common to many? Next, to beget differs from bringing forth; for
begetting involves the primary foundation, but to bring forth is nothing
else than the production of what exists. If then the term belongs to the
body, let it be observed that He did not then receive a beginning of
coming to be when he was evangelized to the shepherds by night, but when
the Angel spoke to the Virgin. And that was not night, for this is not
said; on the contrary, it was night when He issued from the womb. This
difference Scripture makes, and says on the one hand that He was
begotten before the morning star, and on the other speaks of His
proceeding from the womb, as in the twenty-first Psalm, ‘Thou art he
that drew Me from the womb <span id="fr_3399"></span>[3400](#fn_3399) .’
Besides, He did not say, ‘before the rising of the morning star,’ but
simply ‘before the morning star.’ If then the phrase must be taken of
the body, then either the body must be before Adam, for the stars were
before Adam, or we have to investigate the sense of the letter. And this
John enables us to do, who says in the Apocalypse, ‘I am Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end. Blessed are
they who make broad their robes, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. For without are
dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and
whosoever maketh and loveth a lie. I Jesus have sent My Angel, to
testify these things in the Churches. I am the Root and the Offspring of
David, the Bright and Morning Star. And the Spirit and the Bride say,
Come; and let him that heareth say, Come; and let him that is athirst,
Come; and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely <span
id="fr_3400"></span>[3401](#fn_3400) .’ If then ‘the Offspring of David’
be the ‘Bright and Morning Star,’ it is plain that the flesh of the
Saviour is called ‘the Morning Star,’ which the Offspring from God
preceded; so that the sense of the Psalm is this, ‘I have begotten Thee
from Myself before Thy appearance in the flesh;’ for ‘before the Morning
Star’ is equivalent to ‘before the Incarnation of the Word.’

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p20"></span>29. Thus in the Old also, statements
are plainly made concerning the Son; at the same time it is superfluous
to argue the point; for if what is not stated in the Old is of later
date, let them who are thus disputatious, say where in the Old is
mention made of the Spirit, the Paraclete? for of the Holy Spirit there
is mention, but nowhere of the Paraclete. Is then the Holy Spirit one,
and the Paraclete another, and the Paraclete the later, as not mentioned
in the Old? but far be it to say that the Spirit is later, or to <span
id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-Page_445"></span>distinguish the Holy Ghost as one and
the Paraclete as another; for the Spirit is one and the same, then and
now hallowing and comforting those who are His recipients; as one and
the same Word and Son led even then to adoption of sons those who were
worthy <span id="fr_3401"></span>[3402](#fn_3401) . For sons under the
Old were made such through no other than the Son. For unless even before
Mary there were a Son who was of God, how is He before all, when they
are sons before Him? and how also ‘First-born,’ if He comes second after
many? But neither is the Paraclete second, for He was before all, nor
the Son later; for ‘in the beginning was the Word <span
id="fr_3402"></span>[3403](#fn_3402) .’ And as the Spirit and Paraclete
are the same, so the Son and Word are the same; and as the Saviour says
concerning the Spirit, ‘But the Paraclete which is the Holy Ghost, whom
the Father will send in My Name <span
id="fr_3403"></span>[3404](#fn_3403) ,’ speaking of One and Same, and
not distinguishing, so John describes similarly when he says, ‘And the
Word became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory, glory as
of one Only-begotten from the Father <span
id="fr_3404"></span>[3405](#fn_3404) .’ For here too he does not
distinguish but witnesses the identity. And as the Paraclete is not one
and the Holy Ghost another, but one and the same, so Word is not one,
and Son another, but the Word is Only-Begotten; for He says not the
glory of the flesh itself, but of the Word. He then who dares
distinguish between Word and Son, let him distinguish between Spirit and
Paraclete; but if the Spirit cannot be distinguished, so neither can the
Word, being also Son and Wisdom and Power. Moreover, the word
‘Well-beloved’ even the Greeks who are skilful in phrases know to be
equivalent with ‘Only-begotten.’ For Homer speaks thus of Telemachus,
who was the only-begotten of Ulysses, in the second book of the Odyssey:

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p25"></span>O’er the wide earth, dear youth, why
seek to run,

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p26"></span>An only child, a well-beloved <span
id="fr_3405"></span>[3406](#fn_3405) son?

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p28"></span>He whom you mourn, divine Ulysses,
fell

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p29"></span>Far from his country, where the
strangers dwell.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p30"></span>Therefore he who is the only son of
his father is called well-beloved.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p31"></span>30. Some of the followers of the
Samosatene, distinguishing the Word from the Son, pretend that the Son
is Christ, and the Word another; and they ground this upon Peter’s words
in the Acts, which he spoke well, but they explain badly <span
id="fr_3406"></span>[3407](#fn_3406) . It is this: ‘The Word He sent to
the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ; this is Lord of
all <span id="fr_3407"></span>[3408](#fn_3407) .’ For they say that
since the Word spoke through Christ, as in the instance of the Prophets,
‘Thus saith the Lord,’ the prophet was one and the Lord another. But to
this it is parallel to oppose the words in the first to the Corinthians,
‘waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall also
confirm you unto the end unblameable in the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ <span id="fr_3408"></span>[3409](#fn_3408) .’ For as one Christ
does not confirm the day of another Christ, but He Himself confirms in
His own day those who wait for Him, so the Father sent the Word made
flesh, that being made man He might preach by means of Himself. And
therefore he straightway adds, ‘This is Lord of all;’ but Lord of all is
the Word.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p35"></span>31. ‘And Moses said unto Aaron, Go
unto the altar and offer thy sin-offering, and thy burnt-offering, and
make an atonement for thyself and for the people; and offer the offering
of the people, and make an atonement for them, as the Lord commanded
Moses <span id="fr_3409"></span>[3410](#fn_3409) .’ See now here, though
Moses be one, Moses himself speaks as if about another Moses, ‘as the
Lord commanded Moses.’ In like manner then, if the blessed Peter speak
of the Divine Word also, as sent to the children of Israel by Jesus
Christ, it is not necessary to understand that the Word is one and
Christ another, but that they were one and the same by reason of the
uniting which took place in His divine and loving condescension and
becoming man. And even if He be considered in two ways <span
id="fr_3410"></span>[3411](#fn_3410) , still it is without any division
of the Word, as when the inspired John says, ‘And the Word became flesh,
and dwelt among us <span id="fr_3411"></span>[3412](#fn_3411) .’ What
then is said well and rightly <span id="fr_3412"></span>[3413](#fn_3412)
by the blessed Peter, the followers of the Samosatene, understanding
badly and wrongly, stand not in the truth. For Christ is understood in
both ways in Divine Scripture, as when it says Christ ‘God’s power and
God’s wisdom <span id="fr_3413"></span>[3414](#fn_3413) .’ If then Peter
says that the Word was sent through Jesus Christ unto the children of
Israel, let him be understood to mean, that the Word incarnate has
appeared to the children of Israel, so that it may correspond to ‘And
the Word became flesh.’ But if they understand it otherwise, and, while
confessing the Word to be divine, as He is, separate from Him the Man
that He has taken, with which also we believe that He is made one,
saying that He has been sent through Jesus Christ, they are, without
knowing it, contradicting themselves. For those who in this place
separate the divine Word from the divine Incarnation, have, it seems, a
degraded notion of the doctrine of His having become flesh, and
entertain Gentile thoughts, as they do, conceiving that the divine
Incarnation is an alteration of the Word. But it is not so; perish the
thought.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p41"></span>32. For in the same way that John
here preaches that incomprehensible union. ‘the <span id="page_446">p.
446</span> <span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-Page_446"></span>mortal being
swallowed up of life <span id="fr_3414"></span>[3415](#fn_3414) ,’ nay,
of Him who is Very Life (as the Lord said to Martha, ‘I am the
Life <span id="fr_3415"></span>[3416](#fn_3415) ’), so when the blessed
Peter says that through Jesus Christ the Word was sent, he implies the
divine union also. For as when a man heard ‘The Word became flesh,’ he
would not think that the Word ceased to be, which is absurd, as has been
said before, so also hearing of the Word which has been united to the
flesh, let him understand the divine mystery one and simple. More
clearly however and indisputably than all reasoning does what was said
by the Archangel to the Bearer of God herself, shew the oneness of the
Divine Word and Man. For he says, ‘The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that
Holy Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of
God <span id="fr_3416"></span>[3417](#fn_3416) .’ Irrationally then do
the followers of the Samosatene separate the Word who is clearly
declared to be made one with the Man from Mary. He is not therefore sent
through that Man; but He rather in Him sent, saying, ‘Go ye, teach all
nations <span id="fr_3417"></span>[3418](#fn_3417) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p46"></span>33. And this is usual with
Scripture <span id="fr_3418"></span>[3419](#fn_3418) , to express itself
in inartificial and simple phrases. For so also in Numbers we shall
find, Moses said to Raguel the Midianite, the father-in-law of Moses;
for there was not one Moses who spoke, and another whose father-in-law
was Raguel, but Moses was one. And if in like manner the Word of God is
called Wisdom and Power and Right-Hand and Arm and the like, and if in
His love to man He has become one with us, putting on our first-fruits
and blended with it, therefore the other titles also have, as was
natural, become the Word’s portions. For that John has said, that in the
beginning was the Word, and He with God and Himself God, and all things
through Him, and without Him nothing made, shews clearly that even man
is the formation of God the Word. If then after taking him, when
enfeebled <span id="fr_3419"></span>[3420](#fn_3419) , into Himself, He
renews him again through that sure renewal unto endless permanence, and
therefore is made one with him in order to raise him to a diviner lot,
how can we possibly say that the Word was sent through the Man who was
from Mary, and reckon Him, the Lord of Apostles, with the other
Apostles, I mean prophets, who were sent by Him? And how can Christ be
called a mere man? on the contrary, being made one with the Word, He is
with reason called Christ and Son of God, the prophet having long since
loudly and clearly ascribed the Father’s subsistence to Him, and said,
‘And I will send My Son Christ <span
id="fr_3420"></span>[3421](#fn_3420) ,’ and in the Jordan, ‘This is My
Well-beloved Son.’ For when He had fulfilled His promise, He shewed, as
was suitable, that He was He whom He said He had sent.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p50"></span>34. Let us then consider Christ in
both ways, the divine Word made one in Mary with Him which is from Mary.
For in her womb the Word fashioned for Himself His house, as at the
beginning He formed Adam from the earth; or rather more divinely,
concerning whom Solomon too says openly, knowing that the Word was also
called Wisdom, ‘Wisdom builded herself an house <span
id="fr_3421"></span>[3422](#fn_3421) ;’ which the Apostle interprets
when he says, ‘Which house are we <span
id="fr_3422"></span>[3423](#fn_3422) ,’ and elsewhere calls us a temple,
as far as it is fitting to God to inhabit a temple, of which the image,
made of stones, He by Solomon commanded the ancient people to build;
whence, on the appearance of the Truth, the image ceased. For when the
ruthless men wished to prove the image to be the truth, and to destroy
that true habitation which we surely believe His union with us to be, He
threatened them not; but knowing that their crime was against
themselves, He says to them, ‘Destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it up <span id="fr_3423"></span>[3424](#fn_3423) ,’ He, our
Saviour, surely shewing thereby that the things about which men busy
themselves, carry their dissolution with them. For unless the Lord had
built the house, and kept the city, in vain did the builders toil, and
the keepers watch <span id="fr_3424"></span>[3425](#fn_3424) . And so
the works of the Jews are undone, for they were a shadow; but the Church
is firmly established; it is ‘founded on the rock,’ and ‘the gates of
hades shall not prevail against it <span
id="fr_3425"></span>[3426](#fn_3425) .’ Theirs <span
id="fr_3426"></span>[3427](#fn_3426) it was to say, ‘Why dost Thou,
being a man, make Thyself God <span id="fr_3427"></span>[3428](#fn_3427)
?’ and their disciple is the Samosatene; whence to his followers with
reason does he teach his heresy. But ‘we did not so learn Christ, if so
be that we heard’ Him, and were taught from Him, ‘putting off the old
man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts,’ and taking up
‘the new, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness <span id="fr_3428"></span>[3429](#fn_3428) .’ Let Christ then
in both ways be religiously considered.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p59"></span>35. But if Scripture often calls even
the body by the name of Christ, as in the blessed Peter’s words to
Cornelius, when he teaches him of ‘Jesus of Nazareth, whom God anointed
with the Holy Ghost,’ and again to the Jews, ‘Jesus of Nazareth, a Man
approved of God for you <span id="fr_3429"></span>[3430](#fn_3429) ,’
and again the blessed Paul to the Athenians, ‘By that Man, whom He <span
id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-Page_447"></span>ordained, giving assurance to all men,
in that He raised Him from the dead <span
id="fr_3430"></span>[3431](#fn_3430) ’ (for we find the appointment and
the mission often synonymous with the anointing; from which any one who
will may learn, that there is no discordance in the words of the sacred
writers, but that they but give various names to the union of God the
Word with the Man from Mary, sometimes as anointing, sometimes as
mission, sometimes as appointment), it follows that what the blessed
Peter says is right <span id="fr_3431"></span>[3432](#fn_3431) , and he
proclaims in purity the Godhead of the Only begotten, without separating
the subsistence of God the Word from the Man from Mary (perish the
thought! for how should he, who had heard in so many ways, ‘I and the
Father are one,’ and ‘He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father <span
id="fr_3432"></span>[3433](#fn_3432) ?)’ In which Man, after the
resurrection also, when the doors were shut, we know of His coming to
the whole band <span id="fr_3433"></span>[3434](#fn_3433) of the
Apostles, and dispersing all that was hard to believe in it by His
words, ‘Handle Me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye
see Me have <span id="fr_3434"></span>[3435](#fn_3434) .’ And He did not
say, ‘This,’ or ‘this Man which I have taken to Me,’ but ‘Me.’ Wherefore
the Samosatene will gain no allowance, being refuted by so many
arguments for the union of God the Word, nay by God the Word Himself,
who now brings the news to all, and assures them by eating, and
permitting to them that handling of Him which then took place. For
certainly he who gives food to others, and they who give him, touch
hands. For ‘they gave Him,’ Scripture says, ‘a piece of a broiled fish
and of an honey-comb, and’ when He had ‘eaten before them, He took the
remains and gave to them <span id="fr_3435"></span>[3436](#fn_3435) .’
See now, though not as Thomas was allowed, yet by another way, He
afforded to them full assurance, in being touched by them; but if you
would now see the scars, learn from Thomas. ‘Reach hither thy hand and
thrust it into My side, and reach hither thy finger and behold My
hands <span id="fr_3436"></span>[3437](#fn_3436) ;’ so says God the
Word, speaking of His own <span id="fr_3437"></span>[3438](#fn_3437)
side and hands, and of Himself as whole man and God together, first
affording to the Saints even perception of the Word through the
body <span id="fr_3438"></span>[3439](#fn_3438) , as we may consider, by
entering when the doors were shut; and next standing near them in the
body and affording full assurance. So much may be conveniently said for
confirmation of the faithful, and correction of the unbelieving.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p70"></span>36. And so let Paul of Samosata also
stand corrected on hearing the divine voice of Him who said ‘My body,’
not ‘Christ besides Me who am the Word,’ but ‘Him <span
id="fr_3439"></span>[3440](#fn_3439) with Me, and Me with Him.’ For I
the Word am the chrism, and that which has the chrism from Me is the
Man <span id="fr_3440"></span>[3441](#fn_3440) ; not then without Me
could He be called Christ, but being with Me and I in Him. Therefore the
mention of the mission of the Word shews the uniting which took place
with Jesus, born of Mary, Whose Name means Saviour, not by reason of
anything else, but from the Man’s being made one with God the Word. This
passage has the same meaning as ‘the Father that sent Me,’ and ‘I came
not of Myself, but the Father sent Me <span
id="fr_3441"></span>[3442](#fn_3441) .’ For he has given the name of
mission <span id="fr_3442"></span>[3443](#fn_3442) to the uniting with
the Man, with Whom the Invisible nature might be known to men, through
the visible. For God changes not place, like us who are hidden in
places, when in the fashion of our littleness He displays Himself in His
existence in the flesh; for how should He, who fills the heaven and the
earth? but on account of the presence in the flesh the just have spoken
of His mission. Therefore God the Word Himself is Christ from Mary, God
and Man; not some other Christ but One and the Same; He before ages from
the Father, He too in the last times from the Virgin; invisible <span
id="fr_3443"></span>[3444](#fn_3443) before even to the holy powers of
heaven, visible now because of His being one with the Man who is
visible; seen, I say, not in His invisible Godhead but in the
operation <span id="fr_3444"></span>[3445](#fn_3444) of the Godhead
through the human body and whole Man, which He has renewed by its
appropriation to Himself. To Him be the adoration and the worship, who
was before, and now is, and ever shall be, even to all ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3386"></span>[443:3387](2040389.htm#fr_3386) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p3"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p3.1"></span>[1 John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p3.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3387"></span>[443:3388](2040389.htm#fr_3387) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p3.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p4"></span> [1 John
5.20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3388"></span>[443:3389](2040389.htm#fr_3388) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p5"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3389"></span>[443:3390](2040389.htm#fr_3389) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p6"></span> [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3390"></span>[443:3391](2040389.htm#fr_3390) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p7"></span> [John
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3391"></span>[443:3392](2040389.htm#fr_3391) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p8"></span> ii. 31, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3392"></span>[443:3393](2040389.htm#fr_3392) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p9"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#011)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p9.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_3393"></span>[444:3394](2040389.htm#fr_3393) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p10"></span> Vid. [Isa.
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002), [Deut.
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3394"></span>[444:3395](2040389.htm#fr_3394) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p11"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p11.1"></span>[Ps. lxxvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p11.3"></span>, LXX.; xlv. title.

<span id="fn_3395"></span>[444:3396](2040389.htm#fr_3395) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p13"></span> [Psa.
110.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p13.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_3396"></span>[444:3397](2040389.htm#fr_3396) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p14"></span> §24.

<span id="fn_3397"></span>[444:3398](2040389.htm#fr_3397) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p15"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p15.1"></span>[Ps. cxix.
73](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#073)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p15.3"></span>; cxlviii. 5.

<span id="fn_3398"></span>[444:3399](2040389.htm#fr_3398) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p17.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p17.2"></span>ξαιρέτου</span>, ii. 19, n. 6.

<span id="fn_3399"></span>[444:3400](2040389.htm#fr_3399) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p17.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p18"></span> [Ps. xxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3400"></span>[444:3401](2040389.htm#fr_3400) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p19"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p19.1"></span>[Rev. xxii.
13-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p19.3"></span>

<span id="fn_3401"></span>[445:3402](2040389.htm#fr_3401) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p21"></span> Cf. i. 39, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3402"></span>[445:3403](2040389.htm#fr_3402) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p22"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3403"></span>[445:3404](2040389.htm#fr_3403) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p23"></span> [John
14.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3404"></span>[445:3405](2040389.htm#fr_3404) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p24"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3405"></span>[445:3406](2040389.htm#fr_3405) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p27.1"></span>μοῦνος ἐ& 241·ν ἀγαπητός</span>, line
365.

<span id="fn_3406"></span>[445:3407](2040389.htm#fr_3406) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p32"></span> Cf. ii. 1, n. 13.

<span id="fn_3407"></span>[445:3408](2040389.htm#fr_3407) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p33"></span> [Acts x.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3408"></span>[445:3409](2040389.htm#fr_3408) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p34"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p34.1"></span>[1 Cor.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p34.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3409"></span>[445:3410](2040389.htm#fr_3409) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p36"></span> [Lev. ix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3410"></span>[445:3411](2040389.htm#fr_3410) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p37"></span> Cf. iii. 29, init.

<span id="fn_3411"></span>[445:3412](2040389.htm#fr_3411) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p38"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3412"></span>[445:3413](2040389.htm#fr_3412) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p39"></span> ii. 44, n. 1.

<span id="fn_3413"></span>[445:3414](2040389.htm#fr_3413) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p40"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3414"></span>[446:3415](2040389.htm#fr_3414) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p42"></span> [2 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3415"></span>[446:3416](2040389.htm#fr_3415) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p43"></span> [John xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3416"></span>[446:3417](2040389.htm#fr_3416) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p44"></span> [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3417"></span>[446:3418](2040389.htm#fr_3417) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p45"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p45.1"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p45.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3418"></span>[446:3419](2040389.htm#fr_3418) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p47"></span> Cf. ii. 53, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3419"></span>[446:3420](2040389.htm#fr_3419) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p48.1"></span>σαθρωθέντα</span>, cf. ii. 66, n. 7.

<span id="fn_3420"></span>[446:3421](2040389.htm#fr_3420) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p48.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p49"></span> Vid. [2 Esd.
7:28](../../../bib/apo/es2007.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/apo/es2007.htm#029), [Acts
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3421"></span>[446:3422](2040389.htm#fr_3421) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p51"></span> [Prov. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3422"></span>[446:3423](2040389.htm#fr_3422) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p52"></span> [Heb. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3423"></span>[446:3424](2040389.htm#fr_3423) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p53"></span> [John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3424"></span>[446:3425](2040389.htm#fr_3424) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p54"></span> Vid. [Ps. cxxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3425"></span>[446:3426](2040389.htm#fr_3425) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p55"></span> Vid. [Matt.
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#025), [Matt.
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3426"></span>[446:3427](2040389.htm#fr_3426) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p56.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p56.2"></span>κείνων</span>, [John x.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p56.3"></span>

<span id="fn_3427"></span>[446:3428](2040389.htm#fr_3427) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p56.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p57"></span> *De Decr.* 1; *Or.* i. 4, iii. 27;
*de Syn.* 50.

<span id="fn_3428"></span>[446:3429](2040389.htm#fr_3428) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p58"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p58.1"></span>[Eph. iv.
20-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p58.3"></span>

<span id="fn_3429"></span>[446:3430](2040389.htm#fr_3429) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p60"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p60.1"></span>[Acts x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p60.3"></span>; ii. 22.

<span id="fn_3430"></span>[447:3431](2040389.htm#fr_3430) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p60.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p61"></span> [Acts xvii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3431"></span>[447:3432](2040389.htm#fr_3431) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p62"></span> ii. 44, n. 1.

<span id="fn_3432"></span>[447:3433](2040389.htm#fr_3432) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p63"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p63.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p63.3"></span>; xiv. 9.

<span id="fn_3433"></span>[447:3434](2040389.htm#fr_3433) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p63.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p64.1"></span>ξυνωρίς</span>.

<span id="fn_3434"></span>[447:3435](2040389.htm#fr_3434) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p65"></span> [Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3435"></span>[447:3436](2040389.htm#fr_3435) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p65.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p66"></span> [Luke
24:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#042),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#043)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p66.1"></span>, vid. Wetstein *in loc.*

<span id="fn_3436"></span>[447:3437](2040389.htm#fr_3436) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p66.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p67"></span> [John xx.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3437"></span>[447:3438](2040389.htm#fr_3437) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p67.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p68"></span> Cf. iii. 33, n. 5.

<span id="fn_3438"></span>[447:3439](2040389.htm#fr_3438) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p68.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p69"></span> Vid. [1 John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p69.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3439"></span>[447:3440](2040389.htm#fr_3439) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p71"></span> i.e. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p71.1"></span>τὸν Χρ</span>. vid. <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p71.2"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p71.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3440"></span>[447:3441](2040389.htm#fr_3440) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p71.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p72"></span> *Or.* i. 47, n. 11.

<span id="fn_3441"></span>[447:3442](2040389.htm#fr_3441) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p72.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p73"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p73.1"></span>[John vi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p73.3"></span>, viii. 42.

<span id="fn_3442"></span>[447:3443](2040389.htm#fr_3442) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p73.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p74"></span> §35, line 8.

<span id="fn_3443"></span>[447:3444](2040389.htm#fr_3443) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p75"></span> *De Syn.* 27 (15).

<span id="fn_3444"></span>[447:3445](2040389.htm#fr_3444) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p76.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.vi.ix-p76.2"></span>νεργεία</span>, §14, n. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Councils of Ariminum and Seleucia. (De Synodis.)](2040390)
