[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040353)  [Next](2040355.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p1.2"></span>Objections Continued</span>. *Whether is
the Unoriginate one or two? Inconsistent in Arians to use an
unscriptural word; necessary to define its meaning. Different senses of
the word. If it means ‘without Father,’ there is but One Unoriginate; if
‘without beginning or creation,’ there are two. Inconsistency of
Asterius. ‘Unoriginate’ a title of God, not in contrast with the Son,
but with creatures, as is ‘Almighty,’ or ‘Lord of powers.’ ‘Father’ is
the truer title, as not only Scriptural, but implying a Son, and our
adoption as sons.*

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p2"></span>30. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p2.1"></span>These</span> considerations encourage the
faithful, and distress the heretical, perceiving, as they do, their
heresy overthrown thereby. Moreover, their further question, ‘whether
the Unoriginate be one or two <span id="fr_1992"></span>[1993](#fn_1992.md)
,’ shews how false are their views, how treacherous and full of guile.
Not for the Father’s honour ask they this, but for the dishonour of the
Word. Accordingly, should any one, not aware of their craft, answer,
‘the Unoriginated is one,’ forthwith they spirit out their own venom,
saying, ‘Therefore the Son is among things originated,’ and well have we
said, ‘He was not before His generation.’ Thus they make any kind of
disturbance and confusion, provided they can but separate the Son from
the Father, and reckon the Framer of all among His works. Now first they
may be convicted on this score, that, while blaming the Nicene Bishops
for their use of phrases not in Scripture, though these not injurious,
but subversive of their irreligion, they themselves went off upon the
same fault, that is, using words not in Scripture <span
id="fr_1993"></span>[1994](#fn_1993.md) , and those in contumely of the
Lord, knowing ‘neither what they say nor whereof they affirm <span
id="fr_1994"></span>[1995](#fn_1994.md) .’ For instance, let them ask the
Greeks, who have been their instructors (for it is a word of their
invention, not Scripture), and when they have been instructed in its
various significations, then they will discover that they cannot even
question properly, on the subject which they have undertaken. For they
have led me to ascertain <span id="fr_1995"></span>[1996](#fn_1995.md) that
by ‘unoriginate’ is meant what has not yet come to be, but is possible
to be, as wood which is not yet become, but is capable of becoming, a
vessel; and again what neither has nor ever can come to be, as a
triangle quadrangular, and an even number odd. For a triangle neither
has nor ever can become quadrangular; nor has even ever, nor can ever,
become odd. Moreover, by ‘unoriginate’ is meant, what exists, but has
not come into being from any, nor having a father at all. Further,
Asterius, the unprincipled sophist, the patron too of this heresy, has
added in his own treatise, that what is not made, but is ever, is
‘unoriginate <span id="fr_1996"></span>[1997](#fn_1996.md) .’ They ought
then, when they ask the question, to add in what sense they take the
word ‘unoriginate,’ and then the parties questioned would be able to
answer to the point.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p8"></span>31. But if they still are satisfied
with merely asking, ‘Is the Unoriginate one or two?’ they must be told
first of all, as ill-educated men, that many are such and nothing is
such, many, which are capable of origination, and nothing, which is not
capable, as has been said. But if they ask according as Asterius ruled
it, as if ‘what is not a work but was always’ were unoriginate, then
they must constantly be told that the Son as well as the Father must in
this sense be called unoriginate. For He is neither in the number of
things originated, nor a work, but has ever been with the Father, as has
already been shewn, in spite of their many variations for the sole sake
of speaking against the Lord, <span id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-Page_325"></span>‘He is of nothing’ and ‘He was not
before His generation.’ When then, after failing at every turn, they
betake themselves to the other sense of the question, ‘existing but not
generated of any nor having a father,’ we shall tell them that the
unoriginate in this sense is only one, namely the Father; and they will
gain nothing by their question <span
id="fr_1997"></span>[1998](#fn_1997.md) . For to say that God is in this
sense Unoriginate, does not shew that the Son is a thing originated, it
being evident from the above proofs that the Word is such as He is who
begat Him. Therefore if God be unoriginate, His Image is not originated,
but an Offspring <span id="fr_1998"></span>[1999](#fn_1998.md) , which is
His Word and His Wisdom. For what likeness has the originated to the
unoriginate? (one must not weary of using repetition;) for if they will
have it that the one is like the other, so that he who sees the one
beholds the other, they are like to say that the Unoriginate is the
image of creatures; the end of which is a confusion of the whole
subject, an equalling of things originated with the Unoriginate, and a
denial of the Unoriginate by measuring Him with the works; and all to
reduce the Son into their number.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p11"></span>32. However, I suppose even they will
be unwilling to proceed to such lengths, if they follow Asterius the
sophist. For he, earnest as he is in his advocacy of the Arian heresy,
and maintaining that the Unoriginate is one, runs counter to them in
saying, that the Wisdom of God is unoriginate and without beginning
also. The following is a passage out of his work <span
id="fr_1999"></span>[2000](#fn_1999.md) : ‘The Blessed Paul said not that
he preached Christ the power of God or the wisdom of God, but, without
the article, ‘God’s power and God’s wisdom <span
id="fr_2000"></span>[2001](#fn_2000.md) ;’ thus preaching that the proper
power of God Himself, which is natural to Him and co-existent with Him
unoriginatedly, is something besides.’ And again, soon after: ‘However,
His eternal power and wisdom, which truth argues to be without beginning
and unoriginate; this must surely be one.’ For though, misunderstanding
the Apostle’s words, he considered that there were two wisdoms; yet, by
speaking still of a wisdom coexistent with Him, he declares that the
Unoriginate is not simply one, but that there is another Unoriginate
with Him. For what is coexistent, coexists not with itself, but with
another. If then they agree with Asterius, let them never ask again, ‘Is
the Unoriginate one or two,’ or they will have to contest the point with
him; if, on the other hand, they differ even from him, let them not rely
upon his treatise, lest, ‘biting one another, they be consumed one of
another <span id="fr_2001"></span>[2002](#fn_2001.md) .’ So much on the
point of their ignorance; but who can say enough on their crafty
character? who but would justly hate them while possessed by such a
madness? for when they were no longer allowed to say ‘out of nothing’
and ‘He was not before His generation,’ they hit upon this word
‘unoriginate,’ that, by saying among the simple that the Son was
‘originate,’ they might imply the very same phrases ‘out of nothing,’
and ‘He once was not;’ for in such phrases things originated and
creatures are implied.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p15"></span>33. If they have confidence in their
own positions, they should stand to them, and not change about so
variously <span id="fr_2002"></span>[2003](#fn_2002.md) ; but this they
will not, from an idea that success is easy, if they do but shelter
their heresy under colour of the word ‘unoriginate.’ Yet after all, this
term is not used in contrast with the Son, clamour as they may, but with
things originated; and the like may be found in the words ‘Almighty,’
and ‘Lord of the Powers <span id="fr_2003"></span>[2004](#fn_2003.md) .’
For if we say that the Father has power and mastery over all things by
the Word, and the Son rules the Father’s kingdom, and has the power of
all, as His Word, and as the Image of the Father, it is quite plain that
neither here is the Son reckoned among that all, nor is God called
Almighty and Lord with reference to Him, but to those things which
through the Son come to be, and over which He exercises power and
mastery through the Word. And therefore the Unoriginate is specified not
by contrast to the Son, but to the things which through the Son come to
be. And excellently: since God is not as things originated, but is their
Creator and Framer through the Son. And as the word ‘Unoriginate’ is
specified relatively to things originated, so the word ‘Father’ is
indicative of the Son. And he who names God Maker and Framer and
Unoriginate, regards and apprehends things created and made; and he who
calls God Father, thereby conceives and contemplates the Son. And hence
one might marvel at the obstinacy which is added to their irreligion,
that, whereas the term ‘unoriginate’ has the aforesaid good sense, and
admits of being used religiously <span
id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004.md) , they, in their own heresy, bring
it forth for the dishonour of the Son, not having read that he who
honoureth the Son honoureth the Father, <span id="page_326">p.
326</span> <span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-Page_326"></span>and he who
dishonoureth the Son, dishonoureth the Father <span
id="fr_2005"></span>[2006](#fn_2005.md) . If they had any concern at
all <span id="fr_2006"></span>[2007](#fn_2006.md) for reverent speaking and
the honour due to the Father, it became them rather, and this were
better and higher, to acknowledge and call God Father, than to give Him
this name. For, in calling God unoriginate, they are, as I said before,
calling Him from His works, and as Maker only and Framer, supposing that
hence they may signify that the Word is a work after their own pleasure.
But that he who calls God Father, signifies Him from the Son being well
aware that if there be a Son, of necessity through that Son all things
originate were created. And they, when they call Him Unoriginate, name
Him only from His works, and know not the Son any more than the Greeks;
but he who calls God Father, names Him from the Word; and knowing the
Word, he acknowledges Him to be Framer of all, and understands that
through Him all things have been made.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p21"></span>34. Therefore it is more pious and
more accurate to signify God from the Son and call Him Father, than to
name Him from His works only and call Him Unoriginate <span
id="fr_2007"></span>[2008](#fn_2007.md) . For the latter title, as I have
said, does nothing more than signify all the works, individually and
collectively, which have come to be at the will of God through the Word;
but the title Father has its significance and its bearing only from the
Son. And, whereas the Word surpasses things originated, by so much and
more doth calling God Father surpass the calling Him Unoriginate. For
the latter is unscriptural and suspicious, because it has various
senses; so that, when a man is asked concerning it, his mind is carried
about to many ideas; but the word Father is simple and scriptural, and
more accurate, and only implies the Son. And ‘Unoriginate’ is a word of
the Greeks, who know not the Son; but ‘Father’ has been acknowledged and
vouchsafed by our Lord. For He, knowing Himself whose Son He was, said,
‘I am in the Father, and the Father is in Me;’ and, ‘He that hath seen
Me, hath seen the Father,’ and ‘I and the Father are One <span
id="fr_2008"></span>[2009](#fn_2008.md) ;’ but nowhere is He found to call
the Father Unoriginate. Moreover, when He teaches us to pray, He says
not, ‘When ye pray, say, O God Unoriginate,’ but rather, ‘When ye pray,
say, Our Father, which art in heaven <span
id="fr_2009"></span>[2010](#fn_2009.md) .’ And it was His will that the
Summary <span id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010.md) of our faith should
have the same bearing, in bidding us be baptized, not into the name of
Unoriginate and originate, nor into the name of Creator and creature,
but into the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. For with such an
initiation we too, being numbered among works, are made sons, and using
the name of the Father, acknowledge from that name the Word also in the
Father Himself <span id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011.md) . A vain thing
then is their argument about the term ‘Unoriginate,’ as is now proved,
and nothing more than a fantasy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1992"></span>[324:1993](2040354.htm#fr_1992.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.3"></span>γγέν</span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.4"></span>ν</span>\]η<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.5"></span>τον</span> was in the philosophical schools
synonymous with ‘God;’ hence by asking whether there were two
Unoriginates, the Arians implied that there were two Gods, if Christ was
God in the sense in which the Father was. Hence Athan. retorts, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.7"></span>φάσκοντες, οὐ λέγομεν
δύο ἀγένητα, λέγουσι δύο θεούς</span>. *Orat.* iii. 16, also ii. 38.
Plato used <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.9"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.10"></span>γέννητον</span> of the Supreme God \[not
so; he used <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.12"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.13"></span>γένητον</span>, see note 2 on *de Decr.*
28\]; the Valentinians, Tertull. *contr. Val.* 7; and Basilides, Epiph.
*Hær.* 31. 10. S. Clement uses it, see *de Syn.* 47, note 7. \[The
earlier Arians apparently argued mainly, like Asterius, from <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.15"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.16"></span>γένητος</span> (cf.
Epiph. 64. 8), the later (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.17"></span>καινοί</span>, Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 19)
Anomœans rather from <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.19"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.20"></span>γέννητος</span>\]; viz. that <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.22"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.23"></span>ἀγεννησία</span> is
the very <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.24"></span>οὐσία</span> of God, not an attribute. So
Aetius in Epiph. *Hær.* 76. S. Athanasius does not go into this
question, but rather confines himself to the more popular form of it,
viz. the Son is by His very name not <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.26"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.27"></span>γένητος</span>, but <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.29"></span>γενητὸς</span>, but
all <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.30"></span>γενητὰ</span> are creatures; which he
answers, as *de Decr.* §28, by saying that Christianity had brought in a
new idea into theology, viz. the sacred doctrine of a true Son, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.32"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.33"></span>κ τῆς οὐσίας</span>.
This was what the Arians had originally denied <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.35"></span>ἓ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.36"></span>ν τὸ ἀγέννητον ἓν δὲ τὸ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀληθῶς,
καὶ οὐκ ἐκ τῆς οὐσίας αὐτοῦ γεγονός</span>. Euseb. Nic. ap. Theod. *H.
E.* i. 6. When they were urged *what* according to them was the middle
idea to which the Son answered, if they would not accept the Catholic,
they would not define but merely said, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.38"></span>γέννημα, ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ὡς ἓν τῶν
γεννημάτων</span>. \[See pp. 149, 169, and the reference there to
Lightfoot.\]

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[324:1994](2040354.htm#fr_1993.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p3.40"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p4"></span> *De Decr.* 18.

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[324:1995](2040354.htm#fr_1994.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p5"></span> [1 Tim. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007.md)<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1995"></span>[324:1996](2040354.htm#fr_1995.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p6"></span> *De Decr.* 28, note 4.

<span id="fn_1996"></span>[324:1997](2040354.htm#fr_1996.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p7"></span> The two first senses here given answer
to the two first mentioned, *de Decr.* §28. and, as he there says, are
plainly irrelevant. The third in the *de Decr.* which, as he there
observes, is ambiguous and used for a sophistical purpose, is here
divided into third and fourth, answering to the two senses which alone
are assigned in the *de Syn.* §46 \[where see note 5\], and on them the
question turns. This is an instance, of which many occur, how Athan.
used his former writings and worked over again his former ground, and
simplified or cleared what he had said. In the *de Decr.* after 350, we
have three senses of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p7.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p7.3"></span>γένητον</span>, two irrelevant and the
third ambiguous; here in *Orat.* i. (358), he divides the third into
two; in the *de Syn.* (359), he rejects and omits the two first, leaving
the two last, which are the critical senses.

<span id="fn_1997"></span>[325:1998](2040354.htm#fr_1997.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9"></span> These two senses of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9.3"></span>γέννητον</span>
*unbegotten* and *unmade* were afterwards \[but see notes on *de Decr.*
28\] expressed by the distinction of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9.6"></span>νν</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9.7"></span>ν</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9.9"></span>γέννητον</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9.11"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9.12"></span>γένητον</span>. vid.
*Damasc. F. O.* i. 8. p. 135. and Le Quien’s note.

<span id="fn_1998"></span>[325:1999](2040354.htm#fr_1998.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p9.14"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p10"></span> §20, note 5.

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[325:2000](2040354.htm#fr_1999.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p12"></span> *De Syn.* §18, infr. ii. 37.

<span id="fn_2000"></span>[325:2001](2040354.htm#fr_2000.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p13"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2001"></span>[325:2002](2040354.htm#fr_2001.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p14"></span> [Gal. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2002"></span>[325:2003](2040354.htm#fr_2002.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p16"></span> *De Syn.* 9, note 2.

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[325:2004](2040354.htm#fr_2003.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p17"></span> The passage which follows is written
with his *de Decr.* before him. At first he but uses the same topics,
but presently he incorporates into this Discourse an actual portion of
his former work, with only such alterations as an author commonly makes
in transcribing. This, which is not unfrequent with Athan., shews us the
care with which he made his doctrinal statements, though they seem at
first sight written off. It also accounts for the diffuseness and
repetition which might be imputed to his composition, what seems
superfluous being often only the insertion of an extract from a former
work.

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[325:2005](2040354.htm#fr_2004.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p18"></span> *De Syn.* §47.

<span id="fn_2005"></span>[326:2006](2040354.htm#fr_2005.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p19"></span> [John v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[326:2007](2040354.htm#fr_2006.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p20"></span> Here he begins a close transcript of
the *de Decr.* §30, the last sentence, however, of the paragraph being
an addition.

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[326:2008](2040354.htm#fr_2007.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p22"></span> For analogous arguments against the
word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p22.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p22.3"></span>γέννητον</span>, see Basil, *contr.
Eunom.* i. 5. p. 215. Greg. Naz. *Orat.* 31. 23. Epiph. *Hær.* 76. p.
941. Greg. Nyss. *contr. Eunom*. vi. p. 192, &c. Cyril. *Dial.* ii.
Pseudo-Basil. *contr. Eunom.* iv. p. 283.

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[326:2009](2040354.htm#fr_2008.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p22.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p23"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p23.1"></span>[John xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p23.3"></span>; xiv. 9; x. 30. These three texts are
found together frequently in Athan. particularly in *Orat.* iii. where
he considers the doctrines of the ‘Image’ and the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p23.5"></span>περιχώρησις</span>.
vid. Index of Texts, also Epiph. *Hær.* 64. 9. Basil. *Hexaem.* ix. fin.
Cyr. *Thes.* xii. p. 111. \[add in S. Joan, 168, 847\] Potam. *Ep. ap.*
Dacher. t. 3. p. 299. Hil. *Trin.* vii. 41. et supr.

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[326:2010](2040354.htm#fr_2009.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p23.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p24"></span> [Luke xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#002.md)<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[326:2011](2040354.htm#fr_2010.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p25"></span> *De Syn.* 28, note 5.

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[326:2012](2040354.htm#fr_2011.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ix-p26"></span> Here ends the extract from the *de
Decretis.* The sentence following is added as a close.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Objections Continued. How the Word has free will, yet without
being alterable. He is unalterable because the Image of the Father,
proved from texts.](2040355.md)
