[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040333)  [Next](2040335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.ii.i"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="xx.ii.i-Page_270"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xx.ii.i-p1.1"></span>History of the Arians.</span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xx.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xx.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Part I.</span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.ii.i-p4.1"></span>Arian Persecution Under Constantine</span>.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p5"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xx.ii.i-p5.1"></span>And</span> not long after they put in execution
the designs for the sake of which they had had recourse to these
artifices; for they no sooner had formed their plans, but they
immediately admitted Arius and his fellows to communion. They set aside
the repeated condemnations which had been passed upon them, and again
pretended the imperial authority <span
id="fr_1513"></span>[1514](#fn_1513) in their behalf. And they were not
ashamed to say in their letters, ‘since Athanasius suffered, all
jealousy <span id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514) has ceased, and let
us henceforward receive Arius and his fellows;’ adding, in order to
frighten their hearers, ‘because the Emperor has commanded it.’
Moreover, they were not ashamed to add, ‘for these men profess orthodox
opinions;’ not fearing that which is written, ‘Woe unto them that call
bitter sweet, that put darkness for light <span
id="fr_1515"></span>[1516](#fn_1515) ;’ for they are ready to undertake
anything in support of their heresy. Now is it not hereby plainly proved
to all men, that we both suffered heretofore, and that you now persecute
us, not under the authority of an Ecclesiastical sentence <span
id="fr_1516"></span>[1517](#fn_1516) , but on the ground of the
Emperor’s threats, and on account of our piety towards Christ? As also
they conspired in like manner against other Bishops, fabricating charges
against them also; some of whom fell asleep in the place of their exile,
having attained the glory of Christian confession; and others are still
banished from their country, and contend still more and more manfully
against their heresy, saying, ‘Nothing shall separate us from the love
of Christ <span id="fr_1517"></span>[1518](#fn_1517) ?’

<span id="xx.ii.i-p11"></span>2. *Arians sacrifice morality and
integrity to party.*

<span id="xx.ii.i-p12"></span>And hence also you may discern its
character, and be able to condemn it more confidently. The man who is
their friend and their associate in impiety, although he is open to ten
thousand charges for other enormities which he has committed; although
the evidence and proof against him are most clear; he is approved of by
them, and straightway becomes the friend of the Emperor, obtaining an
introduction by his impiety; and making very many pretences, he acquires
confidence before the magistrates to do whatever he desires. But he who
exposes their impiety, and honestly advocates the cause of Christ,
though he is pure in all things, though he is conscious of no
delinquencies, though he meets with no accuser; yet on the false
pretences which they have framed against him, is immediately seized and
sent into banishment under a sentence of the Emperor, as if he were
guilty of the crimes which they wish to charge upon him, or as if, like
Naboth, he had insulted the King; while he who advocates the cause of
their heresy is sought for and immediately sent to take possession of
the other’s Church; and henceforth confiscations and insults, and all
kinds of cruelty are exercised against those who do not receive him. And
what is the strangest of all, the man whom the people desire, and know
to be blameless <span id="fr_1518"></span>[1519](#fn_1518) , the Emperor
takes away and banishes; but him whom they neither desire, nor know, he
sends to them from a distant place with soldiers and letters from
himself. And henceforward a strong necessity is laid upon them, either
to hate him whom they love; who has been their teacher, and their father
in godliness; and to love him whom they do not desire, and to trust
their children to one of whose life and conversation and character they
are ignorant; or else certainly to suffer punishment, if they disobey
the Emperor.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p14"></span><span id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span
id="xx.ii.i-Page_271"></span>3. *Recklessness of their proceedings.*

<span id="xx.ii.i-p15"></span>In this manner the impious are now
proceeding, as heretofore, against the orthodox; giving proof of their
malice and impiety amongst all men everywhere. For granting that they
have accused Athanasius; yet what have the other Bishops done? On what
grounds can they charge them? Has there been found in their case too the
dead body of an Arsenius? Is there a Presbyter Macarius, or has a cup
been broken amongst them? Is there a Meletian to play the hypocrite? No:
but as their proceedings against the other Bishops shew the charges
which they have brought against Athanasius, in all probability, to be
false; so their attacks upon Athanasius make it plain, that their
accusations of the other Bishops are unfounded likewise. This heresy has
come forth upon the earth like some great monster, which not only
injures the innocent with its words, as with teeth <span
id="fr_1519"></span>[1520](#fn_1519) ; but it has also hired external
power to assist it in its designs. And strange it is that, as I said
before, no accusation is brought against any of them; or if any be
accused, he is not brought to trial; or if a shew of enquiry be made, he
is acquitted against evidence, while the convicting party is plotted
against, rather than the culprit put to shame. Thus the whole party of
them is full of idleness; and their spies, for Bishops <span
id="fr_1520"></span>[1521](#fn_1520) they are not, are the vilest of
them all. And if any one among them desire to become a Bishop, he is not
told, ‘a Bishop must be blameless <span
id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521) ;’ but only, ‘Take up opinions
contrary to Christ, and care not for manners. This will be sufficient to
obtain favour for you, and friendship with the Emperor.’ Such is the
character of those who support the tenets of Arius. And they who are
zealous for the truth, however holy and pure they shew themselves, are
yet, as I said before, made culprits, whenever these men choose, and on
whatever pretences it may seem good to them to invent. The truth of
this, as I before remarked, you may clearly gather from their
proceedings.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p19"></span>4. *Arians persecute Eustathius and
others.*

<span id="xx.ii.i-p20"></span>There was one Eustathius <span
id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522) , Bishop of Antioch, a Confessor,
and sound in the Faith. This man, because he was very zealous for the
truth, and hated the Arian heresy, and would not receive those who
adopted its tenets, is falsely accused before the Emperor Constantine,
and a charge invented against him, that he had insulted his mother <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523) . And immediately he is driven into
banishment, and a great number of Presbyters and Deacons with him. And
immediately after the banishment of the Bishop, those whom he would not
admit into the clerical order on account of their impiety were not only
received into the Church by them, but were even appointed the greater
part of them to be Bishops, in order that they might have accomplices in
their impiety. Among these was Leontius the eunuch <span
id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524) , now of Antioch, and his
predecessor Stephanus, George of Laodicea, and Theodosius who was of
Tripolis, Eudoxius of Germanicia, and Eustathius <span
id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525) , now of Sebastia.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p25"></span>5. Did they then stop here? No. For
Eutropius <span id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526) , who was Bishop of
Adrianople, a good man, and excellent in all respects, because he had
often convicted Eusebius, and had advised them who came that way, not to
comply with his impious dictates, suffered the same treatment as
Eustathius, and was cast out of his city and his Church. Basilina <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527) was the most active in the
proceedings against him. And Euphration of Balanea, Kymatius of Paltus,
Carterius of Antaradus <span id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) ,
Asclepas of Gaza, Cyrus of Berœa in Syria, Diodorus of Asia, Domnion of
Sirmium, and Ellanicus of Tripolis, were merely known to hate the
heresy; and some of them on one pretence or another, some without any,
they removed under the authority of royal letters, drove them out of
their cities, and appointed others whom they knew to be impious men, to
occupy the Churches in their stead.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p29"></span>6. *Case of Marcellus.*

<span id="xx.ii.i-p30"></span>Of Marcellus <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) , the Bishop of Galatia, it is
perhaps superfluous for me to speak; for all men have heard how Eusebius
and his fellows, who had been first accused by him of impiety, brought a
counter-accusation against him, and caused the old man to be banished.
He went up to Rome, and there made his defence, and being required by
them, he offered a written declaration of his faith, of which the
Council of Sardica approved. But Eusebius and his fellows made no
defence, nor, when they were convicted of impiety out of their writings,
were they put to shame, but rather assumed greater boldness against all.
For <span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span
id="xx.ii.i-Page_272"></span>they had an introduction to the Emperor
from the women <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) , and were
formidable to all men.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p33"></span>7. *Martyrdom of Paul of Constantinople.*

<span id="xx.ii.i-p34"></span>And I suppose no one is ignorant of the
case of Paul <span id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) , Bishop of
Constantinople; for the more illustrious any city is, so much the more
that which takes place in it is not concealed. A charge was fabricated
against him also. For Macedonius his accuser, who has now become Bishop
in his stead (I was present myself at the accusation), afterwards held
communion with him, and was a Presbyter under Paul himself. And yet when
Eusebius with an evil eye wished to seize upon the Bishopric of that
city (he had been translated in the same manner from Berytus to
Nicomedia), the charge was revived against Paul; and they did not give
up their plot, but persisted in the calumny. And he was banished first
into Pontus by Constantine, and a second time by Constantius he was sent
bound with iron chains to Singara in Mesopotamia, and from thence
transferred to Emesa, and a fourth time he was banished to Cucusus in
Cappadocia, near the deserts of Mount Taurus; where, as those who were
with him have declared, he died by strangulation at their hands. And yet
these men who never speak the truth, though guilty of this, were not
ashamed after his death to invent another story, representing that he
had died from illness; although all who live in that place know the
circumstances. And even Philagrius <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) , who was then
Deputy-Governor <span id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533) of those
parts, and represented all their proceedings in such manner as they
desired, was yet astonished at this; and being grieved perhaps that
another, and not himself, had done the evil deed, he informed Serapion
the Bishop, as well as many other of our friends, that Paul was shut up
by them in a very confined and dark place, and left to perish of hunger;
and when after six days they went in and found him still alive, they
immediately set upon the man, and strangled him. This was the end of his
life; and they said that Philip who was Prefect was their agent in the
perpetration of this murder. Divine Justice, however, did not overlook
this; for not a year passed, when Philip was deprived of his office in
great disgrace, so that being reduced to a private station, he became
the mockery of those whom he least desired to be the witnesses of his
fall. For in extreme distress of mind, groaning and trembling like
Cain <span id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534) , and expecting every
day that some one would destroy him, far from his country and his
friends, he died, like one astounded at his misfortunes, in a manner
that he least desired. Moreover these men spare not even after death
those against whom they have invented charges whilst living. They are so
eager to shew themselves formidable to all, that they banish the living,
and shew no mercy on the dead; but alone of all the world they manifest
their hatred to them that are departed, and conspire against their
friends, truly inhuman as they are, and haters of that which is good,
savage in temper beyond mere enemies, in behalf of their impiety, who
eagerly plot the ruin of me and of all the rest, with no regard to
truth, but by false charges.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p39"></span>8. *Restoration of the Catholics.*

<span id="xx.ii.i-p40"></span>Perceiving this to be the case, the three
brothers, Constantine, Constantius, and Constans, caused all after the
death of their father to return to their own country and Church; and
while they wrote letters concerning the rest to their respective
Churches, concerning Athanasius they wrote the following; which likewise
shews the violence of the whole proceedings, and proves the murderous
disposition of Eusebius and his fellows.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p41"></span>A copy of the Letter of Constantine Cæsar
to the people of the Catholic Church in the city of the Alexandrians.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p42"></span>I suppose that it has not escaped the
knowledge of your pious minds <span id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535)
, &c.

<span id="xx.ii.i-p44"></span>This is his letter; and what more credible
witness of their conspiracy could there be than he, who knowing these
circumstances has thus written of them?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[270:1514](2040334.htm#fr_1513) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p6"></span> §33.

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[270:1515](2040334.htm#fr_1514) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.i-p7.1"></span>φθόνος</span>.

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[270:1516](2040334.htm#fr_1515) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p8"></span> [Is. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span id="xx.ii.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[270:1517](2040334.htm#fr_1516) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p9"></span> Infr. §76.

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[270:1518](2040334.htm#fr_1517) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p10"></span> [Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span id="xx.ii.i-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[270:1519](2040334.htm#fr_1518) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p13"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span id="xx.ii.i-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[271:1520](2040334.htm#fr_1519) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p16"></span> Vid. [Dan.
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#005),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007)<span id="xx.ii.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[271:1521](2040334.htm#fr_1520) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p17"></span> Cf. §49. \[The play on words cannot be
rendered.\]

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[271:1522](2040334.htm#fr_1521) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p18"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span id="xx.ii.i-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[271:1523](2040334.htm#fr_1522) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p21"></span> *Apol. Fug*. 3, note 9.

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[271:1524](2040334.htm#fr_1523) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p22"></span> If the common slander of the day
concerning S. Helena was imputed to S. Eustathius, Constantine was
likely to feel it keenly. ‘Stabulariam,’ says S. Ambrose, ‘hanc primo
fuisse asserunt, sic cognitam Constantio.’ de Ob. *Theod.* 42,
Stabularia, i.e. an innkeeper; so Rahab is sometimes considered to be
‘cauponaria sive tabernaria et meretrix,’ Cornel. à Lap. in [Jos. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001)<span id="xx.ii.i-p22.2"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="xx.ii.i-p22.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xx.ii.i-p22.4"></span>ξ ὁμιλιας γυναικὸς οὐ
σεμνῆς ουδὲ κατὰ νόμον συνελθούσης</span>. Zosim, *Hist.* ii. p. 78.
Constantinus ex concubina Helena procreatus. Hieron. *in Chron. Euseb.*
p. 773. (ed. Vallars.) Tillemont however maintains (*Empereurs,* t. 4.
p. 613), and Gibbon fully admits (*Hist.* ch. 14. p. 190), the
legitimacy of Constantine. The latter adds, ‘Eutropius (x. 2.) expresses
in a few words the real truth, and the occasion of the error, “ex
*obscuriori matrimonio* ejus filius.”’ \[Cf. *Soz*. ii. 19.\]

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[271:1525](2040334.htm#fr_1524) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p22.6"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p23"></span> Below, §28, note.

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[271:1526](2040334.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p24"></span> *Ep. Æg*. 7.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[271:1527](2040334.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p26"></span> *Ap. Fug*. 3.

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[271:1528](2040334.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p27"></span> Julian’s mother.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[271:1529](2040334.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p28"></span> \[The text must be corrected thus; see
*Apol. Fug.* 3.\]

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[271:1530](2040334.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p31"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 32.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[272:1531](2040334.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p32"></span> i.e. Constantia, Constantine’s sister.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[272:1532](2040334.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p35"></span> *Ap. Fug.* 3. For the presence of Ath. at
CP. in 337, see Prolegg. ii. §5 fin.\]

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[272:1533](2040334.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p36"></span> \[Cf. Prolegg. ch. ii. §6 (1) note 3.\]

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[272:1534](2040334.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p37"></span> Vicarius, i.e. ‘vicarius Præfecti, agens
vicem Præfecti;’ Gothofred in *Cod. Theod.* i. tit. 6. vid. their
office, &c., drawn out at length, ibid. t. 6, p. 334.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[272:1535](2040334.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p38"></span> [Gen. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012)<span id="xx.ii.i-p38.1"></span>,
LXX. supr. p. 241.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[272:1536](2040334.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="xx.ii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.i-p43"></span> Given above, *Apol. contr. Arian.* §87.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Arian Persecution under Constantius.](2040335)
