[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040196)  [Next](2040198.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span
id="xiv.i-Page_149"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to de Decretis or Defence of the
Nicene Definition.</span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.i-p3.1"></span>This</span> letter must have been written in the
interval between the return of Athanasius in 346 and his flight in 356.
Acacius was already (§3) Bishop of Cæsarea 339; Eusebius of Nicomedia is
not referred to as though still living (he died 342). Moreover the
language of §2 (“for in no long time they will turn to outrage,” &c.)
implies a period of actual peace, but with a prospect of the repetition
of the scenes of the year 339. This actually occurred in 356.
Accordingly we must probably place the tract under the sole reign of
Constantius, between 351 and the end of 355.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>It is written in answer to a friend who in
disputing with Arians had been posed by their objection to the use of
non-scriptural terms in the Nicene Definition. He accordingly asks for
some account of what the council had done.

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>Athanasius begins his answer by stigmatising
the evasions and inconsistency of the Arianisers, and describing their
conduct at the council, and how they eventually subscribed to the terms
now complained of (1–5). He then investigates the meaning of the divine
Sonship (6–14), and how its true meaning is brought out by the other
titles of the Son (15–17). Coming to the non-scriptural expressions he
shews how they were forced upon the council by the evasions of the
Arians (18–20), and that they express no sense not to be found in
Scripture (21–24). Moreover, they had already been in use in the Church,
as is shewn by extracts from Theognostus, the two Dionysii, and Origen
(25–27). Lastly (28–32) he discusses the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p5.2"></span>γένητος</span>, applied by the Arians (especially
Asterius) to the Father, in contrast, not to the creation, but to the
Son, who is thereby implied to be <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p5.3"></span>γένητος</span>. He insists on ‘Father’ not ‘<span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.i-p5.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.i-p5.5"></span>γένητος</span>’ as the divine
title authorised by Scripture. Lastly he appends, in proof of what he
states in §3, the letter of Eusebius to the people of Cæsarea,
containing the creed of the council, which, for reasons there stated, we
have inserted above, pp. 73–76.

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>The interest of the letter is principally
threefold; first on account of its notice of the proceedings at Nicæa
(cf. *ad Afr.* 5), one of the few primary sources of our knowledge of
what took place there: secondly, on account of its fragments of early
writers, especially the Dionysii, of whom more will be said in the
introduction to the next tract. With regard to Theognostus, the
quotations in this tract and in *Serap.* iv. 9 are important in view of
the somewhat damaging accounts of his teaching in the few other writers
(Gregory of Nyssa, Photius) who mention him.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>Thirdly, the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p7.2"></span>γένητος</span> demands attention. It is
impossible to give its exact force in idiomatic English: the rendering
‘Ingenerate’ adopted by Newman is perhaps the most unfortunate one
imaginable. ‘Uncreated,’ a possible substitute, is also open to
objection, firstly, as not distinguishing the word from the derivatives
of <span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.i-p7.3"></span>κτίζειν, ποιεῖν,
δημιουργεῖν</span>, secondly, as giving it a passive sense, which does
not inherently attach to it. For lack of a better word, ‘Unoriginate’
may perhaps be adopted. ‘That which has not (or cannot) come to be,’
‘that which is *not* the result of a process,’—is what the word strictly
signifies’—‘*das Ungewordene.*’ It was therefore strictly applicable to
the Son as well as to the Father. But throughout the earlier stages of
the Arian controversy the question was embarrassed by the homophones
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.i-p7.4"></span>γέννητος</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.i-p7.5"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.i-p7.6"></span>γέννητος</span>, generate or
begotten, and unbegotten. The confusion of thought due to the
resemblance of sound is reflected in the confusion of readings in the
<span class="c10"><span id="xiv.i-p7.7"></span>mss.</span> Athanasius
himself (*Orat.* i. 56) perceives the distinctive sense of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.i-p7.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.i-p7.9"></span>γέννητος</span>. In the
present tract and in *Orat.* i. 30, he has <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p7.10"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p7.11"></span>γένητος</span> only in view, the idea of
begetting being absent. Here (and cf. *de Syn.* 46, note 5) he is
denying that the Father is alone <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p7.12"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p7.13"></span>γένητος</span>, uncreated or without a
‘becoming.’ Accordingly although the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.i-p7.14"></span>γεννήθεντα</span> was consecrated and
safeguarded in the Creed of Nicæa (Begotten not made), and although the
distinctness of the derivatives of the two verbs was felt by Athanasius,
and pointed out by others (Epiph. *Hær*. 64, 8), the use of either group
of words was avoided by Catholics as dangerous. A clear distinction of
the words and of their respective applicability is made by John
Damascene *Fid. Orth.* I. viii. (see Lightfoot, *Ignat.* vol. 2,
excursus on Eph. §7, Thilo, *ubi supra,* Introd. p. 14, and Harnack,
*Dg.* 2, p. 193 note).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: De Decretis. (Defence of the Nicene Definition.)](2040198.md)
