[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040107)  [Next](2040109.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xi-p1"></span> §11. *Second reason for the Incarnation.
God, knowing that man was not by nature sufficient to know Him, gave
him, in order that he might have some profit in being, a knowledge of
Himself. He made them in the Image of the Word, that thus they might
know the Word, and through Him the Father. Yet man, despising this, fell
into idolatry, leaving the unseen God for magic and astrology; and all
this in spite of God’s manifold revelation of Himself.*

<span id="vii.ii.xi-p2"></span>God, Who has the power over all things,
when He was making the race of men through His own Word, seeing the
weakness of their nature, that it was not sufficient of itself to know
its Maker, nor to get any idea at all of God; because while He was
uncreate, the creatures had been made of nought, and while He was
incorporeal, men had been fashioned in a lower way in the body, and
because in every way the things made fell far short of being able to
comprehend and know their Maker—taking pity, I say, on the race of men,
inasmuch as He is good, He did not leave them destitute of the knowledge
of Himself, lest they should find no profit in existing at all <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) . 2. For what profit to the creatures
if they knew not their Maker? or how could they be rational without
knowing the Word (and Reason) of the Father, in Whom they received their
very being? For there would be nothing to distinguish them even from
brute creatures if they had knowledge of nothing but earthly things.
Nay, why did God make them at all, as He did not wish to be known by
them? 3. Whence, lest this should be so, being good, He gives them a
share in His own Image, our Lord Jesus Christ, and makes them after His
own Image and after His likeness: so that by such grace perceiving the
Image, that is, the Word of the Father, they may be able through Him to
get an idea of the Father, and knowing their Maker, live the happy and
truly blessed life. 4. But men once more in their perversity having set
at nought, in spite of all this, the grace given them, so wholly
rejected God, and so darkened their soul, as not merely to forget their
idea of God, but also to fashion for themselves one invention after
another. For not only did they grave idols for themselves, instead of
the truth, and honour things that were not before the living God,
“and <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) serve the creature rather
than the Creator,” but, worst of all, they transferred the honour of God
even to stocks and stones and to every material object and to men, and
went even further than this, as we have said in the former treatise. 5.
So far indeed did their impiety go, that they proceeded to worship
devils, and proclaimed them as gods, fulfilling their own <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) lusts. For they performed, as was said
above, offerings of brute animals, and sacrifices of men, as was meet
for them <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) , binding themselves
down all the faster under their maddening inspirations. 6. For this
reason it was also that magic arts were taught among them, and oracles
in divers places led men astray, and all men ascribed the influences of
their birth and existence to the stars and to all the heavenly bodies,
having no thought of anything beyond what was visible. 7. And, in a
word, everything was full of irreligion and lawlessness, and God alone,
and His Word, was unknown, albeit He had not hidden Himself out of men’s
sight, nor given the knowledge of Himself in one way only; but had, on
the contrary, unfolded it to them in many forms and by many ways.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[42:233](2040108.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xi-p3"></span> Cf. 13. 2.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[42:234](2040108.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xi-p4"></span> Cf. [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_234"></span>[42:235](2040108.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>αὐτῶν</span> may refer to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii.xi-p5.3"></span>δαίμονες</span>, in which
case compare *c. Gent.* 25. *sub fin.*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[42:236](2040108.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="vii.ii.xi-p5.5"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xi-p6"></span> See *c. Gent.* 25. 1, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii.xi-p6.2"></span>τα ὅμοια τοῖς
ὁμοίοις</span>. Or the text may mean simply “as their due.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: For though man was created in grace, God, foreseeing his
forgetfulness, provided also the works of creation to remind man of him.
Yet further, He ordained a Law and Prophets, whose ministry was meant
for all the world. Yet men heeded only their own lusts.](2040109.md)
