[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040159)  [Next](2040161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_74">p. 74</span> <span
id="ix.ii-Page_74"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>Council of Nicæa.</span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>*Letter of Eusebius of Cæsarea to the people
of his Diocese* <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) .

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="ix.ii-p5.1"></span>What</span> was transacted concerning
ecclesiastical faith at the Great Council assembled at Nicæa, you have
probably learned, Beloved, from other sources, rumour being wont to
precede the accurate account of what is doing. But lest in such reports
the circumstances of the case have been misrepresented, we have been
obliged to transmit to you, first, the formula of faith presented by
ourselves, and next, the second, which \[the Fathers\] put forth with
some additions to our words. Our own paper, then, which was read in the
presence of our most pious <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413)
Emperor, and declared to be good and unexceptionable, ran thus:—

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>2. “As we have received from the Bishops who
preceded us, and in our first catechisings, and when we received the
Holy Laver, and as we have learned from the divine Scriptures, and as we
believed and taught in the presbytery, and in the Episcopate itself, so
believing also at the time present, we report to you our faith, and it
is this <span id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) :”—

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span>3. “We believe in One God, the Father
Almighty, the Maker of all things visible and invisible. And in One Lord
Jesus Christ, the Word of God, God from God, Light from Light, Life from
Life, Son Only-begotten, first-born of every creature, before all the
ages, begotten from the Father, by Whom also all things were made; Who
for our salvation was made flesh, and lived among men, and suffered, and
rose again the third day, and ascended to the Father, and will come
again in glory to judge the quick and dead. And we believe also in One
Holy Ghost:”

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span>“believing each of these to be and to exist,
the Father truly Father, and the Son truly Son, and the Holy Ghost truly
Holy Ghost, as also our Lord, sending forth His disciples for the
preaching, said, “Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) .” Concerning Whom we confidently
affirm that so we hold, and so we think, and so we have held aforetime,
and we maintain this faith unto the death, anathematizing every godless
heresy. That this we have ever thought from our heart and soul, from the
time we recollect ourselves, and now think and say in truth, before God
Almighty and our Lord Jesus Christ do we witness, being able by proofs
to shew and to convince you, that, even in times past, such has been our
belief and preaching.”

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>4. On this faith being publicly put forth by
us, no room for contradiction appeared; but our most pious Emperor,
before any one else, testified that it comprised most orthodox
state<span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span
id="ix.ii-Page_75"></span>ments. He confessed moreover that such were
his own sentiments, and he advised all present to agree to it, and to
subscribe its articles and to assent to them, with the insertion of the
single word, One-in-essence, which moreover he interpreted as not in the
sense of the affections of bodies, nor as if the Son subsisted from the
Father in the way of division, or any severance; for that the
immaterial, and intellectual, and incorporeal nature could not be the
subject of any corporeal affection, but that it became us to conceive of
such things in a divine and ineffable manner. And such were the
theological remarks of our most wise and most religious Emperor; but
they, with a view <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) to the
addition of One in essence, drew up the following formula:—

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span>The Faith dictated in the Council.

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>“We believe in One God, the Father Almighty,
Maker of all things visible and invisible:”—

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span>“And in One Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, begotten of the Father, Only-begotten, that is, from the essence of
the Father; God from God, Light from Light, Very God from Very God,
begotten not made, One in essence with the Father, by Whom all things
were made, both things in heaven and things in earth; Who for us men and
for our salvation came down and was made flesh, was made man, suffered,
and rose again the third day, ascended into heaven, and cometh to judge
quick and dead.”

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span>“And in the Holy Ghost.”

<span id="ix.ii-p18"></span>“And those who say, ‘Once He was not,’ and
‘Before His generation He was not,’ and ‘He came to be from nothing,’ or
those who pretend that the Son of God is ‘Of other subsistence or
essence <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) ,’ or ‘created’ or
‘alterable,’ or ‘mutable,’ the Catholic Church anathematizes.”

<span id="ix.ii-p20"></span>5. On their dictating this formula, we did
not let it pass without inquiry in what sense they introduced “of the
essence of the Father,” and “one in essence with the Father.”
Accordingly questions and explanations took place, and the meaning of
the words underwent the scrutiny of reason. And they professed, that the
phrase “of the essence” was indicative of the Son’s being indeed from
the Father, yet without being as if a part of Him. And with this
understanding we thought good to assent to the sense of such religious
doctrine, teaching, as it did, that the Son was from the Father, not
however a part of His essence <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) .
On this account we assented to the sense ourselves, without declining
even the term “One in essence,” peace being the object which we set
before us, and stedfastness in the orthodox view.

<span id="ix.ii-p22"></span>6. In the same way we also admitted
“begotten, not made;” since the Council alleged that “made” was an
appellative common to the other creatures which came to be through the
Son, to whom the Son had no likeness. Wherefore, say they, He was not a
work resembling the things which through Him came to be <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) , but was of an essence which is too
high for the level of any work; and which the Divine oracles teach to
have been generated from the Father <span
id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) , the mode of generation being
inscrutable and incalculable to every originated nature.

<span id="ix.ii-p25"></span>7. And so too on examination there are <span
id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span id="ix.ii-Page_76"></span>grounds for
saying that the Son is “one in essence” with the Father; not in the way
of bodies, nor like mortal beings, for He is not such by division of
essence, or by severance, no, nor by any affection, or alteration, or
changing of the Father’s essence and power <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) (since from all such the unoriginate
nature of the Father is alien), but because “one in essence with the
Father” suggests that the Son of God bears no resemblance to the
originated creatures, but that to His Father alone Who begat Him is He
in every way assimilated, and that He is not of any other subsistence
and essence, but from the Father <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422)
. To which term also, thus interpreted, it appeared well to assent;
since we were aware that even among the ancients, some learned and
illustrious Bishops and writers <span id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423)
have used the term “one in essence,” in their theological teaching
concerning the Father and Son.

<span id="ix.ii-p29"></span>8. So much then be said concerning the faith
which was published; to which all of us assented, not without inquiry,
but according to the specified senses, mentioned before the most
religious Emperor himself, and justified by the forementioned
considerations. And as to the anathematism published by them at the end
of the Faith, it did not pain us, because it forbade to use words not in
Scripture, from which almost all the confusion and disorder of the
Church have come. Since then no divinely inspired Scripture has used the
phrases, “out of nothing,” and “once He was not,” and the rest which
follow, there appeared no ground for using or teaching them; to which
also we assented as a good decision, since it had not been our custom
hitherto to use these terms.

<span id="ix.ii-p30"></span>9. Moreover to anathematize “Before His
generation He was not,” did not seem preposterous, in that it is
confessed by all, that the Son of God was before the generation
according to the flesh <span id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) .

<span id="ix.ii-p32"></span>10. Nay, our most religious Emperor did at
the time prove, in a speech, that He was in being even according to His
divine generation which is before all ages, since even before He was
generated in energy, He was in virtue <span
id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) with the Father ingenerately, the
Father being always Father, as King always, and Saviour always, being
all things in virtue, and being always in the same respects and in the
same way.

<span id="ix.ii-p34"></span>11. This we have been forced to transmit to
you, Beloved, as making clear to you the deliberation of our inquiry and
assent, and how reasonably we resisted even to the last minute as long
as we were offended at statements which differed from our own, but
received without contention what no longer pained us, as soon as, on a
candid examination of the sense of the words, they appeared to us to
coincide with what we ourselves have professed in the faith which we
have already published.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_412"></span>[74:413](2040160.htm#fr_412) <span
id="ix.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> This Letter is also found in Socr. *H. E.*
i. 8. Theod. *H. E*. i. Gelas. *Hist. Nic.* ii. 34. p. 442. Niceph.
*Hist.* viii. 22.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[74:414](2040160.htm#fr_413) <span
id="ix.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span> And so infr. “most pious,” §4. “most wise
and most religious,” ibid. “most religious,” §8. §10. Eusebius observes
in his *Vit. Const.* the same tone concerning Constantine, and assigns
to him the same office in determining the faith (being as yet
unbaptized). E.g. “When there were differences between persons of
different countries, as if some common bishop appointed by God, he
convened Councils of God’s ministers; and not disdaining to be present
and to sit amid their conferences,” &c. i. 44. When he came into the
Nicene Council, “it was,” says Eusebius, “as some heavenly Angel of
God,” iii. 10. alluding to the brilliancy of the imperial purple. He
confesses, however, he did not sit down until the Bishops bade him.
Again at the same Council, “with pleasant eyes looking serenity itself
into them all, collecting himself, and in a quiet and gentle voice” he
made an oration to the Fathers upon peace. Constantine had been an
instrument in conferring such vast benefits, humanly speaking, on the
Christian Body, that it is not wonderful that other writers of the day
besides Eusebius should praise him. Hilary speaks of him as “of sacred
memory,” *Fragm.* v. init. Athanasius calls him “most pious,” *Apol.
contr. Arian.* 9; “of blessed memory,” *ad Ep. Æg.* 18. 19. Epiphanius
“most religious and of ever-blessed memory,” *Hær.* 70. 9. Posterity, as
was natural, was still more grateful.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[74:415](2040160.htm#fr_414) <span
id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span> “The children of the Church have received
from their holy Fathers, that is, the holy Apostles, to guard the faith;
and withal to deliver and preach it to their own children….Cease not,
faithful and orthodox men, thus to speak, and to teach the like from the
divine Scriptures, and to walk, and to catechise, to the confirmation of
yourselves and those who hear you; namely, that holy faith of the
Catholic Church, as the holy and only Virgin of God received its custody
from the holy Apostles of the Lord; and thus, in the case of each of
those who are under catechising, who are to approach the Holy Laver, ye
ought not only to preach faith to your children in the Lord, but also to
teach them expressly, as your common mother teaches, to say: ‘We believe
in One God,’” &c. Epiph. *Ancor.* 119 fin., who thereupon proceeds to
give at length the \[so-called\] Constantinopolitan Creed. And so Athan.
speaks of the orthodox faith, as “issuing from Apostolical teaching and
the Fathers’ traditions, and confirmed by New and Old Testament.”
*Letter* 60. 6. init. Cyril Hier. too as “declared by the Church and
established from all Scripture.” *Cat.* v. 12. “Let us guard with
vigilance what we have *received*…What then have we received from the
*Scriptures* but altogether this? that God made the world by the Word,”
&c., &c. Procl. *ad Armen.* p. 612. “That God, the Word, after the union
remained such as He was, &c., so clearly hath divine Scripture, and
moreover the doctors of the Churches, and the lights of the world taught
us.” Theodor. *Dial.* 3 init. “That it is the tradition of the Fathers
is not the whole of our case; for they too followed the meaning of
Scripture, starting from the testimonies, which just now we laid before
you from Scripture.” Basil *de Sp.* §16. vid. also a remarkable passage
in *de Synod.* §6 fin. infra.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[74:416](2040160.htm#fr_415) <span
id="ix.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span> <span id="ix.ii-p11.1"></span>[Matt.
xxviii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="ix.ii-p11.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[75:417](2040160.htm#fr_416) <span
id="ix.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span> \[Or, ‘taking the addition as their
pretext.’\]

<span id="fn_417"></span>[75:418](2040160.htm#fr_417) <span
id="ix.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p19"></span> The only clauses of the Creed which admit
of any question in their explanation, are the “He was not before His
generation,” and “of other subsistence or essence.” Of these the former
shall be reserved for a later part of the volume; the latter is treated
of in a note at the end of this Treatise \[see Excursus A.\].

<span id="fn_418"></span>[75:419](2040160.htm#fr_418) <span
id="ix.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p21"></span> Eusebius does not commit himself to any
positive sense in which the formula “of the essence” is to be
interpreted, but only says what it does not mean. His comment on it is
“of the Father, but not as a part;” where, what is not negative, instead
of being an explanation, is but a recurrence to the original words of
Scripture, of which <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p21.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p21.3"></span>ξ οὐσίας</span> itself is the explanation; a
curious inversion. Indeed it is very doubtful whether he admitted the
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p21.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p21.6"></span>ξ οὐσίας</span> at all. He
says, that the Son is not like the radiance of light so far as this,
that the radiance is an inseparable accident of substance, whereas the
Son is by the Father’s will, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p21.8"></span>κατὰ γνώμην καὶ προαίρεσιν</span>, *Demonstr.
Ev.* iv. 3. And though he insists on our Lord being *alone,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p21.10"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p21.11"></span>κ θεοῦ</span>, yet he means
in the sense which Athan. refutes, supr. §6, viz. that He alone was
created immediately from God, vid. next note 6. It is true that he
plainly condemns with the Nicene Creed the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p21.13"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p21.14"></span>ξ οὐκ ὄντων</span> of the Arians, “out of
nothing,” but an evasion was at hand here also; for he not only adds,
according to Arian custom, “as others” (vid. note following) but he has
a theory that no being whatever is out of nothing, for non-existence
cannot be the cause of existence. God, he says, “proposed His own will
and power as ‘a sort of matter and substance’ of the production and
constitution of the universe, so that it is not reasonably said, that
any thing is out of nothing. For what is from nothing cannot be at all.
How indeed can nothing be to any thing a cause of being? but all that
is, takes its being *from One* who only is, and was, who also said ‘I am
that I am.’” *Demonstr. Ev.* iv. 1. Again, speaking of our Lord, “He who
was from nothing would not truly be Son of God, ‘as neither is any other
of things generate.’” *Eccl. Theol.* i. 9 fin. \[see, however, D.C.B.
ii. p. 347\].

<span id="fn_419"></span>[75:420](2040160.htm#fr_419) <span
id="ix.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p23"></span> Eusebius distinctly asserts, *Dem. Ev.* iv.
2, that our Lord is a creature. “This offspring,” he says, “did He first
produce Himself from Himself as a foundation of those things which
should succeed, the perfect handy-work, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p23.2"></span>δημιούργημα</span>, of the Perfect, and the wise
structure, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p23.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p23.5"></span>ρχιτεκτόνημα</span>, of the Wise,” &c.
Accordingly his avowal in the text is but the ordinary Arian evasion of
“an offspring, not as the offsprings.” E.g. “It is not without peril to
say recklessly that the Son is originate out of nothing ‘similarly to
the other things originate.’” *Dem. Ev.* v. 1. vid. also *Eccl. Theol.*
i. 9. iii. 2. And he considers our Lord the only Son by a divine
provision similar to that by which there is only one sun in the
firmament, as a *centre* of light and heat. “Such an Only-begotten Son,
the excellent artificer of His will and operator, did the supreme God
and Father of that operator Himself first of all beget, through Him and
in Him giving subsistence to the operative words (ideas or causes) of
things which were to be, and casting in Him the seeds of the
constitution and governance of the universe;…Therefore the Father being
One, it behoved the Son to be one also; but should any one object that
He constituted not more, it is fitting for such a one to complain that
He constituted not more suns, and moons, and worlds, and ten thousand
other things.” *Dem. Ev.* iv. 5 fin. vid. also iv. 6.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[75:421](2040160.htm#fr_420) <span
id="ix.ii-p23.7"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p24"></span> Eusebius does not say that our Lord is
“from the essence of” the Father, but has “an essence from” the Father.
This is the Semi-arian doctrine, which, whether confessing the Son from
the essence of the Father or not, implied that His essence was not the
Father’s essence, but a second essence. The same doctrine is found in
the Semi-arians of Ancyra, though they seem to have confessed “of the
essence.” And this is one object of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.2"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.3"></span>μοούσιον</span>, to hinder the confession “of
the essence” from implying a second essence, which was not obviated or
was even encouraged by the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.5"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.6"></span>μοιούσιον</span>. The Council of Ancyra, quoting
the text “As the Father hath life in Himself so,” &c., says, “since the
life which is in the Father means essence, and the life of the
Only-begotten which is begotten from the Father means essence, the word
‘so’ implies a likeness of essence to essence.” *Hær.* 73. 10 fin. Hence
Eusebius does not scruple to speak of “two essences,” and other writers
of three essences, *contr. Marc.* i. 4. p. 25. He calls our Lord “a
second essence.” *Dem. Ev.* vi. *Præf. Præp. Ev.* vii. 12. p. 320, and
the Holy Spirit a third essence, ibid. 15. p. 325. This it was that made
the Latins so suspicions of three hypostases, because the Semi-arians,
as well as they, understood <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.8"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.9"></span>πόστασις</span> to mean essence \[but this is
dubious\]. Eusebius in like manner \[after Origen\] calls our Lord
“another God,” “a second God.” *Dem. Ev.* v. 4. p. 226. v. fin. “second
Lord.” ibid. 3 init. 6. fin. “second cause.” *Dem. Ev.* v. *Præf*. vid.
also <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p24.11"></span>ἕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p24.12"></span>τερον ἔχουσα τὸ κατ᾽ οὐσίαν
ὑποκείμενον</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.13"></span>,</span> *Dem. Ev.* v. 1. p. 215. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p24.14"></span>καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν
οὐσιωμένος</span>. ibid. iv. 3. And so <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.16"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.17"></span>τερος παρὰ τὸν πατέρα</span>. *Eccl. Theol.* i.
60. p. 90. and <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p24.19"></span>ζωὴν
ἰδίαν ἔχων</span>. ibid. and <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p24.21"></span>ζῶν καὶ ὑφεστὼς καὶ τοῦ πατρὸς ὑπάρχων
ἔκτος.</span> ibid. Hence Athan. insists so much, as in *de Decr.,* on
our Lord *not* being external to the Father. Once admit that He is in
the Father, and we may call the Father, the *only* God, for He is
included. And so again as to the Ingenerate, the term does not exclude
the Son, for He is generate in the Ingenerate.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[76:422](2040160.htm#fr_421) <span
id="ix.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p26"></span> This was the point on which the Semi-arians
made their principal stand against the “one in essence,” though they
also objected to it as being of a Sabellian character. E.g. Euseb.
*Demonstr.* iv. 3. p. 148. d.p. 149. a, b. v. 1. pp. 213–215. *contr.
Marcell.* i. 4. p. 20. *Eccl. Theol.* i. 12. p. 73. *in laud.* *Const.*
p. 525. *de Fide* i. ap. Sirmond. tom. i. p. 7. *de Fide* ii. p. 16, and
apparently his *de Incorporali.* And so the Semi-arians at Ancyra Epiph.
*Hær.* 73. 11. p. 858. a, b. And so Meletius ibid. p. 878 fin. and Cyril
Hier. *Catech.* vii. 5. xi. 18. though of course Catholics would speak
as strongly on this point as their opponents.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[76:423](2040160.htm#fr_422) <span
id="ix.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p27"></span> Here again Eusebius does not say “from the
Father’s essence,” but “not from other essence, but from the Father.”
According to note 5, supr. he considered the will of God a certain
matter or substance. Montfaucon in loc. and *Collect. Nov.* Præf. p.
xxvi. translates without warrant “ex Patris hypostasi et substantiâ.” As
to the Son’s perfect likeness to the Father which he seems here to
grant, it has been already shewn, *de Decr.* 20, note 9, how the
admission was evaded. The likeness was but a likeness after its own
kind, as a picture is of the original. “Though our Saviour Himself
teaches,” he says, “that the Father is the ‘only true God,’ still let me
not be backward to confess Him also the true God, ‘as in an image,’ and
that possessed; so that the addition of ‘only’ may belong to the Father
alone as archetype of the image.…As, supposing one king held sway, and
his image was carried about into every quarter, no one in his right mind
would say that those who held sway were two, but one who was honoured
through his image; in like manner,” &c. *de Eccles. Theol.* ii. 23, vid.
*ibid.* 7.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[76:424](2040160.htm#fr_423) <span
id="ix.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p28"></span> Athanasius in like manner, *ad Afros.* 6.
speaks of “testimony of ancient Bishops about 130 years since;” and in
*de Syn.* §43. of “long before” the Council of Antioch, <span
class="c10"><span id="ix.ii-p28.2"></span>a.d.</span> 269. viz. the
Dionysii, &c. vid. note on *de Decr.* 20.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[76:425](2040160.htm#fr_424) <span
id="ix.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p31"></span> Socrates, who advocates the orthodoxy of
Eusebius, leaves out this heterodox paragraph \[§§9, 10\] altogether.
Bull, however, *Defens. F. N.* iii. 9. n. 3. thinks it an interpolation.
Athanasius alludes to the early part of the clause, supr. §4. and *de
Syn.* §13. where he says, that Eusebius implied that the Arians denied
even our Lord’s existence before His incarnation. As to Constantine, he
seems to have been used on these occasions by the court Bishops who were
his instructors, and who made him the organ of their own heresy. Upon
the first rise of the Arian controversy he addressed a sort of pastoral
letter to Alexander and Arius, telling them that they were disputing
about a question of words, and recommending them to drop it and live
together peaceably. Euseb. *vit. C.* ii. 69. 72.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[76:426](2040160.htm#fr_425) <span
id="ix.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p33"></span> \[Rather ‘potentially’ both here and three
lines below.\] Theognis, \[one\] of the Nicene Arians, says the same,
according to Philostorgius; viz. “that God even before He begat the Son
was a Father, as having the power, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii-p33.2"></span>δύναμις</span>, of begetting.” *Hist.* ii. 15.
Though Bull pronounces such doctrine to be heretical, as of course it
is, still he considers that it expresses what *otherwise* stated may be
orthodox, viz. the doctrine that our Lord was called the Word from
eternity, and the Son upon His descent to create the worlds. And he
acutely and ingeniously interprets the Arian formula, “Before His
generation He was not,” to support this view. Another opportunity will
occur of giving an opinion upon this question; meanwhile, the *parallel*
on which the heretical doctrine is supported in the text is answered by
many writers, on the ground that Father and Son are words of nature, but
Creator, King, Saviour, are external, or what may be called accidental
to Him. Thus Athanasius observes, that Father actually implies Son, but
Creator only the power to create, as expressing a <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii-p33.4"></span>δύναμις</span>; “a maker is
before his works, but he who says Father, forthwith in Father implies
the existence of the Son.” *Orat*. iii. §6. vid. Cyril too, *Dial.* ii.
p. 459. Pseudo-Basil, *contr. Eun.* iv. 1. fin. On the other hand Origen
argues the reverse way, that since God is eternally a Father, therefore
eternally Creator also: “As one cannot be father without a son, nor lord
without possession, so neither can God be called All-powerful, without
subjects of His power;” *de Princ.* i. 2. n. 10. hence he argued for the
eternity of matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus A.](2040161)
