[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040059)  [Next](2040061.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.xv"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xv-p1"></span> §15. *The details about the gods
conveyed in the representations of them by poets and artists shew that
they are without life, and that they are not gods, nor even decent men
and women.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.xv-p2"></span>For would that the artist would fashion
the gods even without shape, so that they might not be open to so
manifest an exposure of their lack of sense. For they might have cajoled
the perception of simple folk to think the idols had senses, were it not
that they possess the symbols of the senses, eyes for example and noses
and ears and hands and mouth, without any gesture of actual perception
and grasp of the objects of sense. But as a matter of fact they have
these things and have them not, stand and stand not, sit and sit not.
For they have not the real action of these things, but as their
fashioner pleased, so they remain stationary, giving no sign of a god,
but evidently mere inanimate objects, set there by man’s art. 2. Or
would that the heralds and prophets of these false gods, poets I mean
and writers, had simply written that they were gods, and not also
recounted their actions as an exposure of their godlessness and
scandalous life. For by the mere name of godhead they might have filched
away the truth, or rather have caused the mass of men to err from the
truth. But as it is, by narrating the loves and immoralities of Zeus,
and the corruptions of youths by the other gods, and the voluptuous
jealousies of the females, and the fears and acts of cowardice and other
wickednesses, they merely convict themselves of narrating not merely
about no gods, but not even about respectable men, but on the contrary,
of telling tales about shameful persons far removed from what is
honourable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Heathen arguments in palliation of the above: and (1) 'the poets
are responsible for these unedifying tales.' But are the names and
existence of the gods any better authenticated? Both stand or fall
together. Either the actions must be defended or the deity of the gods
given up. And the heroes are not credited with acts inconsistent with
their nature, as, on this plea, the gods are.](2040061.md)
