[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040158)  [Next](2040160.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="ix.i-Page_73"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>Epistola Eusebii.</span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span><span class="c40"><span
id="ix.i-p3.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="ix.i-p4.1"></span>The</span> letter which follows, addressed by
Eusebius of Cæsarea to his flock, upon the conclusion of the great
Synod, is appended by Athanasius to his defense of the Definition of
Nicæa (*de Decretis*), written about <span class="c10"><span
id="ix.i-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 350. It is, however, inserted here in
the present edition, partly in accordance with the chronological
principle of arrangement, but principally because it forms the fittest
introduction to the series of treatises which follow. Along with the
account of Eustathius in Theodoret *H. E.* i. 8, and that given by
Eusebius, in his life of Constantine (vol. I. pp. 521–526 of this
series), it forms one of our most important authorities for the
proceedings at Nicæa, and the only account we have dating from the
actual year of the Council. It is especially important as containing the
draft Creed submitted to the Council by Eusebius, and the revised form
of it eventually adopted. The former, which contained (in the *first
paragraph* of §3, from ‘We believe’ down to ‘One Holy Ghost’) the
traditional Creed of the Church of Cæsarea, which Eusebius had professed
at his baptism, was laid by him before the Council, and approved: but at
the Emperor’s suggestion the single word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.i-p4.3"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> was inserted (not by ‘the
majority’ as distinct from the Emperor, as stated by Swainson, *Creeds,*
p. 65). This modification opened the door for others, which eventually
resulted in the Creed given in §4. It is not altogether easy to
reconcile this account with that given by Athanasius himself (below *de
Decr.* 19, 20, *Ad Afr.* 5), according to which the Council were led to
insist on the insertion of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.i-p4.4"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> by the evasions with which the
Arian bishops met every other test that was propounded, signalling to
each other by nods winks and gestures, as each Scriptural attribute of
the Son was enumerated, that this also could be accepted in an Arian
sense. Probably (see Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (1) note 5) the discussions
thus described came first (cp. Sozom. i. 17): then Eusebius of Nicomedia
presented the document which was indignantly torn up: then came the
Confession of Eusebius of Cæsarea, which was adopted as the basis of the
Creed finally issued. In any case the Emperor’s suggestion of the
insertion of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.i-p4.5"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> must have been prompted by
others, most likely by Hosius (*Hist. Ar.* 42, Cf. Hort, *Two
Dissertations,* p. 58. Gwatkin, *Studies,* pp. 44, 45, puts the scene
described by Athanasius during the debate upon the final adoption of the
Creed).

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>The translation which follows, with the notes
and Excursus A, is the unaltered work of Newman (Library of the Fathers,
vol. 8, pp. 59–72), except that the word ‘essence’ (for <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.i-p5.1"></span>οὐσία</span>), as throughout
this volume, has been substituted for ‘substance,’ and the translation
of <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.i-p5.2"></span>γενητός</span> by
‘generate’ altered wherever it occurs, as explained in the preface.
Additions by the editor of this volume are here as elsewhere included in
square brackets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter of Eusebius. (Epistola Eusebii.)](2040160.md)
