[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040414)  [Next](2040416) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Letter IV</span>.—*For 332. Easter-day
vii Pharmuthi* <span id="fr_4022"></span>[4023](#fn_4022) *, iv Non.
Apr.; Æra Dioclet. 48; Coss. Fabius Pacatianus, Mæcilius Hilarianus;
Præfect, Hyginus* <span id="fr_4023"></span>[4024](#fn_4023) *; Indict.
v.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p4"></span>He sent this Letter from the
Emperor’s Court by a soldier <span id="fr_4024"></span>[4025](#fn_4024)
.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p6"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>I send</span> unto you, my beloved, late
and beyond the accustomed time <span
id="fr_4025"></span>[4026](#fn_4025) ; yet I trust you will forgive the
delay, on account of my protracted journey, and because I have been
tried with illness. Being hindered by these two causes, and unusually
severe storms having occurred, <span id="page_516">p. 516</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-Page_516"></span>I have deferred writing to you. But
notwithstanding my long journeys, and my grievous sickness, I have not
forgotten to give you the festal notification, and, in discharge of my
duty, I now announce to you the feast. For although the date of this
letter is later <span id="fr_4026"></span>[4027](#fn_4026) than that
usual for this announcement, it should still be considered well-timed,
since our enemies having been put to shame and reproved by the Church,
because they persecuted us without a cause <span
id="fr_4027"></span>[4028](#fn_4027) , we may now sing a festal song of
praise, uttering the triumphant hymn against Pharaoh; ‘We will sing unto
the Lord, for He is to be gloriously praised; the horse and his rider He
hath cast into the sea <span id="fr_4028"></span>[4029](#fn_4028) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p11"></span>2. It is well, my beloved, to
proceed from feast to feast; again festal meetings, again holy vigils
arouse our minds, and compel our intellect to keep vigil unto
contemplation of good things. Let us not fulfil these days like those
that mourn, but, by enjoying spiritual food, let us seek to silence our
fleshly lusts <span id="fr_4029"></span>[4030](#fn_4029) . For by these
means we shall have strength to overcome our adversaries, like blessed
Judith <span id="fr_4030"></span>[4031](#fn_4030) , when having first
exercised herself in fastings and prayers, she overcame the enemies, and
killed Olophernes. And blessed Esther, when destruction was about to
come on all her race, and the nation of Israel was ready to perish,
defeated the fury of the tyrant by no other means than by fasting and
prayer to God, and changed the ruin of her people into safety <span
id="fr_4031"></span>[4032](#fn_4031) . Now as those days are considered
feasts for Israel, so also in old time feasts were appointed when an
enemy was slain, or a conspiracy against the people broken up, and
Israel delivered. Therefore blessed Moses of old time ordained the great
feast of the Passover, and our celebration of it, because, namely,
Pharaoh was killed, and the people were delivered from bondage. For in
those times it was especially, when those who tyrannized over the people
had been slain, that temporal feasts and holidays were observed in
Judæa <span id="fr_4032"></span>[4033](#fn_4032) .

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p16"></span>3. Now, however, that the devil,
that tyrant against the whole world, is slain, we do not approach a
temporal feast, my beloved, but an eternal and heavenly. Not in shadows
do we shew it forth, but we come to it in truth. For they being filled
with the flesh of a dumb lamb, accomplished the feast, and having
anointed their door-posts with the blood, implored aid against the
destroyer <span id="fr_4033"></span>[4034](#fn_4033) . But now we,
eating of the Word of the Father, and having the lintels of our hearts
sealed with the blood of the New Testament <span
id="fr_4034"></span>[4035](#fn_4034) , acknowledge the grace given us
from the Saviour, who said, ‘Behold, I have given unto you to tread upon
serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy <span
id="fr_4035"></span>[4036](#fn_4035) .’ For no more does death reign;
but instead of death henceforth is life, since our Lord said, ‘I am the
life <span id="fr_4036"></span>[4037](#fn_4036) ;’ so that everything is
filled with joy and gladness; as it is written, ‘The Lord reigneth, let
the earth rejoice.’ For when death reigned, ‘sitting down by the rivers
of Babylon, we wept <span id="fr_4037"></span>[4038](#fn_4037) ,’ and
mourned, because we felt the bitterness of captivity; but now that death
and the kingdom of the devil is abolished, everything is entirely filled
with joy and gladness. And God is no longer known only in Judæa, but in
all the earth, ‘their voice hath gone forth, and the knowledge of Him
hath filled all the earth <span id="fr_4038"></span>[4039](#fn_4038) .’
What follows, my beloved, is obvious; that we should approach such a
feast, not with filthy raiment, but having clothed our minds with pure
garments. For we need in this to put on our Lord Jesus <span
id="fr_4039"></span>[4040](#fn_4039) , that we may be able to celebrate
the feast with Him. Now we are clothed with Him when we love virtue, and
are enemies to wickedness, when we exercise ourselves in temperance and
mortify lasciviousness, when we love righteousness before iniquity, when
we honour sufficiency, and have strength of mind, when we do not forget
the poor, but open our doors to all men, when we assist
humble-mindedness, but hate pride.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p24"></span>4. By these things Israel of old,
having first, as in a figure, striven for the victory, came to the
feast, for these things were then foreshadowed and typified. But we, my
beloved, the shadow having received its fulfilment, and the types being
accomplished, should no longer consider the feast typical, neither
should we go up to Jerusalem which is here below, to sacrifice the
Passover, according to the unseasonable observance of the Jews, lest,
while the season passes away, we should be regarded as acting
unseasonably <span id="fr_4040"></span>[4041](#fn_4040) ; but, in
accordance with the injunction of the Apostles, let us go beyond the
types, and sing the new song of praise. For perceiving this, and being
assembled together with the Truth <span
id="fr_4041"></span>[4042](#fn_4041) , they drew near, and said unto our
Saviour, ‘Where wilt Thou that we should make ready for Thee the
Passover <span id="fr_4042"></span>[4043](#fn_4042) ?’ For no longer
were these things to be done which belonged to Jerusalem which is
beneath; neither there alone was the feast to be celebrated, but
wherever God willed it to be. Now <span id="page_517">p. 517</span>
<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-Page_517"></span>He willed it to be in every
place, so that ‘in every place incense and a sacrifice might be offered
to Him <span id="fr_4043"></span>[4044](#fn_4043) .’ For although, as in
the historical account, in no other place might the feast of the
Passover be kept save only in Jerusalem, yet when the things pertaining
to that time were fulfilled, and those which belonged to shadows had
passed away, and the preaching of the Gospel was about to extend
everywhere; when indeed the disciples were spreading the feast in all
places, they asked the Saviour, ‘Where wilt Thou that we shall make
ready?’ The Saviour also, since He was changing the typical for the
spiritual, promised them that they should no longer eat the flesh of a
lamb, but His own, saying, ‘Take, eat and drink; this is My body, and My
blood <span id="fr_4044"></span>[4045](#fn_4044) .’ When we are thus
nourished by these things, we also, my beloved, shall truly keep the
feast of the Passover.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p30"></span>5. We begin on the first of
Pharmuthi (Mar. 27<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p30.1"></span>), and rest on
the sixth of the same month (Apr. 1), on the evening of the seventh day;
and the holy first day of the week having risen upon us on the seventh
of the same Pharmuthi (Apr. 2), celebrate we too the days of holy
Pentecost following thereon, shewing forth through them the world to
come <span id="fr_4045"></span>[4046](#fn_4045) , so that henceforth we
may be with Christ for ever, praising God over all in Christ Jesus, and
through Him, with all saints, we say unto the Lord, Amen. Salute one
another with a holy kiss. All the brethren who are with me salute you.
We have sent this letter from the Court, by the hand of an attendant
officer <span id="fr_4046"></span>[4047](#fn_4046) , to whom it was
given by Ablavius <span id="fr_4047"></span>[4048](#fn_4047) , the
Præfect of the Prætorium, who fears God in truth. For I am at the Court,
having been summoned by the emperor Constantine to see him. But the
Meletians, who were present there, being envious, sought our ruin before
the Emperor. But they were put to shame and driven away thence as
calumniators, being confuted by many things. Those who were driven away
were Callinicus, Ision, Eudæmon, and Gelœus <span
id="fr_4048"></span>[4049](#fn_4048) Hieracammon, who, on account of the
shame of his name, calls himself Eulogius.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p35"></span>Here endeth the fourth Festal
Letter of holy Athanasius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4022"></span>[515:4023](2040415.htm#fr_4022) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p2"></span> The Syriac text has 17th instead of
7th. There is the same error in the index. The correct day is given
towards the end of the Letter.

<span id="fn_4023"></span>[515:4024](2040415.htm#fr_4023) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p3"></span> There is sometimes a difficulty, in
the absence of independent testimony, in ascertaining the exact
orthography of the proper names, from the loose manner in which they are
written in the Syriac. Here, however, it is clearly Hyginus, as in
Sozomen, lib. ii. c. 25, Larsow writes it Eugenius. He has also the 46th
instead of the 48th of the Diocletian Æra. The word ‘Fabius’ is not
clear. In Baronii *Annal. Eccles,* however, we find it Ovinius.

<span id="fn_4024"></span>[515:4025](2040415.htm#fr_4024) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p5"></span> See note 6 at the end of the
Letter.

<span id="fn_4025"></span>[515:4026](2040415.htm#fr_4025) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p7"></span> In the index it is stated that the
*third,* but not that the *fourth,* Letter was sent late, but see
*Letter* 3, note 1.

<span id="fn_4026"></span>[516:4027](2040415.htm#fr_4026) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p8"></span> i.e. too late to give notice of the
beginning of Lent, *infr.* §5, and *Letter* 5, §6.

<span id="fn_4027"></span>[516:4028](2040415.htm#fr_4027) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p9"></span> Constantine, in his letter, *supr.*
p. 133, speaks of the envy of the accusers of Athan. and of their
unsuccessful efforts to criminate him.

<span id="fn_4028"></span>[516:4029](2040415.htm#fr_4028) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p10"></span> [Exod. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4029"></span>[516:4030](2040415.htm#fr_4029) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>τοῖς τῆς σαρκὸς ἐπιτιμῶντες
πάθεσιν</span>. S. Cyril. *Hom. Pasch.* xx.

<span id="fn_4030"></span>[516:4031](2040415.htm#fr_4030) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p13"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>[Judith xiii.
8](../../../bib/apo/jdt013.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p13.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4031"></span>[516:4032](2040415.htm#fr_4031) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p13.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p14"></span> [Esther iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#016)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4032"></span>[516:4033](2040415.htm#fr_4032) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p15"></span> Cf. [Esth.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#020), [Jdt.
9:0](../../../bib/apo/jdt009.htm#000), [Jdt.
15:0](../../../bib/apo/jdt015.htm#000)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4033"></span>[516:4034](2040415.htm#fr_4033) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p17"></span> Conf. S. Cyril. *Hom. Pasch.*
xxiv. p. 293. Ed. Paris, 1638.

<span id="fn_4034"></span>[516:4035](2040415.htm#fr_4034) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p18"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p18.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4035"></span>[516:4036](2040415.htm#fr_4035) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p18.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p19"></span> [Luke x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>, *Vit. Ant*. 30.

<span id="fn_4036"></span>[516:4037](2040415.htm#fr_4036) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p20"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4037"></span>[516:4038](2040415.htm#fr_4037) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p21"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>[Ps. xcvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p21.3"></span>; cxxxvii. 1.

<span id="fn_4038"></span>[516:4039](2040415.htm#fr_4038) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p21.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p22"></span> [Ps.
76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001), [Ps.
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4039"></span>[516:4040](2040415.htm#fr_4039) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p23"></span> Cf. [Rom. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4040"></span>[516:4041](2040415.htm#fr_4040) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p25"></span> Cf. *Letter* i. (beginning)

<span id="fn_4041"></span>[516:4042](2040415.htm#fr_4041) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p26"></span> σὺν τῇ ἀληθεί& 139·. I understand
this as referring to Christ. Vid. <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p26.3"></span>[John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p26.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_4042"></span>[516:4043](2040415.htm#fr_4042) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p26.6"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p27"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p27.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p27.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4043"></span>[517:4044](2040415.htm#fr_4043) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p27.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p28"></span> [Mal. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4044"></span>[517:4045](2040415.htm#fr_4044) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p29"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p29.1"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
26-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="fn_4045"></span>[517:4046](2040415.htm#fr_4045) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p31"></span> Cf. Bingham, xx. ch. 6; Cass.
*Coll.* xxi. 11; Cyril uses the same comparison towards the end of his
26th Paschal discourse.

<span id="fn_4046"></span>[517:4047](2040415.htm#fr_4046) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p32"></span>‘Officilius.’ Cureton considers
this may be an error for the Latin Officialis.

<span id="fn_4047"></span>[517:4048](2040415.htm#fr_4047) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p33"></span> Ablavius, Præfect of the East, the
minister and favourite of Constantine the Great, was murdered after the
death of the latter. He was consul in the preceding year. Zozimus ii.
40. (Smith’s *Dict. of Gr. and Rom. Biography.*)

<span id="fn_4048"></span>[517:4049](2040415.htm#fr_4048) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.iv-p34"></span> The name means ‘Laughable.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: For 333. Easter-day, Coss. Dalmatius and Zenophilus; Præfect,
Paternus; vi Indict.; xvii Kal. Maii, xx Pharmuthi; xv Moon; vii Gods;
Æra Dioclet. 49.](2040416)
