[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040236)  [Next](2040238.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.xxvi-p1"></span> 63. Afterwards, on another occasion,
having descended to the outer cells, he was asked to enter a vessel and
pray with the monks, and he alone perceived an exceedingly unpleasant
smell. But those on board said that the stench arose from the fish and
salt meat in the ship. He replied however, the smell was different from
that; and while he was speaking, a youth with an evil spirit, who had
come and hidden himself in the ship, cried out. But the demon being
rebuked in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ departed from him, and the
man became whole. And all knew that the evil smell arose from the demon.

<span id="xvi.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>64. And another, a person of rank, came
to him, possessed by a demon; and the demon was so terrible that the man
possessed did not know that he was coming to Antony. But he even ate the
excreta from his body. So those who brought him besought Antony to pray
for him. And Antony pitying the young man prayed and kept watch with him
all the night. And about dawn the young man suddenly attacked Antony and
gave him a push. But when those who came with him were angry, Antony
said, ‘Be not angry with the young man, for it is not he, but the demon
which is in him. And being rebuked and commanded to go into dry places,
the demon became raging mad, and he has done this. Wherefore give thanks
to the Lord, for his attack on me thus is a sign of the departure of the
evil spirit.’ When Antony had said this, straightway the young man had
become whole, and having come at last to his right mind, knew where he
was, and saluted the old man and gave thanks to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 65](2040238.md)
