[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040301)  [Next](2040303) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="xix.i-Page_254"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to Apologia de Fuga.</span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xix.i-p3.1"></span>The</span> date of this Defence of his Flight
must be placed early enough to fall within the lifetime, or very close
to the death (§1. n. 1), of Leontius of Antioch, and late enough to
satisfy the references (§6) to the events at the end of May 357 (see
notes there), and to the lapse of Hosius, the exact date of which again
depends upon that of the Sirmian Council of 357, which, *if held the
presence of Constantius,* must have fallen as late as August (Gwatk.
*Stud.* 157, n. 3). Athanasius not only refers to the lapse of Hosius,
but by the quotation he makes from [Gal. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)<span id="xix.i-p3.2"></span>,
appears to know of its merely temporary nature (see D.C.B. iii. 173).
How early, then, does the first-named condition compel us to place the
‘Defence?’ Upon the news of the death of Leontius reaching Italy (Soz.
iv. 12), Eudoxius obtained the leave of Constantius (who was in Italy,
April 28 to July 3, 357, and again, Nov. 10 to Dec. 10, Gwatk. p. 292),
to repair to Antioch. There he got himself elected bishop, assembled a
council (Acacius and other Homœans), and wrote a synodal letter,
expelling from the Antiochene Church those who dissented. Some of the
latter repaired to Ancyra with a letter from the semi-Arian George of
Laodicea; at Ancyra, Basil assembled a small council (before Easter,
April 12, 358, see D.C.B. i. 281, Epiph. *Hær*. 73), which wrote to the
Emperor protesting against the proceedings of Eudoxius. To gain room for
these events, at the very least five months, and probably more, must be
allowed to elapse between the death of Leontius and April 12, 358.
Leontius must therefore have died in the summer (Gwatk. p. 153, note),
or at the very latest in October, 357. We cannot, therefore, place the
Apology much after this date, for the reference to Hosius shews—in
addition to many other indications—how quickly Athanasius in his
hiding-place was informed of current events.

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span>The Apology was drawn forth by the charge of
cowardice circulated against him by the Arianising party, especially by
the three bishops named in §1. After a preamble upon the motives of his
accusers (1, 2), he shews that his own case is but part of a general
system (3–5) of expatriation directed against orthodox bishops. He then
refers to the circumstance of the attack upon himself, and dwells at
length upon the tyranny of George (6, 7) and the banishment of Egyptian
and Libyan bishops. This brings him to the argument (8–22) which gives
its name to the tract. After pressing the point that if flight be evil,
those who persecute are the responsible cause (8, 9), and hinting at the
real motive of their mortification at his escape (10), he defends his
flight by the example first (10, 11) of the Scripture Saints, secondly
of the Lord Himself (12–15). From the latter, he returns to the conduct
of the Saints, who, unlike the Lord (16), were unaware of their
appointed time, yet fled or not (17) as circumstances and the direction
of the Spirit required them to do. The Saints if they fled were not
moved to do so by cowardice, else how could their flight so frequently
have been the occasion of divine communications (18–20), and how could
such good (21, 22) have resulted from it? As a pendant to this
vindication of flight on principle comes a short (23) but weighty rebuke
of persecution as inherently devilish <span class="Greek"><span
id="xix.i-p4.1"></span>τὸ δὲ διώκειν διαβολικόν ἐστιν ἐπιχείρημα</span>.
From principle, Athanasius now passes to fact. He gives a graphic
description (24) of the night attack on the Church of Theonas, and shews
(25, 26) how fully his action on that occasion is covered by the
examples of the ancient Saints of God. He concludes (26, 27) with a
somewhat exasperated denunciation of his opponents, and a prayer for the
frustration of their intrigues.

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>The Apology is a *locus classicus* on the
duty of Christians under persecution. Athanasius was not the first great
bishop who felt called upon to defend his conduct in retreating ‘until
the tyranny be overpast’ (see Cyprian, *Ep.* 20. August. *Ep*. 228). His
principles are laid down with regard to the common welfare. Rashness
must be avoided, with its tendency to a reaction (17, end), and its
presumption in forestalling the time appointed by Providence for our
death. But neither must that time be evaded. When our end must come, we
must face it quietly. Accordingly (22) it is a duty to escape when we
can, and to hide when sought for rather than to follow the exceptional
(ib.) action of certain martyrs in courting death.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>It is uncertain to whom the ‘Defence’ was
addressed: it was perhaps a ‘memorandum’ to be circulated wherever
opportunity offered. The tract has always been justly admired for its
lucidity, force, and dignity. It is quoted largely by Socrates (ii. 28,
iii. 8) and by Theodoret (*H. E*. ii. 15).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Defence of His Flight. (Apologia de Fuga.)](2040303)
