[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040084)  [Next](2040086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.iv-p1"></span> §38. *The Unity of God shewn by the
Harmony of the order of Nature*.

<span id="vi.ii.iii.iv-p2"></span>Since then, there is everywhere not
disorder but order, proportion and not disproportion, not disarray but
arrangement, and that in an order perfectly harmonious, we needs must
infer and be led to perceive the Master that put together and compacted
all things, and produced harmony in them. For though He be not seen with
the eyes, yet from the order and harmony of things contrary it is
possible to perceive their Ruler, Arranger, and King. 2. For in like
manner as if we saw a city, consisting of many and diverse people, great
and small, rich and poor, old and young, male and female, in an orderly
condition, and its inhabitants, while different from one another, yet at
unity among themselves, and not the rich set against the poor, the great
against the small, nor the young against the old, but all at peace in
the enjoyment of equal rights,—if we saw this, the inference surely
follows that the presence of a ruler enforces concord, even if we do not
see him; (for disorder is a sign of absence of rule, while order shews
the governing authority: for when we see the mutual harmony of the
members in the body, that the eye does not strive with the hearing, nor
is the hand at variance with the foot, but that each accomplishes its
service without variance, we perceive from this that certainly there is
a soul in the body that governs these members, though we see it not); so
in the order and harmony of the Universe, we needs must perceive God the
governor of it all, and that He is one and not many. 3. So then this
order of its arrangement, and the concordant harmony of all things,
shews that the Word, its Ruler and Governor, is not many, but One. For
if there were more than one Ruler of Creation, such an universal order
would not be maintained, but all things would fall into confusion
because of their plurality, each one biasing the whole to his own will,
and striving with the other. For just as we said that polytheism was
atheism, so it follows that the rule of more than one is the rule of
none. For each one would cancel the rule of the other, and none would
appear ruler, but there would be anarchy everywhere. But where no ruler
is, there disorder follows of course. 4. And conversely, the single
order and concord of the many and diverse shews that the ruler too is
one. For just as though one were to hear from a distance a lyre,
composed of many diverse strings, and marvel at the concord of its
symphony, in that its sound is composed neither of low notes
exclusively, nor high nor intermediate only, but all combine their
sounds in equal balance,—and would not fail to perceive from this that
the lyre was not playing itself, nor even being struck by more persons
than one, but that there was one musician, even if he did not see him,
who by his skill combined the sound of each string into the tuneful
symphony; so, the order of the whole universe being perfectly
harmonious, and there being no strife of the higher against the lower or
the lower against the higher, and all things making up one order, it is
consistent to think that the Ruler and King of all Creation is one and
not many, Who by His own light illumines and gives movement to all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Impossibility of a plurality of Gods.](2040086)
