[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040360)  [Next](2040362) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_348">p. 348</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-Page_348"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Discourse II.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p3.2"></span>Texts explained;
Fourthly,</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p3.3"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p3.4"></span>[Hebrews iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p3.5"></span></span> *Introduction; the Regula Fidei
counter to an Arian sense of the text; which is not supported by the
word ‘servant,’ nor by ‘made’ which occurs in it; (how can the Judge be
among the ‘works’ which ‘God will bring into judgment?’) nor by
‘faithful;’ and is confuted by the immediate context, which is about
Priesthood; and by the foregoing passage, which explains the word
‘faithful’ as meaning trustworthy, as do* <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p3.6"></span>*1 Pet. iv*. *fin. and other texts. On the
whole* made *may safely be understood either of the divine generation or
the human creation.*

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p4"></span>1. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>I did</span> indeed think that enough had
been said already against the hollow professors of Arius’s madness,
whether for their refutation or in the truth’s behalf, to insure a
cessation and repentance of their evil thoughts and words about the
Saviour. They, however, for whatever reason, still do not succumb; but,
as swine and dogs wallow <span id="fr_2209"></span>[2210](#fn_2209) in
their own vomit and their own mire, rather invent new expedients for
their irreligion. Thus they misunderstand the passage in the Proverbs,
‘The Lord hath created me a beginning of His ways for His works <span
id="fr_2210"></span>[2211](#fn_2210) ,’ and the words of the Apostle,
‘Who was faithful to Him that made Him <span
id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211) ,’ and straightway argue, that the
Son of God is a work and a creature. But although they might have
learned from what is said above, had they not utterly lost their power
of apprehension, that the Son is not from nothing nor in the number of
things originate at all, the Truth witnessing <span
id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212) it (for, being God, He cannot be a
work, and it is impious to call Him a creature, and it is of creatures
and works that we say, ‘out of nothing,’ and ‘it was not before its
generation’), yet since, as if dreading to desert their own fiction,
they are accustomed to allege the aforesaid passages of divine
Scripture, which have a good meaning, but are by them practised on, let
us proceed afresh to take up the question of the sense of these, to
remind the faithful, and to shew from each of these passages that they
have no knowledge at all of Christianity. Were it otherwise, they would
not have shut themselves up in the unbelief <span
id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213) of the present Jews <span
id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214) , but would have inquired and
learned <span id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215) that, whereas ‘In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God,’ in consequence, it was when at the good pleasure of the Father the
Word became man, that it was said of Him, as by John, ‘The Word became
flesh <span id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216) ;’ so by Peter, ‘He
hath made Him Lord and Christ <span id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217)
’;—as by means of Solomon in the Person of the Lord Himself, ‘The Lord
created me a beginning of His ways for His works <span
id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218) ;’ so by Paul, ‘Become so much
better than the Angels <span id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219) ;’ and
again, ‘He emptied Himself, and took upon Him the form of a
servant <span id="fr_2220"></span>[2221](#fn_2220) ;’ and again,
‘Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider
the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Jesus, who was faithful
to Him that made Him <span id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221) .’ For
all these texts have the same force and meaning, a religious one,
declarative of the divinity of the Word, even those of them which speak
humanly concerning Him, as having become the Son of man. But, though
this distinction is sufficient for their refutation, still, since from a
misconception of the Apostle’s words (to mention them first), they
consider the Word of God to be one of the works, because of its being
written, ‘Who was faithful to Him that made Him,’ I have thought it
needful to silence this further argument of theirs, taking in hand <span
id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222) , as before, their statement.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p19"></span><span id="page_349">p. 349</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-Page_349"></span>2. If then He be not a Son, let
Him be called a work, and let all that is said of works be said of Him,
nor let Him and Him alone be called Son, nor Word, nor Wisdom; neither
let God be called Father, but only Framer and Creator of things which by
Him come to be; and let the creature be Image and Expression of His
framing will, and let Him, as they would have it, be without generative
nature, so that there be neither Word, nor Wisdom, no, nor Image, of His
proper substance. For if He be not Son <span
id="fr_2223"></span>[2224](#fn_2223) , neither is He Image <span
id="fr_2224"></span>[2225](#fn_2224) . But if there be not a Son, how
then say you that God is a Creator? since all things that come to be are
through the Word and in Wisdom, and without This nothing can be, whereas
you say He hath not That in and through which He makes all things. For
if the Divine Essence be not fruitful itself <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2226](#fn_2225) , but barren, as they hold, as a
light that lightens not, and a dry fountain, are they not ashamed to
speak of His possessing framing energy? and whereas they deny what is by
nature, do they not blush to place before it what is by will <span
id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226) ? But if He frames things that are
external to Him and before were not, by willing them to be, and becomes
their Maker, much more will He first be Father of an Offspring from His
proper Essence. For if they attribute to God the willing about things
which are not, why recognise they not that in God which lies above the
will? now it is a something that surpasses will, that He should be by
nature, and should be Father of His proper Word. If then that which
comes first, which is according to nature, did not exist, as they would
have it in their folly, how could that which is second come to be, which
is according to will? for the Word is first, and then the creation. On
the contrary the Word exists, whatever they affirm, those irreligious
ones; for through Him did creation come to be, and God, as being Maker,
plainly has also His framing Word, not external, but proper to Him;—for
this must be repeated. If He has the power of will, and His will is
effective, and suffices for the consistence of the things that come to
be, and His Word is effective, and a Framer, that Word must surely be
the living Will <span id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227) of the
Father, and an essential <span id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228)
energy, and a real Word, in whom all things both consist and are
excellently governed. No one can even doubt, that He who disposes is
prior to the disposition and the things disposed. And thus, as I said,
God’s creating is second to His begetting; for Son implies something
proper to Him and truly from that blessed and everlasting Essence; but
what is from His will, comes into consistence from without, and is
framed through His proper Offspring who is from It.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p26"></span>3. As we have shewn then they are
guilty of great extravagance who say that the Lord is not Son of God,
but a work, and it follows that we all of necessity confess that He is
Son. And if He be Son, as indeed He is, and a son is confessed to be not
external to his father but from him, let them not question about the
terms, as I said before, which the sacred writers use of the Word
Himself, viz. not ‘to Him that begat Him,’ but ‘to Him that made Him;’
for while it is confessed what His nature is, what word is used in such
instances need raise no question <span
id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229) . For terms do not disparage His
Nature; rather that Nature draws to Itself those terms and changes them.
For terms are not prior to essences, but essences are first, and terms
second. Wherefore also when the essence is a work or creature, then the
words ‘He made,’ and ‘He became,’ and ‘He created,’ are used of it
properly, and designate the work. But when the Essence is an Offspring
and Son, then ‘He made,’ and ‘He became,’ and ‘He created,’ no longer
properly belong to it, nor designate a work; but ‘He made’ we use
without question for ‘He begat.’ Thus fathers often call the sons born
of them their servants, yet without denying the genuineness of their
nature; and often they affectionately call their own servants children,
yet without putting out of sight their purchase of them originally; for
they use the one appellation from their authority as being fathers, but
in the other they speak from affection. Thus Sara called Abraham lord,
though not a servant but a wife; and while to <span id="page_350">p.
350</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-Page_350"></span>Philemon the master
the Apostle joined Onesimus the servant as a brother, Bathsheba,
although mother, called her son servant, saying to his father, ‘Thy
servant Solomon <span id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230) ;’—afterwards
also Nathan the Prophet came in and repeated her words to David,
‘Solomon thy servant <span id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231) .’ Nor
did they mind calling the son a servant, for while David heard it, he
recognised the ‘nature,’ and while they spoke it, they forgot not the
‘genuineness,’ praying that he might be made his father’s heir, to whom
they gave the name of servant; for to David he was son by nature.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p30"></span>4. As then, when we read this, we
interpret it fairly, without accounting Solomon a servant because we
hear him so called, but a son natural and genuine, so also, if,
concerning the Saviour, who is confessed to be in truth the Son, and to
be the Word by nature, the saints say, ‘Who was faithful to Him that
made Him,’ or if He say of Himself, ‘The Lord created me,’ and, ‘I am
Thy servant and the Son of Thine handmaid <span
id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232) ,’ and the like, let not any on
this account deny that He is proper to the Father and from Him; but, as
in the case of Solomon and David, let them have a right idea of the
Father and the Son. For if, though they hear Solomon called a servant,
they acknowledge him to be a son, are they not deserving of many
deaths <span id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233) , who, instead of
preserving the same explanation in the instance of the Lord, whenever
they hear ‘Offspring,’ and ‘Word,’ and ‘Wisdom,’ forcibly misinterpret
and deny the generation, natural and genuine, of the Son from the
Father; but on hearing words and terms proper to a work, forthwith drop
down to the notion of His being by nature a work, and deny the Word; and
this, though it is possible, from His having been made man, to refer all
these terms to His humanity? And are they not proved to be ‘an
abomination’ also ‘unto the Lord,’ as having ‘diverse weights <span
id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234) ’ with them, and with this
estimating those other instances, and with that blaspheming the Lord?
But perhaps they grant that the word ‘servant’ is used under a certain
understanding, but lay stress upon ‘Who made’ as some great support of
their heresy. But this stay of theirs also is but a broken reed; for if
they are aware of the style of Scripture, they must at once give
sentence against <span id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235) themselves.
For as Solomon, though a son, is called a servant, so, to repeat what
was said above, although parents call the sons springing from themselves
‘made’ and ‘created’ and ‘becoming,’ for all this they do not deny their
nature. Thus Hezekiah, as it is written in Isaiah, said in his prayer,
‘From this day I will make children, who shall declare Thy
righteousness, O God of my salvation <span
id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236) .’ He then said, ‘I will make;’ but
the Prophet in that very book and the Fourth of Kings, thus speaks, ‘And
the sons who shall come forth of thee <span
id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237) .’ He uses then ‘make’ for ‘beget,’
and he calls them who were to spring from him, ‘made,’ and no one
questions whether the term has reference to a natural offspring. Again,
Eve on bearing Cain said, ‘I have gotten a man from the Lord <span
id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238) ;’ thus she too used ‘gotten’ for
‘brought forth.’ For, first she saw the child, yet next she said, ‘I
have gotten.’ Nor would any one consider, because of ‘I have gotten,’
that Cain was purchased from without, instead of being born of her.
Again, the Patriarch Jacob said to Joseph, ‘And now thy two sons,
Ephraim and Manasseh, which became thine in Egypt, before I came unto
thee into Egypt, are mine <span id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239) .’
And Scripture says about Job, ‘And there came to him seven sons and
three daughters <span id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240) .’ As Moses
too has said in the Law, ‘If sons become to any one,’ and ‘If he make a
son <span id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241) .’ Here again they speak
of those who are begotten, as ‘become’ and ‘made,’ knowing that, while
they are acknowledged to be sons, we need not make a question of ‘they
became,’ or ‘I have gotten,’ or ‘I made <span
id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242) .’ For nature and truth draw the
meaning to themselves.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p42"></span>5. This being so <span
id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243) , when persons ask whether the Lord
is a creature or work, it is proper to ask of them this first, whether
He is Son and Word and Wisdom. For if this is shewn, the surmise about
work and creation falls to the ground at once and is ended. For a work
could never be Son and Word; nor could the Son be a work. And again,
this being the state of the case, the proof is plain to all, that the
phrase, ‘To Him who made Him’ does not serve their heresy, but rather
condemns it. For it has been shewn that the expression ‘He made’ is
applied in divine Scripture even to children genuine and natural;
whence, the Lord being proved to be the Father’s Son naturally and
genuinely, and Word, and Wisdom, though ‘He made’ be used concerning
Him, or ‘He became,’ this is not said of Him as if a work, but the
saints make no question about using the expression,—for instance in the
case of Solomon, and Heze<span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-Page_351"></span>kiah’s children. For though the
fathers had begotten them from themselves, still it is written, ‘I have
made,’ and ‘I have gotten,’ and ‘He became.’ Therefore God’s enemies, in
spite of their repeated allegation of such phrases <span
id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244) , ought now, though late in the
day, after what has been said, to disown their irreligious thoughts, and
think of the Lord as of a true Son, Word, and Wisdom of the Father, not
a work, not a creature. For if the Son be a creature, by what word then
and by what wisdom was He made Himself <span
id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245) ? for all the works were made
through the Word and the Wisdom, as it is written, ‘In wisdom hast Thou
made them all,’ and, ‘All things were made by Him, and without Him was
not anything made <span id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246) .’ But if
it be He who is the Word and the Wisdom, by which all things come to be,
it follows that He is not in the number of works, nor in short of things
originate, but the Offspring of the Father.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p47"></span>6. For consider how grave an error it
is, to call God’s Word a work. Solomon says in one place in
Ecclesiastes, that ‘God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil <span
id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247) .’ If then the Word be a work, do
you mean that He as well as others will be brought into judgment? and
what room is there for judgment, when the Judge is on trial? who will
give to the just their blessing, who to the unworthy their punishment,
the Lord, as you must suppose, standing on trial with the rest? by what
law shall He, the Lawgiver, Himself be judged? These things are proper
to the works, to be on trial, to be blessed and to be punished by the
Son. Now then fear the Judge, and let Solomon’s words convince you. For
if God shall bring the works one and all into judgment, but the Son is
not in the number of things put on trial, but rather is Himself the
Judge of works one and all, is not the proof clearer than the sun, that
the Son is not a work but the Father’s Word, in whom all the works both
come to be and come into judgment? Further, if the expression, ‘Who was
faithful,’ is a difficulty to them, from the thought that ‘faithful’ is
used of Him as of others, as if He exercises faith and so receives the
reward of faith, they must proceed at this rate to find fault with Moses
for saying, ‘God faithful and true <span
id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248) ,’ and with St. Paul for writing,
‘God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able <span id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249) .’ But when the
saints spoke thus, they were not thinking of God in a human way, but
they acknowledged two senses of the word ‘faithful’ in Scripture, first
‘believing,’ then ‘trustworthy,’ of which the former belongs to man, the
latter to God. Thus Abraham was faithful, because He believed God’s
word; and God faithful, for, as David says in the Psalm, ‘The Lord is
faithful in all His words <span id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250) ,’
or is trustworthy, and cannot lie. Again, ‘If any faithful woman have
widows <span id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251) ,’ she is so called
for her right faith; but, ‘It is a faithful saying <span
id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252) ,’ because what He hath spoken has
a claim on our faith, for it is true, and is not otherwise. Accordingly
the words, ‘Who is faithful to Him that made Him,’ implies no parallel
with others, nor means that by having faith He became well-pleasing; but
that, being Son of the True God, He too is faithful, and ought to be
believed in all He says and does, Himself remaining unalterable and not
changed <span id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253) in His human Economy
and fleshly presence.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p55"></span>7. Thus then we may meet these men
who are shameless, and from the single expression ‘He made,’ may shew
that they err in thinking that the Word of God is a work. But further,
since the drift also of the context is orthodox, shewing the time and
the relation to which this expression points, I ought to shew from it
also how the heretics lack reason; viz. by considering, as we have done
above, the occasion when it was used and for what purpose. Now the
Apostle is not discussing things before the creation when he thus
speaks, but when ‘the Word became flesh;’ for thus it is written,
‘Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider
the Apostle and High Priest of our profession Jesus, who was faithful to
Him that made Him.’ Now when became He ‘Apostle,’ but when He put on our
flesh? and when became He ‘High Priest of our profession,’ but when,
after offering Himself for us, He raised His Body from the dead, and, as
now, Himself brings near and offers to the Father those who in faith
approach Him, redeeming all, and for all propitiating God? Not then as
wishing to signify the Essence of the Word nor His natural generation
from the Father, did the Apostle say, ‘Who was faithful to Him that made
Him’—(perish the thought! for the Word is not made, but makes)—but as
signifying His <span id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-Page_352"></span>descent to mankind and High-priesthood
which did ‘become’—as one may easily see from the account given of the
Law and of Aaron. I mean, Aaron was not born a high-priest, but a man;
and in process of time, when God willed, he became a high-priest; yet
became so, not simply, nor as betokened by his ordinary garments, but
putting over them the ephod, the breastplate <span
id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254) , the robe, which the women wrought
at God’s command, and going in them into the holy place, he offered the
sacrifice for the people; and in them, as it were, mediated between the
vision of God and the sacrifices of men. Thus then the Lord also, ‘In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God;’ but when the Father willed that ransoms should be paid for all and
to all, grace should be given, then truly the Word, as Aaron his robe,
so did He take earthly flesh, having Mary for the Mother of His Body as
if virgin earth <span id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255) , that, as a
High Priest, having He as others an offering, He might offer Himself to
the Father, and cleanse us all from sins in His own blood, and might
rise from the dead.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p58"></span>8. For what happened of old was a
shadow of this; and what the Saviour did on His coming, this Aaron
shadowed out according to the Law. As then Aaron was the same and did
not change by putting on the high-priestly dress <span
id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256) , but remaining the same was only
robed, so that, had any one seen him offering, and had said, ‘Lo, Aaron
has this day become high-priest,’ he had not implied that he then had
been born man, for man he was even before he became high-priest, but
that he had been made high-priest in his ministry, on putting on the
garments made and prepared for the high-priesthood; in the same way it
is possible in the Lord’s instance also to understand aright, that He
did not become other than Himself on taking the flesh, but, being the
same as before, He was robed in it; and the expressions ‘He became’ and
‘He was made,’ must not be understood as if the Word, considered as the
Word <span id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257) , were made, but that
the Word, being Framer of all, afterwards <span
id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258) was made High Priest, by putting on
a body which was originate and made, and such as He can offer for us;
wherefore He is said to be made. If then indeed the Lord did not become
man <span id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259) , that is a point for the
Arians to battle; but if the ‘Word became flesh,’ what ought to have
been said concerning Him when become man, but ‘Who was faithful to Him
that made Him?’ for as it is proper to the Word to have it said of Him,
‘In the beginning was the Word,’ so it is proper to man to ‘become’ and
to be ‘made.’ Who then, on seeing the Lord as a man walking about, and
yet appearing to be God from His works, would not have asked, Who made
Him man? and who again, on such a question, would not have answered,
that the Father made Him man, and sent Him to us as High Priest? And
this meaning, and time, and character, the Apostle himself, the writer
of the words, ‘Who is faithful to Him that made Him,’ will best make
plain to us, if we attend to what goes before them. For there is one
train of thought, and the lection is all about One and the Same. He
writes then in the Epistle to the Hebrews thus; ‘Forasmuch then as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, He also Himself likewise took
part of the same; that through death He might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them who through fear of
death were all their lifetime subject to bondage. For verily He took not
on Him the nature of Angels; but He took on Him the seed of Abraham.
Wherefore in all things it behoved <span id="page_353">p. 353</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-Page_353"></span>Him to be made like unto His
brethren, that He might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.
For in that He Himself hath suffered being tempted, He is able to
succour them that are tempted. Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of a
heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
profession, Jesus; who was faithful to Him that made Him <span
id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p64"></span>9. Who can read this whole passage
without condemning the Arians, and admiring the blessed Apostle, who has
spoken well? for when was Christ ‘made,’ when became He ‘Apostle,’
except when, like us, He ‘took part in flesh and blood?’ And when became
He ‘a merciful and faithful High Priest,’ except when ‘in all things He
was made like unto His brethren?’ And then was He ‘made like,’ when He
became man, having put upon Him our flesh. Wherefore Paul was writing
concerning the Word’s human Economy, when he said, ‘Who was faithful to
Him that made Him,’ and not concerning His Essence. Have not therefore
any more the madness to say that the Word of God is a work; whereas He
is Son by nature Only-begotten, and then had ‘brethren,’ when He took on
Him flesh like ours; which moreover, by Himself offering Himself, He was
named and became ‘merciful and faithful,’—merciful, because in mercy to
us He offered Himself for us, and faithful, not as sharing faith with
us, nor as having faith in any one as we have, but as deserving to
receive faith in all He says and does, and as offering a faithful
sacrifice, one which remains and does not come to nought. For those
which were offered according to the Law, had not this faithfulness,
passing away with the day and needing a further cleansing; but the
Saviour’s sacrifice, taking place once, has perfected everything, and is
become faithful as remaining for ever. And Aaron had successors, and in
a word the priesthood under the Law exchanged its first ministers as
time and death went on; but the Lord having a high priesthood without
transition and without succession, has become a ‘faithful High Priest,’
as continuing for ever; and faithful too by promise, that He may
hear <span id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) and not mislead those
who come to Him. This may be also learned from the Epistle of the great
Peter, who says, ‘Let them that suffer according to the will of God,
commit their souls to a faithful Creator <span
id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262) .’ For He is faithful as not
changing, but abiding ever, and rendering what He has promised.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p67"></span>10. Now the so-called gods of the
Greeks, unworthy the name, are faithful neither in their essence nor in
their promises; for the same are not everywhere, nay, the local deities
come to nought in course of time, and undergo a natural dissolution;
wherefore the Word cries out against them, that ‘faith is not strong in
them,’ but they are ‘waters that fail,’ and ‘there is no faith in them.’
But the God of all, being one really and indeed and true, is faithful,
who is ever the same, and says, ‘See now, that I, even I am He,’ and I
‘change not <span id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263) ;’ and therefore
His Son is ‘faithful,’ being ever the same and unchanging, deceiving
neither in His essence nor in His promise;—as again says the Apostle
writing to the Thessalonians, ‘Faithful is He who calleth you, who also
will do it <span id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264) ;’ for in doing
what He promises, ‘He is faithful to His words.’ And he thus writes to
the Hebrews as to the word’s meaning ‘unchangeable;’ ‘If we believe not,
yet He abideth faithful; He cannot deny Himself <span
id="fr_2265"></span>[2266](#fn_2265) .’ Therefore reasonably the
Apostle, discoursing concerning the bodily presence of the Word, says,
an ‘Apostle and faithful to Him that made Him,’ shewing us that, even
when made man, ‘Jesus Christ’ is ‘the same yesterday, and to-day, and
for ever <span id="fr_2266"></span>[2267](#fn_2266) ’ is unchangeable.
And as the Apostle makes mention in his Epistle of His being made man
when mentioning His High Priesthood, so too he kept no long silence
about His Godhead, but rather mentions it forthwith, furnishing to us a
safeguard on every side, and most of all when he speaks of His humility,
that we may forthwith know His loftiness and His majesty which is the
Father’s. For instance, he says, ‘Moses as a servant, but Christ as a
Son <span id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267) ;’ and the former
‘faithful in his house,’ and the latter ‘over the house,’ as having
Himself built it, and being its Lord and Framer, and as God sanctifying
it. For Moses, a man by nature, became faithful, in believing God who
spoke to Him by His Word; but <span id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268)
the Word was not as one of things originate in a body, nor as creature
in creature, but as God in flesh <span
id="fr_2269"></span>[2270](#fn_2269) , and Framer of all and Builder in
that which was built by Him. And men are clothed in flesh in order to be
and to subsist; but the Word of God was made man in order to sanctify
the flesh, and, though He was Lord, was in the form of a servant; for
the whole creature is the <span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-Page_354"></span>Word’s servant, which by Him came to
be, and was made.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p75"></span>11. Hence it holds that the Apostle’s
expression, ‘He made,’ does not prove that the Word is made, but that
body, which He took like ours; and in consequence He is called our
brother, as having become man. But if it has been shewn, that, even
though the word ‘made’ be referred to the Very Word, it is used for
‘begat,’ what further perverse expedient will they be able to fall upon,
now that the present discussion has cleared up the word in every point
of view, and shewn that the Son is not a work, but in Essence indeed the
Father’s offspring, while in the Economy, according to the good
pleasure <span id="fr_2270"></span>[2271](#fn_2270) of the Father, He
was on our behalf made, and consists as man? For this reason then it is
said by the Apostle, ‘Who was faithful to Him that made Him;’ and in the
Proverbs, even creation is spoken of. For so long as we are confessing
that He became man, there is no question about saying, as was observed
before, whether ‘He became,’ or ‘He has been made,’ or ‘created,’ or
‘formed,’ or ‘servant,’ or ‘son of an handmaid,’ or ‘son of man,’ or
‘was constituted,’ or ‘took His journey,’ or ‘bridegroom,’ or ‘brother’s
son,’ or ‘brother.’ All these terms happen to be proper to man’s
constitution; and such as these do not designate the Essence of the
Word, but that He has become man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[348:2210](2040361.htm#fr_2209) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>κυλιόμενοι</span>, *Orat.* iii. 16.

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[348:2211](2040361.htm#fr_2210) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p6"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p6.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p6.3"></span>. Cf. i. 53 and *infr*. 19–72.

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[348:2212](2040361.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p6.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p7"></span> [Heb. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[348:2213](2040361.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p8"></span> Vid. *infr.* note on 35.

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[348:2214](2040361.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p9"></span> Cf. [Rom. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[348:2215](2040361.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p10.1"></span>τῶν νῦν ᾽Ιουδαίων</span>, means literally
‘the Jews of this day,’ as here and *Orat.* i. 8. 10. 38. *Orat.* ii. 1.
b. iii. 28. c. But elsewhere this and similar phrases as distinctly mean
the Arians, being used in contrast to the Jews. Their likeness to the
Jews is drawn out, *Orat.* iii. 27. *de Decr.* i.

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[348:2216](2040361.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p11.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p11.2"></span>ρωτῶντες ἐμανθάνον</span>; and so <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p11.4"></span>μαθὼν
ἐδιδάσκεν</span>, *Orat.* iii. 9. *de Decr.* 7. *supr.* p. 13, note a.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[348:2217](2040361.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p11.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p12"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[348:2218](2040361.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p13"></span> [Acts ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[348:2219](2040361.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p14"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p14.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p14.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[348:2220](2040361.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p14.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p15"></span> [Heb. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[348:2221](2040361.htm#fr_2220) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p16"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[348:2222](2040361.htm#fr_2221) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p17"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p17.1"></span>[Heb.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p17.3"></span>; *Sent. D.* 11.

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[348:2223](2040361.htm#fr_2222) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p17.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p18"></span> By <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p18.1"></span>λαυβάνοντες παρ᾽ αὐτῶν τὸ λῆμμα</span>,
‘accepting the proposition they offer,’ he means that he is engaged in
going through certain texts brought against the Catholic view, instead
of bringing his own proofs, vid. *Orat.* i. 37. Yet after all it is
commonly his way, as here, to start with some general exposition of the
Catholic doctrine which the Arian sense of the text in question opposes,
and thus to create a prejudice or proof against the latter. vid. *Orat.*
i. 10. 38. 40. init. 53. d. ii. 5. 12. init. 32–34. 35. 44. init. which
refers to the whole discussion, 18–43. 73. 77. iii. 18. init. 36. init.
42. 54. 51. init. &c. On the other hand he makes the ecclesiastical
sense the rule of interpretation, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p18.3"></span>τούτῳ</span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p18.4"></span>τῷ σκοπῷ</span>, the general drift of
Scripture doctrine\] <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p18.6"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p18.7"></span>σπερ κανόνι χρησάμενοι προσέχωμεν τῇ
ἀνάγνωσει τῆς θεοπνεύστου γραφὴς</span>, iii. 28. fin. This illustrates
what he means when he says that certain texts have a ‘good,’ ‘pious,’
‘orthodox’ sense, i.e. they can be interpreted (in spite, if so be, of
appearances) in harmony with the *Regula Fidei.* vid. *infr.* §43, note;
also notes on 35. and iii. 58.

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[349:2224](2040361.htm#fr_2223) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p20"></span> §22, note.

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[349:2225](2040361.htm#fr_2224) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p21"></span> i.e. in any true sense of the word
‘image;’ or, so that He may be accounted the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p21.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p21.3"></span>παράλλακτος εἴκων</span> of the Father,
vid. *de Syn.* 23, note 1. The ancient Fathers consider, that the Divine
Sonship is the very consequence (so to speak) of the necessity that
exists, that One who is Infinite Perfection should subsist again in a
Perfect Image of Himself, which is the doctrine to which Athan. goes on
to allude, and the idea of which (he says) is prior to that of creation.
A redundatio in imaginem is synonymous with a generatio Filii. Cf.
Thomassin, *de Trin.* 19. 1.

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[349:2226](2040361.htm#fr_2225) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p21.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.1"></span>καρπογόνος ἡ οὐσία</span>, *de Decr.* 15.
n. 9. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.3"></span>γεννητικὸς</span>, *Orat.* iii. 66. iv.
4. fin. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.5"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.6"></span>γονος</span>. i. 14. fin. *Sent. Dion.*
15. 19. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.8"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.9"></span>φυσικὴ γονιμότης</span>, *Damasc. F. O.*
i. 8. p. 133. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.11"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.12"></span>καρπος</span>, *Cyr. Thes.* p. 45.
Epiph. *Hær.* 65 p. 609. b. Vid. the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.14"></span>γέννησις</span> and the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.16"></span>κτίσις</span>
contrasted together *Orat.* i. 29. *de Decr.* 11. n. 6, *de Syn.* 51, n.
4. The doctrine in the text is shortly expressed, *infr. Orat.* iv. 4
fin. <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.18"></span>εἰ ἄγονος
καὶ ἀνενέργητος</span>

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[349:2227](2040361.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p22.19"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p23"></span> *Orat.* iii. 59, &c.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[349:2228](2040361.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p24"></span> *Orat.* iii. 63. c.

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[349:2229](2040361.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p25.2"></span>νούσιος</span>, *infr.* 28.

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[349:2230](2040361.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p27"></span> §1, note 13.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[350:2231](2040361.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p28"></span> [1 Kings i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[350:2232](2040361.htm#fr_2231) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p29"></span> [1 Kings
1.26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[350:2233](2040361.htm#fr_2232) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p31"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[350:2234](2040361.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p32.1"></span>πολλάκις ἀπολωλέναι δίκαιοι</span>, vid.
*infr.* §28.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[350:2235](2040361.htm#fr_2234) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p32.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p33"></span> [Prov. xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#023)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[350:2236](2040361.htm#fr_2235) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p34"></span> *Apol. c. Ar.* 36.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[350:2237](2040361.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p35"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p35.1"></span>[Is. xxxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p35.3"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[350:2238](2040361.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p35.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p36"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p36.1"></span>[2 Kings xx.
18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p36.3"></span>; [Is. xxxix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p36.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[350:2239](2040361.htm#fr_2238) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p36.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p37"></span> [Gen. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p37.1"></span>, and *infr.* 44. note on Qanâ.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[350:2240](2040361.htm#fr_2239) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p37.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p38"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p38.1"></span>[Gen. xlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p38.3"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[350:2241](2040361.htm#fr_2240) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p38.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p39"></span> [Job i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p39.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[350:2242](2040361.htm#fr_2241) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p40"></span> Cf. [Deut.
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015), [Lev.
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#021)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p40.1"></span>[Deut. xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p40.3"></span>; vid. [Lev. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#021)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p40.4"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[350:2243](2040361.htm#fr_2242) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p40.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p41"></span> *Serap.* ii. 6. b.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[350:2244](2040361.htm#fr_2243) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p43"></span> That is, while the style of
Scripture *justifies* us in thus interpreting the word ‘made,’ doctrinal
truth *obliges* us to do so. He considers the Regula Fidei the principle
of interpretation, and accordingly he goes on at once to apply it. vid.
*supr.* §1, note 13.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[351:2245](2040361.htm#fr_2244) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p44.1"></span>λεξείδια</span>, *Orat.* iii. 59. a
*Sent.* D. 4. c.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[351:2246](2040361.htm#fr_2245) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p44.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p45"></span> *Orat.* iii. 62 init. *infr.* §22,
note.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[351:2247](2040361.htm#fr_2246) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p46"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p46.1"></span>[Ps. civ.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p46.3"></span>; [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p46.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[351:2248](2040361.htm#fr_2247) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p48"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p48.1"></span>[Eccles. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p48.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[351:2249](2040361.htm#fr_2248) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p48.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p49"></span> Combines Greek of [Deut.
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), [Exod.
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006), [Rev.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p49.1"></span>[Deut. xxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004)<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p49.3"></span>
and [Ex. xxxiv. 6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p49.4"></span>; cf. [Rev. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p49.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[351:2250](2040361.htm#fr_2249) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p49.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p50"></span> [1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[351:2251](2040361.htm#fr_2250) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p51"></span> [Ps. cxlv.
14](../../../bib/sep/psa045.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p51.1"></span>. LXX.

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[351:2252](2040361.htm#fr_2251) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p51.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p52"></span> [1 Tim. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[351:2253](2040361.htm#fr_2252) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p53"></span> [Tit. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p53.1"></span>, &c.

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[351:2254](2040361.htm#fr_2253) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p53.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p54.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p54.2"></span>τρεπτος καὶ μὴ ἀλλοιούμενος</span>; vid.
*supr. de Decr.* 14. it was the tendency of Arianism to consider that in
the Incarnation some such change actually was undergone by the Word, as
they had from the first maintained in the abstract was possible; that
whereas He was in *nature* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p54.4"></span>τρεπτὸς</span>, He was in *fact* <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p54.6"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p54.7"></span>λλοιούμενος</span>.
This was implied in the doctrine that His superhuman nature supplied the
place of a soul in His manhood. Hence the semi-Arian Sirmian Creed
anathematizes those who said, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p54.9"></span>τὸν λόγον τροπὴν ὑπομεμενηκοτα</span>,
vid. *De Syn.* 27. 12). This doctrine connected them with the
Apollinarian and Eutychian Schools, to the former of which Athan.
compares them, *contr. Apoll.* i. 12. while, as opposing the latter,
Theodoret entities his first Dialogue <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p54.11"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p54.12"></span>Ατρεπτος</span>

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[352:2255](2040361.htm#fr_2254) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p56"></span> [Exod. xxix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[352:2256](2040361.htm#fr_2255) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p57.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p57.2"></span>νεργάστου γῆς</span> is an allusion to
Adam’s formation from the ground; and so Irenæus, *Hær.* iii. 21. fin.
and many later fathers.

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[352:2257](2040361.htm#fr_2256) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59"></span> This is one of those distinct and
luminous protests by anticipation against Nestorianism, which in
consequence may be abused to the purpose of the opposite heresy. Such
expressions as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.2"></span>περιτιθέμενος τὴν ἐσθῆτα, ἐκαλύπτετο,
ἐνδυσάμενος σῶμα</span>, were familiar with the Apollinarians, against
whom S. Athanasius is, if possible, even more decided. Theodoret objects
*Hær*. v. 11. p. 422. to the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.4"></span>προκάλυμμα</span>, as applied to our
Lord’s manhood, as implying that He had no soul; vid. also Naz. *Ep.*
102. fin. (ed. 1840). In Naz. *Ep.* 101. p. 90. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.6"></span>παραπέτασμα</span> is
used to denote an Apollinarian idea. Such expressions were taken to
imply that Christ was not in nature *man,* only in some sense *human;*
not a substance, but an appearance; yet pseudo-Athan. *contr. Sabell.
Greg.* 4. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.8"></span>παραπεπετασμένην</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.9"></span>κάλυμμα</span>, ibid.
init. S. Cyril. Hieros. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.10"></span>καταπέτασμα</span>, *Catech.* xii. 26.
xiii. 32. after <span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.12"></span>[Hebr. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.14"></span>. and Athan. *ad Adelph.* 5. e. Theodor.
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.16"></span>παραπέτασμα</span>, *Eran.* i. p. 22.
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.18"></span>προκάλυμμα</span>, ibid. p. 23. and
*adv. Gent.* vi. p. 877. and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.20"></span>στολή</span>, *Eran.* 1. c. S. Leo has
caro Christi velamen, *Ep.* 59. p. 979. vid. also *Serm.* 22. p. 70.
*Serm.* 25. p. 84.

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[352:2258](2040361.htm#fr_2257) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p59.22"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p60.1"></span>ᾗ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p60.2"></span>λόγος ἐστι</span>. cf. i. 43. *Orat.* ii.
74. e. iii. 38 init. 39. b. 41 init. 45 init. 52. b. iv. 23. f.

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[352:2259](2040361.htm#fr_2258) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p60.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p61"></span> The Arians considered that our
Lord’s Priesthood preceded His Incarnation, and belonged to His Divine
Nature, and was in consequence the token of an inferior divinity. The
notice of it therefore in this text did but confirm them in their
interpretation of the words *made, &c.* For the Arians, vid. Epiph.
*Hær.* 69, 37. Eusebius too had distinctly declared, Qui videbatur, erat
agnus Dei; qui occultabatur sacerdos Dei. *advers. Sabell.* i. p. 2. b.
vid. also *Demonst.* i. 10. p. 38. iv. 16. p. 193. v. 3. p. 223. *contr.
Marc.* pp. 8 and 9. 66. 74. 95. Even S. Cyril of Jerusalem makes a
similar admission, *Catech.* x. 14. Nay S. Ambrose calls the Word,
plenum justitiæ sacerdotalis, *de fug. sæc*. 3. 14. S. Clement Alex.
before them speaks once or twice of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p61.2"></span>λόγος ἀρχιερεὺς</span>, e.g. *Strom.* ii.
9 fin. and Philo still earlier uses similar language, *de Profug.* p.
466. (whom S. Ambrose follows), *de Somniis* p. 597. vid. Thomassin. *de
Incarn.* x. 9. Nestorius on the other hand maintained that the Man
Christ Jesus was the Priest, relying on the text which has given rise to
this note; Cyril, *adv. Nest.* p. 64. and Augustine and Fulgentius may
be taken to countenance him, *de Consens.* and *Evang.* i. 6. *ad
Thrasim.* iii. 30. The Catholic doctrine is, that the Divine Word is
Priest *in* and *according* to His manhood. vid. the parallel use of
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p61.4"></span>πρωτότοκος</span>, infr. 62–64. ‘As He is
called Prophet and even Apostle for His humanity,’ says S. Cyril Alex.
‘so also Priest.’ *Glaph.* ii. p. 58. and so Epiph. *loc. cit.*
Thomassin *loc. cit.* makes a distinction between a divine Priesthood or
Mediatorship, such as the Word may be said to sustain between the Father
and all creatures, and an earthly one for the sake of sinners. vid. also
Huet *Origenian.* ii. 3. §4, 5. For the history of the controversy among
Protestants as to the Nature to which His Mediatorship belongs, vid.
Petav. *Incarn.* xii. 3. 4. \[Herzog-Plitt Art. Stancar.\]

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[352:2260](2040361.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p61.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p62"></span> \[One of the few passages in which
Ath. glances at the Arian Christology. A long note is omitted here on
the subject of *Or.* i. 8, note 3.\]

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[353:2261](2040361.htm#fr_2260) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p63"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p63.1"></span>[Heb. ii.
14-18](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p63.3"></span>; iii. 2.

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[353:2262](2040361.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p65"></span> Or, answer, vid. infr. iii. 27.

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[353:2263](2040361.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p65.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p66"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[353:2264](2040361.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p68"></span> Vid. [Jer.
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#003), [Jer.
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#018), [Deut.
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039), [Mal.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p68.1"></span>[Jer. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p68.3"></span>. and xv. 18; [Deut. xxxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p68.4"></span>, LXX.; ib. xxxii. 39; [Mal. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p68.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[353:2265](2040361.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p68.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p69"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p69.1"></span>[1 Thess. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p69.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2265"></span>[353:2266](2040361.htm#fr_2265) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p69.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p70"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2266"></span>[353:2267](2040361.htm#fr_2266) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p70.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p71"></span> [Heb. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[353:2268](2040361.htm#fr_2267) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p72"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p72.1"></span>[Heb.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p72.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[353:2269](2040361.htm#fr_2268) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p72.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p73"></span> Here is a protest beforehand against
the Monophysite doctrine, but such anticipations of various heresies are
too frequent, as we proceed, to require or bear notice.

<span id="fn_2269"></span>[353:2270](2040361.htm#fr_2269) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p74"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p74.1"></span>θεὸς ἐν σαρκὶ</span>, vid. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p74.2"></span>λόγος ἐν σ.</span>
iii. 54. a. <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p74.3"></span>θ.
ἐν σωματι</span>, ii. 12. c. 15. a. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p74.5"></span>λ. ἐν σώμ</span>. *Sent. D.* 8 fin.

<span id="fn_2270"></span>[354:2271](2040361.htm#fr_2270) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.i-p76.1"></span>κατ᾽ εὐδοκίαν</span> *Orat.*iii. 64.
init.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Texts explained; Fifthly, Acts ii. 36. The Regula Fidei must be
observed; made applies to our Lord's manhood; and to His manifestation;
and to His office relative to us; and is relative to the Jews. Parallel
instance in Gen. xxvii. 29, 37. The context contradicts the Arian
interpretation.](2040362)
