[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040400)  [Next](2040402.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiv.i"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_488">p. 488</span> <span
id="xxiv.i-Page_488"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to Ad Afros Epistola
Synodica.</span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxiv.i-p3"></span>(<span class="c10"><span
id="xxiv.i-p3.1"></span>Written About</span> 369.)

<span id="xxiv.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxiv.i-p4.1"></span>The</span> synodical letter which follows was
written after the accession of Damasus to the Roman see (366). Whether
it was written before any Western synod had formally condemned Auxentius
of Milan (see *Letter* 59. 1) may be doubted: the complaint (§10) is
rather that he still retains possession of his see, which in fact he did
until 374, the year after the death of Athanasius. At any rate, Damasus
had had time to hold a large synod, the letter of which had reached
Athanasius. The history of the synods held by Damasus seems hopelessly
obscure, and the date of our encyclical is correspondingly doubtful.
Damasus certainly held at one time a synod of some 90 bishops from Italy
and the Gauls, the letter of which was sent to Illyricum and to the East
(Thdt. *H. E.* ii. 22; Soz. vi. 23; Hard. *Conc.* i. 771: the Latin of
the copy sent to Illyricum is dated ‘Siricio et Ardabure vv. cl. coss.,’
an additional element of confusion). The name of Sabinus at the end of
the Latin copy sent to the East seems to fix the date of this synod
(D.C.B. i. 294) to 372. Thus the synod referred to §1 below must have
been an earlier one, the acts of which are lost. It cannot have been
held before the end of 367 or beginning of 368 (Montf. *Vit. Ath.*), as
the earlier period of the episcopate of Damasus was fully occupied by
different matters. Accordingly our encyclical falls between 368 and 372,
probably as soon as Damasus had been able to assemble so large a synod,
and Athanasius to write in reply (§10). It may be added that the letter
of the Damasine synod of 372 refers in ambiguous terms to the
condemnation of Auxentius as having already taken place, (‘damnatum esse
liquet:’ was this because they felt unable to dislodge him? see Tillem.
viii. 400).

<span id="xxiv.i-p5"></span>The occasion of the letter is two-fold:
principally to counteract the efforts that were being made in the West,
and especially in Africa (still later in the time of S. Augustine, see
*Collat. cum Maximin.* 4; and for earlier Arian troubles in Africa,
*Nicene Lib.* vol. i. p. 287), to represent the council of Ariminum as a
final settlement of the Faith, and so to set aside the authority of the
Nicene definition. The second object is involved in the first. The head
and centre of the dying efforts of Arianism in the Roman West was
apparently Auxentius, ‘one of the last survivors of the victory of
Ariminum.’ That he should be still undisturbed in his see, while working
far and wide to the damage of the Catholic cause, was to Athanasius a
distressing surprise, and he was urging the Western bishops to put an
end to such an anomaly.

<span id="xxiv.i-p6"></span>In the encyclical before us he begins (1–3)
by contrasting the synod of Nicæa with that of Ariminum, and pointing
out the real history of the latter, going over again to some extent the
ground of the earlier sections of the *de Synodis.* He touches (3. end)
on the disastrous termination of the Council. He then proceeds to
vindicate the Nicene creed (4–8) as essentially Scriptural, i.e. as the
only possible bar to the unscriptural formulæ of the Arians. This he
illustrates (5, 6) by an account, substantially identical with that in
the *de Decretis,* of the evasions of every other test by the Asian
bishops at Nicæa. He repeatedly urges that the formula was no invention
of the Nicene Fathers (6, 9), appealing to the admission of Eusebius to
this effect. He attacks the Homœan position, shewing that its
characteristic watchword merely dissembles the alternative between
Anomœanism and the true co-essentiality of the Son (7). The most novel
argument in the Letter is that of §4, where he refutes the repudiation
of <span class="Greek"><span id="xxiv.i-p6.1"></span>οὐσία</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxiv.i-p6.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxiv.i-p6.3"></span>πόστασις</span> in the creed
of Niké by an argument from Scripture, starting from [Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014.md)<span id="xxiv.i-p6.4"></span> (as
*de Decr.* 22 and *de Syn.* 29), and turning upon the equivalence of the
two terms in question. This would appeal to Westerns, and expresses the
usual view of Ath. himself (*Tom. ad Ant. Introd.*) but would not have
much force with those who were accustomed to the Eastern terminology.

<span id="xxiv.i-p7"></span>The insistence (in §11) that the Nicene
formula involves the Godhead of the Spirit should be noted. It seems to
imply that, as a rule, such an explicit assurance as is insisted upon in
*Tom ad Ant.* 3, would be superfluous.

<span id="xxiv.i-p8"></span>The completeness of the work of Athanasius,
now very near his end, in winning over all Egypt to unanimity in faith
and in personal attachment to himself, is quaintly reflected in the
naive assurance (§10) that the bishops of Egypt and the Libyas ‘are all
of one mind, and we always sign for one another if any chance not to be
present.’

<span id="xxiv.i-p9"></span>The translation has been carefully compared
with that of Dr. Bright (*supr.* p. 482).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synodal Letter to the Bishops of Africa. (Ad Afros Epistola
Synodica.)](2040402.md)
