[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040047)  [Next](2040049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.iii-p1"></span> §3. *The decline of man from the above
condition, owing to his absorption in material things.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.iii-p2"></span>Thus then, as we have said, the Creator
fashioned the race of men, and thus meant it to remain. But men, making
light of better things, and holding back from apprehending them, began
to seek in preference things nearer to themselves. 2. But nearer to
themselves were the body and its senses; so that while removing their
mind from the things perceived by thought, they began to regard
themselves; and so doing, and holding to the body and the other things
of sense, and deceived as it were in their own surroundings, they fell
into lust of themselves, preferring what was their own to the
contemplation of what belonged to God. Having then made themselves at
home in these things, and not being willing to leave what was so near to
them, they entangled their soul with bodily pleasures, vexed and turbid
with all kind of lusts, while they wholly forgot the power they
originally had from God. 3. But the truth of this one may see from the
man who was first made, according to what the holy Scriptures tell us of
him. For he also, as long as he kept his mind to God, and the
contemplation of God, turned away from the contemplation of the body.
But when, by counsel of the serpent, he departed from the consideration
of God, and began to regard himself, then they not only fell to bodily
lust, but knew that they were naked, and knowing, were ashamed. But they
knew that they were naked, not so much of clothing as that they were
become stripped of the contemplation of divine things, and had
transferred their understanding to the contraries. For having departed
from the consideration of the one and the true, namely, God, and from
desire of Him, they had thenceforward embarked in divers lusts and in
those of the several bodily senses. 4. Next, as is apt to happen, having
formed a desire for each and sundry, they began to be habituated to
these desires, so that they were even afraid to leave them: whence the
soul became subject to cowardice and alarms, and pleasures and thoughts
of mortality. For not being willing to leave her lusts, she fears death
and her separation from the body. But again, from lusting, and not
meeting with gratification, she learned to commit murder and wrong. We
are then led naturally to shew, as best we can, how she does this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The gradual abasement of the Soul from Truth to Falsehood by the
abuse of her freedom of Choice.](2040049)
