[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040199)  [Next](2040201.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p1.2"></span>Conduct of the Arians towards the Nicene
Council</span>. *Ignorant as well as irreligious to attempt to reverse
an Ecumenical Council: proceedings at Nicæa: Eusebians then signed what
they now complain of: on the unanimity of true teachers and the process
of tradition: changes of the Arians.*

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>And</span> do thou, beloved, consider whether
it be not so. If, the devil having sowed their hearts with this
perverseness <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759.md) , they feel
confidence in their bad inventions, let them defend themselves against
the proofs of heresy which have been advanced, and then will be the time
to find fault, if they can, with the definition framed against
them <span id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760.md) . For no one, on <span
id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="xiv.ii.ii-Page_152"></span>being
convicted of murder or adultery, is at liberty after the trial to
arraign the sentence of the judge, why he spoke in this way and not in
that <span id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761.md) . For this does not
exculpate the convict, but rather increases his crime on the score of
petulance and audacity. In like manner, let these either prove that
their sentiments are religious (for they were then accused and
convicted, and their complaints are subsequent, and it is just that
those who are under a charge should confine themselves to their own
defence), or if they have an unclean conscience, and are aware of their
own irreligion, let them not complain of what they do not understand, or
they will bring on themselves a double imputation, of irreligion and of
ignorance. Rather let them investigate the matter in a docile spirit,
and learning what hitherto they have not known, cleanse their
irreligious ears with the spring of truth and the doctrines of
religion <span id="fr_762"></span>[763](#fn_762.md) .

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p7"></span>3. Now it happened to Eusebius and his
fellows in the Nicene Council as follows:—while they stood out in their
irreligion, and attempted their fight against God <span
id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763.md) , the terms they used were replete
with irreligion; but the assembled Bishops who were three hundred more
or less, mildly and charitably required of them to explain and defend
themselves on religious grounds. Scarcely, however, did they begin to
speak, when they were condemned <span id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764.md)
, and one differed from another; then perceiving the straits in which
their heresy lay, they remained dumb, and by their silence confessed the
disgrace which came upon their heterodoxy. On this the Bishops, having
negatived the terms they had invented, published against them the sound
and ecclesiastical faith; and, as all subscribed it, Eusebius and his
fellows subscribed it also in those very words, of which they are now
complaining, I mean, “of the essence” and “one in essence,” and that
“the Son of God is neither creature or work, nor in the number of things
originated <span id="fr_765"></span>[766](#fn_765.md) , but that the Word
is an offspring from the substance of the Father.” And what is strange
indeed, Eusebius of Cæsarea in Palestine, who had denied the day before,
but afterwards subscribed, sent to his Church a letter, saying that this
was the Church’s faith, and the tradition of the Fathers; and made a
public profession that they were before in error, and were rashly
contending against the truth. For though he was ashamed at that time to
adopt these phrases, and excused himself to the Church in his own way,
yet he certainly means to imply all this in his Epistle, by his not
denying the “one in essence,” and “of the essence.” And in this way he
got into a difficulty; for while he was excusing himself, he went on to
attack the Arians, as stating that “the Son was not before His
generation,” and as thereby rejecting His existence before His birth in
the flesh. And this Acacius is aware of also, though he too through fear
may pretend otherwise because of the times and deny the fact.
Accordingly I have subjoined at the end the letter of Eusebius, that
thou mayest know from it the disrespect towards their own doctors shewn
by Christ’s enemies, and singularly by Acacius himself <span
id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766.md) .

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p12"></span>4. Are they not then committing a crime,
in their very thought to gainsay so great and ecumenical a Council? are
they not in transgression, when they dare to confront that good
definition against Arianism, acknowledged, as it is, by those who had in
the first instance taught them irreligion? And supposing, even after
subscription, Eusebius and his fellows did change again, and return like
dogs to their own vomit of irreligion, do not the present gain-sayers
deserve still greater detestation, because they thus sacrifice <span
id="fr_767"></span>[768](#fn_767.md) their souls’ liberty to others; and
are willing to take these persons as masters of their heresy, who are,
as James <span id="fr_768"></span>[769](#fn_768.md) has said, double-minded
men, and unstable in all their ways, not having one opinion, but
changing to and fro, and now recommending certain statements, but soon
dishonouring them, and in turn recommending what just now they were
blaming? But this, as the <span id="page_153">p. 153</span> <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-Page_153"></span>Shepherd has said, is “the child of the
devil <span id="fr_769"></span>[770](#fn_769.md) ,” and the note of
hucksters rather than of doctors. For, what our Fathers have delivered,
this is truly doctrine; and this is truly the token of doctors, to
confess the same thing with each other, and to vary neither from
themselves nor from their fathers; whereas they who have not this
character are to be called not true doctors but evil. Thus the Greeks,
as not witnessing to the same doctrines, but quarrelling one with
another, have no truth of teaching; but the holy and veritable heralds
of the truth agree together, and do not differ. For though they lived in
different times, yet they one and all tend the same way, being prophets
of the one God, and preaching the same Word harmoniously <span
id="fr_770"></span>[771](#fn_770.md) .

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p17"></span>5. And thus what Moses taught, that
Abraham observed; and what Abraham observed, that Noah and Enoch
acknowledged, discriminating pure from impure, and becoming acceptable
to God. For Abel too in this way witnessed, knowing what he had learned
from Adam, who himself had learned from that Lord, who said, when He
came at the end of the ages for the abolishment of sin, “I give no new
commandment unto you, but an old commandment, which ye have heard from
the beginning <span id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771.md) .” Wherefore also
the blessed Apostle Paul, who had learned it from Him, when describing
ecclesiastical functions, forbade that deacons, not to say bishops,
should be double-tongued <span id="fr_772"></span>[773](#fn_772.md) ; and
in his rebuke of the Galatians, he made a broad declaration, “If anyone
preach any other Gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be
anathema, as I have said, so say I again. If even we, or an Angel from
heaven should preach unto you any other Gospel than that ye have
received, let him be anathema <span id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773.md) .”
Since then the Apostle thus speaks, let these men either anathematise
Eusebius and his fellows, at least as changing round and professing what
is contrary to their subscriptions; or, if they acknowledge that their
subscriptions were good, let them not utter complaints against so great
a Council. But if they do neither the one nor the other, they are
themselves too plainly the sport of every wind and surge, and are
influenced by opinions, not their own, but of others, and being such,
are as little worthy of deference now as before, in what they allege.
Rather let them cease to carp at what they understand not; lest so be
that not knowing to discriminate, they simply call evil good and good
evil, and think that bitter is sweet and sweet is bitter. Doubtless,
they desire that doctrines which have been judged wrong and have been
reprobated should gain the ascendancy, and they make violent efforts to
prejudice what was rightly defined. Nor should there be any reason on
our part for any further explanation, or answer to their excuses,
neither on theirs for further resistance, but for an acquiescence in
what the leaders of their heresy subscribed; for though the subsequent
change of Eusebius and his fellows was suspicious and immoral, their
subscription, when they had the opportunity of at least some little
defence of themselves, is a certain proof of the irreligion of their
doctrine. For they would not have subscribed previously had they not
condemned the heresy, nor would they have condemned it, had they not
been encompassed with difficulty and shame; so that to change back again
is a proof of their contentious zeal for irreligion. These men also
ought therefore, as I have said, to keep quiet; but since from an
extraordinary want of modesty, they hope perhaps to be able to advocate
this diabolical <span id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774.md) irreligion
better than the others, therefore, though in my former letter written to
thee, I have already argued at length against them, notwithstanding,
come let us now also examine them, in each of their separate statements,
as their predecessors; for now not less than then their heresy shall be
shewn to have no soundness in it, but to be from evil spirits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_759"></span>[151:760](2040200.htm#fr_759.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p3.2"></span>πισπείραντος τοῦ διαβόλου</span>, the
allusion is to <span id="xiv.ii.ii-p3.3"></span>[Matt. xiii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025.md)<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p3.5"></span>,
and is very frequent in Athan., chiefly with a reference to Arianism. He
draws it out at length, *Orat.* ii. §34. Elsewhere, he uses the image
for the evil influences introduced into the soul upon Adam’s fall,
*contr. Apoll.* i. §15. as does S. Irenæus, *Hær.* iv. 40. n. 3. using
it of such as lead to back-sliding in Christians. ibid. v. 10. n. 1.
Gregory Nyssen, of the natural passions and of false reason misleading
them, *de An. et Resurr.* p. 640. vid. also Leon. *Ep.* 156. c. 2.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[151:761](2040200.htm#fr_760.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p3.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p4"></span> The Council did two things, anathematise
the Arian positions (at the end of the Creed), and establish the true
doctrine by the insertion of the phrases, “of the substance” and “one in
substance.” Athan. says that the Arians must not criticise the latter
before they had cleared themselves of the former. Thus he says
presently, that they were at once irreligious in their faith and
ignorant in their criticism; and speaks of the Council negativing their
formulæ, and substituting those which were “sound and ecclesiastical.”
vid. also n. 4.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[152:762](2040200.htm#fr_761.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p5"></span> And so S. Leo “passim” concerning the
Council of Chalcedon, “Concord will be easily established, if the hearts
of all concur in that faith which, &c., no discussion being allowed
whatever concerning any retractation,” *Ep.* 94. He calls such an act a
“magnum sacrilegium,” *Ep.* 157. c. 3. “To be seeking for what has been
disclosed, to retract what has been perfected, to tear up what has been
laid down (definita), what is this but to be unthankful for what we
gained?” *Ep.* 162. vid. the whole of it. He says that the attempt is
“no mark of a peace-maker but a rebel.” *Ep.* 164. c. l. fin. vid. also
Epp. 145, and 156, where he says, none can assail what is once
determined, but “aut antichristus aut diabolus.” c. 2.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[152:763](2040200.htm#fr_762.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p6"></span> Vid. *Orat.* iii. §28.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[152:764](2040200.htm#fr_763.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>θεομαχεῖν, θεομάχοι</span>. vid. <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>[Acts v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039.md)<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.4"></span>;
xxiii. 9. are of very frequent use in Athan. as is <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.6"></span>χριστομάχοι</span>, in
speaking of the Arians, vid. *infra passim.* also <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.9"></span>ντιμαχόμενοι τῷ
σωτῆρι</span>, *Ep. Encycl.* §5. And in the beginning of the
controversy, Alexander *ap. Socr.* i. 6. p. 10. b.c.p. 12. p. 13. Theod.
*Hist.* i. 3. p. 729. And so <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.11"></span>θεομάχος γλῶσσα</span>, Basil. *contr.
Eunom.* ii. 27. fin. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.13"></span>χριστομάχων</span>. *Ep.* 236. init. vid.
also Cyril (Thesaurus, p. 19 e. p. 24 e.). <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.15"></span>θεομάχοι</span> is used of other heretics,
e.g. the Manichees, by Greg. Naz. *Orat.* 45. §8.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[152:765](2040200.htm#fr_764.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p8.17"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p9"></span> i.e. “convicted *themselves,*” infr.
§18. init. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p9.3"></span>αυτῶν ἀεὶ κατήγοροι</span>, ad. *Ep. Æg.* §6.
i.e. by their variations, vid. [Tit. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#011.md)<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p9.5"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p9.6"></span>αὐτοκατάκριτος</span>

<span id="fn_765"></span>[152:766](2040200.htm#fr_765.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p9.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>γενητῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[152:767](2040200.htm#fr_766.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p11"></span> The party he is writing against is the
Acacian, of whom he does not seem to have had much distinct knowledge.
He contrasts them again and again in the passages which follow with the
Eusebians of the Nicene Council, and says that he is sure that the
ground they take when examined will be found substantially the same as
the Eusebian. vid. §6 *init. et alib.* §7. *init.* §9. *circ. fin.* §10.
*circ. fin.* §13. *init.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p11.2"></span>τότε καὶ νῦν</span>. §18. *circ. fin.* §28.
*fin* \[On Acacius see Prolegg. ch. ii. §8 (2) b.\]

<span id="fn_767"></span>[152:768](2040200.htm#fr_767.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>προπίνοντες</span> vid. *de Syn.* §14.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[152:769](2040200.htm#fr_768.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p14"></span> [James i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#008.md)<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[153:770](2040200.htm#fr_769.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p15"></span> Hermas, *Mand.* ix., who is speaking
immediately, as S. James, of wavering in prayer.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[153:771](2040200.htm#fr_770.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p16"></span> Thus S. Basil says the same of the
Grecian Sects, “We have not the task of refuting their tenets, for they
suffice for the overthrow of each other.” *Hexaem.* i. 2. vid. also
Theod. *Græc. Affect.* i. p. 707. &c. August. *Civ. Dei,* xviii. 41. and
Vincentius’s celebrated Commonitorium *passim.*

<span id="fn_771"></span>[153:772](2040200.htm#fr_771.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p18"></span> [1 John ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007.md)<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[153:773](2040200.htm#fr_772.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p19"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md)<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[153:774](2040200.htm#fr_773.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p20"></span> [Gal.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009.md)<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[153:775](2040200.htm#fr_774.md) <span
id="xiv.ii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.ii-p21"></span> This is Athan.’s deliberate judgment.
vid. *de Sent. Dion.* fin., *ib.* §24. he speaks of Arius’s “hatred of
the truth.” Again, “though the diabolical men rave” *Orat.* iii. §8.
“friends of the devil, and his spirits,” Ad *Ep. Æg.* 5. Another reason
of his so accounting them, was their atrocious cruelty towards
Catholics; this leads him elsewhere to break out: “O new heresy, that
has put on the whole devil in irreligious doctrine *and conduct!*”
*Hist. Arian.* §66, also Alexander, ‘diabolical,’ ap Theod. *Hist.* i.
3, p. 731. ‘satanical,’ ibid. p. 741. vid. also Socr. i. 9. p. 30 fin.
Hilar. *contr. Const.* 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Two senses of the word Son, 1. adoptive; 2. essential; attempts
of Arians to find a third meaning between these; e.g. that our Lord only
was created immediately by God (Asterius's view), or that our Lord alone
partakes the Father. The second and true sense; God begets as He makes,
really; though His creation and generation are not like man's; His
generation independent of time; generation implies an internal, and
therefore an eternal, act in God; explanation of Prov. viii.
22.](2040201.md)
