[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040349)  [Next](2040351.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p1.2"></span>Subject Continued</span>. *Objection, that
the Son’s eternity makes Him coordinate with the Father, introduces the
subject of His Divine Sonship, as a second proof of His eternity. The
word Son is introduced in a secondary, but is to be understood in real
sense. Since all things partake of the Father in partaking of the Son,
He is the whole participation of the Father, that is, He is the Son by
nature; for to be wholly participated is to beget.*

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p2"></span>14. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p2.1"></span>When</span> these points are thus proved,
their profaneness goes further. ‘If there never was, when the Son was
not,’ say they, ‘but He is eternal, and coexists with the Father, you
call Him no more the Father’s Son, but brother <span
id="fr_1913"></span>[1914](#fn_1913.md) .’ O insensate and contentious! For
if we said only that He was eternally with the Father, and not His Son,
their pretended scruple would have some plausibility; but if, while we
say that He is eternal, we also confess Him to be Son from the Father,
how can He that is begotten be considered brother of Him who begets? And
if our faith is in Father and Son, what brotherhood is there between
them? and how can the Word be called brother of Him whose Word He is?
This is not an objection of men really ignorant, for they comprehend how
the truth lies; but it is a Jewish pretence, and that from those who, in
Solomon’s words, ‘through desire separate themselves <span
id="fr_1914"></span>[1915](#fn_1914.md) ’ from the truth. For the Father
and the Son were not generated from some pre-existing origin <span
id="fr_1915"></span>[1916](#fn_1915.md) , that we may account Them
brothers, but the Father is the Origin of the Son and begat Him; and the
Father is Father, and not born the Son of any; and the Son is Son, and
not brother. Further, if He is called the eternal offspring <span
id="fr_1916"></span>[1917](#fn_1916.md) of the Father, He is rightly so
called. For never was the essence of the Father imperfect, that what is
proper to it should be added afterwards <span
id="fr_1917"></span>[1918](#fn_1917.md) ; nor, as man from man, <span
id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span id="xxi.ii.i.v-Page_315"></span>has
the Son been begotten, so as to be later than His Father’s existence,
but He is God’s offspring, and as being proper Son of God, who is ever,
He exists eternally. For, whereas it is proper to men to beget in time,
from the imperfection of their nature <span
id="fr_1918"></span>[1919](#fn_1918.md) , God’s offspring is eternal, for
His nature is ever perfect <span id="fr_1919"></span>[1920](#fn_1919.md) .
If then He is not a Son, but a work made out of nothing, they have but
to prove it; and then they are at liberty, as if imagining about a
creature, to cry out, ‘There was once when He was not;’ for things which
are originated were not, and have come to be. But if He is Son, as the
Father says, and the Scriptures proclaim, and ‘Son’ is nothing else than
what is generated from the Father; and what is generated from the Father
is His Word, and Wisdom, and Radiance; what is to be said but that, in
maintaining ‘Once the Son was not,’ they rob God of His Word, like
plunderers, and openly predicate of Him that He was once without His
proper Word and Wisdom, and that the Light was once without radiance,
and the Fountain was once barren and dry <span
id="fr_1920"></span>[1921](#fn_1920.md) ? For though they pretend alarm at
the name of time, because of those who reproach them with it, and say,
that He was before times, yet whereas they assign certain intervals, in
which they imagine He was not, they are most irreligious still, as
equally suggesting times, and imputing to God an absence of Reason <span
id="fr_1921"></span>[1922](#fn_1921.md) .

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p12"></span>15. But if on the other hand, while
they acknowledge with us the name of ‘Son,’ from an unwillingness to be
publicly and generally condemned, they deny that the Son is the proper
offspring of the Father’s essence, on the ground that this must imply
parts and divisions <span id="fr_1922"></span>[1923](#fn_1922.md) ; what is
this but to deny that He is very Son, and only in name to call Him Son
at all? And is it not a grievous error, to have material thoughts about
what is immaterial, and because of the weakness of their proper nature
to deny what is natural and proper to the Father? It does but remain,
that they should deny Him also, because they understand not how God
is <span id="fr_1923"></span>[1924](#fn_1923.md) , and what the Father is,
now that, foolish men, they measure by themselves the Offspring of the
Father. And persons in such a state of mind as to consider that there
cannot be a Son of God, demand our pity; but they must be interrogated
and exposed for the chance of bringing them to their senses. If then, as
you say, ‘the Son is from nothing,’ and ‘was not before His generation,’
He, of course, as well as others, must be called Son and God and Wisdom
only by participation; for thus all other creatures consist, and by
sanctification are glorified. You have to tell us then, of what He is
partaker <span id="fr_1924"></span>[1925](#fn_1924.md) . All other things
partake of the Spirit, but He, according to you, of what is He partaker?
of the Spirit? Nay, rather the Spirit Himself takes from the Son, as He
Himself says; and it is not reasonable to say that the latter is
sanctified by the former. Therefore it is the Father that He partakes;
for this only remains to say. But this, which is participated, what is
it or whence <span id="fr_1925"></span>[1926](#fn_1925.md) ? If it be
something external provided by the Father, He will not now be partaker
of the Father, but of what is external to Him; and no longer will He be
even second after the Father, since He has before Him this other; nor
can He be called Son of the Father, but of that, as partaking which He
has been called Son and God. And if this be unseemly and irreligious,
when the Father says, ‘This is My Beloved Son <span
id="fr_1926"></span>[1927](#fn_1926.md) ,’ and when the Son says that God
is His own Father, it follows that what is partaken is not external, but
from the essence of the Father. And as to this again, if it be other
than the essence of the Son, an equal extravagance will meet us; there
being in that case something between this that is from the Father and
the essence of the Son, whatever that be <span
id="fr_1927"></span>[1928](#fn_1927.md) .

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p19"></span>16. Such thoughts then being evidently
unseemly and untrue, we are driven to say that what is from the essence
of the Father, and proper to Him, is entirely the Son; for it is all one
to say that God is wholly participated, and that He <span
id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-Page_316"></span>begets; and what does begetting signify
but a Son? And thus of the Son Himself, all things partake according to
the grace of the Spirit coming from Him <span
id="fr_1928"></span>[1929](#fn_1928.md) ; and this shews that the Son
Himself partakes of nothing, but what is partaken from the Father, is
the Son; for, as partaking of the Son Himself, we are said to partake of
God; and this is what Peter said ‘that ye may be partakers in a divine
nature <span id="fr_1929"></span>[1930](#fn_1929.md) ;’ as says too the
Apostle, ‘Know ye not, that ye are a temple of God?’ and, ‘We are the
temple of a living God <span id="fr_1930"></span>[1931](#fn_1930.md) .’ And
beholding the Son, we see the Father; for the thought <span
id="fr_1931"></span>[1932](#fn_1931.md) and comprehension of the Son, is
knowledge concerning the Father, because He is His proper offspring from
His essence. And since to be partaken no one of us would ever call
affection or division of God’s essence (for it has been shewn and
acknowledged that God is participated, and to be participated is the
same thing as to beget); therefore that which is begotten is neither
affection nor division of that blessed essence. Hence it is not
incredible that God should have a Son, the Offspring of His own essence;
nor do we imply affection or division of God’s essence, when we speak of
‘Son’ and ‘Offspring;’ but rather, as acknowledging the genuine, and
true, and Only-begotten of God, so we believe. If then, as we have
stated and are shewing, what is the Offspring of the Father’s essence be
the Son, we cannot hesitate, rather we must be certain, that the
same <span id="fr_1932"></span>[1933](#fn_1932.md) is the Wisdom and Word
of the Father, in and through whom He creates and makes all things; and
His Brightness too, in whom He enlightens all things, and is revealed to
whom He will; and His Expression and Image also, in whom He is
contemplated and known, wherefore ‘He and His Father are one <span
id="fr_1933"></span>[1934](#fn_1933.md) ,’ and whoso looketh on Him looketh
on the Father; and the Christ, in whom all things are redeemed, and the
new creation wrought afresh. And on the other hand, the Son being such
Offspring, it is not fitting, rather it is full of peril, to say, that
He is a work out of nothing, or that He was not before His generation.
For he who thus speaks of that which is proper to the Father’s essence,
already blasphemes the Father Himself <span
id="fr_1934"></span>[1935](#fn_1934.md) ; since he really thinks of Him
what he falsely imagines of His offspring.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1913"></span>[314:1914](2040350.htm#fr_1913.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p3"></span> This was an objection urged by
Eunomius, cf. *de Syn.* 51, note 8. It is implied also in the Apology of
the former, §24, and in Basil. *contr. Eunom.* ii. 28. Aetius was in
Alexandria with George of Cappadocia, <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 356–8, and Athan. wrote these
Discourses in the latter year, as the *de Syn.* at the end of the next.
It is probable then that he is alluding to the Anomœan arguments as he
heard them reported, vid. *de Syn*. l.c. where he says, ‘they say, “as
you have written,”’ §51. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p3.3"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p3.4"></span>Α</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p3.5"></span>νόμοιος κατ᾽ οὐσίαν</span> is mentioned
infr. §17. As the Arians here object that the First and Second Persons
of the Holy Trinity are <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p3.7"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p3.8"></span>δελφοὶ</span>, so did they say the same in
the course of the controversy of the Second and Third. vid. *Serap.* i.
15. iv. 2.

<span id="fn_1914"></span>[314:1915](2040350.htm#fr_1914.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p3.10"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p4"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p4.1"></span>[Prov. xviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#001.md)<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p4.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1915"></span>[314:1916](2040350.htm#fr_1915.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p5"></span> Vid. *de Syn.* §51.

<span id="fn_1916"></span>[314:1917](2040350.htm#fr_1916.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6"></span> In other words, by the Divine <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.2"></span>γεννησις</span> is not
meant an act but an eternal and unchangeable fact, in the Divine
Essence. Arius. not admitting this, objected at the outset of the
controversy to the phrase ‘always Father, always Son,’ Theod. *H. E.* i.
4. p. 749, and Eunomius argues that, ‘if the Son is co-eternal with the
Father, the Father was never such in act, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.5"></span>νεργὸς</span>, but was <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.7"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.8"></span>ργός</span>.’ Cyril.
*Thesaur.* v. p. 41. S. Cyril answers that ‘works,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.10"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.11"></span>ργα</span>, are made
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.12"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.13"></span>ξωθεν</span>, ‘from
without;’ but that our Lord, as S. Athanasius here says, is neither a
‘work’ nor ‘from without.’ And hence he says elsewhere that, while men
are fathers first in posse then in act, God is <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.15"></span>δυνάμει τε καὶ ἐνεργεί& 139· πατήρ</span>.
*Dial.* 2. p. 458. (vid. supr. p. 65. note m). Victorinus in like
manner, says, that God is potentia et actione Deus sed in æterna, *Adv.
Ar.* i. p. 202; and he quotes S. Alexander, speaking apparently in
answer to Arius, of a semper generans generatio. And Arius scoffs at
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.17"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.18"></span>ειγεννής</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.20"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.21"></span>γεννητογενής</span>.
Theod. *Hist.* i. 4. p. 749. And Origen had said, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.23"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.24"></span>σωτὴρ ἀεὶ
γεννᾶται</span>. ap. Routh. *Reliq.* t. 4. p. 304 and S. Dionysius calls
Him the Radiance, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.26"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.27"></span>ναρχὸν καὶ ἀειγενές</span>. *Sent. Dion*
15. S. Augustine too says, Semper gignit Pater, et semper nascitur
Filius. *Ep.* 238. n. 4. Petav. *de Trin.* ii. 5. n. 7, quotes the
following passage from Theodorus Abucara, ‘Since the Son’s generation
does but signify His having His existence from the Father, which He has
ever, therefore He is ever begotten. For it became Him, who is properly
(<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.29"></span>κυρίως</span>)
the Son, ever to be deriving His existence from the Father, and not as
we who derive its commencement only. In us generation is a way to
existence; in the Son of God it denotes the existence itself; in Him it
has not existence for its end, but it is itself an end, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.31"></span>τέλος</span>, and is
perfect, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.33"></span>τέλειον</span>.’ *Opusc* 26.

<span id="fn_1917"></span>[314:1918](2040350.htm#fr_1917.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p6.35"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p7"></span> *de Decr.* 22, note 9.

<span id="fn_1918"></span>[315:1919](2040350.htm#fr_1918.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p8"></span> Infr. §26 fin., and *de Decr.* 12, note
2.

<span id="fn_1919"></span>[315:1920](2040350.htm#fr_1919.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p9"></span> Vid. *supr.* note 4. A similar passage
is found in Cyril. *Thesaur.* v. p. 42, *Dial.* ii. fin. This was
retorting the objection; the Arians said, ‘How can God be ever perfect,
who added to Himself a Son?’ Athan. answers, ‘How can the Son not be
eternal, since God is ever perfect?’ vid. Greg. Nyssen, *contr. Eunom.
Append.* p. 142. Cyril. *Thesaur.* x. p. 78. As to the Son’s perfection,
Aetius objects ap. Epiph. *Hær.* 76. pp. 925, 6, that growth and
consequent accession from without were essentially involved in the idea
of Sonship; whereas S. Greg. Naz. speaks of the Son as not <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p9.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p9.3"></span>τελῆ πρότερον, εἶτα
τέλειον, ὥσπερ νόμος τῆς ἡμετέρας γενέσεως</span>, *Orat.* 20. 9 fin. In
like manner, S. Basil argues against Eunomius, that the Son is <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p9.5"></span>τέλειος</span>, because
He is the Image, not as if copied, which is a gradual work, but as a
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p9.7"></span>χαρακτὴρ</span>,
or impression of a seal, or as the knowledge communicated from master to
scholar, which comes to the latter and exists in him perfect, without
being lost to the former. *contr. Eunom.* ii. 16 fin.

<span id="fn_1920"></span>[315:1921](2040350.htm#fr_1920.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p9.9"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p10"></span> *de Decr.* 12, 15.

<span id="fn_1921"></span>[315:1922](2040350.htm#fr_1921.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p11"></span> Ib. 22, note 1, infr. §19.

<span id="fn_1922"></span>[315:1923](2040350.htm#fr_1922.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p13"></span> *De Decr.* §§10, 11.

<span id="fn_1923"></span>[315:1924](2040350.htm#fr_1923.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p14"></span> Infr. §23.

<span id="fn_1924"></span>[315:1925](2040350.htm#fr_1924.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p15"></span> *De Syn.* §45, 51.

<span id="fn_1925"></span>[315:1926](2040350.htm#fr_1925.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p16"></span> *Nic. Def.* 9, note 4.

<span id="fn_1926"></span>[315:1927](2040350.htm#fr_1926.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p17"></span> [Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017.md)<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1927"></span>[315:1928](2040350.htm#fr_1927.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18"></span> Here is taught us the strict unity of
the Divine Essence. When it is said that the First Person of the Holy
Trinity communicates divinity to the Second, it is meant that that one
Essence which is the Father, also is the Son. Hence the force of the
word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.2"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.3"></span>μοούσιον</span>, which was in consequence
accused of Sabellianism, but was distinguished from it by the particle
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.5"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.6"></span>μοῦ</span>, ‘together,’
which implied a difference as well as unity; whereas <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.8"></span>ταὐτοούσιον</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.9"></span>συνούσιον</span>
implied, with the Sabellians, an identity or a confusion. The Arians, on
the other hand, as in the instance of Eusebius, &c., supr. p. 75, note
7; *de Syn.* 26, note 3; considered the Father and the Son two <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.11"></span>οὐσίαι</span>. The
Catholic doctrine is that, though the Divine Essence is both the Father
Ingenerate and also the Only-begotten Son, it is not itself <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.13"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.14"></span>γέννητος</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p18.15"></span>γεννητή</span>;
which was the objection urged against the Catholics by Aetius, Epiph.
*Hær.* 76. 10. Cf. *de Decr.* §30, *Orat.* iii. §36 fin., *Expos. Fid.*
2. vid. *de Syn.* 45, note 1. ‘Vera et æterna substantia in se tota
permanens, totam se coæternæ veritati nativitatis indulsit.’ Fulgent.
*Resp.* 7. And S. Hilary, ‘Filius in Patre est et in Filio Pater, non
per transfusionem, refusionemque mutuam, sed per viventis naturæ
perfectam nativitatem.’ *Trin*. vii. 31.

<span id="fn_1928"></span>[316:1929](2040350.htm#fr_1928.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p20"></span> *De Decr.* §31.

<span id="fn_1929"></span>[316:1930](2040350.htm#fr_1929.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p21"></span> [2 Pet. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004.md)<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1930"></span>[316:1931](2040350.htm#fr_1930.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p22"></span> <span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p22.1"></span>[1
Cor. iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016.md)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p22.3"></span>; [2 Cor. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016.md)<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p22.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1931"></span>[316:1932](2040350.htm#fr_1931.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p22.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p23.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p23.2"></span>ννοια</span>, vid. *de Syn.* §48 fin.

<span id="fn_1932"></span>[316:1933](2040350.htm#fr_1932.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p23.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p24"></span> *de Decr.* 17, 24.

<span id="fn_1933"></span>[316:1934](2040350.htm#fr_1933.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p25"></span> [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030.md)<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1934"></span>[316:1935](2040350.htm#fr_1934.md) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.v-p26"></span> *de Decr.* 1, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Subject Continued. Third proof of the Son's eternity, viz. from
other titles indicative of His coessentiality; as the Creator; One of
the Blessed Trinity; as Wisdom; as Word; as Image. If the Son is a
perfect Image of the Father, why is He not a Father also? because God,
being perfect, is not the origin of a race. Only the Father a Father
because the Only Father, only the Son a Son because the Only Son. Men
are not really fathers and really sons, but shadows of the True. The Son
does not become a Father, because He has received from the Father to be
immutable and ever the same.](2040351.md)
