[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040365)  [Next](2040367) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p1.2"></span>Texts explained;
Sixthly,</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p1.3"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p1.4"></span>[Proverbs viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p1.5"></span></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p1.6"></span>. *P*</span>*roverbs are of a figurative
nature, and must be interpreted as such. We must interpret them, and in
particular this passage, by the Regula Fidei. ‘He created me’ not
equivalent to ‘I am a creature.’ Wisdom a creature so far forth as Its
human body. Again, if He is a creature, it is as ‘a beginning of ways,’
an office which, though not an attribute, is a consequence, of a higher
and divine nature. And it is ‘for the works,’ which implied the works
existed, and therefore much more He, before He was created. Also ‘the
Lord’ not the Father ‘created’ Him, which implies the creation was that
of a servant.*

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p2"></span>44. We have gone through thus much
before the passage in the Proverbs, resisting the insensate fables which
their hearts have invented, that they may know that the Son of God ought
not to be called a creature, and may learn lightly to read what admits
in truth of a right <span id="fr_2495"></span>[2496](#fn_2495)
explanation. For it is written, ‘The Lord created me a beginning of His
ways, for His works <span id="fr_2496"></span>[2497](#fn_2496) ;’ since,
however, these are proverbs, and it is expressed in the way of proverbs,
we must not expound them nakedly in their first sense, but we must
inquire into the person, and thus religiously put the sense on it. For
what is said in proverbs, is not said plainly, but is put forth
latently <span id="fr_2497"></span>[2498](#fn_2497) , as the Lord
Himself has taught us in the Gospel according to John, saying, ‘These
things have I spoken unto you in proverbs, but the time cometh when I
shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but openly <span
id="fr_2498"></span>[2499](#fn_2498) .’ Therefore it is necessary to
unfold the sense <span id="fr_2499"></span>[2500](#fn_2499) of what is
said, and to seek it as something hidden, and not nakedly to expound as
if the meaning were spoken ‘plainly,’ lest by a false interpretation we
wander from the truth. If then what is written be about Angel, or any
other of things originate, as concerning one of us who are works, let it
be said, ‘created me;’ but if it be the Wisdom of God, in whom all
things originate have been framed, that speaks concerning Itself, what
ought we to understand but that ‘He created’ means nothing contrary to
‘He begat?’ Nor, as forgetting that It is Creator and Framer, or
ignorant of the difference between the Creator and the creatures, does
It number Itself among the creatures; but It signifies a certain sense,
as in proverbs, not ‘plainly,’ but latent; which It inspired the saints
to use in prophecy, while soon after It doth Itself give the meaning of
‘He created’ in other but parallel expressions, saying, ‘Wisdom made
herself a house <span id="fr_2500"></span>[2501](#fn_2500) .’ Now it is
plain that our body is Wisdom’s house <span
id="fr_2501"></span>[2502](#fn_2501) , which It took on Itself to become
man; hence consistently does John say, ‘The Word was made flesh <span
id="fr_2502"></span>[2503](#fn_2502) ;’ and by Solomon Wisdom says of
Itself with cautious exactness <span
id="fr_2503"></span>[2504](#fn_2503) , not ‘I am a creature,’ but only
‘The Lord created me a beginning of His ways for His works <span
id="fr_2504"></span>[2505](#fn_2504) ,’ yet not ‘created me that I might
have being,’ nor ‘because I have a creature’s beginning and origin.’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p13"></span>45. For in this passage, not as
signifying the Essence of His Godhead, nor His own everlasting and
genuine generation from the Father, has the Word spoken by Solomon, but
on the other hand His manhood and Economy towards us. And, as I said
before, He has not said ‘I am a creature,’ or ‘I became a creature,’ but
only ‘He created <span id="fr_2505"></span>[2506](#fn_2505) .’ For the
creatures, having a created essence, are <span id="page_373">p.
373</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-Page_373"></span>originate, and are
said to be created, and of course the creature is created: but this mere
term ‘He created’ does not necessarily signify the essence or the
generation, but indicates something else as coming to pass in Him of
whom it speaks, and not simply that He who is said to be created, is at
once in His Nature and Essence a creature <span
id="fr_2506"></span>[2507](#fn_2506) . And this difference divine
Scripture recognises, saying concerning the creatures, ‘The earth is
full of Thy creation,’ and ‘the creation itself groaneth together and
travaileth together <span id="fr_2507"></span>[2508](#fn_2507) ;’ and in
the Apocalypse it says, ‘And the third part of the creatures in the sea
died which had life;’ as also Paul says, ‘Every creature of God is good,
and nothing is to be refused if it be received with thanksgiving <span
id="fr_2508"></span>[2509](#fn_2508) ;’ and in the book of Wisdom it is
written, ‘Having ordained man through Thy wisdom, that he should have
dominion over the creatures which Thou hast made <span
id="fr_2509"></span>[2510](#fn_2509) .’ And these, being creatures, are
also said to be created, as we may further hear from the Lord, who says,
‘He who created them, made them male and female <span
id="fr_2510"></span>[2511](#fn_2510) ;’ and from Moses in the Song, who
writes, ‘Ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee since
the day that God created man upon the earth, and from the one side of
heaven unto the other <span id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511) .’ And
Paul in Colossians, ‘Who is the Image of the Invisible God, the
Firstborn of every creature, for in Him were all things created that are
in heaven, and that are on earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were
created through Him, and for Him, and He is before all <span
id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p22"></span>46. That to be called creatures,
then, and to be created belongs to things which have by nature a created
essence, these passages are sufficient to remind us, though Scripture is
full of the like; on the other hand that the single word ‘He created’
does not simply denote the essence and mode of generation, David shews
in the Psalm, ‘This shall be written for another generation, and the
people that is created shall praise the Lord <span
id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513) ;’ and again, ‘Create in me a clean
heart, O God <span id="fr_2514"></span>[2515](#fn_2514) ;’ and Paul in
Ephesians says, ‘Having abolished the law of commandments contained in
ordinances, for to create in Himself of two one new man <span
id="fr_2515"></span>[2516](#fn_2515) ;’ and again, ‘Put ye on the new
man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness <span
id="fr_2516"></span>[2517](#fn_2516) .’ For neither David spoke of any
people created in essence, nor prayed to have another heart than that he
had, but meant renovation according to God and renewal; nor did Paul
signify two persons created in essence in the Lord, nor again did he
counsel us to put on any other man; but he called the life according to
virtue the ‘man after God,’ and by the ‘created’ in Christ he meant the
two people who are renewed in Him. Such too is the language of the book
of Jeremiah; ‘The Lord created a new salvation for a planting, in which
salvation men shall walk to and fro <span
id="fr_2517"></span>[2518](#fn_2517) ;’ and in thus speaking, he does
not mean any essence of a creature, but prophesies of the renewal of
salvation among men, which has taken place in Christ for us. Such then
being the difference between ‘the creatures’ and the single word ‘He
created,’ if you find anywhere in divine Scripture the Lord called
‘creature,’ produce it and fight; but if it is nowhere written that He
is a creature, only He Himself says about Himself in the Proverbs, ‘The
Lord created me,’ shame upon you, both on the ground of the distinction
aforesaid and for that the diction is like that of proverbs; and
accordingly let ‘He created’ be understood, not of His being a creature,
but of that human nature which became His, for to this belongs creation.
Indeed is it not evidently unfair in you, when David and Paul say ‘He
created,’ then indeed not to understand it of the essence and the
generation, but the renewal; yet, when the Lord says ‘He created’ to
number His essence with the creatures? and again when Scripture says,
‘Wisdom built her an house, she set it upon seven pillars <span
id="fr_2518"></span>[2519](#fn_2518) ,’ to understand ‘house’ <span
id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-Page_374"></span>allegorically, but to take ‘He
created’ as it stands, and to fasten on it the idea of creature? and
neither His being Framer of all has had any weight with you, nor have
you feared His being the sole and proper Offspring of the Father, but
recklessly, as if you had enlisted against Him, do ye fight, and think
less of Him than of men.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p29"></span>47. For the very passage proves that
it is only an invention of your own to call the Lord creature. For the
Lord, knowing His own Essence to be the Only-begotten Wisdom and
Offspring of the Father, and other than things originate and natural
creatures, says in love to man, ‘The Lord created me a beginning of His
ways,’ as if to say, ‘My Father hath prepared for Me a body, and has
created Me for men in behalf of their salvation.’ For, as when John
says, ‘The Word was made flesh <span
id="fr_2519"></span>[2520](#fn_2519) ,’ we do not conceive the whole
Word Himself to be flesh <span id="fr_2520"></span>[2521](#fn_2520) ,
but to have put on flesh and become man, and on hearing, ‘Christ hath
become a curse for us,’ and ‘He hath made Him sin for us who knew no
sin <span id="fr_2521"></span>[2522](#fn_2521) ,’ we do not simply
conceive this, that whole Christ has become curse and sin, but that He
has taken on Him the curse which lay against us (as the Apostle has
said, ‘Has redeemed us from the curse,’ and ‘has carried,’ as Isaiah has
said, ‘our sins,’ and as Peter has written, ‘has borne them in the body
on the wood <span id="fr_2522"></span>[2523](#fn_2522) ’); so, if it is
said in the Proverbs ‘He created,’ we must not conceive that the whole
Word is in nature a creature, but that He put on the created body <span
id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523) and that God created Him for our
sakes, preparing for Him the created body, as it is written, for us,
that in Him we might be capable of being renewed and deified. What then
deceived you, O senseless, to call the Creator a creature? or whence did
you purchase for you this new thought, to parade it <span
id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524) ? For the Proverbs say ‘He
created,’ but they call not the Son creature, but Offspring; and,
according to the distinction in Scripture aforesaid of ‘He created’ and
‘creature,’ they acknowledge, what is by nature proper to the Son, that
He is the Only-begotten Wisdom and Framer of the creatures, and when
they say ‘He created,’ they say it not in respect of His Essence, but
signify that He was becoming a beginning of many ways; so that ‘He
created’ is in contrast to ‘Offspring,’ and His being called the
‘Beginning of ways <span id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525) ’ to His
being the Only-begotten Word.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p37"></span>48. For if He is Offspring, how call
ye Him creature? for no one says that He begets what He creates, nor
calls His proper offspring creatures; and again, if He is Only-begotten,
how becomes He ‘beginning of the ways?’ for of necessity, if He was
created a beginning of all things, He is no longer alone, as having
those who came into being after Him. For Reuben, when he became a
beginning of the children <span id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526) ,
was not only-begotten, but in time indeed first, but in nature and
relationship one among those who came after him. Therefore if the Word
also is ‘a beginning of the ways,’ He must be such as the ways are, and
the ways must be such as the Word, though in point of time He be created
first of them. For the beginning or initiative of a city is such as the
other parts of the city are, and the members too being joined to it,
make the city whole and one, as the many members of one body; nor does
one part of it make, and another come to be, and is subject to the
former, but all the city equally has its government and constitution
from its maker. If then the Lord is in such sense created as a
‘beginning’ of all things, it would follow that He and all other things
together make up the unity of the creation, and He neither differs from
all others, though He become the ‘beginning’ of all, nor is He Lord of
them, though older in point of time; but He has the same manner of
framing and the same Lord as the rest. Nay, if He be a creature, as you
hold, how can He be created sole and first at all, so as to be beginning
of all? when it is plain from what has been said, that among the
creatures not any is of a constant <span
id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527) nature and of prior formation, but
each has its origination with all the rest, however it may excel others
in glory. For as to the separate stars or the great lights, not this
appeared first, and that second, but in one day and by the same command,
they were all called into being. And such was the original formation of
the quadrupeds, and of birds, and fishes, and cattle, and plants; thus
too has the race <span id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-Page_375"></span>made after God’s Image come to be,
namely men; for though Adam only was formed out of earth, yet in him was
involved the succession of the whole race.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p40"></span>49. And from the visible creation,
we clearly discern that His invisible things also, ‘being perceived by
the things that are made <span id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528) ,’
are not independent of each other; for it was not first one and then
another, but all at once were constituted after their kind. For the
Apostle did not number individually, so as to say ‘whether Angel, or
Throne, or Dominion, or Authority,’ but he mentions together all
according to their kind, ‘whether Angels, or Archangels, or
Principalities <span id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529) :’ for in this
way is the origination of the creatures. If then, as I have said, the
Word were creature He must have been brought into being, not first of
them, but with all the other Powers, though in glory He excel the rest
ever so much. For so we find it to be in their case, that at once they
came to be, with neither first nor second, and they differ from each
other in glory, some on the right of the throne, some all around, and
some on the left, but one and all praising and standing in service
before the Lord <span id="fr_2530"></span>[2531](#fn_2530) . Therefore
if the Word be creature He would not be first or beginning of the rest;
yet if He be before all, as indeed He is, and is Himself alone First and
Son, it does not follow that He is beginning of all things as to His
Essence <span id="fr_2531"></span>[2532](#fn_2531) , for what is the
beginning of all is in the number of all. And if He is not such a
beginning, then neither is He a creature, but it is very plain that He
differs in essence and nature from the creatures, and is other than
they, and is Likeness and Image of the sole and true God, being Himself
sole also. Hence He is not classed with creatures in Scripture, but
David rebukes those who dare even to think of Him as such, saying, ‘Who
among the gods is like unto the Lord <span
id="fr_2532"></span>[2533](#fn_2532) ?’ and ‘Who is like unto the Lord
among the sons of God?’ and Baruch, ‘This is our God, and another shall
not be reckoned with Him <span id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533) .’
For the One creates, and the rest are created; and the One is the own
Word and Wisdom of the Father’s Essence, and through this Word things
which came to be, which before existed not, were made.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p47"></span>50. Your famous assertion then, that
the Son is a creature, is not true, but is your fantasy only; nay
Solomon convicts you of having many times slandered him. For he has not
called Him creature, but God’s Offspring and Wisdom, saying, ‘God in
Wisdom established the earth,’ and ‘Wisdom built her an house <span
id="fr_2534"></span>[2535](#fn_2534) .’ And the very passage in question
proves your irreligious spirit; for it is written, ‘The Lord created me
a beginning of His ways for His works.’ Therefore if He is before all
things, yet says ‘He created me’ (not ‘that I might make the works,’
but) ‘for the works,’ unless ‘He created’ relates to something later
than Himself, He will seem later than the works, finding them on His
creation already in existence before Him, for the sake of which He is
also brought into being. And if so, how is He before all things
notwithstanding? and how were all things made through Him and consist in
Him? for behold, you say that the works consisted before Him, for which
He is created and sent. But it is not so; perish the thought! false is
the supposition of the heretics. For the Word of God is not creature but
Creator; and says in the manner of proverbs, ‘He created me’ when He put
on created flesh. And something besides may be understood from the
passage itself; for, being Son and having God for His Father, for He is
His proper Offspring, yet here He names the Father Lord; not that He was
servant, but because He took the servant’s form. For it became Him, on
the one hand being the Word from the Father, to call God Father: for
this is proper to son towards father; on the other, having come to
finish the work, and taken a servant’s form, to name the Father Lord.
And this difference He Himself has taught by an apt distinction, saying
in the Gospels, ‘I thank Thee, O Father,’ and then, ‘Lord of heaven and
earth <span id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535) .’ For He calls God His
Father, but of the creatures He names Him Lord; as shewing clearly from
these words, that, when He put on the creature <span
id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536) , then it was He called the Father
Lord. For in the prayer of David the Holy Spirit marks the same
distinction, saying in the Psalms, ‘Give Thy strength unto Thy Child,
and help the Son of Thine handmaid <span
id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537) .’ For the natural and true child
of God is one, and the sons of the handmaid, that is, of the nature of
things originate, are other. Wherefore the One, as Son, has the Father’s
might; but the rest are in need of salvation.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p52"></span>51. (But if, because He was called
child, <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-Page_376"></span>they idly talk, let them know that
both Isaac was named Abraham’s child, and the son of the Shunamite was
called young child.) Reasonably then, we being servants, when He became
as we, He too calls the Father Lord, as we do; and this He has so done
from love to man, that we too, being servants by nature, and receiving
the Spirit of the Son, might have confidence to call Him by grace
Father, who is by nature our Lord. But as we, in calling the Lord
Father, do not deny our servitude by nature (for we are His works, and
it is ‘He that hath made us, and not we ourselves <span
id="fr_2538"></span>[2539](#fn_2538) ’), so when the Son, on taking the
servant’s form, says, ‘The Lord created me a beginning of His ways,’ let
them not deny the eternity of His Godhead, and that ‘in the beginning
was the Word,’ and ‘all things were made by Him,’ and ‘in Him all things
were created <span id="fr_2539"></span>[2540](#fn_2539) .’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2495"></span>[372:2496](2040366.htm#fr_2495) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>καλῶς ἀναγινώσκειν</span>.…<span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p3.3"></span>ὀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p3.4"></span>ρθὴν ἔχον τὴν
διάνοιαν</span>, i.e. the text admits of an interpretation consistent
with the analogy of faith, and so <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p3.6"></span>μετ᾽ εὐσεβείας</span> just below. vid.
§1. n. 13. Such phrases are frequent in Athan.

<span id="fn_2496"></span>[372:2497](2040366.htm#fr_2496) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p3.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p4"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p4.3"></span>. Athanasius follows the Sept. rendering
of the Hebrew Qanâ. by <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p4.5"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p4.6"></span>κτισε</span>. The Hebrew sense is
appealed to by Eusebius, *Eccles. Theol.* iii. 2, 3. S. Epiphanius,
*Hær*. 69. 25. and S. Jerome *in Isai.* 26. 13. Cf. Bas. *c. Eun.* ii.
20, and Greg. Nyss. *c. Eun.* 1. p. 34.

<span id="fn_2497"></span>[372:2498](2040366.htm#fr_2497) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p4.8"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p5"></span> This passage of Athan. has been used
by many later fathers.

<span id="fn_2498"></span>[372:2499](2040366.htm#fr_2498) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p6"></span> [John xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2499"></span>[372:2500](2040366.htm#fr_2499) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p7"></span> Here, as in so many other places, he
is explaining what is obscure or latent in Scripture by means of the
*Regula Fidei.* Cf. Vincentius, *Commonit.* 2. Vid. especially the first
sentence of the following paragraph, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p7.2"></span>τί δεῖ νοεῖν κ.τ.λ</span>. vid. *supr.*
note 1.

<span id="fn_2500"></span>[372:2501](2040366.htm#fr_2500) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p7.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p8"></span> [Prov. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2501"></span>[372:2502](2040366.htm#fr_2501) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p9"></span> Ut intra intemerata viscera
ædificante sibi Sapientia domum, Verbum caro fieret. Leon. *Ep.* 31, 2.
Didym. *de Trin.* iii. 3. p. 337. (ed. 1769.) August. *Civ. D.* xvii.
20. Cyril *in Joann.* p. 384, 5. Max. *Dial.* iii. p. 1029. (ap.
Theodor. ed. Schutz.) vid. *supr. Or.* i. 11, note 8. Hence S. Clement.
Alex. <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p9.2"></span>ὁ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p9.3"></span>λόγος ἑαυτὸν
γεννᾷ</span>. *Strom.* v. 3.

<span id="fn_2502"></span>[372:2503](2040366.htm#fr_2502) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p9.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p10"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2503"></span>[372:2504](2040366.htm#fr_2503) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p11"></span> §12, n. 4.

<span id="fn_2504"></span>[372:2505](2040366.htm#fr_2504) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p12"></span> The passage is in like manner
interpreted of our Lord’s human nature by Epiph. *Hær.* 69, 20–25.
Basil. *Ep.* viii. 8. Naz. *Orat.* 30, 2. Nyss. *contr. Eunom.* i. p.
34. et al. Cyril. *Thesaur.* p. 154. Hilar. *de Trin.* xii. 36–49.
Ambros. *de Fid.* i. 15. August. *de Fid. et Symb.* 6.

<span id="fn_2505"></span>[372:2506](2040366.htm#fr_2505) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p14"></span> He seems here to say that it is
both true that ‘The Lord created,’ and yet that the Son was not created.
Creatures alone are created, and He was not a creature. Rather something
belonging or relating to Him, something short of His substance or
nature, was created. However, it is a question in controversy whether
even His Manhood can be called a creature, though many of the Fathers
(including Athan. in several places) seem so to call it. On the whole it
would appear, (1.) that if ‘creature,’ like ‘Son,’ be a *personal* term,
He is not a creature; but if it be a word of *nature,* He is a creature;
(2.) that our Lord is a creature in respect to the flesh (vid. *infr.*
47); (3.) that since the flesh is infinitely beneath His divinity, it is
neither natural nor safe to call Him a creature (cf. Thom. Aq. *Sum.
Th.* iii. xvi. 8, ‘non dicimus, quod Æthiops est albus, sed quod est
albus secundum dentes’) and (4.) that, if the flesh is worshipped, still
it is worshipped as in the Person of the Son, not by a separate act of
worship. Cf. *infr. Letter* 60. *ad Adelph.* 3. Epiph. has imitated this
passage, *Ancor.* 51. introducing the illustration of a king and his
robe, &c.

<span id="fn_2506"></span>[373:2507](2040366.htm#fr_2506) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.1"></span>τὸ λεγόμενον κτίζεσθαι τῇ φύσει καὶ τῇ
οὐσί& 139· κτίσμα</span>. also *infr.* 60. Without meaning that the
respective terms are synonymous, is it not plain that in a later
phraseology this would have been, ‘not simply that He is in His Person a
creature,’ or ‘that His Person is created?’ Athan.’s use of the phrase
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.3"></span>οὐσία τοῦ
λόγου</span> has already been noticed, *supr.* i. 45, and passages from
this Oration are given in another connexion, *supr.* p. 70, note 15. The
term is synonymous with the Divine Nature as existing in the Person of
the Word. \[Cf. Prolegg. ch. ii. §3 (2) b.\] In the passage in the text
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.5"></span>οὐσία</span> of the Word is contrasted
to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.7"></span>οὐσία</span> of creatures; and it is
observable that it is implied that our Lord has not taken on Him a
created <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.9"></span>οὐσία</span>. ‘He said not, Athan.
remarks, ‘I became a creature, for the creatures have a created
essence;’ he adds that ‘He created’ signifies, *not* essence, but
something taking place in Him <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.11"></span>περὶ ἔκεινον</span>, i.e. some adjunct
or accident (e.g. notes on *de Decr.* 22), or as he says *supr.* §8,
envelopment or dress. And *infr.* §51, he contrasts the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.13"></span>οὐσία</span> and
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.15"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.16"></span>νθρώπινον</span> of the Word; as in
*Orat.* i. 41. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.18"></span>οὐσία</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.20"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.21"></span>ἀνθρωπότης</span>;
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.23"></span>φύσις</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.24"></span>σάρξ</span>, iii.
34. init. and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.25"></span>λόγος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.26"></span>σάρξ</span>, 38.
init. And He speaks of the Son ‘taking on Him the *economy,*’ *infr.*
76, and of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.28"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.29"></span>πόστασις τοῦ λόγου</span> being one
with <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.30"></span>ὁ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.31"></span>ἄνθρωπος</span>, iv. 25, c. It is
observed, §8, note, how this line of teaching might be wrested to the
purposes of the Apollinarian and Eutychian heresies; and, considering
Athan.’s most emphatic protests against their errors in his later works,
as well as his strong statements in *Orat.* iii. there is no hazard in
this admission. His ordinary use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.33"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.34"></span>νθρωπος</span> for the manhood might
quite as plausibly be perverted on the other hand into a defence of
Nestorianism. Vid. also the Ed. Ben. on S. Hilary, præf. p. xliii. who
uses *natura* absolutely for our Lord’s Divinity, as contrasted to the
*dispensatio,* and divides His titles into *naturalia* and *assumpta.*

<span id="fn_2507"></span>[373:2508](2040366.htm#fr_2507) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p15.36"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p16"></span> [Ps.
104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024), [Rom.
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p16.1"></span>[Ps. civ.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p16.3"></span>. LXX.; [Rom. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p16.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2508"></span>[373:2509](2040366.htm#fr_2508) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p16.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p17"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p17.1"></span>[Rev. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p17.3"></span>; [1 Tim. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p17.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2509"></span>[373:2510](2040366.htm#fr_2509) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p17.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p18"></span> [Wisd. ix.
2](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2510"></span>[373:2511](2040366.htm#fr_2510) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p19"></span> [Matt. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p19.1"></span>. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p19.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p19.3"></span>κτίσας</span>).

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[373:2512](2040366.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p19.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p20"></span> [Deut. iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[373:2513](2040366.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p21"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p21.1"></span>[Col. i.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p21.3"></span>

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[373:2514](2040366.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p23"></span> [Ps. cii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p23.1"></span>. LXX.

<span id="fn_2514"></span>[373:2515](2040366.htm#fr_2514) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p24"></span> [Ps. li.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2515"></span>[373:2516](2040366.htm#fr_2515) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p25"></span> [Eph. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2516"></span>[373:2517](2040366.htm#fr_2516) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p26"></span> [Eph. iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p26.1"></span>; vid. Cyr. *Thes.* p. 156.

<span id="fn_2517"></span>[373:2518](2040366.htm#fr_2517) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p26.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p27"></span> [Jer. xxxi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p27.1"></span>. vid. also *supr.* p. 85, where he
notices that this is the version of the Septuagint, Aquila’s being ‘The
Lord created a new thing in woman.’ Athan. has preserved Aquila’s
version in three other places, in <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p27.3"></span>[Psalm xxx.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p27.5"></span>; lix. 5; lxv. 18.

<span id="fn_2518"></span>[373:2519](2040366.htm#fr_2518) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p27.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p28"></span> [Prov. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2519"></span>[374:2520](2040366.htm#fr_2519) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p30"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2520"></span>[374:2521](2040366.htm#fr_2520) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p31"></span> §10. n. 6.

<span id="fn_2521"></span>[374:2522](2040366.htm#fr_2521) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p32"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p32.1"></span>[Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p32.3"></span>; [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p32.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2522"></span>[374:2523](2040366.htm#fr_2522) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p32.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p33"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p33.1"></span>[Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p33.3"></span>; [Is. liii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p33.4"></span>; [1 Pet. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p33.5"></span>

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[374:2524](2040366.htm#fr_2523) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p33.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p34"></span> Here he says that, though our
Lord’s flesh is created or He is created as to the flesh, it is not
right to call Him a creature. This is very much what S. Thomas says, as
referred to in §45, note 1, in the words of the Schools, that Æthiops,
albus secundum dentes, non est albus. But why may not our Lord be so
called upon the principle of the *communicatio Idiomatum* (*infr.* note
on iii. 31.) as He is said to be born of a Virgin, to have suffered,
&c.? The reason is this:—birth, passion, &c., confessedly belong to His
human nature, without adding ‘according to the flesh;’ but ‘creature’
not implying humanity, might appear a simple attribute of His Person, if
used without limitation. Thus, as S. Thomas adds, though we may not
absolutely say Æthiops est albus, we may say ‘crispus est,’ or in like
manner, ‘calvus est.’ Since crispus, or calvus, can but refer to the
hair. Still more does this remark apply in the case of ‘Sonship,’ which
is a personal attribute altogether; as is proved, says Petav. *de
Incarn.* vii. 6 fin. by the instance of Adam, who was in all respects a
man like Seth, yet not a son. Accordingly, we may not call our Lord,
even according to the manhood, an adopted Son.

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[374:2525](2040366.htm#fr_2524) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p35.1"></span>πομπεύετε</span>, *infr.* 82.

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[374:2526](2040366.htm#fr_2525) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p35.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p36.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p36.2"></span>ρχὴν ὁδῶν·</span> and so in Justin’s
*Tryph.* 61. The Bened. Ed. *in loc.* refers to a similar application of
the word to our Lord in Tatian *contr.* *Gent.* 5. Athenag. *Ap.* 10.
Iren. *Hær.* iv. 20. n. 3. Origen. *in Joan.* tom. 1. 39. Tertull. *adv.
Prax.* 6. and Ambros. *de Fid.* iii. 7.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[374:2527](2040366.htm#fr_2526) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p38.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p38.2"></span>ρχὴ τέκνων</span>, <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p38.3"></span>[Gen. xlix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p38.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[374:2528](2040366.htm#fr_2527) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p38.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p39"></span> Cf. p. 157, note 7.

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[375:2529](2040366.htm#fr_2528) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p41"></span> [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[375:2530](2040366.htm#fr_2529) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p42"></span> Vid. [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2530"></span>[375:2531](2040366.htm#fr_2530) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p43"></span> i. 61; ii. 27.

<span id="fn_2531"></span>[375:2532](2040366.htm#fr_2531) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p44"></span> He says that, though none could be
‘a beginning’ of creation, who was a creature, yet still that such a
title belongs not to His essence. It is the name of an *office* which
the Eternal Word alone can fill. His Divine Sonship is both superior and
necessary to that office of a ‘Beginning.’ Hence it is both true (as he
says) that ‘if the Word is a creature, He is not a beginning;’ and yet
that that ‘beginning’ is ‘in the number of the creatures.’ Though He
becomes the ‘beginning,’ He is not ‘a beginning as to His *essence*,’
vid. *supr.* i. 49, and *infr.* §60. where he says, ‘He who is *before
all*, cannot be a *beginning of all*, but is other than all,’ which
implies that the beginning of all is not other than all. vid. §8, note
4, on the Priesthood, and §16, n. 7.

<span id="fn_2532"></span>[375:2533](2040366.htm#fr_2532) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p45"></span> [Ps. lxxxix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[375:2534](2040366.htm#fr_2533) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p46"></span> [Bar. iii.
35](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#035)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2534"></span>[375:2535](2040366.htm#fr_2534) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p48"></span> Vid. [Prov.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#019), [Prov.
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[375:2536](2040366.htm#fr_2535) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p49"></span> [Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[375:2537](2040366.htm#fr_2536) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p50.1"></span>τὸ κτιστὸν</span>, i.e. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p50.3"></span>σῶμα</span>, §47.

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[375:2538](2040366.htm#fr_2537) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p50.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p51"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p51.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p51.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2538"></span>[376:2539](2040366.htm#fr_2538) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p53"></span> [Ps. c.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#000)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2539"></span>[376:2540](2040366.htm#fr_2539) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p54"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p54.1"></span>[John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p54.3"></span>; [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vi-p54.4"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Texts Explained; Sixthly, Proverbs viii. 22 Continued. Our Lord
is said to be created 'for the works,' i.e. with a particular purpose,
which no mere creatures are ever said to be. Parallel of Isai. xlix. 5,
&c. When His manhood is spoken of, a reason for it is added; not so when
His Divine Nature; Texts in proof.](2040367)
