[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wsm06)  [Next](wsm08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE THEFT OF PINE NUTS

(Elko, Nevada. Shoshoni)

At one time there were no pine nuts in this country. All the pine nuts
were up north, where Crane kept them on a high pole.

One day Crow, Coyote, Frog, Snake, Mouse, and all the other animals and
birds were lying on a hill, looking down at some boys who were playing a
game. Suddenly a puff of wind blew from the north and they could smell
pine nuts cooking. They asked each other what the smell was. Coyote
said, "It is pine nuts cooking." Crow said, "We will go up north and get
them."

All the people started from somewhere south of Beowawee and traveled
toward the north. They went past Owyhee and could smell the pine nuts in
the north. On their way, they planned how they would get them. They
traveled and traveled, many days. Some of the people got tired and
stopped. Frog, Rattlesnake, and several others opt tired and could not
go any farther. But the long-legged persons kept on going toward the
north into what is now Idaho.

When Crow and the others got to Crane's place, where the pine nuts were,
they suggested that everybody have a round dance. They all began to
dance; they danced all night, until sunup. The girls at

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Crane's place talked about the different men.
They said, "Look at Coyote. He is a bad man. He is ugly. Look at Skunk."
They turned Skunk over and said, "He is a pretty boy. White Mouse and
White Weasel are pretty boys, too." Everybody did the round dance. After
while they stopped to eat. When they did this, Weasel and Mouse went
away to hide; they went to sleep.

When morning came, all the people played the hand game. They played for
bows and arrows, feathers, and other things. They played all day. Weasel
and Mouse did not join the game because they were sleeping.

That night all the people did the round dance again. Mouse and Weasel
came to the dance, but, after the people had eaten, went away to sleep.
Everyone danced the round dance for 5 nights and played the hand game
every day. By the time it was all over, they all went to sleep.

An old woman had been guarding the pine nuts. Mouse and Weasel tried to
get the nuts, but they were tied on the top of a high pole and could not
be reached. They took two woodpecker beaks, tied them together, and shot
them at the pine nuts. All the pine nuts fell down. Crow and his people
took the pine nuts and ran toward the south. When this happened, the old
woman hollered, clapping her hand over her mouth. Crane woke up, and
told his people to chase the thieves. They could see them running in the
distance.

Crow saw that Crane and his people were pursuing them. A small bird
among Crow's men tried to carry the nuts, but they were too heavy for
him. Crane's people overtook Crow's people and killed them. Only Crow
and Coyote remained. Coyote took some of the nuts. While he ran, he
chewed them up and spit them out everywhere. Pine nut trees grew up
wherever he spit. Crow also took some and put them in his leg. Then he
sat down on the saddle of a hill. Crane saw Crow put the pine nuts under
his arm and in his leg, and, when he came up to Crow, kicked and killed
him. When he kicked Crow, the nuts were scattered all over the
mountains. Then Crane looked and saw that the mountains were all black
with smoke from places where the people were roasting pine nuts. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)

Crane took his two children to a place where there was smoke, hoping to
get some pine nuts to eat. It was Crow's mother's camp. When she saw
Crane coming, she said, "I will give Crane all the wormy ones." When
Crane came up to her, she said, "I will open some good, fresh pine nuts
for you." She opened one and it was full of worms; the next one had
worms too. She opened one after another and they all had worms.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

Crane gave up trying to get pine nuts and said, "I will go down by the
river and stay there." When Crane flew away, Crow's mother tried to
strike him, but only knocked off his tail. That is why cranes have short
tails.

Kaŋgwüsi gweak: <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) (Woodrat's tail,
pulled off).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[258:3](wsm06.htm#fr_2.md) They evidently made one
long, composite beak.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[259:4](wsm07.htm#fr_3.md) B. G. believes that
because of Crow's part in procuring pine nuts, crows should not be
killed today.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[260:5](wsm07.htm#fr_4.md) The conventional myth
ending, meaning, in effect, "It is finished."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Theft of Pine Nuts (Winnemucca, Nevada. Northern
Paiute)](wsm08.md)
