[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wsm13)  [Next](wsm15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE ORIGIN OF PEOPLE

(Skull Valley, Utah. Gosiute)

Two women, a mother and her daughter, lived on an island in Great Salt
Lake ...

Sinav and Coyote lived in Skull Valley. After the girl had killed all
the men in the world, she came to get Coyote. Sinav told her that there
was no \[such person as\] Coyote.

Sinav went with the woman toward her home. It was very hot and they had
no water. After a while the woman wanted to rest under a tree but Sinav
knew better \[than to let her stop\]. He said, "No, we must go on." They
went on to Great Salt Lake. The woman walked across on the water to the
island. Sinav stayed near the shore, standing in the water. The girl's
mother said to her, "Why don't you bring him over?" The girl made a path
of earth through the water. Sinav walked over to the island, the water
closing in behind him all the way. <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)

Sinav went hunting and brought back deer. The women ate the meat and
disposed of the bones . . . Sinav killed two mountain sheep, an old one
and a young one. He first used the neck of the old one . . . Then he
used the neck of the young one . . .

For several days Sinav hunted and brought in two deer each day. Each
night he visited the women. Each woman bore a baby daily and put it in a
large basketry jug. The jug became larger each day.

Finally, the older woman told Sinav to go South and take the jug with
him. She made a path of dirt across the lake to the shore. Sinav
crossed, and the water closed in behind him. At first, as he walked
along, the jug was light and easy to carry. It became heavier. After a
while, he had to set it down. He went on again and set it down again.
Each time he went a shorter distance before he had to set it down. This
happened five or six times.

Sinav heard a buzzing noise like a bee inside the jug. He wanted to
look. When he began to open it, men jumped out and made a lot of dust.
They knocked him over and ran away. Three times

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

he removed the stopper and people came out. He watched them. They ran in
all directions. They were the Shoshoni, Ute, Paiute and other tribes.
The last man to come out was all covered with dust' He was the
Gosiute. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](wsm15.htm#fn_18.md) He is tougher
than other people; he is bulletproof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[267:18](wsm14.htm#fr_17.md) This is probably
Antelope Island, which, in years of exceptionally low water, is joined
to the mainland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Race to Koso Hot Springs (Death Valley, California.
Shoshoni)](wsm15.md)
