[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsm14)  [Next](wsm16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE RACE TO KOSO HOT SPRINGS

(Death Valley, California. Shoshoni)

At one time many people lived at Koso Hot Springs. These were animals
who were then people. Even Sun was a person. Bear and all kinds of
animals were there.

The people were going to have a race. In this race they bet themselves
\[that is, their lives\]. Two of them made a fire to cook those who lost
the race. One of the firemakers was Mudhen. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

Every one went south to a place where there were some willows. Coyote
was with them. Many people, who were going to race, gathered there. When
the race started, Coyote walked off to the willows and began to eat a
white sugar \[sap\] on the stems. Frog went to Coyote and struck him.
Coyote came out of the willows, and found that all the people had gone.
He started to run; he was way behind them. As he ran he saw Frog ahead
of him, sitting down. Coyote stopped and urinated on Frog. Then he went
on. Soon he saw Frog ahead of him again sitting down. Again he urinated
on Frog and ran on. The people were getting close to Koso Hot Springs.
While they ran, Frog jumped over Coyote and urinated on him. The people
were near Koso Hot Springs. Frog got there first and won the race. After
the race, the firetenders threw the losers into the fire. Only Bear and
Sun remained. When they started to drag Bear to the fire, he roared, but
they threw him into it. Only Sun was left. The people started to talk
about Sun. They said, "We had better leave him so that there will be
light." Coyote, who was chief, said, "If he had beaten me, he would have
thrown me into the fire. We must throw him in." Coyote took hold of
Still. When he did this, Nighthawks, Chipmunks, and all the other people
ran for the house. <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) Coyote dragged
Sun to the fire. His friends were afraid that it would be dark; they ran
to the house. When Coyote was ready to throw Sun into the fire, he
looked to see which way he would have to run to get to the house. Then
he pushed Sun into the fire and all went dark. Coyote ran toward the
house but

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

could not find it. He ran around looking for it and shouting. The people
in the house heard him, but would not answer. Coyote looked all around,
shouted, but heard no answer. He found a flat stick, a kind of paddle,
and knew that he was near the house. He said to himself, "I am here." He
had climbed over the house many times before, but had not known where he
was.

All this had happened in the fall, and Coyote had traveled around all
winter looking for the house. He became thin. In the spring he was still
looking for the house. While he was looking, the people inside talked
about him. They said, "We had better tell him to come here. He is smart.
He might tell us what to do." After this, they answered Coyote when he
shouted. Coyote went inside the house. While he was crawling in,
Chipmunk sat by the door. Coyote put his hand on Chipmunk and said, "I
am putting my hand on my brother-in-law." He went on into the house.

Owl and Nighthawk went out into the darkness to get green plants to eat.
They did not give any to Coyote. Coyote heard them chewing, and said,
"What are you people eating?" They put some of it into Coyote's mouth.
Coyote said, "I don't want you to do that." They said, "We have been
eating that kind of stuff (tuhuvida)."

Coyote started to talk. He said, "We had better start to make the sun.
There are a lot of different kinds of people here. Some of us ought to
know how to make the sun." The people said, "That is fine." Some of them
started to shout, and a little light appeared. Nighthawk wanted it all
dark, because he traveled at night. All the people were there. Coyote
said, "When I shout, the sun will come out." Coyote shouted and it
became completely dark again. Woodpecker and Mallard Duck were there.
They shouted, and the sun came out. After this, the people came out and
found that there were many green plants everywhere.

Coyote started to eat tuhuvida. Coyote said, "I am going to make it
sweeter," and urinated on it. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) After
this, some of the people tasted it. It had been sweet before, but Coyote
made it salty and bitter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[268:19](wsm14.htm#fr_18) The literal
translation is Gosip, "dust," and Ute, from the fact that the Gosiute
live in the very dusty, alkali deserts south of Great Salt Lake.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[268:20](wsm15.htm#fr_19) Possibly hell-diver, a
bird which has a red eye, said to have been caused by making the fire.
B. D. doesn't remember who the other firemaker was.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[268:21](wsm15.htm#fr_20) In other versions,
Coyote had allowed his people time to build a house before throwing Sun
Into the fire.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[269:22](wsm15.htm#fr_21) Tuhuvida, some kind of
plant with yellow flowers. It was sometimes eaten by Shoshoni, but has
an unpleasant flavor for which Coyote is held responsible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Race to Koso Hot Springs (Saline Valley, California.
Shoshoni)](wsm16)
