[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsm28)  [Next](wsm30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SKY BROTHERS

(Death Valley, California. Shoshoni)

Many people had camps where they were hunting mountain sheep. Their
chief went ahead and made fires (when they hunted).

There were two brothers in the sky (tugumbi, "sky"; duwitc, "boys").
They traveled along shooting arrows in competition with someone. <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) Doing this, the brothers lost all their
arrows.

The brothers went to the camp of the sheep hunters; they went to the
fire. When they arrived they had no arrows because they had lost them
all. The people gave one arrow to each of the brothers, and said, "When
you see a mountain sheep, the older of you must shoot it." All the
people went hunting. The brothers went along together. They saw a sheep.
The younger said, "I had better shoot him." The older one said, "No."
The younger disagreed with him, and they argued. Finally, the older one
yielded and said, "All right, shoot." The younger brother shot at the
sheep, but did not hit

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

it squarely, and the sheep ran away. When the people had given them the
arrows they had said, "If you do not kill the sheep, do not chase it.
You might get into trouble." The brothers argued. The younger said, "We
had better track it." The older said, "They told us not to do that
because we might get into trouble." The younger had his way, and they
started to track the sheep. They followed its tracks. They came to a
pool of water that was near somebody's house. The brothers went to the
pool and took a bath. While they were bathing, they saw a sunshade built
near the spring. After their bath, they went to the shade where some
people lived. This was Snake's home. Snake said to them, "Tell me who
you are." The brothers did not want to tell him. They said, "We heard
that our grandfather lived here," though they really had no
grandfather. <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) Snake said, "What are
you two doing in this place?" The brothers said, "We have killed a sheep
near here." Snake said, "All right, but you two must go back at once."
Snake had two wives. He said, "If you don't go back right away, my wives
will kill you."

Snake's wives were gathering berries (hu:pi). One of them began to sing.
. . . She said, "I believe someone has come to our house." The other
said, "You had better go on with your work." The first went on singing
and said, "I tell you, someone has come to our house." She stopped
picking berries and stood still.

Snake said to the brothers, "Where did you boys kill the sheep?" They
said, "We killed it right there," and showed him the place. Snake said,
"You must get a stick and throw me to where the sheep is. I will get
it." They threw Snake with a stick and he landed by the sheep. Snake
brought back the sheep. The boys went away. While Snake was carrying
back the sheep, he covered up the boys' tracks so that the women would
not see them when they came home. The boys went away to the sky. They
sat there.

Snake used the mountain sheep's feet to cover up the tracks the brothers
had made around the spring. Then he went to his house. The women were
still gathering berries and one of them sang. After a while the other
began to sing; they both sang. They said, "Someone came to our house."

The women returned to the house. As they came near it, Snake had his
head out of the house, looking toward the spring. The women knew that
Snake was trying to deceive them. They said, "Someone gave him a sheep."
Snake said to them, "Don't talk loudly. Some mountain sheep are watering
at our spring." The women said, "Someone else killed this sheep." The
women went to the

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

water to bathe. They found a long hair in the water. It had become
tangled around them. They compared the hair with their own and found
that it was longer. They knew what had happened. They said, "Someone has
come to our place." They sang . . . After their bath, the women walked
around and around the spring to find the tracks of the person who had
come. The brothers were above in the sky, watching them. The younger
brother thought, "I hope one of them will look up and see us." The women
looked up and saw the brothers sitting there. Then the women lay on
their backs and sang. They said, "You had better come down." The younger
brother said, "We must go down." The older said, "No, we will be
killed." The two women had long knives. The brothers argued about it and
at last the younger had his way. The older said, "You go down . . . and
come back alive." The younger said, "I will go down . . ." He started
down while the women watched him. When he came to them, they cut off his
head. The older brother was very sorry when this happened, and said, "I,
too, must go down and die." He went down and the women killed him. After
they had killed the brothers, the women stayed there that night.

The next morning the people at the sheep hunting camp were talking. Bat
had had a dream and told them about it. He said, "I dreamed last night
that there was blood on the sky." Bat was the boys' grandfather, and
when he said that he cried. He knew the boys had been killed.

That morning the women began to track the boys to see where they had
come from. They followed the tracks to where they had shot the sheep,
and then to where they had built a fire. They went on to the hunting
camp. The people had their houses in a hollow. The women approached and
looked at the camp from behind a ridge. Bat saw them looking toward the
camp. When the women saw that Bat was looking at them, they went around
the hill to another place and watched. Again they saw Bat looking toward
them. Then they went around to another place. While they were doing
this, they split juniper trees into small pieces with their knives. The
pieces became people. They went toward the camp and the women
accompanied them. The hunters saw them coming.

Coyote said, "Maybe they are going to have a fight with us. I am going
to be out in front of everyone." He ran out in front of the hunters. The
people came closer; Coyote was the first to have his head cut off. The
people came on and cut off everyone's head. When they were through
killing the hunters and were standing there, the women noticed that Bat
was absent. They said, "Where is Bat, who was looking at us?" They
searched for him among the dead people, and heard a noise like a mouse
inside a mountain sheep carcass. They

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

went to the sheep and found Bat hanging on the inside of the body. They
took him out, and said, "This is our pet. We must take hill, home." Then
they said, "Our husband might kill us. But our little Bat is pretty."
They held him in their hands and made him fly. He flew around and lit on
their heads. They said, "Our little pet is very good and pretty." They
continued to do this. Bat flew around and lit on all parts of them. This
made them angry and they tried to stab him with their knives but missed
him. They continued to strike at him but stabbed themselves and died.

When the women were dead, Bat cut a piece out of each of them with a
knife. He put both of the pieces around his neck like necklaces and
started out for Snake's house. When he came to Snake, Snake said, "I
know that you are wearing pieces of my wives." Bat said, "No, I won
these a long time ago when I made a trip to the north. You were small at
that time. You were in that cradle and I rocked you." Snake said, "No."
He was angry and bit at a rock. Bat seized the shin bone of a deer and
struck a rock with it. It made a red flash. He said, "I will do this to
you, too." Snake became angrier. He was coiling, drawing himself higher
and higher. Bat picked up a pebble and he flipped it into the air with
his fingers. The pebble went high and as it fell became larger and
larger. It fell on Snake's head and killed him.

Bat went back to where his dead grandsons were. He put a stick under one
of them and threw him into the air. He came back to life. He did the
same to the other boy, and he returned to life. He went back to his
hunting camp and did the same to all the people who had been killed.
They all came back to life. He did not do this to Coyote. Some people
said, "We won't bother about Coyote. He always gets into trouble. We
won't bring him back to life." But others said, "He is smart. He might
tell us something." They threw Coyote up into the air with a stick and
he came back to life. Coyote arose and said, "I have been sleeping."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[287:33](wsm29.htm#fr_32) They threw a bunch of
willows ahead, over a bush where they could not see it, and shot to try
to strike nearest to it.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[288:34](wsm29.htm#fr_33) But compare below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin of Death (Big Smoky Valley, Nevada. Shoshoni)](wsm30)
