[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wsm32)  [Next](wsm34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COYOTE AND THE BEAR CUBS; THE DEATH OF WOLF

(Ash Meadows, Nevada. Shoshoni.)

One day Wolf said to his brother, Coyote. "I would like some seeds. I
like them better than meat. Go to your aunt's place and get some for
me." Coyote said, "We have no relatives." Wolf said, "Yes; we have. You
go over there and see."

Coyote went out to find the seeds and met two girl cousins, two bear
cubs. They looked like twins. They were gathering seeds. Coyote talked
to them for a little while. Then he choked both of them; they
died. <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) He laid them side by side and
covered them up with a rabbit-skin blanket. Then he started to gather
seeds.

About sundown, Coyote's aunt, Bear, came to where the girls were. She
was carrying seeds. She said, "What are you doing there, sleeping at
this time?" She walked over to them, and pushed and pinched them, trying
to wake them up. When they didn't move she looked under the blanket and
saw that they were dead. This made her angry. She ran to Coyote and
clawed all the meat off his back with her fingers. Coyote howled,
"Wheeeeee." Then he ran away.

Coyote covered his back with a blanket and went home without his seeds.

When he arrived at his home, Wolf asked for the seeds. Coyote said, "I
did not see any." Wolf, who knew everything, said "Yes, you did. Why do
you cover your back? I know you killed those girls and your aunt clawed
you." Coyote admitted that this was so.

Wolf wished Coyote asleep. He had this power. Wolf then went out hunting
and killed a very small fawn. He cut the meat off its back in thin
strips. It was very smooth and tender. When he got home, Coyote was
still curled up asleep. Wolf slipped Coyote's blanket off and mended his
back with the fawn's back muscles. He made it smooth, just like new.

In the morning, Coyote stretched himself and felt his back. He said, "My
back meat has returned. Last night it was gone and there were just bones
back there, but now it has come back. It is fine and smooth!"

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

Wolf said to Coyote, "Now you be good. You are always fooling me. Don't
go back and bother your aunt. But, if you do, be sure to skin her and
cut up all the meat and bring it home. Don't leave any of it."

Coyote said he would not go back, but he went nevertheless. He met Bear
and cut her throat. He skinned her and cut up all the meat and wrapped
it in the skin, but he forgot a piece of tripe. On the way home he
remembered the tripe, and what Wolf had said about bringing all the meat
home, so he went back for it. The Tripe had moved to the north. Coyote
chased it but could not catch it. He asked, "What are you doing?" Tripe
said, "I am well now. I am going to tell my people what you have done to
my daughters." Coyote said, "Go ahead. I am glad."

When Coyote returned to the camp with the meat, he told Wolf he had
brought it all home. Wolf said, "No you didn't. You had better watch
out. When you see your people, you will find out why." Coyote said,
"There are no people here. What is the matter?" Wolf only said, "In a
few days you will see."

In a few days Wolf said to Coyote, "Stand away from the fire and look to
the north." Coyote said, "Why should I? It is cold." But he looked, and
in the north there was a crowd of people. They looked black in the
distance. There was lightning. Finally Coyote said, "It looks like
people coming closer. I can see arms and legs. You look, Wolf." Wolf
would not look, but he said to Coyote, "You had better pack everything,
and move away." Coyote said, "Why should I move?"

Wolf went out to see the people coming. The men in the crowd shot Wolf
and he died. Then they skinned him, and taking the skin with them they
went back to the north. Coyote was afraid, but he followed their tracks
until he came to a big camp. The people had made things ready for a
circle dance around a fire.

Coyote didn't dare go into the camp, but stayed on the outside, watching
them. An old woman came up to him there and said, "Maybe you are
Coyote." Coyote said "What is this Coyote?" The old woman said, "He
lives at Tin Mountain (i. e., Charleston Peak), Coyote said, "What is
he, a bad Indian?" She said, "I think you must be Coyote." He said, "I
come from the north, but my grandfather told me about Coyote's brother,
Wolf, who lives on Tin Mountain. Have you ever heard of him?" The old
woman said, "Yes, my son has killed Wolf. My people have Wolf's hide. At
sundown we will dance all night." The old woman then told Coyote that
during the dance she tended the children of the dancers. She gathered
them all around her and covered them all up with Wolf's hide. She said
that was why she was crying. She told him that during the night

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

while the children slept she, too, could dance a little, but in the
morning the children would cry, "Mama, mama, come and take care of me."

When Coyote heard this, he had an idea. He killed the old woman. He beat
her and beat her and broke all her bones. He then made a little opening
in her skin and pulled all the bones out and made a sack. He climbed
into this sack and looked just like the old woman. He took her stick and
hobbled into the camp. The children all cried, "Grandma is coming."
After sundown, the people all said, "Mama, look after the babies while
we dance."

While the people were dancing, Coyote quietly choked the children to
death. He held their noses, and choked them. The people thought the
children were asleep and they asked him to dance. Coyote said, "All
right." Then he jumped out of the old woman's skin and put on Wolf's
hide. He ran out of the house shouting, "I am the man you killed," and
then fled from the camp.

The people followed him, but he ran, ran, ran, ran, and finally came to
a wooded mountain. Here the people lost the track and returned home.
Coyote walked back to the place where Wolf had been killed. Wolf's
carcass was all dried up and stiff like wood. Very carefully, he fitted
Wolf's skin over the carcass.

In the morning he went out to look and saw that the nose had moved a
little and was slightly wet. The next morning Coyote was awakened by
hearing Wolf howl. He got up to look, but found that Wolf had gone to
the northeast. Wolf was alive but he was very angry.

He left Tin Mountain and never came back. That is why there are no
wolves or bears on Tin Mountain now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[294:36](wsm33.htm#fr_35) M. S. intimated that
the girls rebuffed Coyote's amorous advances, which caused him to kill
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pole Cat, Takadoa, and Hawk (Elko, Nevada, Shoshoni)](wsm34)
