[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wsm33)  [Next](wsm35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### POLE CAT, TAKADOA, AND HAWK

(Elko, Nevada, Shoshoni)

Night Owl (Munibitc) lived with his wife and boy who was 6 or 7 years
old. His wife, Takadoa, <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) carried the
boy around on her back.

Night Owl went hunting for rabbits. While he was stamping his feet in
the snow, he stepped on a piece of bone that was sticking up and drove
it into his foot. He came home and asked his wife to pull it out. She
wanted to marry Skunk, so she pushed the bone in farther and Night Owl
died.

Takadoa went to Skunk's place and talked to his grandmother. She told
her that she wanted to marry Skunk. The grandmother said that Skunk was
strong, but was no good. She began to cry. Takadoa went away carrying
her son. Skunk came home, and said to his grandmother, "What are you
crying about, Grandmother? Tell me what is

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

the matter." She said, "Oh, I am just crying because my son has died";
she referred to Owl. Skunk said, "How do you know that he died? You must
know something." He smelled her. He said, "You are too old to smell this
way." He smelled all around and knew that somebody else's smell was
there. Then he found a string that had belonged to some stranger. Now he
knew who had been there. He said, "Why didn't you tell me who was here?"

Skunk started to follow the woman, Takadoa. He followed her tracks. The
woman thought, "I wish a lot of roses would grow up so he can't get
through." A lot of dry roses grew up and Skunk became stuck in them.
Then Skunk looked up and saw an enormous alkali flat \[i. e., playa\]
that had no end. Skunk let out his smell. It overtook the woman and her
boy and killed both of them.

Badger, Coyote, Hawk (Kini), and their friends were camped on the other
side of the flat. Badger restored Takadoa to life. She wanted to marry
Hawk. She went to the camp and found that all the men were out hunting
rabbits. Hawk's mother was alone. Takadoa saw only one bed in her house,
but there were many rabbits there. After a while, Coyote came back with
four rabbits. He gave them to Takadoa, and her boy, but Takadoa would
not marry him. She wanted Hawk, but could not find him. Ha-wk was
staying in a round hole up in the rocks.

Every evening someone brought a great many rabbits to Hawk's mother's
house. Takadoa said, "Who brought all these rabbits?" Hawk's mother
said, "My boy brings them." Takadoa looked all around and in the bed for
Hawk. Hawk's mother said, "What do you want? Do you want my boy? After I
die you want to marry him? No, you might make him trouble. You would
scare him so that be could not hunt rabbits any more."

That night, after every one was asleep, Takadoa went to Hawk's place in
the rocks to sleep with him. She went in the middle of the night. No one
knew that she was going. When she arrived, she got in bed with him and
called, "Kinini, kinini, kinini." When Hawk woke up and found somebody
in bed with him he was frightened.

In the morning Hawk got up and sat on a rock with his feathers all
ruffled. He looked funny. He went hunting for rabbits but only got one.
His luck was spoiled. He had been the best of all hunters, but after
being frightened by the woman, he was no good.

Kăngwasi gweak: (Woodrat's tail, pulled off).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[296:37](wsm34.htm#fr_36.md) A black-headed bird
that comes in the spring time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Coyote Liberates Game Animals; Wolf is Killed and Restored
(Winnemucca, Nevada. Northern Paiute)](wsm35.md)
