[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey21)  [Next](grey23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

# Te Kanawa's Adventure with a Troop of Fairies

TE KANAWA, a chief of Waikato, was the man who fell in with a troop of
fairies upon the top of Puke-more, a high hill in the Waikato district.

This chief happened one day to go out to catch kiwi with his dogs, and
when night came on he found himself right at the top of Puke-more. So
his party made a fire to give them light, for it was very dark. They had
chosen a tree to sleep under--a very large tree, the only one fit for
their purpose that they could find; in fact, it was a very convenient
sleeping-place, for the tree had immense roots, sticking up high above
the ground: they slept between these roots, and made the fire beyond
them.

As soon as it was dark they heard loud voices, like the voices of people
coming that way; there were the voices of men, of women, and of
children, as if a very large party of people were coming along. They
looked for a long time, but could see nothing; till at last Te Kanawa
knew that noise must proceed from fairies. His people were all
dreadfully frightened, and would have run away if they could; but where
could they run to? They were in the midst of a forest, on the top of a
lonely mountain, and it was dark night.

For long time the voices grew louder and more distinct as the fairies
drew nearer and nearer, until they came quite close to the fire; Te
Kanawa and his party were half dead with fright. At last the fairies
approached to look at Te Kanawa, who

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

was a very handsome fellow. To do this, they kept peeping slily over the
large roots of the tree under which the hunters were lying, and kept
constantly looking at Te Kanawa, whilst his companions were quite
insensible from fear. Whenever the fire blazed up brightly, off went the
fairies and hid themselves, peeping out from behind stumps and trees;
and when it burnt low, back they came close to it, merrily singing as
they moved:

'Here you come climbing over Mount Tirangi  
To visit the handsome chief of Ngapuhi,  
Whom we have done with.' <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

A sudden thought struck Te Kanawa that he might induce them to go away
if he gave them all the jewels he had about him; so he took off a
beautiful little figure, carved in green jasper, which he wore as a neck
ornament, and a precious carved jasper ear-drop from his ear. Ah, Te
Kanawa was only trying to amuse and please them to save his life, but
all the time he was nearly frightened to death. However, the fairies did
not rush on the men to attack them, but only came quite close to look at
them. As soon as Te Kanawa had taken off his neck ornament, and pulled
out his jasper pendant, and his other ornament, made of a tooth of the
tiger-shark, he spread them out before the fairies, and offered them to
the multitude who were sitting all round about the place; and thinking
it better the fairies should not touch him, he took a stick, and fixing
it into the ground, hung his neck ornament and ear-rings upon it.

As soon as the fairies had ended their song, they

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

took the shadows of the pendants, and handed them about from one to the
other, until they had passed through the whole party, which then
suddenly disappeared, and nothing more was seen of them.

The fairies carried off with them the shadows of all the jewels of Te
Kanawa, but they left behind them his jasper neck ornament and his
pendants, so that he took them back again, the hearts of the fairies
being quite contented at getting the shadows alone; they saw, also, that
Te Kanawa was an honest, well-dispositioned fellow. However, the next
morning, as soon as it was light, he got down the mountain as fast as he
could without stopping to hunt longer for kiwis.

The fairies are a very numerous people; merry, cheerful, and always
singing, like the cricket. Their appearance is that of human beings,
nearly resembling a European's; their hair being very fair, and so is
their skin. They are very different from the Maoris, and do not resemble
them at all.

Te Kanawa had died before any Europeans arrived in New Zealand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[213:1](grey22.htm#fr_22) Te Wherowhero did not
remember the whole song, but that this was the concluding verse; it was
probably in allusion to their coming to peep at Te Kanawa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Loves of Takarangi and Rau-mahora](grey23)
