[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey15)  [Next](grey17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

# Legend of the Emigration of Manaia

### (The Progenitor of the Ngati-awa Tribe)

THE cause which led Manaia to come here from Hawaiki, was his being very
badly treated by a large party of his friends and neighbours, whom,
according to the usual custom when a chief has any heavy work to be
done, he had collected to make his spears for him, for they violently
ravished his wife Rongotiki.

It chanced thus: One day Manaia determined to have his neighbours all
warned to come to a great gathering of people for the purpose of making
spears for him, so he sent round a messenger to collect them, and the
messenger arrived at the place of Tupenu, who listened to his message,
and he being chief of the tribe who lived at that place, encouraged his
people to go in obedience to the message of Manaia; they went and set to
work, and after some time it happened that Manaia felt a wish to go and
catch some fish for his workmen; so he went off in his canoe with
several of his people. After he had been gone for some time the workmen
proposed amongst themselves to assault Rongotiki, the wife of Manaia;
and they carried their intentions into execution without any one knowing
what they were doing; all this time Manaia, suspecting nothing, was
paddling in his canoe out to sea, and when he reached the
fishing-ground, they lay on their paddles. Manaia's people soon caught
plenty of fish, but he had not even a single bite, until at

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

last, as they were on the point of returning, he felt a fish nibbling at
his hook, so he gave a jerk to his line to pull it up; and when he got
the fish up to the side of the canoe, to his surprise he saw that the
hook was not in the mouth of the fish, but fast in its tail; and as this
had long been esteemed as a sign that your wife was being insulted by
somebody he at once knew how his had been treated by his workmen;
without waiting, therefore, a moment longer, he said to his crew: 'Heave
up the anchor, we will return to the shore'; so they hove up the anchor,
and shaped a course for the landing-place on the main; whilst they were
pulling into the shore, Manaia took the fish he had caught, and with the
hook still fast in its tail, tied it on to one of the thwarts of the
canoe, and left it there, in order that when Rongotiki saw it she might
know without his telling her, that he was aware that she had been badly
treated by his workmen.

At length his canoe reached the shore, and the crew jumping out, hauled
it up on the sandy beach, and Manaia leaving it there, walked home
towards his village; when he had got near home, his wife seeing him
approach, arose and made the fire ready to roast some fern-root for her
husband, who she thought would come back hungry; and when he reached
home the fire was lighted, and she was sitting by the side of it
roasting the fern-root, and she made signs to him by which he might know
what had happened; but he knew it already from the manner in which his
hook had caught in the tail of the fish; then he sent his wife to fetch
the fish, saying: 'Mother, go and fetch the fish I have caught from my
canoe'; so she went, and when she got there, she found that there were
no fish but the single one, hanging to the thwart of the canoe, with a
hook fast in its tail; then she took that fish and carried it home with
her, and when she got there, Manaia said: 'That is the fish I meant you
to

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

bring, lest you should have said that I did not know what had taken
place until you told me.'

Manaia then turned over in his mind various plans for revenging himself
upon the people who had acted in so brutal a manner towards his wife,
and he consulted with his own tribe how they might destroy those who had
thus injured him; when the tribe of Manaia heard what had taken place,
they all arose to seek revenge; but before the fighting which arose from
this affair broke out, Manaia went to the people who had wronged his
wife, and told them that he hoped they would make the spears large and
strong, and not put him off with weak things, but rather make them stout
and strong; this was a mere piece of deceit on his part, in order that
when he attacked them, their weapons might be too heavy readily to parry
their enemies' blows with them.

All these preparations having been made, Manaia lay in ambush with some
of his people, and when the opportunity of rushing on their enemies
presented itself, Manaia nudged with his elbow his son, Tu-ure-nui, who
was lying by his side, to encourage him to distinguish himself by
rushing in, and killing the first man of the enemy; but being afraid to
go he did not move, and whilst Manaia was encouraging him in vain,
another young man, the name of whose father had never been told by his
mother, rushed forward and slew the first of the enemy, and as with his
weapon he struck him down, he cried out: 'The first slain of the enemy
belongs to me, to Kahu-kaka-nui, the son of Manaia'; then for the first
time Manaia knew that this young man was his son, his last born son; he
had before thought that Tu-ure-nui had been his only son; but when the
other young man called out his name, he knew that he also was his son,
and, pleased with his courage, he loved him very much.

The people lying in ambush, all followed the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

youth when he rushed on their enemies, and slaughtered them; but their
chief Tupenu fled by the way of the beach of Pikopikoi-wheti, and Manaia
pursued him closely, but was not fleet enough of foot to catch him; then
he called out to his wife, Rongotiki, to utter incantations to weaken
his enemy; and she did so, repeating an incantation termed Tapuwae, and
when she had finished that, by her enchantments she rendered the flying
warrior faint and feeble, so that Manaia rapidly gained on him, caught
him, and slew him.

Thus perished Tupenu and the party of people whom he had taken with him
to work for Manaia; the report of what had occurred soon spread
throughout the country, and at last reached the tribe of Tupenu; and
when they heard it, they said: 'Your relatives have perished.' Their
army collected and started to avenge themselves on Manaia and his tribe,
and to destroy them; they slew many of them, and continued from time to
time to attack them, so that their numbers dwindled away, till at length
Manaia began to reflect within. himself saying: Ah, ah, my warriors are
wasting away, and by and by, perhaps, I also shall be slain; rather than
let this state of things continue, I had better abandon this country,
and, removing to a great distance, seek a new one for myself and my
people.'

Having made up his mind to act in this way, he began to repair a canoe
and to fit it for sea; the name of the canoe was Tokomaru, it belonged
to his brother-in-law. when it was fit for sea, he asked his
brother-in-law: 'Will you not consent to accompany me on this
voyage?'--and the latter asked in reply: 'Where do you want me to
accompany you to? Manaia said: 'I wish you to bear me company on this
voyage which I am about to undertake, to search for a new and distant
country for both of us'; but his brother-in-law when he

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

understood what Manaia was pressing him to do, replied: 'No, I will not
go with you'; Manaia answered: 'That is right, do you remain here.'

When the canoe was quite fit for sea, they dragged it down to the water,
and hauled it into the sea until it floated; then they brought down the
cargo and stowed it away, and Manaia embarked in it with his wife, his
children, and his dependants, and then he said to some of his warriors:
'Let my brother-in-law now be slain as an offering for the gods, that
they may prove propitious to this canoe of ours.'

So he called to his brother-in-law, who was standing on the shore,
bidding him farewell: 'I say, wade out to me for one minute, that I may
tell you something, and take my last farewell, for I am going to part
for ever from you, leaving you here behind me.'

When Manaia's brother-in-law heard this, he began to wade out to him; at
first the water hardly covered his ankles, next it touches his knees, at
last it came up above his loins, and when it had reached so high he
said: 'Shove the canoe in a little nearer the shore, I shall be under
water directly'; but Manaia answered him: 'Wade away, there is no depth
of water'; and to deceive him better, he kept on pretending to touch the
bottom with a stick; and the poor fellow having no suspicion, believed
what Manaia said, that the water was not deep; but Manaia had spoken
before to his people, saying: 'Let him come on, out into the deep water,
until his feet cannot touch the bottom, then seize him by the head and
slay him.' At length his feet could no longer touch the bottom, and he
found himself swimming close to the canoe; then Manaia seized him by the
head, with one blow of his stone battle-axe he clave it, and his
brother-in-law perished.

Having thus slain his victim, he caught up his dog

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

which had swum out with its master, and lifting it into the canoe, he
sailed away, to search for a new country for himself.

He sailed on and on, and had proceeded very far from the land they had
quitted, when one day the dog Manaia had taken into the canoe scented
land, and howled loudly, struggling to get loose and jump overboard into
the water; the people in the canoe were much surprised at this, and
said: 'Why, what can be the matter with the dog? And some of them said:
'We'd better let him go if he wishes it, and see what comes of it'; so
they let the dog loose, and he jumped overboard, and swam on ahead of
the canoe, howling loudly as he went, and this he continued to do, till
at last night fell on them: the canoe still followed for a long time the
low faint howling of the dog, which they could only indistinctly hear;
at last he had got so far off they could no longer distinguish it, but
the dog, after swimming for a long time, finally reached land.

In the meantime the canoe came following straight on the track which the
dog had taken and when at length the night ended, and the day began to
break, they again heard the howling of the dog, which had landed close
to the stranded carcass of a whale; they pulled eagerly to the shore,
and as soon as they reached it, there they saw the whale lying stranded,
and the dog by its side; and there they landed on this island--on Aotea.

They were rejoiced, indeed, when they ascertained this was the country
for which they had been seeking; first, they allotted out equally
amongst them the whale they had found; but first Manaia addressed his
men, saying: 'We must now build a house to shelter us, and then we will
cut up the whale.' His people at once obeyed their chief's directions;
some of them began to collect materials for building a shelter, and
others to clear spots of ground, and to prepare them for planting.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

Some few of them called out: 'Here is the best place for our village';
whilst others, on the contrary, cried out: 'No, no, this is the best
place for it'; and others still, who had got a little farther along the
beach, cried out: 'Here is still a better place'; and others, yet
further ahead, said: 'Here, here, this is the best place we have yet
seen'; thus all were led to leave their proper work, and to wander a
long way along the shore, exploring the new country, and seeking for a
site for their future home; at last they found that little by little
they had been drawn a long way from the spot where they had landed, and
from the whale which they had found.

Now there were some other canoes coming close after the canoe, Tokomaru,
which presently made the land, too, and reached the shore just at the
point where the Tokomaru had been drawn up upon the beach, and they saw
the marks of the Tokomaru upon the sand, and the sheds that had been put
up, and the bits of land that had been cleared; and they, without delay,
began to claim each one as his own, the sheds, the cleared ground, and
the whale, which all belonged to the people of the canoe which had first
landed.

Then they went to search for the people who had come in that canoe, and
when they had found them, each party saluted the other, and when their
mutual greetings were over, those who had come in the first canoe asked
those who had come in the second: 'When did you arrive here? And they
answered them by saying: 'When did you arrive here? Those of the first
canoe answered: 'A long time ago.' Then the people of the second canoe
answered: 'And we also arrived a long time ago.' Those who had come in
the first canoe now replied: 'Nay, nay, we arrived here before you.'
Then those of the second canoe answered: 'Nay, nay, but we arrived here
before you'; and they

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

continued disputing, arguing each party with the other.

At last Manaia asked them: 'What are the proofs you give to show when
you arrived here? And they answered: 'That is all very well; but what
proofs have you to show when you arrived here? But Manaia replied: 'The
proof I have to show when I arrived here is a whale of mine which I
found upon the beach.' Then the people who had come in the second canoe
answered: I No, indeed, that whale belongs to us.' But Manaia answered
quite angrily: 'No, I say that whale belongs to me; just look you, you
will find my sheds standing there, and my temporary encampment, and the
pieces of land which my people have cleared.' But the others answered
him: 'Nay, indeed those are our sheds, and our pieces of cleared land;
and as for the whale, it is our whale; now let us go and examine them.'

So the whole party returned together, until they came to the place where
they had landed, and when they saw all these things there, Manaia said:
'Look you, that whale belongs to me; as well as those sheds and the
cleared pieces of land.' But the others laughed at him and said: 'Why,
you must have gone mad, all these houses belong to us, and the
clearings, and that whale too.' And Manaia, who was now quite provoked,
replied: 'I say no; the clearings are mine, the sheds are mine, as well
as the whale.' The others, however, answered him: 'Very well, then, if
that is the case, where is your sacred place? But Manaia replied: ,
Where is your sacred place also then? And they answered: 'Come along,
and see it.' And they all went together to see the sacred place of these
newly-arrived people, and when they saw it, Manaia believed them.

Although he gave credit to the fact of their having arrived first,
Manaia was sorely perplexed and

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

troubled, and he abandoned altogether the part of the country he had
first reached, and started again to seek for another for himself, for
his relations, and his people; they coasted right along the shores of
the island from Whanga-Paraoa, and doubled the North Cape, and from
thence made a direct course to Taranaki, and made the land at
Tongaporutu, between Pariwinihi and Mokau, and they landed there, and
remained for some time, and left the god they worshipped there; the name
of their god was Rakeiora.

They then turned to journey back towards Mokau; some of them went by
land along the coast line, and others in their canoe, the two parties
keeping in sight of one another as they examined the coast; and when
they reached the river Mokau those in the canoe landed, and they left
there the stone anchor of their canoe; it is still lying near the mouth
of the river, on its north side, and the present name of the rock is the
Punga-o-Matori. Then they pulled back in the Tokomaru, to Tongaporutu,
and leaving the canoe there, explored the country unto Pukearuhe, thence
they went on as far as Papatiki, and there descended to the shore to the
beach of Kukuriki, and travelling along it, they reached the river of
Onaero, forded it, and passed the plain of Motu-nui, and Kaweka, and
Urenui; that river had a name before Manaia and his people reached it;
but when Manaia arrived there with his son, Tu-ure-nui, he changed its
name, and called it after his son, Tu-ure-nui; and they forded the
river, and travelled on until they reached Rohutu, at the mouth of the
river Waitara, and they dwelt there, and there they found people living,
the native inhabitants of these islands; but Manaia and his party slew
them, and destroyed them, so that the country was left for himself and
for his descendants, and for his tribe and their descendants, and Manaia
and his followers destroyed

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

the original occupants of the country, in order to obtain possession of
it.

Manaia was the ancestor of the Ngati-Awa tribe; he fought two great
battles in Hawaiki, the names of which were Kirikiriwawa and Rotorua;
the fame *of his weapons* resounded there--their names were Kihia and
Rakea; and there also was known the fame of his son, of
Kahu-kaka-nui-a-Manaia, of the youth who was baptized with the baptism
of children whose fathers are not known.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Hine-Moa](grey17.md)
