[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey24)  [Next](grey26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

# The Story of Te Huhuti <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)

NOW this woman, Te Huhuti, was just like Hine-Moa. As Hine-Moa swam Lake
Rotorua, so Te Huhuti swam Lake Roto-a-Tara. She belonged to the
Ngati-Kahu-ngunu tribe and from her Te Hapuku is descended. The reason
why she swam the lake is that she had fallen in love with Te
Whatuiapiti, attracted by his handsome appearance.

She did not stop to consider the difficulty or the danger. No; all she
thought was, 'Although the lake is wide and deep, what does it matter?
Only let me try it and if I should sink, never mind, but if I should
succeed, all the better.' (Now, my friend, just realize what this young
girl had in her mind. She had no hesitation because for a long time she
had longed to see this handsome young man--the darling of her heart.)

And so she swam and reached Te Whatuiapiti's home. As she was swimming
she was seen by his mother and the old lady was

greatly surprised. Then she looked at Te Huhuti as she stepped out of
the water on to the shore. What a lovely skin, gleaming like a white
cliff! The girl slowly approached the old woman, who could now see how
lovely she was, like a sunbeam lingering in the western sky.

As she came nearer the old woman said to Te Huhuti, 'You look lovelier
than ever, like the rocky cliffs or like a ray of the setting sun.' The
maiden kept silent. Then the old woman said, 'My dear, where are you
going? And still there was no reply. Again the question was asked, and
again without success. Then the old woman cried out, 'What nonsense! Why
do you not answer me?' Then the maiden opened her lips and said to the
old woman, 'Where is the house of Te Whatuiapiti? The old woman said,
'This is where we live, come along with me.' She took the girl by the
hand and they went on to Te Whatuiapiti's house. He heard them coming
and at once arose. He looked at her and greeted her warmly, as might be
expected. He was glad at seeing the delight of his heart, and the
maiden--well, she was happy at having reached Te Whatuiapiti with whom
she had long been deeply in love.

And so they were married, and here are their descendants, and right up
to the present time they keep in memory the feat of their ancestress Te
Huhuti in swimming lake Roto-a-Tara, and we celebrate it in song--'Te
Huhuti swam hither', etc.

You see that her descendants do not forget the part played by their
ancestress. Te Huhuti was drawn to Te Whatuiapiti because of his
personal attraction, but there were two other advantages possessed by
him-one we might personify as Tahu and the other as Tu. Hence her reason
for undertaking the journey across the lake, as she thought that by
marrying Te Whatuiapiti she would share in these two, Tahu (the husband)
for the harmony of peaceful days, and Tu (the warrior) for the bold face
needed outside the home. Hence she was so keen to acquire Te Whatuiapiti
as her husband.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[226:1](grey25.htm#fr_23) This legend was not
given in the original English 1855 version of the text, but was included
in the 1854 Maori edition. The translation is by W.W. Bird.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix: On the Native Songs of New Zealand](grey26)
