[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey05)  [Next](grey07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

# Rupe's Ascent into Heaven

WE left Hinauri floating out into the ocean <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md); we now return to her adventures: for many
months she floated through the sea, and was at last thrown up by the
surf on the beach at a place named Wairarawa; she was there found, lying
as if dead, upon the sandy shore, by two brothers named Ihuatamai and
Ihuwareware; her body was in many parts overgrown with seaweed and
barnacles, from the length of time she had been in the water, but they
could still see some traces of her beauty, and pitying the young girl,
they lifted her up in their arms, and carried her home to their house,
and laid her down carefully by the side of a fire, and scraped off very
gently the seaweed and barnacles from her body, and thus by degrees
restored her.

When she had quite recovered, Ihuatamai and Ihuwareware looked upon her
with pleasure, and took her as a wife between them both; they then asked
her to tell them who she was, and what was her name; this she did not
disclose to them, but she changed her name, and called herself
Ihungaru-paea, or the Stranded-log-of-timber.

After she had lived with these two brothers for a long time, Ihuwareware
went to pay a visit to his superior chief, Tinirau, and to relate the
adventures which had happened; and when Tinirau heard all that had taken
place, he went to bring

away the young stranger as a wife for himself, and she was given up to
him; but before she was so given to him, she had conceived a child by
Ihuatamai, and when she went to live with Tinirau it was near the time
when the child should be born.

Tinirau took her home with him to his residence on an island called
Motu-tapu: he had two other wives living there--they were the daughters
of Mangamanga-i-atua, and their names were Harataunga and Horotata. Now,
when these two women saw the young stranger coming along in their
husband's company, as if she was his wife, they could not endure it, and
they abused Hinauri on account of her conduct with their husband; at
last they proceeded so far as to attempt to strike her, and to kill her,
and they cursed her bitterly. When they treated her in this manner the
heart of Hinauri became gloomy with grief and mortification, so she
began to utter incantations against them, and repeated one so powerful
that hardly had she finished it when the two women fell flat on the
ground with the soles of their feet projecting upwards, and lay quite
dead upon the earth, and her husband was thus left free for her alone.

All this time Hinauri was lost to her friends and home, and her young
brother Mauimua, afterwards called Rupe, could do nothing but think of
her; and excessive love for his sister, and sorrow at her departure, so
harassed him, that he said he could no longer remain at rest, but that
he must go and seek for his sister.

So he departed upon this undertaking, and visited every place he could
think of without missing one of them, yet could he nowhere find his
sister; at last, Rupe thought that be would ascend to the heavens to
consult his great ancestor Rehua, who dwelt there at a place named Te
Putahi-nui-o-Rehua, and in fulfilment of this design he began his ascent
to the heavenly regions.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Rupe continued his ascent, seeking everywhere hastily for Rehua; at
last, he reached a place where people were dwelling, and when he saw
them, he spoke to them, saying: 'Are the heavens above this
inhabited?'--and the people dwelling there answered him: 'They are
inhabited.' And he again asked them: 'Can I reach those heavens? and
they replied: 'You cannot reach them, the heavens above these are those
the boundaries of which were fixed by Tane.'

But Rupe forced a way up through those heavens, and got above them, and
found an inhabited place; and he asked the inhabitants of it, saying:
'Are the heavens above these inhabited?'--and the people answered him:
'They are inhabited.' And he again asked: 'Do you think I can reach
them?'--and they replied: 'No, you will not be able to reach them, those
heavens were fixed there by Tane.'

Rupe, however, forced a way through those heavens too, and thus he
continued to do until he reached the tenth heaven, and there he found
the abode of Rehua. When Rehua saw a stranger approaching, he went
forward and gave him the usual welcome, lamenting over him; Rehua made
his lamentation without knowing who the stranger was, but Rupe in his
lament made use of prayers by which he enabled Rehua to guess who he
was.

When they had each ended their lamentation, Rehua called to his
servants: 'Light a fire, and get everything ready for cooking food.' The
slaves soon made the fire burn up brightly, and brought hollow
calabashes, all ready to have food placed in them, and laid them down
before Rehua. All this time Rupe was wondering whence the food was to
come from with which the calabashes, which the slaves had brought, were
to be filled; but presently he observed that Rehua was slowly loosening
the thick bands which enveloped his locks around and upon the top of his
head; and when his long locks

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

all floated loosely, he shook the dense masses of his hair, and forth
from them came flying flocks of the Tui birds, which had been nestling
there, feeding upon lice; and as they flew forth, the slaves caught and
killed them, and filled the calabashes with them, and took them to the
fire, and put them on to cook, and when they were done, they carried
them and laid them before Rupe as a present, and then placed them beside
him that he might eat, and Rehua requested him to eat food, but Rupe
answered him: 'Nay, but I cannot eat this food; I saw these birds
loosened and take wing from thy locks; who would dare to eat birds that
had fed upon lice in thy sacred head? For the reasons he thus stated,
Rupe feared that man of ancient days, and the calabashes still stood
near him untouched.

At last, Rupe ventured to ask Rehua, saying: 'O Rehua, has a confused
murmur of voices from the world below reached you upon any subject
regarding which I am interested? And Rehua answered him: 'Yes, such a
murmuring of distant voices has reached me from the island of Motu-tapu
in the world below these.'

When Rupe heard this, he immediately by his enchantments changed himself
into a pigeon, and took flight downwards towards the island of
Motu-tapu; on, on he flew, until he reached the island, and the dwelling
of Tinirau, and then he alighted right upon the window-sill of his
house. Some of Tinirau's people saw him, and exclaimed: 'Ha!
ha!--there's a bird, there's a bird'; whilst some called out: 'Make
haste, spear him, spear him'; and one threw a spear at him, but he
turned it aside with his bill, and it passed on one side of him, and
struck the piece of wood on which he was sitting, and the spear was
broken; then they saw that it was no use to try to spear the bird, so
they made a noose, and endeavoured to slip it gently over his

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

head, but he turned his head on one side, and they found that they could
not snare him. His young sister now suspected something, so she said to
the people who were trying to kill or snare the bird: 'Leave the bird
quiet for a minute until I look at it'; and when she had looked well at
it, she knew that it was her brother, so she asked him, saying: 'What is
the cause which has made you thus come here?'-and the pigeon immediately
began to open and shut its little bill, as if it was trying to speak.
His young sister now called out to Tinirau: 'Oh, husband, here is your
brother-in-law'; and her husband said in reply: 'What is his name?'--and
she answered: 'It is my brother Rupe.' It happened that upon this very
day, Hinauri's little child was born, then Rupe repeated this form of
greeting to his sister, the name of which is Toetoetu:

'Hinauri,  
Hinauri is the sister,  
And Rupe is her brother,  
But how came he here?  
Came he by travelling on the earth,  
Or came he through the air?  
Let your path be through the air.'

As soon as Rupe had ceased his lamentation of welcome to his sister, she
commenced hers, and answered him, saying:

'Rupe is the brother,  
And Hina is his young sister,  
But how came he here?  
Came he by travelling on the earth,  
Or came he through the air?  
Let your path be now upwards through the air  
To Rehua.'

Hardly had his young sister finished repeating

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

this poem, before Rupe had caught her up with her new-born baby: in a
moment they were gone. Thus the brother and sister departed together,
with the infant, carrying with them the placenta to bury it with the
usual rites; and they ascended up to Rehua, and as they passed through
the air, the placenta was accidentally dropped, and falling into the
sea, was devoured by a shark, and this circumstance was what caused the
multitude of large eggs which are now found in the inside of the shark.

At length the brother and sister arrived at the dwelling-place of Rehua,
which was called Te Putahi-nui-o-Rehua. The old man was unable to keep
his court-yard clean for himself, and his people neglected to do so from
idleness; thus it was left in a very filthy state. Rupe, who was
displeased at seeing this, one day said to Rehua: 'Oh, Rehua, they leave
this court-yard of yours in a very filthy state'; and then he added:
'Your people are such a set of lazy rogues, that if every mess of dirt
was a lizard, I doubt if they could even take the trouble to touch its
tail to make it run away'; and this saying passed into a proverb.

At last, Rupe thought that he could clean and beautify, in some
respects, Rehua's dwelling for him, so he made two wooden shovels for
his work, one of which he called Tahitahia, and the other Rake-rakea,
and with them he quite cleansed and purified Rehua's court-yard. He then
added a building to Rehua's dwelling, but fixing one of the beams of it
badly, Rehua's son Kaitangata, was one day killed from hanging on to
this beam, which giving way and springing back, he was thrown down and
died, and his blood running about over part of the heavens stained them,
and formed what we now call a ruddiness in the sky; when, therefore, a
red and ruddy tinge is seen in the heavens, men say: 'Ah! Kaitangata
stained the heavens with his blood.'

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

Rupe's first name was Maui-mua; it was after he was transformed into a
bird that he took the name of Rupe. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[58:1](grey06.htm#fr_8.md) See .

<span id="fn_9"></span>[64:1](grey06.htm#fr_9.md) The part of the tradition
which relates to the death of Kaitangata is considerably shortened in
the translation, as not being likely to interest the European reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend of Kae's Theft of the Whale](grey07.md)
