[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey23)  [Next](grey25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

# Stratagem of Puhihuia's Elopement with Te Ponga

THERE was formerly a large fortified town upon Mount Eden; its defences
were massive and strong, and a great number of persons inhabited the
town. In the days of olden time a war was commenced by the tribes of
Awhitu and of Waikato, against the people who inhabited the town at
Mount Eden or Maunga-whau.

There they engaged in a fierce war: one side first persisted in their
efforts for victory, until they were successful in beating the other
party; then the other side in their turn succeeded in resisting their
enemies, and gained a victory in their turn; thus the tribes of Waikato
did not succeed in destroying their enemies as they desired.

After this the people of Waikato thought, for a long time: 'Well, what
had we better do now to destroy these enemies of ours? And seeing no way
to accomplish this, they determined to make peace with them; so, at
last, they arranged a peace, and it appeared to be a sure one.

When this peace had been made, Te Ponga, a chief from Awhitu, and one of
the fiercest enemies of the people of that town, went, attended by a
large company, to Maunga-whau, and whilst he was yet a long way off, he
and his party were seen coming along by the people of the fortified
town, and they ran to the gates of the fortress, calling out: 'Welcome,
oh, welcome, strangers from afar!'--and they waved their garments to
them; and the strangers, encouraged by these cries, came straight

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

on to the town until they reached it, and then walked direct to the
large court-yard in front of the house of the chief of the town, and
there they all seated themselves.

The inhabitants being all now assembled in the town as well as the
strangers, the chiefs of each party stood up and made speeches, and when
they had concluded this part of the ceremony, the women lighted fires to
cook food for the strangers, and when the ovens were heated, they put
the food in and covered them up. In a very short time the food was all
cooked, when they opened the ovens, placed the food in baskets, and
ranged it in a long pile before the visitors; then, separating it into
shares, one of their chiefs called aloud the name of each of the
visitors to whom a share was intended, and when this allotment was
completed they fell to at the feast.

The strangers, however, ate very slowly, knowing they had better take
but little food, in order not to surfeit themselves, and so that their
waists might be slim when they stood up in the ranks of the dancers, and
that they might look as slight as if their waists were almost severed in
two; and as the strangers sat they kept on thinking: 'When will night
come and the dance begin?' and the thoughts of the others were of the
same kind.

As soon as it began to get dark, the inhabitants of the village rapidly
assembled, and when they had all collected in the courtyard of the
house, which was occupied by the strangers, they stood up for the dance,
and rank after rank of dancers was duly ranged in order, until at length
all was in readiness.

Then the dancers began, and whilst they sprang nimbly about, Puhihuia,
the young daughter of the chief of the village stood watching a good
opportunity to bound forward before the assembly, and made the gestures
usual with dancers, since she

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

knew that she could not dance so well, or so becomingly, if she pressed
on before the measure was completed, but that when the beating time by
the assembly With their feet and hands, and the deep voices of the men,
were all in exact unison, was the fitting moment for her to bound
forward into the dance, with the becoming gestures.

Then, just as they were all beating time together, Puhihuia perceived
the proper moment had come, and forth she sprang before the assembled
dancers; first she bends her head with many gestures towards the people
upon the one side, and then towards those upon the other, as she
performed her part beautifully; her full orbed eyes seemed clear and
brilliant as the full moon rising in the horizon, and whilst the
strangers looked at the young girl, they all were quite overpowered with
her beauty; and Te Ponga, their young chief, felt his heart grow wild
with emotion, when he saw so much loveliness before him. In the
meanwhile the people of the village went on dancing, until all the
evolutions of the dance were duly completed, when they paused.

Then up sprang the strangers to dance in their turn, and they duly
ranged themselves in order, rank behind rank of the dancers, and began
with their hands to beat time, and whilst they thus gave the time of the
measure, the young chief, Te Ponga, stood peeping over them and waiting
a good opportunity for him to spring forward, and in his turn make
gestures; at last forth he bounded; then he, too, bent his head with
many gestures, first upon the one side and then upon the other; indeed,
he performed beautifully! The people of the village were so surprised at
his agility and grace, that they could do nothing but admire him, and as
for the young girl Puhihuia, her heart conceived a warm passion for Te
Ponga.

At length the dance concluded, and all dispersed, each to the place
where he was to rest; then,

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

overcome with weariness, they all reclined in slumber, except Te Ponga,
who lay tossing from side to side, unable to sleep, from his great love
for the maiden, and devising scheme after scheme by which he might have
an opportunity of conversing alone with her. At last he formed a
project, or rather it originated in the suggestions of his slave, who
said to his master: 'Sir, I have found out a plan by which you may
accomplish your wishes; listen to me whilst I detail it to you.
To-morrow evening, just at night-fall, as you sit in the court-yard of
the chief of the village, feign to be very thirsty, and call to me to
bring you a draught of water; on my part, I will take care to be at a
distance from the place, but do you continue to shout loudly and angrily
to me: "Sirrah, I want water, fetch me some"; call loudly, so that the
father of the young girl may hear; then he will probably say to his
daughter: "My child, my child, why do you let our guest call in that way
for water, without running to fetch some for him?" Then, when the young
girl, in obedience to her father's orders, runs down the hill to fetch
water from the fountain for you, do you follow her to the spring; there
you can uninterruptedly converse together; but when you rise to follow
the young girl, in order to prevent them from suspecting your
intentions, do you pretend to be in a great passion with me, and speak
thus: "Where's that deaf slave of mine? I'll go and find the fellow. Ah!
you will not hear when you do not like, but I'll break your head for
you, my fine fellow."'

Thus the slave advised his master, and they arranged fully the plan of
their proceedings; the next day Te Ponga went to visit the chief of the
village, and sat in his house watching the young girl, and before long
evening closed in, and they retired to rest, and some time afterwards Te
Ponga, pretending to be thirsty, called out loudly to his

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

slave: 'Holloa! sir, fetch me some water'; but not a word did the slave
answer him; and Te Ponga continued to call out to him louder and louder,
until at last he seemed to become weary of shouting. When the chief of
the village heard him calling out in this way for water, he at length
said to his young daughter: 'My child, run and fetch some water for our
guest; why do you allow him to ao on calling for water in that way,
Without fetching some for him? Then the maiden arose, and, taking a
calabash went off to fetch water; and no sooner did Te Ponga see her
starting off than he too arose, and went out of the house, feigning by
his voice and words to be very angry with his slave, so that all might
think he was going to give him a beating; but as soon as be was out of
the house, he went straight off after the young girl; he did not,
indeed, well know the path which led to the fountain, but led by the
voice of the maiden, who tripped along the path singing blithely and
merrily as she went, Te Ponga followed the guidance of her tones.

When the maiden arrived at the brink of the fountain and was about to
dip her calabash into it, she heard someone behind her, and, turning
suddenly round, ah! there stood a man close behind her; yes, there was
Te Ponga himself. She stood quite astonished for some time, and at
length asked: 'What can have brought you here? He answered, 'I came here
for a draught of water.' But the girl replied: 'Ha, indeed! Did not I
come here to draw water for you? Why, then, did you come? Could not you
have remained at my father's house until I brought the water for you?
Then Te Ponga answered: 'You are the water that I thirsted for.' And as
the maiden listened to his words, she thought within herself: 'He, then,
has fallen in love with me'; and she sat down, and he placed himself by
her side, and they conversed together, and to each

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

of them the words of the other seemed most pleasant and engaging. Why
need more be said? Before they separated they arranged a time when they
might escape together, and then each of them returned to the village to
wait for the occasion they had agreed upon.

When the appointed time had arrived, he desired some chosen men of his
followers to go to the landing-place on Manuka harbour, where the canoes
were all hauled on shore, there to wait for him; and Puhihuia and he
directed them when they got there to prepare one canoe in which he and
all his followers might escape; he desired that this canoe should be
launched and kept afloat in the water with every paddle in its place, so
that the moment they embarked it might put off from the shore; he
further directed them to go round every one of the other canoes, to cut
the lashings which made the top sides fast to the hulls, and to pull out
all the plugs, so that those following them might be checked and thrown
into confusion at finding they had no canoes in which to continue the
pursuit. Those of his people to whom Te Ponga gave these orders
immediately departed, and did exactly as their chief had directed diem.

The next morning Te Ponga having told his host that he must return to
his own country, all the people of the place assembled to bid him
farewell; and when they had all collected, the chief of the fortress
stood up, and, after a suitable speech, presented his jade *mere* to Te
Ponga as a parting gift, which might establish and make sure the peace
which they had concluded. Te Ponga in his turn presented with the same
ceremonies his jade *mere* to the chief of the fortress; and when all
the rites observed at a formal parting were completed, Te Ponga and his
followers arose, and went upon their way: then the people of the place
all arose too, and accompanied them to the gates of the fortress to

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

bid them farewell; and as the strangers quitted the gates, the people of
the place cried aloud after them: 'Depart in peace! Depart in peace! May
you return in safety to your homes!'

Just before the strangers had started, Puhihuia and some of the young
girls of the village stole a little way along the road, so as to
accompany the strangers some way on their path; and when they joined
them, the girls stepped proudly along by the side of the band of strange
warriors, laughing and joking with them; at last they got some distance
from the village, and Puhihuia's father, the chief of the place, seeing
his daughter was going so far, called out: 'Children, children, come
back here!' Then the other girls stopped and began to return towards the
village, but as to Puhihuia, her heart beat but to the one thought of
escaping with her beloved Te Ponga. So she began to run. She drew near
to some large scoria rocks, and glided behind them, and, when thus
hidden from the view of those in the village, she redoubled her speed;
well done, well done, young girl! She runs so fast that her body bends
low as she speeds forward. When Te Ponga saw Puhihuia running in this
hurried manner, he called aloud to his men: 'What is the meaning of
this? Let us be off as fast as we can too.' Then began a swift flight,
indeed, of Te Ponga, and his followers, and of the young girl; rapidly
they flew, like a feather drifting before the gale, or as runs the waka
which has broken loose from a fowler's snare.

When the people of the village saw that their young chieftainess was
gone, there was a wild rushing to and fro in the village for weapons,
and whilst they thus lost their time, Te Ponga and his followers, and
the young girl, went unmolestedly upon their way; and when the people of
the fortress at last came out ready for the pursuit, Te Ponga and his
followers, and Puhihuia, had got far enough away,

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

and before their pursuers had gained any distance from the fortress, Te
Ponga and his people had almost reached the landing-place at Manuka
harbour, and by the time the pursuing party had arrived near the
landing-place, they had embarked in their canoe, had grasped their
paddles, and being all ready, they dashed their paddles into the water,
and shot away, swift as a dart from a string, whilst they felt the sides
of the canoe shake from the force with which they drove it through the
water.

When the pursuers saw that the canoe had dashed off into Manuka harbour,
they laid hold of another canoe, and began to haul it down towards the
water, but as the lashings of the top sides were cut, what was the use
of their trying to haul it to the sea? they dragged nothing but the top
sides-there lay the bottom of the canoe unmoved. Pursuit was impossible;
the party that had come to make peace escaped, and returned uninjured
and joyful to their own country, and went cheerfully upon their way,
carrying off with them the young chieftainess from their enemies, who
could only stand like fools upon the shore, stamping with rage and
threatening them in vain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Te Huhuti](grey25)
