[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey14)  [Next](grey16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

# Legend of the Emigration of Turi

### (The Progenitor of the Whanganui Tribes)

THE following narrative shows the cause which led Turi, the ancestor of
the Whanganui tribes, to emigrate to New Zealand, and the manner in
which he reached these islands.

Hoimatua, a near relation of Turi, had a little boy named Potikiroroa;
this young fellow was sent one day with a message to Uenuku, who was an
*ariki*, or chief high-priest, to let him know that a burnt-offering had
been made to the gods, of which Uenuku, as *ariki*, was to eat part, and
the little fellow accidentally tripped and fell down in the very doorway
of Wharekura, the house of Uenuku, and this being a most unlucky omen,
Uenuku was dreadfully irritated, and he laid hold of the little fellow,
and ate him up, without even having the body cooked, and so the poor boy
perished.

Turi was determined to have revenge for this barbarous act, and to slay
some person as a payment for little Potikiroroa, and, after casting
about in his thoughts for some time as to the most effectual mode of
doing this, he saw that his best way of revenging himself would be to
seize Hawepotiki, the little son of Uenuku, and kill him.

One day Turi, in order to entice the boy to his house, ordered the
children of all the people who dwelt there with him to begin playing
together, in a place where Hawepotiki could see them; so they began
whipping their tops, and whirling their

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

whiz-gigs, but it was of no use; the little fellow could not be tempted
to come and play with them, and that plan failed.

At last summer came with its heats, scorching men's skins; and Turi, one
very hot day, ordered all the little children to run and bathe in the
river Waimatuhirangi; so they all ran to the river and began sporting
and playing in the water. When little Hawepotiki saw all the other lads
swimming and playing in the river, he was thrown off his guard and ran
there too, and Turi waylaid him, and killed him in a moment, and thus
revenged the death of Potikiroroa.

After killing the poor boy, Turi cut the heart out of his body, which
was eaten by himself and his friends; but when, shortly afterwards, a
chieftainess, named Hotukura, sent up a present of baskets of food to
their sacred prince, to Uenuku, carried in the usual way by a long
procession of people, some of Turi's friends pushed into the basket of
baked sweet potatoes prepared for Uenuku the heart of Hawepotiki, cut up
and baked too, and so it was carried up to Uenuku in the basket, and
laid before him, that he might eat it.

Uenuku, who had missed his little boy, being still unable to ascertain
what had become of him, could not help sighing when he saw such an
excellent feast, and said: 'Poor little Hawepotiki, how he would have
liked this, but he now no longer comes running to sit by my side at
mealtime'; and then he himself ate the food that was laid before him. He
had hardly, however, ended his meal, when one of his friends, who had
found what had been done, came and told him, saying: 'They have made you
eat a part of Hawepotiki.' And he answered: 'Very well, let it be; he
lies in the belly of Toi-te-huatahi'; meaning by this proverb that he
would have a fearful revenge; but he showed no other signs of feeling,
that he might not

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

gratify his enemies by manifesting his sorrow, or alarm them by loud
threats of revenge.

At this time Turi was living in a house, the name of which was
Rangiatea, and there were born two of his children, Turangaimua and
Taneroroa. One evening, shortly after the death of Hawepotiki,
Rongo-rongo, Turi's wife, went out of the house to suckle her little
girl, Taneroroa, and she heard Uenuku in his house, named Wharekura,
chanting a poem, of which this was the burden:

'Oh! let the tribes be summoned from the south,  
Oh! let the tribes be summoned from the north;  
Let Ngati-Ruanui come in force;  
Let Ngati-Rongotea's warriors too be there,  
That we may all our foes destroy,  
And sweep them utterly away.  
Oh, they ate one far nobler than themselves.'

When Rongo-rongo heard what Uenuku was chanting, she went back to her
house, and said to her husband: 'Turi, I have just heard them chanting
this poem in Wharekura.' And Turi answered: 'What poem do you say, it
was? Then she hummed it gently over to her husband, and Turi at once
divined the meaning of it, <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) and

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

said to his wife: 'That poem is meant for me'; and he knew this well,
because, as he had killed the child of Uenuku, he guessed that they
meant to slay him as a payment for the boy, and that the lament his wife
had heard evinced that they were secretly laying their plans of revenge.

He, therefore, at once started off to his father-in-law, Toto, to get a
canoe from him, in which he might escape from his enemies; and Toto gave
him one, the name of which was Aotea; the tree from which it had been
made grew upon the banks of the Lake Waiharakeke. Toto had first hewn
down the tree, and then split it, breaking it lengthways into two parts;
out of one part of the tree he made a canoe, which he named Matahorua,
and out of the other part he made a canoe which he named Aotea. He gave
the canoe which he had named Matahorua to Kuramarotini; and the canoe
which he had named Aotea he made a present of to Rongo-rongo; thus
giving a canoe to each of his two daughters. Matahorua was the canoe in
which a large part of the world was explored, and Reti was the name of
the man who navigated it.

One day Kupe and Hoturapa went out upon the sea to fish together, and
when they had anchored the canoe at a convenient place, Kupe let down
his line into the sea; and he said to his cousin, Hoturapa: 'Hotu', my
line is foul of something; do you, like a good young fellow, dive down
and release it for me'; but Hoturapa said: 'Just give me your line, and
let me see if I cannot pull it up for you.' But Kupe answered: 'It's of
no use,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

you cannot do it; you had better give a plunge in at once, and pull it
up.' This was a mere stratagem upon the part of Kupe, that he might
obtain possession of Kuramarotini, who was Hoturapa's wife; however,
Hoturapa not suspecting this, good-naturedly dived down at once to bring
up Kupe's line; and as soon as he had made his plunge, Kupe at once cut
the rope which was attached to the anchor, and paddled off for the shore
as fast as he could go, to carry off Hoturapa's wife, Kuramarotini. When
Hoturapa came up to the surface of the water, the canoe was already a
long distance from him, and he cried out to Kupe: 'Oh, Kupe, bring the
canoe back here to take me in.' But Kupe would not listen to him, he
brought not back the canoe, and so Hoturapa perished. Kupe then made
haste, and carried off Kuramarotini, and to escape from the vengeance of
the relations of Hoturapa, he fled away with her, on the ocean, in her
canoe Matahorua, and discovered the islands of New Zealand, and coasted
entirely round them, without finding any inhabitants.

As Kupe was proceeding down the cast coast of New Zealand, and had
reached Castle Point, a great cuttle-fish, alarmed at the sight of a
canoe with men in it, fled away from a large cavern which exists in the
south headland of the cove there; it fled before Kupe, in the direction
of Raukawa, or Cook's Straits; when Kupe arrived at those straits, he
crossed them in his canoe, to examine the middle islands; seeing the
entrance of Awa-iti (now called Tory Channel), running deep up into the
land, he turned his canoe in there to explore it; he found a very strong
current coming out from between the lands, and named the entrance
Kura-te-au; strong as the current was, Kupe stemmed it in his canoe, and
ascended it, until he was just surmounting the crown of the rapid. The
great cuttle-fish or dragon, that had fled from Castle

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Point, which Kupe named Te Wheke-a-Muturangi, or
the cuttle-fish of Muturangi, had fled to Tory Channel, and was lying
hid in this part of the current. The monster heard the canoe of Kupe
approaching as they were pulling up the current, and raised its arms
above the waters to catch and devour the canoe, men and all. As it thus
floated upon the water, Kupe saw it, and pondered how he might destroy
the terrible monster. At last he thought of a plan for doing this; he
had already found that, although he kept on chopping off portions of its
gigantic arms, furnished with suckers, as it tried to fold them about
the canoe, in order to pull it down, the monster was too fierce to care
for this; so Kupe seized an immense hollow calabash he had on board to
carry his water in, and threw it overboard; hardly had it touched the
water ere the monster flew at it, thinking that it was the canoe of
Kupe, and that he would destroy it; so it reared its whole body out of
the water, to press down the huge calabash under it, and Kupe, as he
stood in his canoe, being in a most excellent position to cut it with
his axe, seized the opportunity, and, striking it a tremendous blow, he
severed it in two, and killed it. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md)

The labours of Kupe consisted in this, that he discovered these islands,
and examined the different openings which he found running up into the
country. He only found two inhabitants in the country, a bird which he
named the Kokako, and another bird which he named the Tiwaiwaka; he,
however, did not ultimately remain in these islands, but returned to his
own house, leaving the openings

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

he had examined in the country as signs that he had been here.

Thus he left his marks here, but he himself returned to his own country,
where he found Turi and all his people still dwelling; although it was
now the fourth year from that one in which he had slain little
Hawepotiki; but Turi was then on the point of flying to escape from the
vengeance of Uenuku, and as he heard of the discoveries Kupe had made,
he determined to come to these islands. So he bad his canoe, the Aotea,
dragged down to the shore in the night, and Kupe, who happened to be
near the place, and heard the bottom of the canoe grating upon the beach
as they hauled it along, went to see what was going on; and when he
found what Turi was about to do, he said to him: 'Now, mind, Turi, keep
ever steering to the eastward, where the sun rises; keep the bow of your
canoe ever steadily directed towards that point of the sky.' Turi
answered him: 'You had better accompany me, Kupe. Come, let us go
together.' And when Kupe heard this, he said to Turi: 'Do you think that
Kupe will ever return there again?'--and he then continued: 'When you
arrive at the islands, you had better go at once and examine the river
that I discovered \[said to be the Patea\]; its mouth opens direct to
the westward; you will find but two inhabitants there \[meaning the
Kokako and Tiwaiwaka\]; one of them carries its tail erect and sticking
out; now do not mistake the voice of one of them for that of a man, for
it calls out just like one; and if you stand on one side of the river,
and call out to them, you will hear their cries answering you from the
other. That will be the very spot that I mentioned to you.' <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Turi's brother-in-law, Tuau, now called out to him: , why, Turi, the
paddles you are taking with you are good for nothing, for they are made
from the huhoe-tree'; Turi replied: 'Wherever can I get other paddles
now?'--and Tuau answered: 'Just wait a little, until I run for the
paddles of Taiparaeroa'; and he brought back, and put on board the
canoe, two paddles, the names of which were Rangihorona and
Kautu-ki-te-rangi, and two bailers, the names of which were
Tipuahoronuku and Rangi-ka-wheriko. Then Turi said: 'Tuau, come out a
little way to sea with me, and then return again, when you have seen me
fairly started upon my long voyage.' To this Tuau cheerfully consented,
and got into the canoe, which was already afloat; then were carried on
board all the articles which the voyagers were to take; and their
friends put on board for them seed, sweet potatoes, of the species
called Te Kakau, and dried stones of the berries of the Karaka-tree; and
some five edible rats in boxes, and some tame green parrots; and added
some pet Pukeko, or large water-hens; and many other valuable things
were put on board the canoe, whence the proverb: 'Aotea of the valuable
cargo.'

At last away floated the canoe, whilst it was yet night, and Tuau sat at
the stem, gently paddling as they dropped out from the harbour; but when
they got to its mouth, Turi called out to his brother-in-law: 'Tuau, you
come and sit for a little at the house amidships, on the floor of the
double canoe, and let me take the paddle and pull till I warm myself.'
So Tuau came amidships, and sat down with the people there, whilst Turi
went astern and took his paddle. Then Turi and his people pulled as hard
as they could, and were soon far outside the harbour, in the wide sea,
Tuau, who had intended to land at the heads, at last turned to see what
distance they had got. Alas! alas! they were far

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

out at sea; then he called out to Turi: 'Oh, Turi, Turi, pray turn back
the canoe and land me.' But not the least attention did Turi pay to him;
he persisted in carrying off his brother-in-law with him, although there
was Tuau weeping and grieving when he thought of his children and wife,
and lamenting as he exclaimed: 'How shall I ever get back to my dear
wife and children from the place where you are going to!' But what does
Turi care for that; he still thinks fit to carry him off with him, and
Tuau cannot now help himself. They were now so far out at sea that he
could not gain the shore, for he could scarcely have seen where the land
was whilst swimming in the water, as it was during the night-time that
they started.

Lo! the dawn breaks; but hardly had the daylight of the first morning of
their voyage appeared, than one of the party, named Tapo, became
insolent and disobedient to Turi. His chief was therefore very wroth
with him, and hove him overboard into the sea; and when Tapo found
himself in the water, and saw the canoe shooting ahead, he called out to
Turi quite cheerfully and jocosely: 'I say, old fellow, come now, let me
live in the world a little longer'; and when they heard him call out in
this manner, they knew he must be under the protection of the god Maru,
and said: 'Here is Maru, here is Maru.' So they hauled him into the
canoe again, and saved his life.

At last the seams of Turi's canoe opened in holes in many places, and
the water streamed into it, and they rapidly dipped the bailers into the
water and dashed it out over the sides; Turi, in the meanwhile, reciting
aloud an incantation, which was efficacious in preventing a canoe from
being swamped; they succeeded at length, by these means, in reaching a
small island which lies in mid-ocean, which they named Rangitahua; there
they landed, and ripped all the old lashings out of

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

the seams of the canoe, and re-lashed the top sides on to it, and
thoroughly refitted it.

Amongst the chiefs who landed there with them was one named
[Potoru](errata.htm#0.md), whose canoe was called Te Ririno. They were
carrying some dogs with them, as these would be very valuable in the
islands they were going to, for supplying by their increase a good
article of food, and skins for warm cloaks; on this island, they,
however, killed two of them, the names of which were Whakapapa-tuakura
and Tanga-kakariki; the first of these they cooked and shared amongst
them, but the second they cut up raw as an offering for the gods, and
laid it cut open in every part before them, and built a sacred place,
and set up pillars for the spirits, that they might entirely consume the
sacrifice; and they took the enchanted apron of the spirits, and spread
it open before them, and wearied the spirits by calling on them for some
omen, saying: 'Come, manifest yourselves to us, O gods; make haste and
declare the future to us. It may be now, that we shall not succeed in
passing to the other side of the ocean; but if you manifest yourselves
to us, and are present with us, we shall pass there in safety.' Then
they rose up from prayer, and roasted with fire the dog which they were
offering as a sacrifice, and holding the sacrifice aloft, called over
the names of the spirits to whom the offering was made; and having thus
appeased the wrath of the offended spirits, they again stuck up posts
for them, saying as they did so:

'Tis the post which stands above there;  
'Tis the post which stands in the heavens,  
Near Atutahimarehua.'

Thus they removed all ill-luck from the canoes, by repeating over them
prayers called Keuenga, Takanga, Whakamumumanga, etc., etc.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

When all these ceremonies were ended, a very angry discussion arose
between Potoru and Turi, as to the direction they should now sail in;
Turi persisted in wishing to pursue an easterly course, saying: 'Nay,
nay, let us still sail towards the quarter where the sun first flares
up'; but Potoru answered him: 'But I say nay, nay, let us proceed
towards that quarter of the heavens in which the sun sets.' Turi
replied: 'Why, did not Kupe, who had visited these islands, particularly
tell us? Now mind, let nothing induce you to turn the prow of the canoe
away from that quarter of the heavens in which the sun rises.' However,
Potoru still persisted in his opinion, and at last Turi gave up the
point, and let him have his own way; so they embarked and left the
island of Rangitahua, and sailed on a westerly course.

After they had pursued this course for some time, the canoe Ririno
getting into the surf, near some rocks, was lost on a reef which they
named Taputapuatea, being swept away by a strong current, a rapid
current, by a swift-running current, swiftly running on to the realms of
death; and the Ririno was dashed to pieces: hence to the present day is
preserved this proverb: 'You are as obstinate as Potoru, who persisted
in rushing on to his own destruction.'

When the Ririno had thus been lost, Turi, in the Aotea, pursued his
course towards the quarter of the rising sun, and whilst they were yet
in mid-ocean, a child, whom he named Tutawa, was born to Turi; they had
then but nine sweet potatoes left, and Turi took one of these, leaving
now but eight, and he offered the one he took as a sacrifice to the
spirits, and touched with it the palate of little Tutawa, born in
mid-ocean, at the same time repeating the fitting prayers. When they
drew near the shore of these islands, one of the crew, named
Tuanui-a-te-ra, was very disobedient and insolent

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

to Turi, who, getting exceedingly provoked with him, threw him overboard
into the sea. When they had got near enough to the shore to see
distinctly, they foolishly threw the red plumes they wore on their heads
into the sea, these being old, dirty, and faded, from length of wear,
for they thought, although wrongly, the red things they saw in such
abundance on the shore were similar ornaments.

At length the Aotea is run up on the beach of these islands, and the
wearied voyagers spring out of her on to the sands, and the first thing
they remark are the footprints of a man; they run to examine them , and
find them to be those of Tuanui-a-te-ra, whom Turi had shortly before
thrown overboard; there can be no doubt of this, because some of the
footprints are crooked, exactly suiting a deformed foot which he had.

Turi having rested after his voyage, determined to start and seek for
the river Patea, which Kupe had described to him, and he left his canoe
Aotea in the harbour, which he named after it. He travelled along the
coast-line from Aotea to Patea, having sent one party before him, under
Pungarehu, ordering them to plant the stones of the berries of the
Karaka-tree, which they had brought with them, all along their route, in
order that so valuable an article of food might be introduced into these
islands. Turi, who followed with another party after Pungarehu, gave
names to all the places as they came along; when he reached the harbour
of Kawhia, he gave it that name or the *awhinga* of Turi; then he came
to Marokopa, or the place that Turi wound round to another spot; the
river Waitara he named from the *taranga*, or wide steps which he took
in fording it at its mouth; Mokau, or Moekau, he named from his sleeping
there; at Manga-ti, they opened and spread out an enchanted garment
named Hunakiko, and as all the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

people gazed at it, Turi named the place Mataki-taki; at another place
(near the lake at the Gray institution at Taranaki), Turi took up a
handful of earth to smell it, that he might guess whether the soil was
good enough, and he named that place Hongihongi; another place, six
miles to the south of Taranaki, he named Tapuwae, or the footsteps of
Turi; another place he named Oakura, from the bright redness of the
enchanted cloak Hunakiko; another place Katikara, twelve miles south of
Taranaki; another river he named Raoa, from a piece of food he was
eating nearly choking him there; another spot he named Kaupoko-nui (a
river thirty-four miles north-west of Patea), or the head of Turi; when
they arrived there, the enchanted cloak Hunakiko was twice opened and
spread out, so he called the spot Marae-kura; a place that they encamped
at he named Kapuni (a river at Waimate), or the encampment of Turi;
another place he called Waingongoro, or the place at which Turi snored;
another spot he named Tangahoe, after his paddle; Ohingahape, he named
after the crooked foot of Tuanui-a-te-ra; a headland where there was a
natural bridge running over a cave, he named Whitikau, from the long
time he was fording in the water to turn the headland, because he did
not like to cross the bridge (this is five miles north of Patea).

At length he reached the river which Kupe had described to him; there he
built a *pa*, or fortress, which he named Rangitaawhi, and there he
erected a post which he named Whakatopea, and he built a house which he
named Matangirie, and he laid down a door-sill, or threshold, which he
named Paepaehakehake; and he built a small elevated storehouse to hold
his food, and he named it Paeahua; the river itself he named Patea; and
he dug a well which he named Parara-ki-te-uru. The farm he cultivated
there he named Hekeheke-i-papa; the wooden spade he made he called
Tipu-i-ahuma:

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

then he had his farm dug up, and the chant they sang to encourage
themselves, and to keep time as they dug, was:

'Break up our goddess mother,  
Break up the ancient goddess earth;  
We speak of you, oh, earth! but do not disturb  
The plants we have brought hither from Hawaiki the noble;  
It was Maui who scraped the earth in heaps round the sides,  
In Kuratau.'

There they planted the farm; they had but eight seed potatoes, but they
divided these into small pieces, which they put separately into the
ground; and when the shoots sprang up, Turi made the place sacred with
prayers and incantations, lest any one should venture there and hurt the
plants; the name of the incantation he used was Ahuroa; then
harvest-time came, they gathered in the crop of sweet potatoes, and
found that they had eight hundred baskets of them. The deeds above
related were those which our ancestor Turi performed; Rongo-rongo was
the name of his principal Wife, and they had several children, from whom
sprang the tribes of Whanganui and the Ngati-Ruanui tribe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[151:1](grey15.htm#fr_19.md) The discovery of a
plot by guessing the meaning of a song which persons were overhead
singing was a common circumstance with all the races and throughout all
the islands of the Pacific; for instance, in Pitcairn's Island, when
first occupied by part of the crew of *The Bounty* and some Tahitian men
and women, we find:

'Brown and Christian were very intimate, and their two wives overhead
one night Williams's second wife sing a song. *Why should the Tahitian
men sharpen their axes to cut off the Englishmen's heads?* The wives of
Brown and Christian told their husbands what Williams's second wife had
<span id="page_152">p. 152</span> been singing; when Christian heard of
it, he went by himself with his gun to the house where all the Tahitian
men were assembled; he pointed his gun at them, but it missed fire. Two
of the natives ran away into the bush.'--*Pitcairn's island and the
Islander*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[154:1](grey15.htm#fr_20.md) They show several
spots upon the east coast where Kupe touched with his canoes; but I have
not yet had time to arrange and transcribe the various traditions
connected with his landing at those places.--G. G.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[155:1](grey15.htm#fr_21.md) It will be seen that
they did not follow Kupe's directions, thinking that he was deceiving
them, he being probably friendly to Uenuku.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Legend of the Emigration of Manaia](grey16.md)
