[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey18)  [Next](grey20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

# The Two Sorcerers

### (Ko Te Matenga O Kiki)

KIKI was a celebrated sorcerer, and skilled in magical arts; he lived
upon the river Waikato. The inhabitants of that river still have this
proverb: 'The offspring of Kiki wither shrubs'. This proverb had its
origin in the circumstance of Kiki being such a magician, that he could
not go abroad in the sunshine; for if his shadow fell upon any place not
protected from his magic, it at once became *tapu*, and all the plants
there withered.

This Kiki was thoroughly skilled in the practice of sorcery. If any
parties coming up the river called at his village in their canoes as
they paddled by, he still remained quietly at home, and never troubled
himself to come out, but just drew back the sliding door of his house,
so that it might stand open, and the strangers stiffened and died; or
even as canoes came paddling down from the upper parts of the river, he
drew back the sliding wooden shutter to the window of his house, and the
crews on board of them were sure to die.

At length, the fame of this sorcerer spread exceedingly, and resounded
through every tribe, until Tamure, a chief who dwelt at Kawhia, heard
with others, reports of the magical powers of Kiki, for his fame
extended over the whole country. At length Tamure thought he would go
and contend in the arts of sorcery with Kiki, that it might be seen
which of them was most skilled in magic; and

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

he arranged in his own mind a fortunate season for his visit.

When this time came, he selected two of his people as his companions,
and he took his young daughter with him also; and they all crossed over
the mountain range from Kawhia, and came down upon the river Waipa,
which runs into the Waikato, and embarking there in a canoe, paddled
down the river towards the village of Kiki; and they managed so well,
that before they were seen by anybody, they had arrived at the
landing-place. Tamure was not only skilled in magic, but he was also a
very cautious man; so whilst they were still afloat upon the river, he
repeated an incantation of the kind called 'Mata-tawhito', to preserve
him safe from all arts of sorcery; and he repeated other incantations,
to ward off spells, to protect him from magic, to collect good genii
round him, to keep off evil spirits, and to shield him from demons; when
these preparations were all finished, they landed, and drew up their
canoe on the beach, at the landing-place of Kiki.

As soon as they had landed, the old sorcerer called out to them that
they were welcome to his village, and invited them to come up to it: so
they went up to the village: and when they reached the square in the
centre, they seated themselves upon the ground; and some of Kiki's
people kindled fire in an enchanted oven, and began to cook food in it
for the strangers. Kiki sat in this house, and Tamure on the ground just
outside the entrance to it, and he there availed himself of this
opportunity to repeat incantations over the threshold of the house, so
that Kiki might be enchanted as he stepped over it to come out. When the
food in the enchanted oven was cooked, they pulled off the coverings,
and spread it out upon clean mats. The old sorcerer now made his
appearance out of his house and he invited Tamure to come and eat

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

food with him; but the food was all enchanted, and his object in asking
Tamure to eat with him was, that the enchanted food might kill him;
therefore Tamure said that his young daughter was very hungry, and would
eat of the food offered to them; he in the meantime kept on repeating
incantations of the kind called Mata-tawhito, Whakangungu, and Parepare,
protections against enchanted food, and as she ate she also continued to
repeat them; even when she stretched out her hand to take a sweet
potato, or any other food, she dropped the greater part of it at her
feet, and hid it under her clothes, and then only ate a little bit.
After she had done, the old sorcerer, Kiki, kept waiting for Tamure to
begin to eat also of the enchanted food, that he might soon die. Kiki
having gone into his house again, Tamure still sat on the ground outside
the door, and as he had enchanted the threshold of the house, he now
repeated incantations which might render the door enchanted also, so
that Kiki might be certain not to escape when he passed out of it. By
this time Tamure's daughter had quite finished her meal, but neither her
father nor either of his people had partaken of the enchanted food.

Tamure now ordered his people to launch his canoe, and they paddled
away, and a little time after they had left the village, Kiki became
unwell; in the meanwhile, Tamure and his people were paddling homewards
in all haste, and as they passed a village where there were a good many
people on the river's bank, Tamure stopped, and said to them: 'If you
should see any canoe pulling after us, and the people in the canoe ask
you, have you seen a canoe pass up the river, would you be good enough
to say: "Yes, a canoe has passed by here"?--and then, if they ask you:
"How far has it got?" would you be good enough to say: "Oh, by this time
it has got very far up the river"?'--

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

and having thus said to the people of that village, Tamure paddled away
again in his canoe with all haste.

Some time after Tamure's party had left the village of Kiki, the old
sorcerer became very ill indeed, and his people then knew that this had
been brought about by the magical arts of Tamure, and they sprang into a
canoe to follow after him, and puffed up the river as hard as they
could; and when they reached the village where the people were on the
river's bank, they called out and asked them: 'How far has the canoe
reached, which passed up the river?'--and the villagers answered: 'Oh,
that canoe must got very far up the river by this time.' The people in
the canoe that was pursuing Tamure, upon hearing this, returned again to
their own village, and Kiki died from the incantations of Tamure.

Some of Kiki's descendants are still living--one of them, named Mokahi,
recently died at Tau-ranga-a-Ruru, but Te Maioha is still living on die
river Waipa. Yes, some of the descendants of Kiki, whose shadow withered
trees, are still living. He was indeed a great sorcerer: he overcame
every other sorcerer until he met Tamure, but be was vanquished by him,
and had to bend the knee before him.

Tamure has also some descendants living, amongst whom are Mahu and Kiake
of the Ngati-Mariu tribe; these men arc also skilled in magic: if a
father skilled in magic died, he left his incantation to his children;
so that if a man was skilled in sorcery, it was known that his children
would have a good knowledge of the same arts, as they were certain to
have derived it from their parent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Magical Wooden Head](grey20)
