[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey00)  [Next](grey02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE

TOWARDS the close of the year 1845 I was suddenly and unexpectedly
required by the British Government to administer the affairs of New
Zealand, and shortly afterwards received the appointment of
Governor-in-chief of those Islands.

When I arrived in them, I found Her Majesty's native subjects engaged in
hostilities with the Queen's troops, against whom they had up to that
time contended with considerable success; so much discontent also
prevailed generally amongst the native population, that where
disturbances had not yet taken place, there was too much reason to
apprehend they would soon break out, as they shortly afterwards did, in
several parts of the Islands.

I soon perceived that I could neither successfully govern, nor hope to
conciliate, a numerous and turbulent people, with whose language,
manners, customs, religion, and modes of thought I was quite
unacquainted. In order to redress their grievances, and apply remedies
which would neither wound their feelings nor militate against their
prejudices, it was necessary that I should be able thoroughly to
understand their complaints; and to win their confidence and regard it
was also requisite that I should be able at all times and in all places
patiently to listen to the tales of their wrongs or sufferings, and,
even if I could not assist them, to give them a kind reply, couched in
such terms as should leave no doubt on their minds that I clearly
understood

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

and felt for them, and was really well disposed towards them.

Although furnished with some very able interpreters, who gave me
assistance of the most friendly nature, I soon found that even with
their aid I could still only very imperfectly perform my duties. I could
not at all times and in all places have an interpreter by my side; and
thence often when waylaid by some suitor, who had perhaps travelled two
or three hundred miles to lay before me the tale of his or her
grievances, I was compelled to pass on without listening, and to witness
with pain an expression of sorrow and keenly disappointed hope cloud
over features which the moment before were bright with gladness, that
the opportunity so anxiously looked for had at length been secured.

Again, I found that any tale of sorrow or suffering, passing through the
medium of an interpreter, fell much more coldly on my ear than what it
would have done had the person interested addressed the tale direct to
myself; and in like manner an answer delivered through the intervention
of a third person appeared to leave a very different impression upon the
suitor from what it would have had coming direct from the lips of the
Governor of the country. Moreover, this mode of communication through a
third person was so cumbrous and slow that, in order to compensate for
the loss of time thus occasioned, it became necessary for the
interpreters to compress the substance of the representations made to
me, as also of my own replies, into the fewest words possible; and, as
this had in each instance to be done hurriedly and at the moment, there
was reason to fear that much that was material to enable me fully to
understand the question brought before me, or the suitor to comprehend
my reply, might be unintentionally omitted. Lastly, I had on several
occasions reasons to believe that a native

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

hesitated to state facts or to express feelings and wishes to an
interpreter, which he would most gladly have done to the Governor, could
he have addressed him direct.

These reasons, and others of equal force, made me feel it to be my duty
to make myself acquainted, with the least possible delay, with the
language of the New Zealanders, as also with their manners, customs, and
prejudices. But I soon found that this was a far more difficult matter
than I had at first supposed. The language of the New Zealanders is a
very difficult one to understand thoroughly: there was then no
dictionary of it published (unless a vocabulary can be so called); there
were no books published in the language which would enable me to study
its construction; it varied altogether in form from any of the ancient
or modern languages which I knew; and my thoughts and time were so
occupied with the cares of the government of a country then pressed upon
by many difficulties, and with a formidable rebellion raging in it, that
I could find but very few hours to devote to the acquisition of an
unwritten and difficult language. I, however, did my best, and
cheerfully devoted all my spare moments to a task, the accomplishment of
which was necessary to enable me to perform properly every duty to my
country and to the people I was appointed to govern.

Soon, however, a new and quite unexpected difficulty presented itself.
On the side of the rebel party were engaged, either openly or covertly,
some of the oldest, least civilized, and most influential chiefs in the
Islands. With them I had, either personally or by written
communications, to discuss questions which involved peace or war, and on
which the whole future of the islands and of the native race depended,
so that it was in the highest degree essential that I should fully and
entirely comprehend their thoughts and intentions, and that

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

they should not in any way misunderstand the nature of the engagements
into which I entered with them.

To my surprise, however, I found that these chiefs, either in their
speeches to me or in their letters, frequently quoted, in explanation of
their views and intentions, fragments of ancient poems or proverbs, or
made allusions which rested on an ancient system of mythology; and,
although it was clear that the most important parts of their
communications were embodied in these figurative forms, the interpreters
were quite at fault, they could then rarely (if ever) translate the
poems or explain the allusions, and there was no publication in
existence which threw any light upon these subjects, or which gave the
meaning of the great mass of the words which the natives upon such
occasions made use of; so that I was compelled to content myself with a
short general statement of what some other native believed that the
writer of the letter intended to convey as his meaning by the fragment
of the poem he had quoted or by the allusions he had made. I should add
that even the great majority of the young Christian natives were quite
as much at fault on these subjects as were the European interpreters.

Clearly, however, I could not, as Governor of the country, permit so
close a veil to remain drawn between myself and the aged and influential
chiefs whom it was my duty to attach to British interests and to the
British race, whose regard and confidence, as also that of their tribes,
it was my desire to secure, and with whom it was necessary that I should
hold the most unrestricted intercourse. Only one thing could under such
circumstances be done, and that was to acquaint myself with the ancient
language of the country, to collect its traditional poems and legends,
to Induce their priests to impart to me their mythology, and to study
their

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

proverbs. For more than eight years I devoted a great part of my
available time to these pursuits. indeed, I worked at this duty in my
spare moments in every part of the country I traversed and during my
many voyages from portion to portion of the islands. I was also always
accompanied by natives, and still at every possible interval pursued my
inquiries into these subjects. Once, when I had with great pains amassed
a large mass of materials to aid me in my studies, the Government House
was destroyed by fire, and with it were burnt the materials I had so
collected, and thus I was left to commence again my difficult and
wearying task.

The ultimate result, however, was, that I acquired a great amount of
information on these subjects, and collected a large mass of materials,
which was, however, from the manner in which they were acquired, in a
very scattered state-for different portions of the same poem or legend
were often collected from different natives, in very distant parts of
the country; long intervals of time, also, frequently elapsed after I
had obtained one part of a poem or legend, before I could find a native
accurately acquainted with another portion of it; consequently the
fragments thus obtained were scattered through different notebooks, and,
before they could be given to the public, required to be carefully
arranged and rewritten, and, what was still more difficult (whether
viewed in reference to the real difficulty of fairly translating the
ancient language in which they were composed, or my many public duties),
it was necessary that they should be translated.

Having, however, with much toil acquired information which I found so
useful to myself, I felt unwilling that the result of my labours should
be lost to those whose duty it may be hereafter to deal with the natives
of New Zealand; and I therefore undertook a new task, which I have
often, very

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

often, been sorely tempted to abandon; but the same sense of duty which
made me originally enter upon the study of the native language has
enabled me to persevere up to the present period, when I have already
published one large volume in the native language, containing a very
extensive collection of the ancient traditional poems, religious chants,
and songs, of the Maori race, and I now present to the European reader a
translation of the principal portions of their ancient mythology and of
some of their most interesting legends.

Another reason that has made me anxious to impart to the public the most
material portions of the information I have thus attained is that,
probably, to no other person but myself would many of their ancient
rhythmical prayers and traditions have been imparted by their priests;
and it is less likely that anyone could now acquire them, as I regret to
say that most of their old chiefs and even some of the middle-aged ones
who aided me in my researches, have already passed to the tomb.

With regard to the style of the translation a few words are required; I
fear in point of care and language it will not satisfy the critical
reader; but I can truly say that I have had no leisure carefully to
revise it; the translation is also faithful, and it is almost impossible
closely and faithfully to translate a very difficult language without
almost insensibly falling somewhat into the idiom and form of
construction of that language, which, perhaps, from its unusualness may
prove unpleasant to the European ear and mind, and this must be
essentially the case in a work like the present, no considerable
continuous portion of the original whereof was derived from one person,
but which is compiled from the written or orally delivered narratives of
many, each differing from the others in style, and some even materially
from the rest in dialect.

I have said that the translation is close and

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

faithful: it is so to the full extent of my powers and from the little
time I have had at my disposal. I have done no more than add in some
places such few explanatory words as were necessary to enable a person
unacquainted with the productions, customs, or religion of the country,
to understand what the narrator meant. For the first time, I believe, a
European reader will find it in his power to place himself in the
position of one who listens to a heathen and savage high-priest,
explaining to him, in his own words and in his own energetic manner, the
traditions in which he earnestly believes, and unfolding the religious
opinions upon which the faith and hopes of his race rest.

That their traditions are puerile is true; that the religious faith of
the races who trust in them is absurd is a melancholy fact; but all my
experience leads me to believe that the Saxon, Celtic, and Scandinavian
systems of mythology, could we have become intimately acquainted with
them, would be found in no respects to surpass that one which the
European reader may now thoroughly understand. I believe that the
ignorance which has prevailed regarding the mythological systems of
barbarous or semi-barbarous races has too generally led to their being
considered far grander and more reasonable than they really were.

But the puerility of these traditions and barbarous mythological systems
by no means diminishes their importance as regards their influence upon
the human race. Those contained in the present volume have, with slight
modifications, prevailed perhaps considerably more than two thousand
years throughout the great mass of the islands of the Pacific Ocean;
and, indeed, the religious system of ancient Mexico was, probably, to
some extent connected with them. They have been believed in and obeyed
by many millions of the human race; and it is still more melancholy to
reflect that they were

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

based upon a system of human sacrifices to the gods; so that, if we
allow them to have existed for two thousand years, and that, in
accordance with the rites which are based upon them, at least two
thousand human victims were annually sacrificed throughout the whole
extent of the numerous islands in which they prevailed (both of which
suppositions are probably much within the truth), then at least four
millions of human beings have been offered in sacrifice to false gods;
and to this number we should have to add a frightful list of children
murdered under the system of infanticide, which the same traditions
encouraged, as also a very large number of persons, destroyed for having
been believed guilty of the crime of sorcery or witchcraft.

It must further be borne in mind that the native races who believed in
these traditions or superstitions are in no way deficient in intellect,
and in no respect incapable of receiving the truths of Christianity; on
the contrary, they readily embrace its doctrines and submit to its
rules; in our schools they stand a fair comparison with Europeans, and,
when instructed in Christian truths, blush at their own former ignorance
and superstitions, and look back with shame and loathing upon their
previous state of wickedness and credulity; and yet for a great part of
their lives have they, and for thousands of years before they were born
have their forefathers, implicitly submitted themselves to those very
superstitions, and followed those cruel and barbarous rites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](grey02.md)
