[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](grey08)  [Next](grey10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

# The Legend of Rata

### His Adventures with the Enchanted Tree and Revenge of his Father's Murder

BEFORE Tawhaki ascended up into the heavens, a son named Wahieroa had
been born to him by his first wife. As soon as Wahieroa grew to man's
estate, he took Kura for a wife, and she bore him a son whom they called
Rata. Wahieroa was slain treacherously by a chief named Matukutakotako,
but his son Rata was born some time before his death. It therefore
became his duty to revenge the death of his father Wahieroa, and Rata
having grown up, at last devised a plan for doing this: he therefore
gave the necessary orders to his dependants, at the same time saying to
them: 'I am about to go in search of the man who slew my father.'

He then started upon a journey for this purpose, and at length arrived
at the entrance to the place of Matukutakotako; be found there a man who
was left in charge of it, sitting at the entrance to the court-yard, and
he asked him, saying: 'Where is the man who killed my father? The man
who was left in charge of the place answered him: 'He lives beneath in
the earth there, and I am left here by him, to call to him and warn him
when the new moon appears; at that season he rises and comes forth upon
the earth, and devours men as his food.'

Rata then said to him: 'All that you say is true, but how can he know
when the proper time comes for him to rise up from the earth? The man
replied: 'I call aloud to him.'

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Then said Rata: 'When will there be a new moon? And the man who was left
to take care of the place answered him: 'In two nights hence. Do you now
return to your own village, but on the morning of the second day from
this time come here again to me.'

Rata, in compliance with these directions, returned to his own dwelling,
and waited there until the time that had been appointed him, and on the
morning of that day he again journeyed along the road he had previously
travelled, and found the man sitting in the same place, and he asked
him, saying: 'Do you know any spot where I can conceal myself, and he
hid from the enemy with whom I am about to fight, from Matukutakotako?'
The man replied: 'Come with me until I show you the two fountains of
clear water.'

They then went together until they came to the two fountains.

The man then said to Rata: 'The spot that we stand on is the place where
Matuku rises up from the earth, and yonder fountain is the one in which
he combs and washes his dishevelled hair, but this fountain is the one
he uses to reflect his face in whilst he dresses it; you cannot kill him
whilst he is at the fountain he uses to reflect his face in, because
your shadow would be also reflected in it, and he would see it; but at
the fountain in which he washes his hair, you may smite and slay him.'

Rata then asked the man: 'Will be make his appearance from the earth
this evening?' And the man answered: 'Yes.'

They had not waited long there, when evening arrived, and the moon
became visible, and the man said to Rata: 'Do you now go and hide
yourself near the brink of the fountain in which he washes his hair';
and Rata went and hid himself near the edge of the fountain, and the man
who had been left to watch for the purpose shouted aloud: 'Ho,

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Ho, the new moon is visible--a moon two days
old.' And Matukutakotako heard him, and seizing his two-handed wooden
sword, he rose up from the earth there, and went straight to his two
fountains; then he laid down his two-handed wooden sword on the ground,
at the edge of the fountain where he dressed his hair, and kneeling down
on both knees beside it, he loosened the strings which bound up his long
locks, and shook out his dishevelled hair, and plunged down his head
into the cool clear waters of the fountain. So Rata creeping out from
where he lay hid, rapidly moved up, and stood behind him, and as
Matukutakotako raised his head from the water, Rata, with one hand
seized him by the hair, while with the other he smote and slew him; thus
he avenged the death of his father Wahieroa.

Rata then asked the man whom he had found in charge of the place: 'Where
shall I find the bones of Wahieroa my father? And the keeper of the
place answered him: 'They are not here; a strange people who live at a
distance came and carried them off.'

Upon bearing this Rata returned to his own village, and there reflected
over many designs by which be might recover the bones of his father.

At length he thought of an excellent plan for this purpose, so he went
into the forest and having found a very tall tree, quite straight
throughout its entire length, he felled it, and cut off its noble
branching top, intending to fashion the trunk into a canoe; and all the
insects which inhabit trees, and the spirits of the forests, were very
angry at this, and as soon as Rata had returned to the village at
evening, when his day's work was ended, they all came and took the tree,
and raised it up again, and the innumerable multitude of insects, birds,
and spirits, who are called 'The offspring of Hakuturi', worked away at
replacing each little chip and shaving in its proper place, and sang
aloud their incantations

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

as they worked; this was what they sang with a confused noise of various
voices:

Fly together, chips and shavings,  
Stick ye fast together,  
Hold ye fast together;  
Stand upright again, O tree!

Early the next morning back came Rata, intending to work at hewing the
trunk of his tree into a canoe. When he got to the place where he had
left the trunk lying on the ground, at first he could not find it, and
if that fine tall straight tree, which he saw standing whole and sound
in the forest, was the same he thought he had cut down, there it was now
erect again; however he stepped up to it, and manfully hewing away at it
again, he felled it to the ground once more, and off he cut its fine
branching top again, and began to hollow out the hold of the canoe, and
to slope off its prow and the stem into their proper gracefully curved
forms; and in the evening, when it became too dark to work, he returned
to his village.

As soon as he was gone, back came the innumerable multitudes of insects,
birds, and spirits, who are called the offspring of Hakuturi, and they
raised up the tree upon its stump once more, and with a confused noise
of various voices, they sang incantations as they worked, and when they
had ended these, the tree again stood sound as ever in its former place
in the forest.

The morning dawned, and Rata returned once more to work at his canoe.
When he reached the place, was not he amazed to see the tree standing up
in the forest, untouched, just as he had at first found it? But he,
nothing daunted, hews away at it again, and down it topples crashing to
the earth; as soon as he saw the tree upon the ground, Rata went off as
if going home, and then turned back

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

and hid himself in the underwood, in a spot whence he could peep out and
see what took place; he had not been hidden long, when he heard the
innumerable multitude of the children of Tane approaching die spot,
singing their incantations as they came along; at last they arrived
close to the place where the tree was lying upon the ground. Lo, a rush
upon them is made by Rata. Ha, he has seized some of them; he shouts out
to them, saying: 'Ha, ha, it is you, is it, then, who have been
exercising your magical arts upon my tree?' Then the children of Tane
all cried aloud in reply: 'Who gave you authority to fell the forest god
to the ground? You had no right to do so.'

When Rata heard them say this, he was quite overcome with shame at what
be had done.

The offspring of Tane again all called out aloud to him: 'Return, O
Rata, to thy village, we will make a canoe for you.'

Rata, without delay, obeyed their orders, and as soon as he had gone
they all fell to work; they were so numerous, and understood each what
to do so well, that they no sooner began to adze out a canoe than it was
completed. When they had done this, Rata and his tribe lost no time in
hauling it from the forest to the water, and the name they gave to that
canoe was Riwaru.

When the canoe was afloat upon the sea, 140 warriors embarked on board
it, and without delay they paddled off to seek their foes; one night,
just at nightfall, they reached the fortress of their enemies who were
named Ponaturi. When they arrived there, Rata alone landed, leaving the
canoe afloat and all his warriors on board; as be stole along the shore,
he saw that a fire was burning on the sacred place, where the Ponaturi
consulted their gods and offered sacrifices to them. Rata, without
stopping, crept directly towards the fire, and bid himself behind some
thick bushes of the

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Harakeke; <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) he
then saw that there were some priests upon the other side of the same
bushes, serving at the sacred place, and, to assist themselves in their
magical arts, they were making use of the bones of Wahieroa, knocking
them together to beat time while they were repeating a powerful
incantation, known only to themselves, the name of which was Titikura.
Rata listened attentively to this incantation, until he learnt it by
heart, and when he was quite sure that he knew it, he rushed suddenly
upon the priests; they, surprised and ignorant of the numbers of their
enemy, or whence they came, made little resistance, and were in a moment
smitten and slain. The bones of his father Wahieroa were then eagerly
snatched up by him; he hastened with them back to the canoe, embarked on
board it, and his warriors at once paddled away, striving to reach his
fortified village.

In the morning some of the Ponaturi repaired to their sacred place, and
found their priests lying dead there, just as they were slain by Rata.
So, without delay, they pursued him. A thousand warriors of their tribe
followed after Rata. At length this army reached the fortress of Rata,
and an engagement at once took place, in which the tribe of Rata was
worsted, and sixty of its warriors slam; at this moment Rata bethought
him of the spell he had learnt from the priests, and, immediately
repeating the potent incantation, Titikura, his slain warriors were by
its power once more restored to life; then they rushed again to the
combat, and the Ponaturi were slaughtered by Rata and his tribe, a
thousand of them--the whole thousand were slam.

Te Rata's task of avenging his father's death being thus ended, his
tribe hauled up his large canoe on the shore, and roofed it over with
thatch to protect it from the sun and weather. Rata now

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

took Tongarautawhiri as one of his wives, and she bore him a son whom he
named Tuwhakararo; when this son came to man's estate, he took Apakura
as one of his wives, and from her sprang a son named Whakatau. He was
not born in the manner that mortals are, but came into being in this
way: one day Apakura went down upon the sea-coast, and took off a little
apron which she wore in front as a covering, and threw it into the
ocean, and a god named Rongotakawiu took it and shaped it, and gave it
form and being, and Whakatau sprang into life, and his ancestor
Rongotakawiu taught him magic and the use of enchantments of every kind.

When Whakatau was a little lad, his favourite amusement was flying
kites. Mortals then often observed kites flying in the air, and could
see nothing else, for Whakatau was running about at the bottom of the
waters, still holding the end of the string of the kite in his bands.
One day he stole up out of the water by degrees, and at length came upon
the shore, when the whole of his body was quite plainly seen by some
people who were near, and they ran as fast as they could to catch him.
When Whakatau observed them all running to seize him, he slipped back
again into the water, and continued flying his kite as before; but the
people who had seen him were surprised at this strange sight, and being
determined to catch him the next time he came out, they sat down upon
the bank to wait for him. At last Whakatau came up out of the water
again, and stepped on shore once more; then the people who were watching
for him, all ran at full speed to catch him. When Whakatau saw them
coming after him again, he cried out: 'You had better go and bring
Apakura here, she is the only person who can catch me and hold me fast.'

When they heard this, one of them ran to fetch Apakura, and she came
with him at once, and as

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

soon as she saw little Whakatau, she called out to him: 'Here I am, I am
Apakura.' Whakatau then stopped running, and Apakura caught hold of him
with her hands, and she questioned him, saying: 'Whom do you belong to?
And Whakatau. answered her: 'I am your child; you one day threw the
little apron which covered you on the sands of the sea, and the god
Rongotakawiu, my ancestor, formed me from it, and I grew up a human
being, and he named me Whakatau.'

From that time Whakatau left the water and continued to live on shore.
His principal amusement, as long as he was a lad, was still flying
kites; but he understood magic well, and nothing was concealed from him,
and when he grew up to be a man he became a renowned hero.

 

This second legend of the destruction by Whakatau-potiki of the house
called Te Tihi-o-Manono, or Te Uru-o-Manono, is added because it differs
consistently from the other, and is often alluded to in ancient poems.

Tinirau determined to attempt to avenge the death of his descendant
Tuhuruhuru, and he thought that the best person to do this was Whakatau,
whom he knew to be very skilful in war, and in enchantments, so he
directed his wife Hine-i-te-iwaiwa to find Whakatau, and she went in
search; when she reached a village near where she expected to find him,
she asked some people whom she saw, where Whakatau was, and they
answered her: 'He is on the top of yonder hill flying a kite.' She at
once proceeded on her way until she came to the hill, and seeing a man
there, she asked him: 'Can you tell me where I can find Whakatau?'--and
he replied: 'You must have passed him as you came here.' Then she
returned to the village where she had seen the people, and said to them:
'Why, the man upon the hill says that Whakatau is here';

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

but they told her that the man who had spoken to her must have been
Whakatau himself, and that she had better return to him, and told her
marks by which she might know him; she therefore returned, and he, after
some time, when she showed him that she knew certain marks about his
person, admitted that he was Whakatau; and he then asked her what had
made her come to him, and she replied: 'Tinirau sent me to you to ask
you to come and assist in revenging the death of my son; the warriors
are all collecting at the village of Tinirau, but they fear to go to
attack this enemy, for it is the bravest of all the enemies of Tinirau.'
Whakatau then asked her: 'Have you yet given a feast to the
warriors?'--and she said, 'Not yet.' He then spoke to her, saying:
'Return at once and when you reach your village, give a great feast to
the warriors; give them abundance of potted birds from the forest, but
let all the oil in which the birds were preserved be kept for me; as for
yourself, do not go to the feast, but, decking your head with a mourning
dress of feathers, remain seated close in the house of mourning.' Then
Hine-i-te-iwaiwa at once returned to Tinirau, to do as she had been
directed.

Shortly after his visitor had left him, Whakatau called aloud to his
people, saying: 'Let the side-boards be at once fresh lashed on to our
canoe, to the canoe of our ancestor of Rata.' His men were so anxious to
fulfil their chief's orders, that almost as soon as he had spoken they
were at work, and had finished the canoe that very day, and dragged it
down to the sea; when night fell, six of his warriors embarked in it,
and Whakatau made the seventh; they then paddled off, following a direct
course, until they reached the village of Tinirau where they found
Hine-i-te-iwaiwa seated in her house of mourning. Whakatau then asked
her: 'Have the warriors all left yet?'--and she replied: 'They

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

will not do it, they are afraid.' Whakatau then said to her: 'Farewell,
then; do you remain here until you hear further from me.'

Whakatau and his men having re-embarked in their canoe, made a straight
course for the place where was situated the great house called Te
Tihi-o-Manono, and they let their anchor drop, and floated there.

When the next morning broke, and some of the people of the village
coming out of the house, and beyond their defences, saw the canoe
floating at the anchorage, they gave the alarm, crying out: 'A war
party! a war party!' Then the warriors came rushing forth to the fray in
crowds, and arranged themselves in bands. Then stood forth one of their
champions whose name was Mango-huritapena, and he defied Whakatau, who
was standing up in his canoe, calling out: 'Were you fool enough, then,
to come here of your own accord?'--and Whakatau answered him, by
shouting out: 'Which of the arts of war do you consider yourself famous
for?'--and Mango-huritapena shouted out in answer: 'I am a most skilful
diver.' 'Dive here, then, if you dare', shouted out Whakatau in reply.
Then the champion of the enemy gave a plunge into the water, and dived
under it. just as he got right under the canoe, one of Whakatau's men
poured the oil which Hine-i-te-iwaiwa had given them into the sea, and
its waters immediately became quite transparent, so that they saw the
warrior come floating up under the canoe, and Whakatau transfixed him
with a wooden spade; so that champion perished.

Then forward stepped another champion named Pitakataka, and he defied
Whakatau, shouting out: 'Ah! You only killed Mango-huritapena because he
chanced to put himself in a wrong position.' Whakatau shouted out in
reply: 'Which of the arts of war are you skilled in, then?'--and he
answered:

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 'Oh! I leap so skilfully that I seem to fly in
the air.' 'Then leap here, if you dare', answered Whakatau; and the
champion of his enemies took a run and made a spring high into the air;
but Whakatau laid a noose on the canoe, and as the warrior alighted in
it, he drew it tight, and caught him as a bird in a springe, and thus
slew that warrior also.

And thus, one after the other, he slew ten of the most famous warriors
of his enemies; one whom he had seized, he saved alive, but he cut out
his tongue, and then said to him: 'Now, off with you to the shore again,
and tell them there bow I have overcome you all'; having done this,
Whakatau retired a little distance back from the place, so that his
canoe could not be seen by his enemies.

In the afternoon Whakatau landed on the coast, and before eating
anything, offered the prescribed sacrifice of the hair and a part of the
skin of the head of one of his victims to the gods; and when the
religious rites were finished, he ate food; and having done this, he
directed the people he had with him to return, saying: 'Return at once,
and when you reach the residence of Hine-i-te-iwaiwa, speak to her,
saying: "Whakatau told us to come, and tell you, that he could not
return with us"';--and he further said: 'If heavy rain falls in large
drops, it is a sign that I have been killed; but if a light, misty rain
falls, and the whole horizon is lighted up with flames, then you may
know that I have conquered, and that I have burnt Te Tihi-o-Manono'; he
also said that 'he wished you to sit upon the roof of your house
watching until you saw Te Tihi-o-Manono burnt.' Whakatau's people at
once returned to Hine-i-te-iwaiwa to deliver the message he had given
them.

Just before nightfall, Whakatau drew near the great house, called Te
Tihi-o-Manono, and as the people of Whitinakonako, a great chief, were
collecting firewood at the edge of a forest, he stealthily

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

dropped in amongst them, pretending to be collecting firewood too; and
as they were going home with their loads of firewood upon their backs,
he managed to push on in front of them, and got into the house first
with a long rope in his hand: one end of this he pushed between one of
the side posts which supported the roof, and the plank walls of the
house, and did the same with every post of the house, until the rope had
gone quite round it, and then he made one end of it fast to the last
post, and held the other end in his band.

By this time the people who lived in the house all came crowding in to
pass the night in it, and soon filled it up: the house was so large, and
there were so many of them, that they had to light ten fires in it.

When their fires had burnt up brightly, some of them called out to
Mango-Pare, the man whom Whakatau bad saved alive, and whose tongue he
had cut out: 'Well, now, tell us what kind of looking fellow that was
who cut your tongue out'; and Mango-Pare answered: 'There is no one I
can compare him to, he was not like a man in the proportion of his
frame.' One of them then called out: 'Was he at all like me? But
Mango-Pare answered: 'There is nobody I can compare him to.' Then
another called out: 'Was he at all like me?'-and another: 'Was he like
me?'--until, at length, Mango-Pare cried out: 'Have I not already told
you, that there is not one of you whom I can compare to him?

Whakatau himself then exclaimed: 'Was he at all like me? And Mango-Pare,
who had not before seen him in the crowd, looked attentively at him for
a minute, and then cried out: 'I say, look here all of you at this
fellow, he is not unlike the man, he looks very like him, perhaps it is
he himself.' But Whakatau coolly asked him again: 'Was the man really
something like me? And

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

Mango-Pare replied: 'Yes, he was like you; I really think it was you';
and Whakatau shouted aloud: 'You are right, it was I.' As soon as they
heard this, all of them in a moment sprang to their feet. But, at the
same instant, Whakatau laid hold of the end of the rope which he had
passed round the posts of the house, and, rushing out, pulled it with
all his strength, and straightway the house fell down, crushing all
within it, so that the whole tribe perished, and Whakatau, who had
escaped to the outside of the house, set it on fire, and
Hine-i-te-iwaiwa, who was sitting upon the roof of her own house
watching for the event, saw the whole of one part of the heavens red
with its flames, and she knew that her enemies were destroyed. Whakatau,
having thus avenged the death of Tuhuruhuru the son of Tinirau, returned
to his own village.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[84:1](grey09.htm#fr_10) New Zealand flax.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend of Toi-te-huatahi and Tama-te-kapua](grey10)
