[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Samaritans](index)  [Previous](manners)  [Next](nabloos) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Messianic Hope of the Samaritans

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE MESSIANIC HOPE

OF THE SAMARITANS

 

## BY

### JACOB, SON OF AARON

HIGH PRIEST OF THE SAMARITANS

 

#### TRANSLATED FROM THE ARABIC BY

## ABDULLAH BEN KORI

#### PROFESSOR OF ARABIC AT PACIFIC UNIVERSITY

 

EDITED WITH AN INTRODUCTION

BY

## WILLIAM ELEAZAR BARTON

 

REPRINTED FROM THE OPEN COURT

#### MAY AND SEPTEMBER, 1907

 

## CONCERNING SAMARITAN MANUSCRIPTS

   The Samaritan priests, appreciating the interest of American and
European Christians, are now willing to sell to them accurate modern
copies of the ancient books of the Samaritan religion. I think it well,
however, to warn intending purchasers, that not all the copies offered
for sale, even in Nablus, are accurate. Some people of little learning,
relying on the ignorance of tourists, have made garbled copies of our
Torah, and have sold them to tourists or correspondents. Manuscripts
purchased at our Synagogue, from myself or my sons will be certified as
complete and correct. Several recent purchasers have sent their
manuscripts to me for inspection, and I have been sorry not to be able
to certify to their correctness. It grieves us to have our Law
incorrectly copied. I request my friend, Dr. Barton, to make this
statement to intending purchasers. We desire that such copies of our
sacred books, as go forth into Christian libraries shall be accurate.
Any manuscript purchased in our Synagogue, and bearing my seal, is
genuine and complete.

                 JACOB, SON OF AARON, High Priest of the Samaritans.

       Samaritan Synagogue, Nablus, Palestine.

 

THE MESSIANIC HOPE OF THE SAMARITANS.

INTRODUCTION.

 

I COUNT it no small honor that I am permitted to introduce to American
and English readers the author of the following little treatise, Jacob,
Son of Aaron, High Priest of the Samaritans. Through him the hope of
ages utters its voice in expectation of a Messiah still to come. So far
as I know the messianic hope of this ancient and almost forgotten sect
has never before been set forth with authority and completeness in a
modern tongue.

   The High Priest lives at Nablus, the modern Shechem, at the foot of
his sacred mountain, Gerizim. Jerusalem has been destroyed again and
again, and its name almost forgotten; but this little sect still clings
to its holy mountain, and speaks its unheeded message in a strange
language and to a world that has almost forgotten the existence of this
ancient and now diminutive congregation.

   A few years ago it was my privilege to visit the Samaritan colony at
Shechem, and to establish an acquaintance with the High Priest out of
which has grown an interesting correspondence.

   In January 1906, I learned from Mr. E.K. Warren, who had visited
Jerusalem as chairman of the World's Sunday School Convention in 1904,
that some correspondents of his had discovered what they believed was an
independent source of information concerning the life of our Lord. The
letter which he showed me read in part as follows:

   "It seems to me we have made a discovery which will greatly interest
you. The Samaritans have a genealogy of their high priests, which I have
never heard has been translated. Each high priest notes what during his
priestly office occurs of note. One of these high priests speaks of
\`Jesus the Son of Mary' being born, and another of his being crucified
during his term. I have secured an Arabic hand-written transcript of
this record and their history, which, with the translation of those
passages into English, we are sending under separate cover to you."
(page 2)

   I at once wrote to the High Priest, who wrote me under date of
February 28, 1906:

   "I have received your letter, and the explanation which you require
about the genealogy of the priests, and the information (photo with
caption: \`Jacob, son of Aaron, High Priest of the Samaritans.') about
Jesus Christ and his crucifixion. It is found with us. We gathered the
information from various historians and papers which were with us of
very ancient date. These were written by priests (page 3) long before
our time. The ancient papers were sold to a learned Jew about 35 years
ago. The name of the Jew was Abraham of the Museum of the Russians. He
bought all the papers which were with us, and we have not one of those
papers now. But before those papers were sold I gathered the history
from those papers of ancient date. The history as now written includes
the history of our congregation and all that happened to us from the day
we entered the Holy Land to the present time. If you wish one of those
histories, I will send it. It will be useful to you." (photo with
caption: \`high priest and the Holy scroll of Nablous.')

   Meantime Mr. Warren received a copy of the book from his
correspondents in Jerusalem. It was a manuscript volume of 494 pages in
Arabic, with a tabular supplement of 13 pages. Later word was received
that the High Priest's cousin Isaac had a copy of a part of the
chronicle, one leaf of which was sent to him for examination, and by him
forwarded to me. It was on very old parchment, 8 x 12 inches. The book
contained 15 such leaves, and one other, (page 4) the first one, in
paper; the original first leaf having been worn out. For this chronicle
he wanted 200 pounds sterling.

   Prof. Abdullah Ben Kori of Pacific University examined the book, and
reported its contents. It proved to be the Samaritan Chronicle of
Abulfath, compiled about 1355 A.D. (756 of the Hegira), and brought down
to date. The work of Abulfath was edited by Edward Vilmar and published
in Gotha in Arabic, in 1865. The narrative ends with the reign of
Haroun-al-Raschid. This chronicle the High Priest had taken, and from
the records and traditions of his ancestors, the priests of the
Samaritans, had brought the chronicle down to date. (photo with caption:
\`A village Fountain') Before I had determined the precise character of
the book, I had secured a translation of those portions relating to
Jesus, and had discovered that they were, in their present form, not
earlier than the period of the Crusades. Their references to Jesus are
here given:

*About the Birth of Jesus, the Son of Joseph the Carpenter.*

   "In the days of the high-priesthood of Yahokeem, who was high priest
for about thirty-two years, occurred the birth of Jesus, son of (page 5)
Joseph the carpenter, of the sect of the Jews: hence the date from our
ancestor Adam (to whom be peace) to the appearance of the son of Mary,
4290 years, and from the commencement of Fansota to the birth of the
said Jesus, the son of Mary, 1236. And his birth took place in
Bethlehem, and his resort was to Nazareth, and many of the sect of the
Jews were gathered to him, until his chief men were from among them. And
the Jews hated him with bitter hatred, and sought in every way to slay
him, because they claimed that his works were contrary to the law of
their religion, and opposed to the traditions of their elders in every
matter. And when he had gathered apostles, he delegated them to various
countries. Among (photo with caption: \`Department store at Nablous.')
these, Peter was sent to Rome and Andrew to the Soudan, Matthew
accompanying him. This Matthew wrote a Gospel; (this word is Greek2 and
signifies "good news"). This Matthew wrote his Gospel in the year 41
after the death of Jesus, and it is said that he wrote it in Judea.
Thomas was sent to Babylon, and Philip to Kerwan, and Africa, and Paul
to Eliya, and its neighborhood. This Paul (page 6) wrote a number of
epistles which the Christians have. And he at first was called Saul, and
it is said that he was born in Tarsus, capital of Cilicia. It is said he
belonged to the tribe of Benjamin, but more truly he belongs to the
tribe of Judah. He wrote fourteen epistles. Before he wrote these he
sent an epistle to Salonica in the year 52 after the slaying of Jesus,
the son of Mary: the last was the second epistle to the people of
Timothy in the fifty-sixth year after the slaying of Jesus. And Simon
was sent to the country of Barbary. And the said Jesus had other
disciples than these, among whom was Mark, who also wrote a gospel, and
of whom it was said that he was a disciple of Peter. It is said that he
wrote his (photo with caption: \`Plows in the Valley of Shechem') Gospel
at the dictation of peter to the people of Rome. It is said that he
wrote his Gospel forty-eight years after the death of his master Peter.
Among the others there was Luke, who was from the city of Anitoch and
Sabius, practicing medicine; and it was said that he was originally a
heathen. After he became a Christian it is said that he became a
disciple of Paul. It was said that he wrote his Gospel in Boeotia, which
is a state in Greece, and its king was Tabis Cade. Among the others was
John, who was from Bethsaida, a town of Galilee. He was the son of
Zebedee and Salome. He was (page 7) in his youth a fisherman, and Jesus
ordained him as an apostle. He also wrote a Gospel in the year 101 after
the death of Jesus, but more correctly in the year 97 after the slaying
of Jesus. Because he reached the age of 115. And it is said that he
wrote a part of his Gospel in the island of Patmos, and part after his
return from there, in Ephesus: and he continued at the writing of his
Gospel from the year 64 to the year 97 after the slaying of
Jesus..........

   "To return to the subject of Jesus, the son of Mary, whom the sect of
Jews, his relatives, accounted an illegitimate son of Joseph the
carpenter; Herod the king sought to slay him, and he fled from (photo
with caption: \`Children near Shechem.") his hands and was a fugitive
from him and from his relatives the Jews. At this time the High Priest
Yahokeem\[3\] died, in the mercy of God, and was succeeded by the High
Priest Jonathan, who held the office twenty-seven years. In his day
Jesus, the son of Mary, was crucified by the Emperor Tiberius. With him
were crucified two sinners, who according to the law of the Jews, were
worthy of death. One of them was crucified on his right, and the (page
8) other on his left, and this was in the Jebusite city of Aelia,\[4\]
through the instrumentality of Pilateh who ruled over the sect of the
Jews.

   "This Jesus never molested the Samaritans, all the days of his life;
neither were the Samaritans concerned with him or molested (photo with
caption: \`Mother and Child.') him. But he was a plague to his relatives
and his co-religionists, from whom he sprang. These are the sect of the
Jews who hated him with a bitter hatred. (page 9)

   "The Jews were also the cause of the death of John, a disciple of the
same Jesus; and they deceived Herod through the means of a young maiden,
whom they presented to him for his pleasure. And when she found out that
said King Herod was dead in love with her and her beauty, and was
inclined to her, it was not difficult for her; and he beheaded said
John. Said Herod was at Sabaste at that time. The reason for him naming
him John the Baptist was that originally the Jews believed in his being
righteous, and believed on him, and were also baptized of him; but
stopped doing so when they saw that he was a lover of Jesus, son of
Mary. Because they asked John not to baptize Jesus; but he took him to
Jericho and baptized him there; for the Jews believed that any one who
was baptized in those waters was freed from all their uncleanliness and
sins. Since that time baptism was changed, and taken up by the
Christians and refused by the Jews; and the Jews instituted in its place
to pass through the waters of the Jordan, believing whoever did so would
be cleansed from their sins. But when the Christian kings came into
power, they forbade them from doing that."

   While this evidently possessed no value as a source of information
concerning the events of our Lord's life, it seemed to me to have
interest as an interpretation. And it caused me to question the High
Priest farther as to his view of the person of Christ, and his hope of a
Christ to come. He wrote me in answer:

   "Concerning your question about Christ who has come and the Christ
who is to come, I have sent you a long epistle. I trust in God it will
reach you and that you will be pleased with it."

   The document is a manuscript booklet of 21 pages written in Arabic,
with Scripture quotations in Samaritan Hebrew and in red ink. Prof. Ben
Kori has translated it very faithfully, bringing to the work a very
accurate knowledge of the Arabic. I preface it with further word about
its author taken from near the end of the chronicle above referred to,
when it begins with the death of his uncle and predecessor, and his own
induction to the priesthood:

   "In the year 1292 (i.e., 1874 A.D.) in the beginning of the year, in
the days of the High Priest Omran, on the night of Friday of the month
of Moharem, the days of his priesthood came to an end, and he died, to
the mercy of God. And he left Isaac and Salaam his sons: and he also His
Excellency, his nephew Jacob, the son of his brother, who succeeded him
in the priesthood and commandery. And Jacob, the aforesaid High Priest,
who can trace his generation to antiquity, acquired great respect from
the Mohammedan government, and from the children of his own people; may
God multiply (page 10, Photo with caption: \`Samaritan Pentateuch and
Genesis. Owned by Dr. Wm. E. Barton.') (page 11.) their like. And he
became perfect in his personality, and through the good counsels by
which he became the highest of his people. And there is none who would
oppose him in significant title of his priesthood. May God lengthen his
honorable existence. His is great ability in writing Hebrew and Arabic;
and he is very zealous upon the enemies of his religion. Amen. To him
belong several Hebrew compositions, and also a book containing ten
chapters concerning the origin of the Samaritan people and their customs
and their religion. And he is the man who gathered the various portions
of this history; for he is the foremost of his age and time. And may God
be exalted, and lengthen the days of his honorable existence. Amen."

   It is evident that this little treatise raises as many questions as
it answers. We cannot help wondering whether the Messiah of the
Samaritans is to be a prophet and only a prophet. The High Priest speaks
throughout of a Second Kingdom, but gives no hint as to whether the
Messiah is to be a king. Apparently his office is to be prophetic and
spiritual; and the political offices of the kingdom may be discharged by
others. Of this we may not be to sure; and fortunately we shall be able
to secure the information at first hand, and will await further
information from the High Priest himself.

   Also we wonder whether the Messiah is to be a priest; and whether the
sacrifices are considered prophetic of his coming, and are to be
discontinued at his appearing. And we shall be glad to know what is to
become of other nations and religions. We will inquire of the High
Priest; but meantime here is the little treatise as we sent it. An
interesting piece of rabbinical logic it is; and one which cannot fail
to be suggestive to American and English readers.

William E. Barton.

Oak Park, Illinois.

## First Congregational Church

 

(page 12)

THE CHRIST WHOM THE SAMARITANS EXPECT.

 

IN THE NAME OF THE MOST MERCIFUL GOD!

     Praise be to the powerful King, the Omniscient, the Conqueror, the
One who chose Israel and conferred honor upon (photo of written letter
in Arabic with Arabic caption) it through his revelation, the One who
revealed the truth to all creation through his apostle Moses, son of
Amram, upon him and his righteous fathers, each and all, the best of
peace! (page 13)

   As the minds of the majority of this our generation are not able to
undertake a detailed research after most of the truths that are in the
Torah, on account of hindrances and other life relations, (photo with
caption: \`The High Priest at the time of Prayer.) one whose requests
are binding on me and whom I would respect by obliging him to the utmost
of my power, requested me to write down for him some statements in proof
of the Second Kingdom. (page 14) To this request I gave an affirmative
answer and composed, accordingly, this essay; in order that men's minds
may become prepared for the triumph and the vanquishing of evil and
adversity. I pray God, in the meanwhile, for success; verily He hears
and answers. Amen.

   The reference concerning the establishment of the Second Kingdom,
affirming the appearance of "THBH" or a Prophet at the end of time of
whose appearance we have a promise, is found in Ex. xx, (photo with
caption: \`Samaritan High Priest reciting history of the first Passover.
Exodus XXII. On Top of Mt. Gerizim, Passover celebration of 1906.) in
the last verses, which are not found in the Torah of the Jews. It reads,
"They said well. Let their consciences uphold my fear, and the keeping
of my commandments, all the time: so that it may be done well unto them
and their children. I shall set up for them a prophet from among their
brethren, like unto thee, and I shall put my words into his mouth and he
shall speak to them all that I command him. And it shall be that the man
who harkens not to the words which he speaks, I shall make him thereto
responsible." These words concern the prophet in whose coming we
believe. (page 15) Again, "The prophet who dares to address words in my
name and speaks what I have not commanded him, and he that speaks in the
name of foreign gods shall be killed." The same is stated again in
Deuteronomy, as also one may find in the Torah of the Jews, Deut. xviii.
15.

   Now, proofs concerning the Prophet and his coming amount to ten in
the holy Torah, and they are given in the way of symbols.

   A part of the first proof is denoted in the meaning of the sleep that
fell upon Abraham in Gen. xv. 17, beginning with "*Wa iehi hashemesh*,"
i.e. "and the sun was." The second part consists in the fact that when
our lord Abraham was assured of God's promise to him, given in the
chapter beginning with *Achar haddebarim haelleh,"* i.e., "After these
things," as follows: "Look up toward heaven and count the stars, if thou
be able to count them;" and He added: "thus shall thy seed be." I say
when this assurance was given him, he wanted to know whether or not
their kingdom and the fulfillment of the covenant rested on conditions.
He desired to find out the order of events; and hence his question given
in the same chapter, verse 8: "Whereby shall I know that I shall inherit
it?" God (who is exalted) knowing Abraham's purpose and the aim of his
question, informed him that the kingdom and the fulfillment of the
covenant rested on certain conditions: therefore He said to him (in the
same chapter, verse 9): "Take me a heifer of three years old, a she-goat
of three years old, a ram of three years old, etc." He also informed him
of the manner of offering them. Concerning the beasts it is said: "He
divided through," just as it has been revealed unto Moses (upon him be
peace) in the first chapter and twelfth verse of the book of Leviticus,
as follows: "And he shall cut it according to its pieces." Referring to
the birds, Gen. xv. 11 says: "He divided not," just as one reads in Lev.
1. 17: "And he shall rend it between its wings but clear through."
Herein indications are given as to what is fit for sacrifice offerings.
In the word *meshulleshet*, we understand that peace offerings are to be
divided into three parts: (a) God's part or portion, as it is indicated;
(b) The high priest's portion, consisting of the heave thigh and wave
breast; (c) Israel's portion, consisting of the remainder. Now, allusion
is made to the first kingdom in the section beginning with "*Haiah
hashemesh*." First in verse 12: "And they will enslave them and oppress
them for four hundred years," down to and including verse 14, "And after
that they shall go out with much wealth." Here he was informed that
their servitude during these years and what would transpire for and
against them (page 16) will not come about in his days; for we read in
the same chapter, verse 15: "But thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace,
and thou shalt be buried in a good old age." When He was through these
informations concerning the first kingdom, as to how it would begin and
ho He would hide his pleasure and how the truth would be falsified-
Compare "And the sun had disappeared," meaning of course, His pleasure,
and "Darkness came,"

That is erring away- he included those concerning the reappearance of
his pleasure and the (Photo with caption: Samaritans prostrating
themselves in Prayer. On top of Mount Gerizim, Passover celebration of
1906.) beginning of the second kingdom. God assured that to him with a
firm covenant, saying (xv. 18): "In that day God made a covenant with
Abraham, saying, To thy seed will I give this land, from the river of
Egypt as far as the great river, the Euphrates river." By this he was
referring to the second kingdom, for the Jews did not possess that
territory during the first kingdom. Concerning the passage, "And behold
a smoking furnace and a sheet of fire," we (page 17) shall give a later
explanation, in its proper place. Now, the scattered mention of "Seven
nations" refers to those whom God had destroyed before Israel, and whose
lands He caused Israel to possess. But we have here a mention of eleven
nations. They are those whose lands Israel shall possess in the second
kingdom, from the river of Egypt as far as the great river, the river
Euphrates, and as far as the far sea. Here ends the first proof.

   The second consists in that to which Jacob called the attention of
his sons, in Chapter IX. Jacob (may peace be his lot) had, indeed,
included in his sayings some subtle meanings. He said: "gather
yourselves," referring to the first kingdom and Israel's gathering and
coming out of Egypt. He referred, also, to its wandering away and the
evil consequences resulting therefrom; for in the same chapter and
verse, he says: "And I will inform you as to what shall befall you in
the latter days." Even our lord Moses, the apostle (may peace be upon
him), said in Deut. iii. 29: "And evil shall befall  you in the latter
days." Such days are the days of error. But these will disappear and be
displaced by those of his pleasure and the return of the kingdom, in
reference to the words, "Gather yourselves." Such is affirmed by God
(who is exalted) in the holy book, in Deut. xxx. 4: "From thence will
IHVH, thy god, gather thee and from thence will he fetch thee." But this
will take place only when perfect obedience is assured and conditions of
repentance are fulfilled. We pray the Lord (who is exalted) for success
in our affairs. May He mend our doings and bring us to the days of his
pleasure, when the Shekinah will appear. Verily He is able to dispose of
everything He will.

    The third proof is found in connection with the hand of the apostle
Moses (upon him be peace), and with its change to whiteness and return
to its first state. The meaning is that He (who is exalted) indicated
thereby to the apostle that the truth will appear at his hand, and then
it will disappear. His hand was, therefore, designated as "leprous," and
"as white as snow," referring to purity. The word *Mesoraat* reminds us
of the days of error. *Kashaleg* would indicate that though error is
prevailing and God's pleasure is taken away, there would remain a
portion that would cling to the law, believe in its truthfulness,
obtaining thus care from God for the purpose of preserving his covenant,
according as we find the word of God in Lev. xxvi, 42: "I shall remember
my covenant with Jacob and I shall remember my covenant also with Isaac
and my covenant with Abraham." Also the passage in the same chapter
beginning with verse 44: "But still, though they are (page 18) in the
land of their enemies," etc. That these conditions are to disappear and
the return of God's pleasure is to follow, is illustrated by the fact
that the apostle's hand assumed its former state; for in the book of
Exodus iv. 7 we read: "Behold it became again like his flesh." This
agrees fully with the promise: "But I will remember, in their favor, the
covenant of their ancestors." What would prove, moreover, the days of
error, is the passage in the same chapter, verse 43: "And the land shall
be deserted by them," i.e., it shall be empty of them. Their return and
the restoration of their kingdom is affirmed thus: "I will remember the
covenants of their *(*photo with caption: "Jacob's Well") ancestors, in
their favor." That the kingdom shall be lasting is indicated by the
passage: "That I may be their God, I am the Lord:" for God (who is
exalted) is eternal with no change (may His highness be exalted!).

   The fourth argument consists of a part of the parable of Balaam in
Numbers xxiv. 17: "A star shall come out of Jacob and a rod shall rise
out of Israel," to "the sons of uproar." Herein certain characteristics
of the first kingdom are mentioned. We are informed, also, that such a
kingdom was removed from Israel to Esau (see verse 18): "And Edom shall
be a possession;" then it (page 19) shall be handed to Esau, then to
Ishmael by way of inheritance, in accordance with the verse: "And Esau
shall be an inheritance to his enemies." Thus by the end of the kingdom
of "Ishmael," "Ieshrael" shall reign. Thus we read later: "And Israel
shall act valiantly," referring to its victory, as we read in verse 19:
"And the one, who is from Jacob, shall have dominion," i.e., shall have
the rulership. All such is firmly proved, and God knows best all
matters.

   The fifth proof is found in the section beginning with: "If ye shall
bring forth children." This section is divided in three stages. The
first stage refers to the days of rebellion and the loss of the kingdom
and the disappearance of the Shekinah, (compare Deut. iv. 25) : "And ye
shall corrupt yourselves," etc. The second concerns the necessity of
repentance and God's satisfaction that its conditions have been
fulfilled, (compare verse 29 of the same chapter): "Then if thou shalt
seek," etc. The third deals with God's return to them with his pleasure,
with rulership and kind doings. Compare verse 31: "For the Lord thy God
is a merciful God," etc.

   The sixth proof is derived from the disasters that would befall the
enemy. Says Deut. xxix. 22, "And the last generation shall say," down to
"They shall see the plagues of the land," including "And no grass shall
grow therein." The references to the places which are the object of
God's displeasure, are sufficient to convict of error those of Israel
who have strayed from the truth. Deut xxix. 24 says: "All nations shall
say, why hath God done thus unto this land?" and they shall confess
their error and their forsaking the truth and their continued lethargy
in falsehood, and it shall be answered as in verse 25: "because they
forsook the covenant of the Lord, the God of their fathers, which He
made with them, when He brought them out of the land of Egypt." Also
verse 27: "Therefore the anger of the Lord was kindled against that
land." Those who will say these words are the faithful to the law of
truth, and this will take place when the truth shall appear. Its
appearance will have its signs, just as the appearance of falsehood has
its own signs: and all will be recorded in its own place.

   The seventh proof is discerned in the noted section beginning with,
"And then all these things are come upon thee," designating thereby
that, at the end of the days of falsehood, minds will be rectified,
religions purified, good doings practiced and impurities washed away.
With all these things, perfection is, however, to be obtained from God
(whose is might and glory). Compare Deut. xxx. 6: "And the Lord thy God
will circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy seed, that thou mayest
love the Lord thy God," etc. (page 20) Then they shall come up and rule
the land and truth shall triumph. Compare verse 3: "And the Lord thy God
will return, \`with' thy *repentance,\[5\]* Also as far as "More than
thy fathers."

   The eight proof is found in the section beginning with, "Give ear."
Deut. xxxiii. 22 says: "A fire is kindled in my anger and it burns to
the lowest pit." This is given after the extreme rebellion of Israel has
been related, compare verse 24: "They have moved me to jealously with
that which no God; they have provoked me (photo with caption: \`Joseph's
Tomb and Mount Ebal.') with their vanities." Next to these words we
read: "But I will move them to jealousy with those that are not a
people; with a foolish nation will I provoke them." After that, the holy
of holies of the enemy will be disgraced and truth eill be triumphant;
that is *Bethiahweh, har Gerizim, Bethel*. Israel will have the kingdom:
"I became kindled in the fire of my anger," etc., as far as "It is the
fire that will burn," *Migdash Zerutah*. Compare verse 22: "It will eat
up the land and its produces." It is the fire concerning which (page 21)
we read xxix. 23: "All its land is burning; it shall not be sown nor
shall it bear," etc.

   What would also prove the second kingdom is Gen. xv. 17: "And behold
a smoking furnace and a fire torch." Thus would show that the triumph of
truth will proceed from God (who is exalted and honored) in having the
form of these two symbols. The fire of the one will descend upon *Al
migdash-Zerutah*, the other will descend upon *Al har Gerizim* in order
to purify it of the defilements of those who accept another sanctuary
instead of it. Then will truth triumph and the kingdom be restored.
Compare Deut. xxxii, 22: "It shall lick the foundations of the
mountains." It is the fire (Photo with caption: \`Valley of Sychar and
Ancient Tomb.) that will descend upon Mount Gerizim. Do you not see that
when *Migdash Zerutah* were mentioned, the word *Tokel* was used,
meaning annihilation; while with the mention of *Gerizim*, the word is
*Telahet?* This distinctly means, "It will lick," that is, it will
purify but not annihilate. The latter is used in the same meaning as
*Tahiru bash,* ye shall pass in fire, referring to purification. We
have, indeed, two consecutive expressions that have nearly the same
meaning; but God knows best! The use of *Gerizim* in plural is out of
respect to it, and it should be, therefore, elliptically understood in
the expression: "It will lick the traces of the mountains." (page 22)

   The ninth proof is found in the section beginning with "*Zoth
habberaka*," i.e., "This is the blessing," in Deut. xxxiii. 4, which is:
"They are sitting at thy feet and receiving thy words," etc. The
reference is about the seed of our lord Abraham, namely, the children of
Esau and of Ishmael, whom God invited, in the day of gathering, to enter
into his service to keep the law. Compare verse 2 of the same chapter:
"And shone from Seir unto them," referring to the children of Esau, in
harmony with Gen. xxxvi. 8: :And Esau dwelt in Mount Seir." Compare also
Deut. xxxiii. 2: "And he glimmered from the mountain of Paran," meaning
the children of Ishmael, in harmony with Gen. xxi. 21: "And he (Ishmael)
dwelt in the wilderness of Paran." Thus, from these plain references one
can not doubt that truth will appear in favor of Israel, through the
fact that these nations shall return to its religion, though they had
already refused, as it is without doubt, to enter its religion and to
submit to its laws. But God (who is exalted) has informed us that they
will submit themselves to the Law, for we read in Deut. xxxiii. 4: "They
are sitting at thy feet and receiving thy words." This, however, will
take place when God's pleasure shall be restored; when the clouds shall
alight upon the Shekinah, in the house of God, on mount Gerizim. This is
in fulfillment of Ex. xv. 17: "Thus, O God, hast made a sanctuary: O
Lord build it up with thy might by the ever presence of the Shekinah and
of offerings."\[6\] The ever presence of the Shekinah is linked with
God's eternity, as the next verse indicates: "The Lord will reign for
ever and ever." They will say, "*Torah asher sy-wah lanu Mosheh,*" i.e.,
"The law which Moses commanded us," thereby confessing the veracity of
the prophecy of our lord Moses (upon him be peace); that he was sent for
the sake of the truth to the whole world. They will also concede that
God (may He be exalted) brought down the Law upon Israel, and thereby
honored Israel above all nations and made him the prince of the whole
world; for it is said in Deut. xxxiii. 4: a possession of the people of
Jacob." May God, who is exalted, bring the time near by His might and
will. AMEN, LORD, AMEN!

   The tenth proof is contained in chapter 34 of Deuteronomy, beginning
with: "And Moses went up from Arabat Moab." Here said in Exodus xxxiv.
10: "I will perform miracles with thee," etc. It is: "And the Lord
showed him all the land" down to "As far as the great sea," and "To thy
seed will I give," referring to the children of Moses (upon him be
peace). This was not exclusive: The (page 23) mention of the fathers
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (upon them be peace) has already preceded. They
were the people of the covenant, oath and promise for giving the land to
their seed, and it is the twelve tribes that came out of the lions of
Jacob. Therefore in saying to the apostle Moses (upon him be peace):
"This is the land I swore to thy fathers to give to their seed," He
meant that to each of them He made an oath. For example, He said to
Abraham in Gen xii. 7: "To thy seed will I give this land." To Isaac He
said in xxvi. 3 of the same book: "To thee and thy seed will I give
those lands." And to Jacob He said in the same book (xxxv. 12): "And the
land that I gave to Abraham and Isaac, to thee I give; to thy seed give
I the land."

   We have proved the establishment of the kingdom, its restoration and
the reappearance of the Shekinah and its duration; but the things that
are hidden belong to the Lord, our God, and those that are revealed are
for ourselves and children.

   As to the appearance and coming of the lord Christ, recorded in our
chronicles, we regard its validity not from the viewpoint of our law,
but as a matter of history. As to the Messiah, with whose coming we are
promised, there are proofs and demonstrations in regard to his coming.
As our learned men have explained in their voluminous commentaries, he
will rise and perform miracles and demonstrations; he will uphold
religion and justice. Among other proofs he will produce the following
three:

1.       The reproduction of the ark of testimony, which is the greatest
attestation for Israel. For Deut. xxix. 29 says: "It shall be there FOR
THEE as a witness." This upholds strongly the veracity of our Torah; it
has only twenty-two letters, in harmony with the numerical value of "B"
and "K,"\[7\] with no addition or retraction, and not as the Jews
pretend, for their version possesses twenty-eight letters.

2.       He will produce, at his hand, the staff which was given by the
Creator (who is exalted) to our lord Moses (upon him be peace), about
whose attribute a reference is made as follows: "And this shall be to
thee as a sign," in order that miracles be performed thereby.

3.       He must produce the omer of manna which our fathers ate, while
in the wilderness, for forty years. This is the greatest proof, because,
after all this period, it will be found to have undergone not the
slightest change. When our ancestors, in the days when manna used to
fall, would keep some of it till the marrow, it would become rotten and
wormy. Therefore, it would be a proof none could deny (page 24) (photo
with caption: \`Chart of the Tabernacle in the wilderness. With symbols
of the temple furniture to be restored by the Messiah, as illustrated on
the case of the Holy Scroll. From a drawing by the High Priest.) (page
25) if it should appear sound after this long interval, and remain in
its sound state. Thus the people of the second kingdom might see it, and
confess reverently and increase in exalting and glorifying the Creator
(who is exalted), for the power of producing such a marvel.

   These three proofs must be verified by the Prophet; and without them
his claim would be considered illegal. No matter could ever be sustained
unless with two or three testimonies, in accordance with the saying of
the holy Law: "Upon the testimony of two or three witnesses a matter is
sustained." Without such proof he has no standing.

   But how many have appeared and claimed the prophecy through signs and
dreams, against whom the Law has warned us? Read: "If there arise in thy
midst a prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and if he give thee a sign or
miracle, and if the sign or miracle whereof he spoke unto thee take
place, and then say unto thee, Come let us follow other unknown gods and
worship them: listen not to the words of that prophet or dreamer of that
dream." The foregoing is found in Deuteronomy xiii. 1. Verse 6 of the
same chapter says: "If thy brother, the son of thy father or the son of
thy mother, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend,
who is as thyself, would entice thee, saying: Come, let us worship other
gods, that are unknown to thee and to thy fathers, from the nations that
are around thee, whether near or far away from thee, thou shalt not
listen," etc.

   Testimonies similar to the foregoing are many in the Torah of the
law, that is, the Old Testament, and so much is enough concerning this
question.

*   This is all that my frail mind could suggest for this essay; and God
knows best!* (Writing in Arabic and a seal mark in Arabic.) (page26)

 

FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE SAMARITAN HIGH PRIEST.

COMMUNICATED BY WILLIAM E. BARTON, D.D.

 

   The treatise of the Samaritan High Priest on "The Messianic Hope of
the Samaritans" was submitted to the author, and it reached him at the
time of the Passover on the top of Mt. Gerizim. It was read to him and
he heard it with approval, but in comment on the footnote at the bottom
of page 8, he explained that the name Aelia, given to Jerusalem after
its destruction, is not used (Photo with caption: \`Ruin of temple on
the top of Mt. Gerizim.) by the Samaritans for the city itself, but
denotes a village near the present site of Jerusalem, the spot where Eli
set up his tabernacle. He adds that the place now called Shiloh, near
Sinjil, which Christians suppose to have been the Shiloh of Eli and
Samuel, was not the real Shiloh. The High Priest then proceeds to answer
the questions asked him concerning the Messiah.

   In the little treatise the Messiah was depicted as a prophet. But the
Christian messiah is spoken of as "Prophet, Priest and King." It seemed
an interesting question whether the Messiah of (page 27) the Samaritans
were to be more than a prophet. The High Priest answers this inquiry:

   "There is nothing in prophecy to say whether he will be of the
priestly line or not. Some of our learned men say he will come from the
children of Aaron, and be a priest. Others say that he will be of the
children of Joseph, and \`like unto his brethren.' My own private
opinion is that he will be of the children of Joseph."

   Of course the Samaritan hope is not colored by any of the Jewish
memories of the throne of David, and the treatise gave no (Photo with
caption: \`Samaritan High Priest and His family.) hint as to any kingly
rule. Asked concerning this, the High Priest answers:

   "The Messiah will be a prophet, and will be acknowledged as a
prophet. That will be his title, as the prophecies give it. But he will
also be a king."

   The High Priest was asked concerning two or three Old Testament
passages frequently quoted as Messianic. He replies:

   "The promise that the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's
head, in Genesis iii, 15, has no Messianic significance whatever. It has
a very long interpretation, but the substance is this: (page 28)

   "The serpent has intruded upon man, and the man who seeks revenge
upon the serpent does so with much advantage yet with peril. He will
have his heel bruised, but ultimately will overcome the serpent and kill
it."

   "Of course the serpent is only a serpent."

   "While there is some difference of opinion about Gen. xlix. 55, which
tells at what time the scepter shall depart from Judah, there (photo
with caption: Crypt of old Crusaders' church showing Jacob's well.) is
light to be found in the form of the name Shiloh. The Jews make it two
words, but in the Samaritan Torah it is but one word, and that is the
name Solomon. The characteristics which Jacob attributes to Shiloh
belong very well to the character of Solomon. For he it was who set up
idolatry in Jerusalem that he might please his heathen wives; and
further built there the temple for the pretended ark, as I have told in
another place. Then it was (page 29) that the scepter departed from
Judah, and under his son Rehoboam, though he came back to the true
capital, Shechem, to be anointed king, the true Israel revolted, and set
up the kingdom in Shechem where it belonged, and the scepter departed
from Judah."

   To Christians it will be interesting to know whether the Samaritan
Messiah is expected to be in any sense divine. The High Priest answers:
(photo with caption: Jacob's well showing ruins of the old Crusaders'
church.)

   The Messiah will not be in any sense a Son of God. He will be prophet
like Moses and like his brethren, as it is told in Deut. xviii, 15-22:

   "'The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst
of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken;
according to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb in the
day of the assembling, saying, Let me not hear again the (page 30) voice
of the Lord my God, neither let me see this great fire any more, that I
die not. And the Lord said unto me, they have well said that which they
have spoken. I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren,
like unto thee; and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak
unto them all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my
name, I will require it of him. But the prophet, which shall speak a
word presumptuously in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak,
or that shall speak in the name of other gods, that same prophet shall
die. And (photo with caption: Old olive grove outside Nablous.) if thou
say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord hath
spoken? When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing
follow not, nor come to pass, that is the ting which the Lord hath not
spoken: the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously, thou shalt not be
afraid of him.'

   "This is the passage of the Torah which tells us what the Messiah
will be, and I hope you will read it with clear eye, as you always read
everything."

   Another thing was asked of the High Priest, namely, what (page 31)
would be the attitude of the Messiah toward Christians and other
nations. He answers:

   The Messiah will be a prophet, as I have told you, and will no doubt
work signs to prove his mission. There will be unusual signs and
wonders, which I described in the little book. But he is to be a king,
and rule the earth from Shechem, the ancient seat of power, and from his
holy mountain, Gerizim. He will call all the world to acknowledge him,
and will do so. He will bring blessings to all nations that acknowledge
him." (photo with caption: View from High Priest's House. (The rock of
Jotham is seen on the hill above.)

   Still one thing was asked the High Priest as he sat in his tent while
the fires were heating the ovens for the sacrifice of the lambs for the
Passover, Will the Passover continue after the Messiah comes?

   He answered:

   "The Passover will continue after the Messiah comes. It is a
perpetual feast. It has no reference whatever to the Messiah."

   I am sure that these answers will be interesting to very many readers
of the little treatise already printed. (page 32)

   The priest wishes also that a word be inserted cautioning Americans
and Englishmen who buy manuscripts in the Samaritan tongue that it is
not safe to buy them except at the Samaritan synagogue; as the demand
for them has led unauthorized persons to make incorrect copies, some of
which have come to him to be authenticated; and he finds them imperfect,
and some of them fraudulent. The synagogue is very glad to sell copies
of the Pentateuch and of their other books. The copies which they have
for sale are of course modern copies made by the priests and
authenticated. It is to be hoped that the oldest manuscript will not
pass from the (photo with caption: Samaritan synagogue with ancient
Pentateuch on the chair.) possession of the Samaritan community. This,
their greatest treasure, held in most holy veneration, should not depart
from its historic home in the bare little synagogue at the base of Mount
Gerizim so long as the Samaritan community exists.

   The oldest of the Samaritan manuscripts, and that from which all the
others are derived, is believed by many scholars to be as old as the
Christian era, and is generally conceded to be the oldest manuscript of
the Bible in the world. Strange as it may seem, our Old Testament
manuscripts are much less ancient than those of the New. There are three
New Testament manuscripts which date (page 33) from 300 to 450 A.D., -
the Alexandrian, known as Codex A, in the British Museum; the Vatican,
known as Codex B, which is in the Vatican at Rome; and the Sinaitic,
known as Codex Aleph, which is treasured at St. Petersburg. One of these
is in possession of the Greek Church, another of the Roman, and the
other of the Protestants, which illustrates the dependence of all sects
in Christendom on the same things and on each other. But the Old
Testament manuscripts we have none in Hebrew going back of the tenth
century. The Samaritans have one nearly a millennium older!

   Five years ago I saw this oldest manuscript. The High Priest stood
guard over it, and one of his sons exhibited the next oldest roll which
on all ordinary occasions is shown in place of the oldest one. The
ancient one is supposed to be shown to the Samaritans once a year only,
on the day of Atonement, and never to outsiders. Most travelers who
suppose themselves to have seen it have seen only the substitute. The
original is written on a yellow parchment, not brown or white, without
ruled lines, and the writing is smaller and less regular than in the
substitute. The ordinary ink of the Samaritans is dense black and
glossy, but this is purple. It has been re-inked in many places. At
least a third of it has cracked way, for it is very brittle, the black
is reinforced by other parchment, and the missing portions have been
supplied. It is many years since it has been unrolled, and the High
Priest writes that to unroll it would be to injure if not destroy it. He
is willing to consider the question of photographing such pages as can
be exposed without endangering the parchment, but not the entire work.
The old book is kept under lock and key, and covered with rich green
cloth.

   I have what may possibly be a fragment of that old codex. I obtained
it from a son of the High Priest as a premium with a larger purchase. No
Samaritan, I hope has yet reached a depth of depravity which have lead
him to mutilate that book for money, but in many places bits have been
worn out of it, and this is such a scrap, five and one half by three and
one half inches from the lowest margin of the manuscript, and containing
Genesis xxvi, 20-22. The letters are small and irregular; it has been
re-inked at least twice in places; the lines are not ruled; the
parchment is yellow and brittle and wrinkled; and above all, the ink,
which is so faded and over-written that it would be difficult to tell
from the front of the leather what was the original color, has stained
the back of the parchment a distinct purple. If it is true as Deutsch
affirms, that (page 34) "the ink is black in all cases except the scroll
at Nablous," then I may not be counted over-credulous in thinking the
relic I obtained (photo with caption: view near Nablous.) from the young
priest Abalhassan as being of distinct interest among literary
treasures. (page 35)

   Pictures of the Samaritan Pentateuch are not rare, though in almost
every case it is the substitute roll that has been photographed. They
give a good general idea of the appearance of the Holy Scroll. The case
is of silver, as large as a stove-pipe, cut lengthwise into three
sections, and with two sets of hinges at the back, so that it will
(photo with caption: High Priest with ancient Pentateuch manuscript.)
open and show a column of text, or close and protect all from the light.
At the top are three large knobs, the middle one a dummy and the two end
ones rollers by which the parchment is rolled forward or back. The case
inside is about eighteen inches high; but the knobs above and the legs
below make the entire height about (page 36) thirty inches. The five
books of Moses, which are all the Bible which the Samaritans receive,
are written on the hair side of skins of lambs offered in sacrifice. The
entire roll is probable sixty or more feet in length. I presume no one
knows how long it is, though Condor was told that it contains
twenty-four skins. As a Hebrew Pentateuch which I brought in Jerusalem
has fifty-two skins, and another on exhibition at the St. Louis Fair
(which I also bought) has more, I think Condor's estimate too low.

   The Samaritan colony now is very small and poor. There were 152 of
them in 1901, 97 males and only 55 females. While this is a greater
number than that of the passengers of the Mayflower, and their
descendants now are legion, there is little prospect that the Samaritans
will leave such a posterity. They expect to be brought practically to
extinction, but to be restored when their Messiah comes.

   So far as the treatise indicates, the Samaritans do not look for any
vicarious sacrifice on the part of their Messiah. His career, when he
comes, would appear to be one of victory and tranquil rule, primarily
religious, but with some political significance. The sacrifices are
declared not to be prophetic of his mission. The passages quoted by
Christians from the Pentateuch as messianic are held not to refer to
him. Practically the whole content of Samaritan messianic prophecy
appears to be derived from Deut. xviii. 15-22, in which the Messiah is a
prophet like unto Moses, raised up from among the people, and one of
their own brethren. (end)

  

2 The high priest's definition of the meaning of Gospel is better than
his knowledge of the language from which it has been derived. It is good
Old English and means "God-story." The Greek (word) $\#^&&& means "good
news."

\[3\] In a translation made in Jerusalem this name is spelled Ay tam;
and in another made in Nablous it is Yahonata; but the Samaritan reads
Yhkeem.

\[4\] Aelia was a village near Jerusalem which was left after the
destruction of the city. See p. 26.

\[5\] The High Priest renders *Shebooth ka* as "repentance."

\[6\] The High Priest's rendering of the quotation is very loose.- A.
Ben Kori.

\[7\] The components of "in thee." B=2, and K= 20: total, 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nabloos and the Samaritans](nabloos)
