[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lam08)  [Next](lam10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Life and Its Mysteries*, by Frank L. Hammer, \[1945\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### VII

### MIRACLES

##### PART 1

Many people wonder whether miracles ever took place. Others believe they
may have happened in Biblical times, but are somewhat skeptical whether
they actually happened. They share the opinion of the agnostic who says:
"A miracle is an unusual phenomenon which never occurred." Many agree
with Hume's idea: "A miracle may be accurately defined, a transgression
of a law of nature by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the
interposition of some invisible agent." Webster, however, approaches the
truth in his explanation: "An event or effect in the physical world,
beyond or out of the ordinary course of things, deviating from the known
laws of nature, or transcending our knowledge of these laws."

Nature is indeed known to us only in a very limited degree, and known
laws are few compared to the many unknown laws. And although the
circumstances of the occurrence or miracles may appear unusual, they are
never contrary to nature, but only contrary to nature as known to us,
for everything

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

that happens, or has happened, or will happen, can happen only through
law.

Also lack of knowledge creates a belief in miracles. Happenings which we
cannot explain are miraculous to us and, as we never will know all,
there will always be miracles. Moreover, things that an ignorant,
undeveloped man considers miraculous are quite simple to the educated
and learned philosopher. Superstitious people consider all unusual
things marvelous, everything not encompassed within the realm of their
limited understanding.

Furthermore, any event called miraculous now may easily cease to be so
at some future time. Many things commonplace today would have been
considered miracles not so long ago, for example, the wonders of
electricity, radio, aeroplane, television, all these would have been
called miracles a few years ago.

The conquest of numerous diseases by science would have been regarded
miracles a century back. Then, certain diseases meant certain death, for
men did not know their cause and were powerless to effect a cure. So
knowledge dissipates miracles.

The greatest objection to miracles seems to be that facts are against
them. Well, are they against them? Science declares that the universe is
governed by great, natural laws, whose action is definite, constant and
unchangeable; and for miracles to be produced these laws would have to
be overridden, intermitted, or set aside. And this, scientists insist,
cannot be done, for any interference with

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

natural laws would instantly plunge the universe into chaos, if not
destruction. They argue that natural law repudiates and rejects the idea
of divine intervention; that God does not, and cannot, interfere with
the laws He has created and controls. In other words, they believe that
He is bound by His own laws.

Now, what is the nature of Deity? Is He omnipotent or is He not? He IS
omnipotent and, therefore, is not bound by any law. If He created them,
He can overrule them or destroy them. Some of the theories advanced by
scientists who doubt the omnipotence of Deity are far more incredible,
implausible and improbable than the truth—which is that the All-powerful
Supreme Being can and does intervene in the affairs of men. It is much
more reasonable to believe that He cares for His creations than to
accept the scientific theory that there is nothing but cold, natural
law, devoid of feeling and intelligence. Apparently men are not content
to [create](errata.htm#1) God in THEIR likeness, but must ascribe to Him
their limitations as well.

In the study of miracles we can discard all ideas of accident and
violation of natural law. But we cannot dismiss the action of
intelligent beings other than man controlling and regulating these laws,
for no miracles are performed by law alone, as behind all law there are
intelligent operators. If you deny the existence of beings other than
man, you have a hopeless task accounting not only for miracles, but for
many other events which frequently occur.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

Intelligence or mind is master of natural law. A higher law can be
employed to overrule and direct a lower one. Intelligence can override
it, vary it, and use it however it will, and can make it work. Christ
more than once hinted that, by an increase of power, ascendancy is
gained over the lower and physical laws; that by faith, knowledge and
power men may control things that are around them, just as the body can
be made subservient to the mind power. Indications of it also pervade
the history of the race down to our time.

The Bible unquestionably is the greatest history of miracles. Angels are
frequently mentioned in connection with them, and the angels usually
appeared in human form. Furthermore, it is evident they possessed
extraordinary strength and great wisdom. Then the question arises: "Who
are angels?" Angels were once human beings who have progressed to the
status of angelhood, for life is immortal and progression eternal. Some
are sufficiently advanced to have planetary authority, and are
superhuman to an indescribable extent. There are others who control the
elements, and prayer for rain has been complied with innumerable times.
Moreover, all grades of intelligences are utilized in some way as agents
of the Almighty.

The Resurrection is regarded by many people as the most impossible of
"miracles." However, this event was not at all miraculous, but some of
its interpretations certainly are. Why should anyone think it incredible
that Christ rose from the "dead"?

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nothing unusual
about it. All people rise from the dead. No soul ever inhabits a grave,
crypt or tomb, but at death discards its material garment and rises in a
spiritual body and continues life elsewhere. What makes the Resurrection
take on the nature of a miracle, as defined by Hume, "a transgression of
the law of nature," is due to men's ignorance of their true nature.

"If a man die, shall he live again?" This question has been pondered
throughout the ages by all races of men. In the first records of any
nation at all civilized or cultured, we find they believed in
immortality. The Egyptians were among the first to furnish us with
knowledge of this subject. Their architecture gives evidence that they
believed in the life beyond. So do their mummies, which are still in a
preserved condition. In fact, all ancient races possessed this truth
which, in time, was lost to the masses or distorted, but always a few
have kept this knowledge alive.

The minds of the untutored of every race could not conceive the idea of
the life of the immortal soul as separate from the physical body. Hence,
we have the embalming, pyramids, different methods of preserving the
body, as once again, they believed it would be the dwelling place of the
soul.

The same thing happened to the doctrine of the Christian religion. The
rising of Christ from the "dead" was considered a physical resurrection,
and even today there are people who firmly believe He

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

resumed His physical body when three days later He appeared to the Marys
and His disciples.

But, contrary to this belief, Jesus rose in His spiritual body; clothed
Himself with a temporary materialized body for the purpose of
identification. In no other way would the doubting Thomas' have
recognized Him. He walked the earth forty days in this body. Though
material, it was so ethereal that He appeared "suddenly in their midst."
"He appeared in another form, the doors being shut," and He also, says
the Evangelist, "vanished out of their sight." This power of
materialization did not end with Christ. It still exists at the present
time and has been witnessed by many.

Every event and every act in the life of Christ were in accordance with
natural law. All His life He taught the truth of immortality and, after
His crucifixion, demonstrated it by appearing objectively to many
people. Nothing unusual about this. Many people have done the same. Many
departed souls have appeared to relatives and friends before the burial
of their bodies. We know of instances where they returned within sever
hours after severing connection with their material forms. But no soul
ever again assumes the physical body after death, for that, saying
nothing about its impossibility, would be raising the body only to die
again. The reference is to reclothing the spiritual body in such
materialized garments as to be visible to the physical eye. At the time
of the crucifixion many spirit entities clothed

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

themselves, or materialized, and appeared in Jerusalem.

"If a man die, shall he live again?" is the question uppermost in the
minds of people all over the world today, for they know that death has
been having an unprecedented harvest in the past few years, and they
seek an answer to this age-old query. Hundreds of thousands of American
boys have been slaughtered on foreign soil. Their blood has mingled with
the blood of the youths of other nations on the battlefields of hate and
greed. The slaughter has been something the like of which the world has
never seen, and so has the suffering, for those who went to war, for
those who returned crippled, diseased, maimed and blind. But those who
live to mourn will suffer the most.

And, on the eve of their departure to the unknown country, multitudes of
young men think deeply and ask themselves many questions—questions
relative to life and death. They ask, What manner of life awaits us Over
There? Or is this ghastly, horrible world all we shall ever know? Is
life to end abruptly before we ever have an opportunity to live? Or are
there other worlds where better living, saner adventures may be had? Are
justice, equality, brotherly love only myths, or do they have reality
elsewhere?

Some of these boys seek solace in religion. Others take refuge in
cynicism and bitterness. Many fortify themselves with a contemptuous and
reckless philosophy. Many bewildered youngsters indulge in

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

what they believe to be a "last fling." But alas, there is no "last
fling" for a race of immortals dwelling in eternity; for life is a
continuous stream of consciousness and cannot be broken into separate
and isolated fragments. Life and death are *one* and inseparably
entwined. What the world calls "death" is life's greatest and most
beautiful adventure, for death holds the key which opens the door which
cannot be opened any other way. It unfastens the gate to the spiritual
realms where absolute justice, love, peace and harmony are the law. For
those who do not possess actual knowledge of this truth, but must accept
it on faith, we have the word of Him who knew the Father: "In my
Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told
you."

 

*The more we unfold the more beautiful life becomes*.

 

##### PART II

Prayer and the power of God figure conspicuously in the performance of
all miracles, and there is no record of any authentic miracle ever
having occurred without them. Christ always gave the glory of His
accomplishments to God: "The Father in me doeth the works." The prophets
"cried out to God," or "called upon God" before they performed any
miracle.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These men of God
lived and died in prayer, for they knew that without Him they could do
nothing.

Another noticeable feature connected with miracles is the inconstant
power of those who performed them. St. Paul, an outstanding healer, was
not always successful and, like any other uninspired physician,
prescribed wine for Timothy. Moreover, he was unable to cure his own
infirmity. He writes: "For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that
it might depart from me. And He said unto me, "My grace is sufficient
for thee." Yet God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul.

Moses, a healer of extraordinary powers, could not cure his stammering,
and Aaron was his mouthpiece whenever he addressed his people. Only with
perfection and with God there are no failures.

Healing formed an integral part of the ministry of the disciples and the
apostles. And was it not their Master's command to "raise the dead and
heal the sick?" Jesus was eminently practical and knew that men were not
interested in their souls while hunger gnawed at their stomachs, so He
first fed the multitude and then preached to them. The Disciples,
following in His footsteps, healed as they preached, and it was their
healing which attracted the people. Human nature remains much the same.
People are still more interested in obtaining relief from their physical
afflictions than in the welfare of their souls. And is not the human
organism one of the greatest miracles on earth? But men in their
colossal ignorance

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

neglect, abuse, mutilate and desecrate this holy of holies, the temple
of the Living God.

There never has been any cessation of miraculous healing; it is in our
midst today. Countless people have had instantaneous and miraculous
cures; many have been healed through faith and prayer, or the laying on
of hands after doctors had pronounced them incurable. Many "incurables"
have been made whole at the Shrine of Lourdes. Some physicians scoff at
these cures, saying they are solely due to hypnotic influence acting on
patients who are merely hysterical. Like the great Charcot, who denied
the faith cures at Our Lady of Lourdes and then declared: "What does it
matter if the patient gets well?" and sent patients to Lourdes to be
healed.

Some twenty years ago a friend of ours was gradually going blind from
glaucoma. At that time cures for this disease were more or less in the
experimental stage, but he tried them all in the hope that one might
effect a cure. Yet to no avail. He also submitted to several mental
phases of healing, but with no better result. His eyesight finally
became so impaired he could scarcely distinguish large objects. The
world was closing in on him and he had reached the end of his resources.
Then, one night in utter despair and abject hopelessness, he fell on his
knees and cried: "My God, I have done all I could; I leave it to Thee."
In that instant he was healed. From a state of almost total blindness,
he no longer required glasses, not even for- reading.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

Miracles are not always beneficial, but sometimes definitely retributory
in character. We know a woman who was suddenly stricken blind a short
distance from a bank where she was going to deposit a considerable sum
of money which she had extorted from a poor man. She had loaned him the
money for a stipulated period, at the end of which he was unable to
repay due to unemployment and illness. But, nevertheless, she was
determined to have her money. So she hounded and
[harassed](errata.htm#2) the unfortunate man who, in order to get out of
her clutches, borrowed the money elsewhere and repaid her. She paid
dearly for her cupidity. Total blindness for over a year; many months
more of only partial vision. Not only this, in her terror and confusion
at suddenly being blind, she dropped her purse in the street and it was
never recovered.

A modern miracle occurred at Dunkerque. In reading first-hand accounts
one has the feeling from first to last that there was something
miraculous about the entire ten days of evacuation; that there were
forces at work not attributable to human beings. The whole thing, as one
writer observed, "was covered with a strange feeling of something
supernatural." The pier at Dunkerque, their only avenue of escape, was
the unceasing target of bombs and shellfire throughout, yet it never was
hit. "God sent a wind which crushed the Spanish Armada; this time God
withheld the wind." The board of Admiralty thought they would be lucky
if 30,000 could

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

be saved, but 335,000 men escaped. If that was not a miracle, there
never was a miracle.

Dunkerque's parallel is found in the book of II Kings, where Elisha and
his servant found themselves surrounded by a host of chariots and horses
sent by the king of Syria. Elisha possessed the disconcerting faculty of
being able to hear what the king spake in his bedchamber, many miles
distant, who for this reason sought to seize Elisha. The servant was
frightened, so Elisha prayed that his eyes might be opened. He saw: "And
behold, the mountains were full of horses and chariots of fire round
Elisha. They that be with us are more than they that be with them." Then
Elisha blinded them and escaped from the city.

The rescue of Rickenbacker and his men has indications of miraculous
elements. Furthermore, five who were atheists did not come back
atheists. Persons who have known such close escapes from death are not
apt to deny either miracles or the power of God to act in the affairs of
men.

How often people say: "That certainly was a miracle." They had missed a
boat or train that met with an accident and loss of life. Thy were
detained from keeping an engagement and, in doing so, avoided danger.
Sometimes we are impressed to do certain things, or we have "hunches" to
walk on another street, or avoid a particular place, and discover in
doing so we avoided injury or disaster. Most people have miraculous
escapes of which they are not even aware, for in truth "God has
appointed His angels

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

charge over us" and they, seeing more clearly, warn us of dangers of
which we know not.

Then some remonstrate: "But why should only some people be singled out
for Divine protection?" All people are under Divine protection, but,
unfortunately, not all are sufficiently sensitive to catch the subtle
thoughts of warning. And then how often people admit they received
impressions and premonitions to do things, or act in a certain manner,
but refused to follow and profit by them, invariably to their sorrow and
regret.

Few miracles have exercised such fascination upon the human mind as the
miracles of the Philosopher's Stone and the Elixir of Youth. Throughout
all ages people have been interested in the prolongation of physical
life and the transmutation of the baser metals into precious metals.
Transmuting iron into gold was, and is known to the adepts, but there is
another power, transmuting base, low qualities into noble and high ones.
This Philosopher's Stone is in the possession of all men, but how few
value it or use it!

The secret of the Elixir of Youth is known to those who have attained an
advanced degree of development, and such individuals have the power to
prolong life in the physical body far beyond the average age. This they
do whenever it is necessary to complete a mission or perform a task,
which requires their functioning in corporeal form. But they extend life
at its prime, and not in old age. Like Moses, "who lived to be one
hundred and twenty in

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

full vigor nor was his eyesight dimmed," these persons retain their
mental and physical vigor to the end.

Another miracle dawning upon the horizon is the discovery of the unseen
world. It is destined to become like a newly discovered continent. We
shall see its inhabitants and we shall hold communion with them, and we
shall marvel how many thousands of years could pass with our being in
ignorance of their existence. Then immortality will no longer be a
question of faith, conjecture or theory, but every man will know
definitely that life follows life and that death is a condition that has
never existed.

 

*People do not all die at the same time, nor do they all arise at the
same time*.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Equality](lam10)
