[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc15005)  [Next](cc15007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 38

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span><span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
38:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>**1.** In those days was Hezekiah sick unto
death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came unto him, and said
unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt
die, and not live.

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>**1.** In diebus illis aegrotavit Ezechias
usque ad mortem. Et vemt ad eum Isaias filius Amoz Propheta, dixitque
illi: Sic dicit Iehova, Praeeipe quoad domum tuam; *(vel, domui tuoe;)*
quia tu morieris, et non rives.

<span id="vii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Then Hezekiah turned his face toward
the wall, and prayed unto the LORD,

<span id="vii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tunc vertit Ezechias faciem suam ad
parietem, oravitque Iehovam.

<span id="vii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And said, Remember now, O LORD, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect
heart, and have done *that which is* good in thy sight. And Hezekiah
wept sore.

<span id="vii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ac dixit: Obsecro, Iehova, recordare
nunc quod ambulaverim coram to in veritate, in corde perfecto, et recte
fecerim in oculis tuis. Flevitque Ezechias fletu magno.

<span id="vii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Then came the word of the LORD to
Isaiah, saying,

<span id="vii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Tunc factum fuit verbum Iehovae ad
Isaiam, dicendo:

<span id="vii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith
the LORD, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have
seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years.

<span id="vii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Vade, et dic Ezechiae: Sic dicit
Iehova Deus David patris tui: Audivi orationem tuam, et vidi lachrymas
tuas: Ecce ego adjicio ad dies tuos annos quindecim.

<span id="vii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And I will deliver thee and this city
out of the hand of the king of Assyria: and I will defend this city.

<span id="vii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et eruam to de manu regis Assur,
atque urbem hane; et protector ero huic urbi.

<span id="vii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And this *shall be* a sign unto thee
from the LORD, that the LORD will do this thing that he hath spoken;

<span id="vii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Erit autem hoc tibi signum ab Iehova,
quod Iehova hanc rem facturus sit, de qua loquutus est:

<span id="vii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Behold, I will bring again the shadow
of the degrees, which is gone down in the sundial of Ahaz, ten degrees
backward. So the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone
down.

<span id="vii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Ecce ego reduco umbram graduum,
quibus descendit in horologio Achaz per solem decem gradibus; et
reversus est sol decem gradibus in horologio, quibus jam descenderat.

<span id="vii.i-p18"></span>**9.** The writing of Hezekiah king of
Judah, when he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness:

<span id="vii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Scriptum Ezechiae regis Iuda, cum
aegrotasset, ac convaluisset a morbo Suo.

<span id="vii.i-p20"></span>**10.** I said in the cutting off of my
days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue
of my years.

<span id="vii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Ego dixi in successione dierum
meorum, vadam ad portas sepulchri; privatus sum residuo annorum meorum.

<span id="vii.i-p22"></span>**11.** I said, I shall net see the LORD,
*even* the LORD, in the land of the living: I shall behold man no more
with the inhabitants of the world.

<span id="vii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Dixi, Non videbo Deum, Deum in terra
viventium; non aspiciam hominem ultra cum incolis seculi.

<span id="vii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Mine age is departed, and is removed
from me as a shepherd’s tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he
will cut me off with pining sickness: from day *even* to night wilt thou
make an end of me.

<span id="vii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Habitatio mea discessit, et
convoluta est a me, quasi tabernaculum pastoris; succidi quasi textor
vitam meam; ab elevatione *(vel macie ant morbo)* succidet me; a die
usque ad noctem conficies me.

<span id="vii.i-p26"></span>**13.** I reckoned till morning, *that,* as
a lion, so will he break all my bones: from day *even* to night wilt
thou make an end of me.

<span id="vii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Supputabam ad auroram; sicut leo,
its contrivit ossa mea; ab aurora ad noctem conficies me.

<span id="vii.i-p28"></span>**14** Like a crane *or* a swallow, so did I
chatter: I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail *with looking* upward: O
LORD, I am oppressed; undertake for me.

<span id="vii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Sicut grus aut hitundo garriebam,
gemeban, quasi columba. Elevabantur ocnli mei in sublime, Domine, vim
fecit mihi, recrea me.

<span id="vii.i-p30"></span>**15.** What shall I say? he hath both
spoken unto me, and himself hath done *it*: I shall go softly all my
years in the bitterness of my soul.

<span id="vii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quid loqusr? Qui dixit mihi, ipse
fecit: Movebor *(vel, trepidus incedam)* omnibus diebus vitae meae in
amaritudine animae meae.

<span id="vii.i-p32"></span>**16.** Lord, by these *thing men* live, and
in all these *things is* the life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me,
and make me to live.

<span id="vii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Domine, etiam omnibus qui ultra eos
vivent, vita spiritus mei in illis (nota erit,) et me quod dormire
feceris, et vivificaveris me.

<span id="vii.i-p34"></span>**17.** Behold, for peace I had great
bitterness: but thou hast in love to my soul *delivered it* from the pit
of corruption: for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.

<span id="vii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Ecce in pace amaritudo mihi amara,
et tibi placuit animam meam (eruere) a fovea; *(vel, amasti animam meam
a fovea interitns;)* quia projecisti post tergum omnia peccata mea.

<span id="vii.i-p36"></span>**18.** For the grave cannot praise thee;
death can *not* celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot
hope for thy truth.

<span id="vii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Quoniam non infernus confitebitur
tibi neque mors laudabit to; nec expectabunt qui in foveam descendunt
veritatem tuam.

<span id="vii.i-p38"></span>**19.** The living, the living, he shall
praise thee, as I *do* this day: the father to the children shall make
known thy truth.

<span id="vii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Vivens, vivens, ipse confitebitur
tibi; sicur ego hodie. Pater filiis notam faciet veritatem tuam.

<span id="vii.i-p40"></span>**20.** The LORD *was ready* to save me:
therefore we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments all the days
of our life in the house of the LORD.

<span id="vii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Iehova ad me servandum; et cantica
nostra cantabimus omnibus diebus vitae nostrae in domo Iehovae.

<span id="vii.i-p42"></span>**21.** For Isaiah had said, Let them take a
lump of figs, and lay *it* for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall
recover.

<span id="vii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Dixit autem Isaias, Accipient massam
ficuum, et adhibebunt ulceri, et vivet.

<span id="vii.i-p44"></span>**22.** Hezekiah also had said, What *is*
the sign that I shall go up to the house of the LORD?

<span id="vii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Dixerat enim *(vel, autem)*
Ezechias, Quod signum, quod ascensurus sim in domum Iehovae?

<span id="vii.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="vii.i-p47"></span><span id="vii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p48"></span>**1.** *In those days.* The Prophet now
relates that the pious king was violently assailed by a different kind
of temptation, namely, that he was seized with a mortal disease and
despaired of life; and not only so, but likewise that he suffered
dreadful agony, in consequence of having received from God a warning of
his death, as if in a hostile manner God had thundered on his head from
heaven. At what time that happened, whether after the siege, or during
the siege, is not very evident; but it is unnecessary to give ourselves
much trouble on that subject. It may be easily inferred from the sacred
history, that this event happened about the fourteenth year of his
reign, either while he was invaded by the Assyrian, or after he was
delivered, for he reigned twenty-nine years, (<span
id="vii.i-p48.1"></span>[2Ki 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002)<span
id="vii.i-p48.1"></span>;) in the fourteenth year of his reign the
Assyrian attacked Judea, (<span id="vii.i-p48.2"></span>[2Ki
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013)<span id="vii.i-p48.2"></span>,)
and fifteen years were added by the promise which is here related by the
Prophet, (<span id="vii.i-p48.3"></span>[2Ki
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#006)<span id="vii.i-p48.3"></span>,)
and this makes up twenty-nine years. Hence it appears that it must have
been about the fourteenth year of his reign that Hezekiah was afflicted
by this disease.

<span id="vii.i-p49"></span>The only doubtful point is, whether it was
during the time of the siege, or afterwards, that *he was sick.* For my
own part, I look upon it as a more probable conjecture, that he was
attacked by this disease after the siege had been raised; for if he had
been sick during the time of the siege, that circumstance would not have
been left out by the Prophet, who, on the other hand, has related that
Hezekiah sent messengers, went into the temple, spread a letter before
the Lord, and sent for the Prophet. These circumstances do not at all
apply to a man who was suffering heavy sickness; and if disease had been
added to so many distresses, that circumstance would not have been
omitted. In doubtful matters, therefore, let us follow what is more
probable, namely, that the pious king, having been delivered from the
enemy, is attacked by disease and is in great danger.

<span id="vii.i-p50"></span>Yet it is not without reason that our
attention is also directed to an almost uninterrupted succession of
events, that we may know that he scarcely had leisure to breathe, but,
after having scarcely reached the shore from one ship-wreck, suddenly
fell into another equally dangerous. Let us therefore remember that
believers must endure various temptations, so that they are assailed
sometimes by wars, sometimes by diseases, sometimes by other calamities,
and sometimes one calamity follows another in unbroken succession, and
they are laid under the necessity of maintaining uninterrupted warfare
during their whole life; so that, when they have escaped from one
danger, they are on the eve of enduring another. They ought to be
prepared in such a manner, that when the Lord shall be pleased to add
sorrow to sorrow, they may bear it patiently, and may not be discouraged
by any calamity. If any respite be allowed,  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) let them know that this is granted for
their weakness, but let not a short truce lead them to form a false
imagination of a lengthened peace; let them make additional exertions,
till, having finished the course of their earthly life, they arrive at
the peaceful harbor.

<span id="vii.i-p52"></span>*Even unto death.* The severity of the
disease might be very distressing to the good man. First, mortal disease
brings along with it sharp pains, especially when it is attended by an
inflammatory boil. But the most distressing of all was, that he might
think that God opposed and hated him, because, as soon as he had been
rescued from so great a calamity, he was immediately dragged to death,
as if he had been unworthy of reigning. Besides, at that time he had no
children; and there was reason to believe that his death would be
followed by a great disorder of public affairs. (<span
id="vii.i-p52.1"></span>[2Ki 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001)<span
id="vii.i-p52.1"></span>.) This dread of the wrath of God occasions far
more bitter anguish to the consciences of believers than any bodily
disease; and if they lose their perception of the favor of God, it is
impossible that they should not be immediately grieved. But God, as if
he expressly intended to add oil to the flame, absolutely threatens
death, and, in order to affect him more deeply, takes away all hope of
life.

<span id="vii.i-p53"></span>*For; thou shalt die, and shalt not live.*
The clause, *thou shalt not live,* is not superfluous, but is added for
the purpose of giving intensity or confirmation, as if it had been said
that there will be no hope of remedy. Men practice evasion, even though
death is at hand, and eagerly seek the means of escape; and, therefore,
that Hezekiah may not look around him as if he were uncertain, he is
twice informed that he must die.

<span id="vii.i-p54"></span>*Give charge concerning thy house,*  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) or, *to thy house.*  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) In order that he may bid adieu to the
world, the Prophet enjoins him speedily to order what he wishes to be
done after his death; as if he had said, “If thou dost not wish that
death shall seize thee, give immediate orders about thy domestic
affairs.” Here we see in passing, that the Lord approves of a practice
which has been always customary among men, namely, that when they are
about to die, they give orders to their neighbors or servants, and
arrange the affairs of their family.

<span id="vii.i-p57"></span>Jonathan renders it, “Give up thy house to
another;” but the construction conveys a different meaning. Every
person, when he must depart from this life, ought to testify that he
pays regard to his duty, and that he provides even for the future
interests of his family. But his chief care ought to be, not about
testaments and heirs, but about promoting the salvation of those whom
the Lord has committed to his charge.

<span id="vii.i-p58"></span><span id="vii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p59"></span>**2.** *Then Hezekiah turned his face to the
wall.* He now relates the manner in which Hezekiah was affected when he
received this message, that we may see his piety and faith. He does not
break out into rage or indignation like unbelievers, but bears this
affliction patiently. He does not debate with God, as if he had already
endured enough of distresses from enemies, and ought not to be again
chastised so severely by a new kind of afflictions. And this is true
patience, not merely in a single instance to endure patiently any
distress, but to persevere to the end, and always to be prepared for
enduring new troubles, but, above all, to bow to the judgments of God in
calm silence, and not to murmur at his severity, though it appear to be
great; as David acknowledges that *“he* was dumb, because he saw that he
had to deal with God.” (<span id="vii.i-p59.1"></span>[Ps
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)<span id="vii.i-p59.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p60"></span>And such is the import of “turning the face
*to the wall;”* for, in consequence of being overwhelmed by shame and
grief, as if he shunned the face of men, he summons up his energy, and
turns wholly to God, so as to rely entirely upon him. The mere attitude,
indeed, is immaterial; but it is of very great importance to us, that
nothing should be presented to our eyes or senses which would drag us
away from prayer, that we may pour out our desires more freely before
God. We are naturally unsteady, and easily drawn aside; and therefore we
cannot be too diligent in fixing our attention. If we must pray in
public, we are restrained by shame, lest, if we manifest excessive
vehemence, we should be thought to do so for the sake of ostentation; or
we are afraid of falling into improper attitudes; and therefore we ought
to remove everything that would lead us aside.

<span id="vii.i-p61"></span>Hezekiah, therefore, does not turn away his
face, as if he were overwhelmed, or as if he bitterly and obstinately
rejected the message that had been brought to him, but in this manner
sharpens his eagerness for prayer. That he does not present his prayers
openly, as when he formerly went up into the temple, followed by the
rest of the multitude, (<span id="vii.i-p61.1"></span>[Isa
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#014)<span id="vii.i-p61.1"></span>,)
is an indication of the deepest anxiety, as if grief had seized his
whole frame. Yet it is a remarkable pattern of piety, that, when he has
received the sentence of death, he does not cease to call upon God.

<span id="vii.i-p62"></span>These words, *Thou shalt die, and shalt not
live,* tended not only to startle him, but deeply to wound and pierce
his heart, as if God were rushing upon him in a hostile manner to
destroy him. It was an alarming token of wrath to be thrown headlong out
of life in the very flower of his age, and to be cast out of the world,
as if he were unworthy of the society of men; and therefore he had to
contend not only with death, but with hell itself and with frightful
torments.

<span id="vii.i-p63"></span>Hence it follows that he attached to the
Prophet’s words more meaning than they actually conveyed; for, although
he could not all at once disentangle himself, yet the Holy Spirit
suggested to his dark and confused heart “groanings that could not be
uttered.” (<span id="vii.i-p63.1"></span>[Ro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="vii.i-p63.1"></span>)
And indeed it would have been a foolish message if God had not supported
him by secret influence, when he appeared to have been slain by the
external voice of his servant. But since he would never have aimed at
repentance if he had been seized with despair, the slaying came first,
and was next followed by that secret energy which dedicated the dead man
to God.

<span id="vii.i-p64"></span><span id="vii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p65"></span>**3.** *And said, I beseech thee, Jehovah.*
He appears here to expostulate with God, and to remonstrate with him
about his own past life, as if he were undeservedly distressed; but the
case is far otherwise. On the contrary, he strengthens and fortifies
himself against a heavy and dangerous temptation, which might otherwise
have been suggested. For the great severity with which the Lord
chastised him might lead him to think that the Lord had cast off,
forsaken, and disapproved him, and had rejected all that he had formerly
done. On this account he strengthens and encourages himself, and
declares that whatever he did was done by him with a good conscience. In
short, he concludes that, although he must die, still his services have
not been displeasing to God, that he may thus open up for himself a path
to prayer and good hopes.

<span id="vii.i-p66"></span>*Remember now that I have walked before thee
in truth.* He does not plead his merits against God, or remonstrate with
him in any respect, as if he were unjustly punished, but fortifies
himself against a sore temptation, that he may not think that God is
angry with him for correcting the vices and removing the corruptions
which prevailed throughout the whole of his kingdom, and especially in
regard to religion. Yet the Lord permits his people even to glory, in
some degree, on account of their good actions, not that they may boast
of their merits before him, but that they may acknowledge his benefits,
and may be affected by the remembrance of them in such a manner as to be
prepared for enduring everything patiently. But sometimes the
unreasonable conduct of their enemies constrains them to holy boasting:
that they may commend their good cause to their judge and avenger; as
David boldly meets the wicked slanders of enemies by pleading his
innocence before the judgment-seat of God. (<span
id="vii.i-p66.1"></span>[Ps. 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008), [Ps.
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#002)<span id="vii.i-p66.1"></span>.)
But here Hezekiah intended to meet the craftiness of Satan, which
believers feel, when, under the pretense of humility, he overwhelms them
with despair; and therefore we ought earnestly to beware lest our hearts
be swallowed up by grief.

<span id="vii.i-p67"></span>*With a perfect heart.* We learn from his
words what is the true rule of a pious life; and that is, when integrity
of heart holds the first place, for nothing is more abhorred by God than
when we endeavor to deceive either him or men by our hypocrisy. Although
the eyes of men are dazzled by the splendor of worlds, yet pretended
holiness, which is as it were a profanation of his name, provokes his
anger; and, because “he is a Spirit,” (<span
id="vii.i-p67.1"></span>[Joh 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="vii.i-p67.1"></span>,) he justly demands spiritual obedience, and
declares that he abhors “a double heart.” (<span
id="vii.i-p67.2"></span>[Ps 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)<span
id="vii.i-p67.2"></span>.) Most properly, therefore, does Hezekiah begin
with sincerity of heart. The Hebrew word <span
id="vii.i-p67.3"></span>שלם, *(shalem,)* which is translated *perfect,*
means nothing else than integrity as contrasted with hypocrisy, which is
also evident from the use of the word *truth;* as Paul affirms that

<span id="vii.i-p68"></span>“the end of the law is brotherly love, out
of a pure heart and a good conscience and unfeigned faith.” (<span
id="vii.i-p68.1"></span>[1Ti 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span
id="vii.i-p68.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p69"></span>*And have done what is good in thine eyes.*
He brings forward also the fruits which spring from an upright heart as
from a root, not only to confirm himself, but likewise to confirm
others, in reference to those things which might have given any occasion
of offense. Hezekiah therefore did not hesitate or waver, but wished to
take away what might have given offense to many persons. But again, it
ought to be observed in what manner we must regulate our life, if we
desire that God shall approve of our conduct. We must do nothing but
what is agreeable to his command; for, as he rejects and condemns all
the pageantry of which hypocrites boast, so he likewise reckons of no
value all the false worship in which foolish men weary themselves in
vain, while they labor to obtain his favor by disregarding his word.
Accordingly, Hezekiah, who knew that “obedience is of greater value than
sacrifice,” (<span id="vii.i-p69.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span id="vii.i-p69.1"></span>,)
says not only that he ran, (which is often done in a disorderly manner,)
but that he regulated his life in obedience to God, who alone is
competent to judge. Hence we may conclude how great was his earnestness
in prayer; for though he sees on every hand nothing but the tokens of
God’s anger, yet he does not cease to fly to him, and to exercise faith,
which all believers ought earnestly and diligently to do amidst the
heaviest afflictions.

<span id="vii.i-p70"></span><span id="vii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p71"></span>**4.** *Then came the word of Jehovah.*
Isaiah had departed, leaving the sting, as the saying is, in the wound,
reckoning as abandoned him on whom he had pronounced sentence in the
name of God himself. Yet with what trembling uneasiness he was
tormented, and even with what terror he was seized, may be partly
learned from the song. What interval of time elapsed between the
Prophet’s departure and return we know not, but it is certain that the
glad tidings of life were not brought until, after long and severe
struggles, he perceived that he was utterly’ ruined; for it was a severe
trial of faith that he should be kept plunged in darkness by the hiding
of God’s face. We have said that, while the doctrine of consolation was
taken away, still the faith of the good king was not extinguished so as
not to emit some sparks, because, by the secret influence of the Spirit,
“groans that could not be uttered” (<span id="vii.i-p71.1"></span>[Ro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="vii.i-p71.1"></span>)
arose to God out of the gulf of sorrow. Hence also we conclude that,
while “in the day of trouble” (<span id="vii.i-p71.2"></span>[Ps
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span id="vii.i-p71.2"></span>)
God heareth believers, yet the favor of God does not all at once shine
on them, but is purposely delayed till they are sincerely humbled. And
if a king so eminent in piety needed almost to suffer anguish, that he
might be more powerfully excited to seek the favor of God, and, being
almost wasted by grief, might groan from hell to God; let us not wonder
if he sometimes permits us for a time to be agitated by fears and
perplexities, and delays longer to bestow consolation in answer to our
prayers.

<span id="vii.i-p72"></span>But it may be thought strange that God,
having uttered a sentence*,* should soon afterwards be moved, as it
were, by repentance to reverse it; for nothing is more at variance with
his nature than a change of purpose. I reply, while death was threatened
against Hezekiah, still God had not decreed it, but determined in this
manner to put to the test the faith of Hezekiah. We must, therefore,
suppose a condition to be implied in that threatening; for otherwise
Hezekiah would not have altered, by repentance or prayer, the
irreversible decree of God. But the Lord threatened him in the same
manner as he threatened Gerar for carrying off Sarah, (<span
id="vii.i-p72.1"></span>[Ge 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)<span
id="vii.i-p72.1"></span>,) and as he threatened the Ninevites. (<span
id="vii.i-p72.2"></span>[Jonah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#002),
[Jonah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004)<span
id="vii.i-p72.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p73"></span>Again, it will be objected, that it appears
to be inconsistent with the nature of God to threaten what he does not
intend to execute, and that it takes away from the authority of the
word, and causes the promises and threatenings to have less weight. But
what we have already said as to the sentence must likewise be maintained
as to the form of the words. God threatened the death of Hezekiah,
because he was unwilling that Hezekiah should die; and, indeed, it would
have been unnecessary and even useless to predict it, if a remedy had
not been provided. Now, as it was the purpose of God to humble his
servant by fear and terror, that he might voluntarily condemn himself,
and might thus escape punishment through prayer; so by harsh language
and an absolute threatening of death, he intended to slay him, that,
rising like a dead man out of the grave, he might feel that life had
been restored to him. And thus we must suppose an implied condition to
have been understood, which Hezekiah, if he did not immediately perceive
it, yet afterwards in good time knew to have been added. Nor are we at
liberty to infer from it that God used dissimulation by accommodating
his discourse to the capacity and attainments of man; for it is no new
thing if he “kill before he make alive.” (<span
id="vii.i-p73.1"></span>[De 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)<span
id="vii.i-p73.1"></span>; <span id="vii.i-p73.2"></span>[1Sa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)<span id="vii.i-p73.2"></span>.) In
order to prepare Hezekiah by a spiritual resemblance of death, and
gradually form him to a new life, he keeps back a part of the discourse.

<span id="vii.i-p74"></span><span id="vii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p75"></span>**5.** *Thus saith Jehovah the God of David
thy father.* At first, when he struck terror alone, he reckoned it
enough to mention the bare and simple name of God, to whose heavenly
judgmentseat he summoned him as a criminal; but now, when he brings
consolation, he distinguishes God by a peculiar and honorable title in
order to point out the cause and origin of grace; as if he had said
that, from a regard to his covenant which he made with David, he is
inclined to mercy, so that he does not deal rigorously with Hezekiah.
(<span id="vii.i-p75.1"></span>[2Sa
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012)<span id="vii.i-p75.1"></span>.)
We know that nothing is more difficult than for hearts that have been
greatly alarmed by the conviction of God’s anger to be encouraged to
entertain favorable hope, so as to perceive that God is reconciled to
them. That confirmation was therefore necessary, that the pious king,
who in himself was ruined, might know that he could be again raised up
to that life from which he had fallen; for the prophecy concerning the
eternity of that kingdom could not fail. Since, therefore, he fainted
when he thought that he had no hope of living, in order that he may
breathe again, he is reminded of a promise, which at that time was
universally known, that kings of the seed and posterity of David would
always reign over the elect people,

<span id="vii.i-p76"></span>“as long as the sun and moon should shine in
the heavens.”  
(<span id="vii.i-p76.2"></span>[Ps.
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span id="vii.i-p76.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p77"></span>That was the plank which he seized, and by
which he escaped shipwreck.

<span id="vii.i-p78"></span>*David* is not mentioned in this passage as
a private individual, but as an eternal king, to whom had been committed
the promise which might support Hezekiah; eternal, I say, not in
himself, but in his blessed seed. Now, since that eternity was at length
to be manifested in Christ, of whom Hezekiah along with other kings was
a type, it must have been a solid ground of favorable hope that he was a
son of David.  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) Whenever, therefore,
we feel that our own sins hinder us from drawing near to God, in order
that we may obtain his favor, let us think of this preface, that,
although we have been estranged from him by our own fault, still he is
the Father of Christ, who is our head, and

<span id="vii.i-p80"></span>“in whom our salvation always remains
hidden.”  
(<span id="vii.i-p80.2"></span>[Col
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="vii.i-p80.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p81"></span>In a word, God had lately spoken in the
character of a judge, but now he is reconciled, and points out a
Mediator who comes forth to appease him.

<span id="vii.i-p82"></span>*I have heard thy prayer.* Having opened the
door of hope, he tells Hezekiah that God “has heard his prayers.” This
ought greatly to encourage us to earnestness in prayer; for, although
God of his own accord takes a deep interest in our salvation, and
anticipates us by his kindness, not only while we are asleep, but
“before we were born,” (<span id="vii.i-p82.1"></span>[Ro
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)<span id="vii.i-p82.1"></span>,)
yet, when he testifies that all the benefits which he bestows are
granted in answer to our prayers, our negligence is altogether
inexcusable, if, after having received such large invitations, we
neglect to perform the duty of prayer,  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) And yet we must not imagine that prayers,
to which God so graciously listens, are meritorious; but, in giving
freely what he freely promised, he adds this as the crowning excellence
of his kindness, in order more strongly to stimulate our faith. It is no
ordinary privilege to be able to approach to him freely, and in a
familiar manner to lay our cares in his bosom. If Hezekiah had not
prayed, God would undoubtedly have secured that, in one way or another,
some government of the kingdom should be preserved in the posterity of
David; but what he would do from a regard to his truth, he says that he
will give in answer to the prayers of Hezekiah, that he may acknowledge
that he has obtained very abundant fruit from his faith which he
exercised in prayer.

<span id="vii.i-p84"></span>*And I have seen thy tears.* He mentions
*tears* as a sign of repentance, and likewise of warmth and earnestness;
not that in themselves tears procure favor, or have any power of
appeasing God, but because they distinguish sincere prayers from those
which are offered in a careless manner.

<span id="vii.i-p85"></span>*Behold, I add to thy days fifteen years.*
At length he adds that God has prolonged the life of Hezekiah to the
extent of “fifteen years.” This might, indeed, at first sight, appear to
be absurd; for we were created on the condition of not being able to
pass, by a single moment, the limit marked out for us; as Job also says,
“Thou hast appointed his bounds which he cannot pass.” (<span
id="vii.i-p85.1"></span>[Job 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005)<span
id="vii.i-p85.1"></span>.) But the solution is easy. What is said about
an extended period must be understood to refer to the views of Hezekiah,
who had been excluded from the hope of life, and, therefore, must; have
justly reckoned to be gain what was afterwards added, as if he had been
raised up from the grave to a second life.

<span id="vii.i-p86"></span><span id="vii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p87"></span>**6.** *And I will deliver thee.* Those who
think that Hezekiah was sick during the time of the siege found an
argument on this, that otherwise this promise would appear to be
superfluous. But there is little force in that reasoning; for the
Assyrian might have recruited his forces, and mustered a fresh army, at
a later period, for the purpose of again invading Judea and attacking
Jerusalem. The very defeat of which we have now read might have been a
provocation to his rage and cruelty, so that the Jews had good reason
for being continually alarmed at any reports which they heard.  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) That promise, therefore, is far from
being superfluous, because along with life it promises protection from
the enemy, against whom he would not otherwise have been secured, and
may be regarded as an enlargement and increase of that blessing which
the Lord promised to Hezekiah; as in the former chapter he promised
abundance of fruits to accompany the deliverance. (<span
id="vii.i-p88.2"></span>[Isa
37:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#030)<span id="vii.i-p88.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p89"></span><span id="vii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p90"></span>**7.** *And this shall be a sign to thee.*
The sacred history relates in the proper order that Hezekiah asked a
sign from the Lord, (<span id="vii.i-p90.1"></span>[2Ki
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008)<span id="vii.i-p90.1"></span>,)
and that it was granted to him; which the Prophet will likewise mention
at the end of this chapter. But it is no new thing for Hebrew writers to
reverse the order of the narrative. God gives some signs of his own
accord, without being asked; and he grants other signs to his people who
ask them. Signs being generally intended to aid our weakness, God does
not for the most part wait till we have prayed for them; but at first he
appointed those which he knew to be profitable to his Church. If at any
time, therefore, believers wished to have their faith confirmed by a
sign, this circumstance, being rare, ought not to be produced as an
example. Thus, to Gideon, whom he called from the sheepfold to govern
Israel, he gave one sign and then another, when he asked them, (<span
id="vii.i-p90.2"></span>[Judg. 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#017),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#039)<span id="vii.i-p90.2"></span>,)
that he might be more fully convinced of his calling. He commonly gave,
as we have said, other signs, in accommodation to the weakness of men;
as to Adam the tree of life, (<span id="vii.i-p90.3"></span>[Ge
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009)<span id="vii.i-p90.3"></span>,) to
Noah the bow in heaven, (<span id="vii.i-p90.4"></span>[Ge
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#012)<span id="vii.i-p90.4"></span>,)
and next the cloud and pillar of fire, (<span
id="vii.i-p90.5"></span>[Ex 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)<span
id="vii.i-p90.5"></span>,) and the serpent of brass in the wilderness.
(<span id="vii.i-p90.6"></span>[Nu
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#008)<span id="vii.i-p90.6"></span>.)
The same remarks apply to the passover, (<span
id="vii.i-p90.7"></span>[Ex 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008)<span
id="vii.i-p90.7"></span>,) and to all the sacraments, both those which
were formerly observed, and those which have now been appointed by
Christ,  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) and which no one asked
from God.

<span id="vii.i-p92"></span>But it may be thought that Hezekiah insults
God, by refusing credit to his word, when he asks a sign. I reply, we
must not accuse him of unbelief, because his faith was weak; for we
shall not find. any person who ever had faith which was perfect and
complete in every respect. In seeking some assistance to support his
weakness, he cannot, be blamed on that account; for, having embraced the
promise made to him by the Prophet, he shews his confidence in God by
seeking a remedy for distrust. And if there had been no weakness in man,
he would not have needed any signs; and consequently we need not wonder
that he asks a sign, since on other occasions the Lord freely offers
them.

<span id="vii.i-p93"></span>Yet it is proper also to observe, that
believers never rushed forward at random to ask signs, but were guided
by a secret and peculiar influence of the Spirit. The same thing might
be said about miracles. If Elijah prayed to God for rain and for
drought, (<span id="vii.i-p93.1"></span>[Jas.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018)<span id="vii.i-p93.1"></span>,) it
does not follow that others are at liberty to do the same. We must,
therefore, see what God permits to us, lest, by disregarding his word,
we bargain with him according to the foolish desires of our flesh.

<span id="vii.i-p94"></span><span id="vii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p95"></span>**8.** *Lo, I bring back the shadow of
degrees.* The sign which is here given to Hezekiah is the going back of
the shadow on the sundial, along with the sun, *ten degrees by which it
had already gone up,*  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) that is, had
advanced above the horizon. And this sign bears a resemblance to the
event itself, as all other signs generally do; for it is as if he had
said, “As it is in my power to change the hours of the day, and to make
the sun go backwards, so it is in my power to lengthen thy life.” As to
the shadow not going back as many degrees as there were years added to
his life, that was impossible, because there were not more than twelve
degrees on the sundial; for the day was divided by them into twelve
hours, either longer or shorter, according to the change of the season.
We need not, therefore, give ourselves any uneasiness about the number;
it is enough that there is a manifest correspondence and resemblance.

<span id="vii.i-p97"></span>*On the sundial of Ahaz.*  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) Here the Jews make fables according to
their custom, and contrive a story, that the day on which *Ahaz* died
was shorter than ten hours, and that what God had justly inflicted on
him as a punishment for his sins was reversed for the benefit of
Hezekiah; because the shortening of one day was the lengthening of
another. But there is no history of this, and it is entirely destitute
not only of evidence but of probability; nor is there anything said here
about the death of Ahaz, or about the change which took place when he
died, but about the sundial which he had made.

<span id="vii.i-p99"></span><span id="vii.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p100"></span>**9.** *The writing of Hezekiah.* Though
sacred history gives no account of this writing, yet it deserves to be
recorded, and is highly worthy of observation; for we see that Hezekiah
was unwilling to pass in silence, or to bury in forgetfulness, so
remarkable a blessing which he had received from God. By his example he
shews what all believers ought to do, when God miraculously and in an
unusual manner exerts his power on their behalf. They ought to make
known their gratitude, not only to their contemporaries, but also to
posterity; as we see that Hezekiah did by this song, which may be
regarded as a public record. We see that David composed many psalms on
this subject, when he had been delivered from very great dangers, so
that he took care to celebrate till the end of the world what was worthy
of being remembered by all ages. (<span id="vii.i-p100.1"></span>[Ps.
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002), [Ps.
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)<span id="vii.i-p100.1"></span>.)
Especially, the more eminent any man is, and the higher the station
which he occupies, the more is he bound to consider himself as placed by
God on a theater, and enjoined to perform this duty.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) Yet all men, whether they be of ordinary
rank or nobles and great men, ought to beware of ambition, lest, while
they profess to imitate Hezekiah and David, they magnify their own name
more than the name of God.  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80)

<span id="vii.i-p103"></span><span id="vii.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p104"></span>**10.** *I said in the cutting off of my
days.* This is a very melancholy song; for it contains complaints rather
than prayers. Hence it is evident that he was oppressed by so great
perplexity, that he was weary with groaning, and sunk in lamentations,
and did not venture to rise up freely to form a prayer. Murmuring thus
within himself, he expresses the cause and intensity of his grief.

<span id="vii.i-p105"></span>As to the cause, it might be thought
strange that he had so strong an attachment, and so ardent a longing for
this fading life, and that he so much dreaded death. The tendency of the
first elements of heavenly doctrine is, that we may learn to sojourn in
this world, and to advance swiftly towards the heavenly life. Hezekiah
appears to be as warmly devoted to the earth as if he had never had the
smallest particle of piety; he shuns and abhors death, as much as if he
had never heard a word about heavenly doctrine. Now, what purpose did it
serve to commit to writing those stormy passions which would rather
prompt readers to the same excess than induce them to obey God? For we
are too prone to rebellion, though there be no additional excitements of
any kind.

<span id="vii.i-p106"></span>But when it shall be minutely, and wisely,
and carefully examined, we shall find that nothing could have been more
advantageous to us than to have this picture of a man overwhelmed with
grief painted to the life. It was not the object of the good king, in
proclaiming his virtues, to hunt for the applause of the world. His
prayer was undoubtedly a proof both of faith and of obedience; but, as
if he had been overcome by fear, and dread, and sorrow, he leaves off
prayer, and feebly utters complaints. He unquestionably intended to make
known his weakness, and thus to give a lesson of humility to all the
children of God, and at the same time to magnify the grace of God, which
had brought out of the lowest depths of death a ruined man.

<span id="vii.i-p107"></span>As to the manner in which he deplores his
lot, when he is near death, as if he placed his existence on the earth,
and thought that death reduced men to nothing, we must attend to the
special reason. For while death is not desirable on its own account, yet
believers ought to “groan continually,” (<span
id="vii.i-p107.1"></span>[Ro 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span
id="vii.i-p107.1"></span>,) because sin holds them bound in the prison
of the flesh. They are forbidden also to “mourn as unbelievers usually
mourn,” (<span id="vii.i-p107.2"></span>[1Th
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013)<span id="vii.i-p107.2"></span>,)
and are even commanded to “lift up their heads,” when they are about to
depart from the world, because they are received into a happier life.
(<span id="vii.i-p107.3"></span>[Lu
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028)<span id="vii.i-p107.3"></span>.)
Nor was the ancient Church under the Law destitute of this consolation;
and, although the knowledge of a blessed resurrection was less clear,
yet it must have been sufficient for mitigating sorrow.  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) If that impostor Balaam was forced to
exclaim, “Let my soul die the death of the righteous,” (<span
id="vii.i-p108.2"></span>[Nu
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010)<span id="vii.i-p108.2"></span>,)
what joy must have filled the hearts of believers, in whose ears
resounded that voice, “I am the God of Abraham!” (<span
id="vii.i-p108.3"></span>[Ex 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)<span
id="vii.i-p108.3"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p109"></span>But although with steady and assured hope
they looked forward to the heavenly life, still we need not wonder to
see in Hezekiah what David confesses as to himself, (<span
id="vii.i-p109.1"></span>[Ps 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009)<span
id="vii.i-p109.1"></span>,) who yet, when his time was come, full of
days, calmly left the world. (<span id="vii.i-p109.2"></span>[1Ki
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#010)<span id="vii.i-p109.2"></span>.)
It is therefore evident that both of them were not assailed by the mere
dread of death, but that they prayed with tears to be delivered from
death, because they saw in it manifest tokens of God’s anger. We ought
to remember that the Prophet came as a herald, to announce the death of
Hezekiah in the name of God. This messenger might naturally have plunged
all the senses of Hezekiah into a frightful deluge of grief, so that,
thinking of nothing but God’s wrath and curse, he would struggle with
despair.

<span id="vii.i-p110"></span>Thus the piety of Hezekiah already begins
to shew itself, when, placing himself before the tribunal of his judge,
he applies his mind to meditation on his guilt. And, first, there might
occur to him that thought by which David confesses that he was tempted:
“What did God mean by treating his servants with cruel severity and
sparing profane despisers? (<span id="vii.i-p110.1"></span>[Ps
73:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003)<span id="vii.i-p110.1"></span>.)
Next, he saw that he was exposed to the jeers of the wicked, by whom
true religion also was basely reviled. He saw that it was scarcely
possible that his death should not shake the minds of all good men; but
especially, he was oppressed by God’s wrath, as if he had been already
condemned to hell and to the eternal curse. In a word, because our true
and perfect happiness consists in having fellowship with God, Hezekiah,
perceiving that he was in some measure alienated from him, had good
reason for being so greatly alarmed; for that word, “Thou shalt die, and
shalt not live,” had seized his mind so completely, that he believed
that he must die.  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) This is
expressed by the phrase *I said;* for in Hebrew it does not mean merely
to speak, or to pronounce a word, but to be persuaded or convinced in
one’s own mind. Even though hypocrites receive a hundred threatenings
from God, still they look around them on all sides, so that if they see
any opening by which they think that they can escape, they may mock God,
and give themselves up to luxury and indifference. But Hezekiah, being a
sincere worshipper of God, did not resort to subterfuges; but, on the
contrary, believing the words of the Prophet, he concluded that he must
prepare for dying, because it was God’s good pleasure.

<span id="vii.i-p112"></span>In this sense he speaks of *the cutting off
of his days,* because he believed that an angry and offended God had
broken off the course of his life; for he does not merely say in the
ordinary manner that his life is cut short by a violent disease, but
recognises that undoubted judgment of God as the cause of “the cutting
off.” Now, life is “cut off,” whether we die at the entrance of life, or
in middle life, or in old age; but they who are hurried away in the very
flower of their age are said to be “cut off” from life, because they
appear to die too soon, and before they have finished their course. The
case was different with Hezekiah; for he perceived that the remaining
part of life was “cut off” by the sword of God, because he had provoked
God’s wrath by his offenses. Thus he complains that, as if he had been
unworthy of enjoying it, God suddenly deprives him of life, which
otherwise would have lasted longer. Such is the import of the phrase,
“the residue of the years;” for although, being born mortal, we have
reason to expect death every moment, yet since it was threatened as a
punishment, he has good reason for saying that those years had been
taken from him which he might have lived, if it had been the good
pleasure of God.

<span id="vii.i-p113"></span><span id="vii.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p114"></span>**11.** *I said, I shall not see God.*
Amidst such earnest longing for an earthly life, Hezekiah would have
gone beyond bounds, if his grief had not been aggravated by the
conviction of God’s wrath. Since, therefore, he is violently dragged
away by his own fault, as if he were unworthy of enjoying the ordinary
light of the sun, he exclaims that he is miserable, because henceforth
he shall never see either God or man. Among believers the statement
would have been regarded as liable to this exception, that, so long as
we dwell on the earth, we wander and are distant from God, but that,
when the entanglements of the flesh shall have been laid aside, we shall
more closely “see God.”

<span id="vii.i-p115"></span>*In the land of the living.* These words
are indeed added as a, limitation; but in this way Hezekiah appears to
limit “the seeing of God” to the present life, as if death extinguished
all the light of understanding. We must therefore keep in view what I
formerly remarked, that when he received the message of God’s vengeance,
it affected him in such. a manner as if he had been deprived of God’s
fatherly love; for if he was unworthy of beholding the sun, how could he
hope for what was of higher value? Not that hope was altogether effaced
from his mind, but because, having his attention fixed on the curse of
God, he cannot so soon or so quickly rise to heaven, to soothe present
grief by the delightfulness of a better life.

<span id="vii.i-p116"></span>Thus it sometimes happens that godly minds
are overclouded, so that they do not always receive consolation, which
for a time is suppressed, but still remains in their minds, and
afterwards manifests itself. Yet it is an evidence of piety, that, by
the proper and lawful object of life, he shews how grievous and
distressing it is to be deprived of it. Even to cattle it gives
uneasiness to die, but they have almost no use for their life except to
feed and eat to the full; while we have a far more excellent object, for
we were created and born on the express condition, that we should devote
ourselves to the knowledge of God. And because this is the chief reason
why we live, he twice repeats the name of God, and thus expresses the
strength of his feelings; “I shall not see God, God in the land of the
living.”  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)

<span id="vii.i-p118"></span>If it be objected that here we do not “see
God,” the answer is easy, that he is visible in his works; because
“through the visible workmanship of the world,” as Paul says, “his
eternal power and Godhead are known.” (<span
id="vii.i-p118.1"></span>[Ro 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="vii.i-p118.1"></span>.) Hence also the Apostle calls this world a
mirror of invisible things. (<span id="vii.i-p118.2"></span>[Heb
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)<span id="vii.i-p118.2"></span>.)
The more nearly he manifests himself to be known by believers, the more
highly did Hezekiah value that spiritual beholding; as David also says
that they see the face of God who confirm their faith by the exercises
of piety in the sanctuary. (<span id="vii.i-p118.3"></span>[Ps.
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#002), [Ps.
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002)<span id="vii.i-p118.3"></span>.)
So far as relates to men, he grieves that he is withdrawn from their
society, because we were born for the purpose of performing mutual kind
offices to each other.

<span id="vii.i-p119"></span><span id="vii.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p120"></span>**12.** *My dwelling* *is departed.* He
proceeds in his complaints, by painting his life under a beautiful
metaphor; for he compares it to *a shepherd’s tent.* Such indeed is the
condition of human life in general; but he does not relate so much what
happens to all universally as what has befallen himself as an
individual. The use of *tents* is more common in those countries than in
ours, and shepherds often change their residence, while they drive their
flock from one place to another. He does not therefore say absolutely
that men dwell in a frail lodginghouse, while they pass through the
world, but that, after he had dwelt at ease in a royal palace, his lot
was changed, just as if “a shepherd’s tent” were pitched for two days in
one field and afterwards removed to another.

<span id="vii.i-p121"></span>*I have cut off, as a weaver, my life.* It
is worthy of observation, that he indiscriminately ascribes the cause of
his death, sometimes to himself, and sometimes to God, but at the same
time explains the grounds; for when he speaks of himself as the author,
he does not complain of God, or remonstrate that God has robbed him of
his life, but accuses himself, and acknowledges deep blame. His words
are equivalent to the proverbial saying, “I have cut this thread for
myself, so that I alone am the cause of my death.” And yet it is not
without reason that he soon afterwards ascribes to God what he had
acknowledged to have proceeded from himself; for although we give to God
grounds for dealing severely with us, yet he is the judge who inflicts
punishment. In our afflictions, therefore, we ought always to praise his
judgment; because he performs his office when he chastises us as we
deserve.

<span id="vii.i-p122"></span>*From lifting up he will cut me off.* Some
translate <span id="vii.i-p122.1"></span>מדלה *(middallah)* “through
leanness,” or “through sickness,” and others translate it “by taking
away.” The former derive this noun from <span
id="vii.i-p122.2"></span>דלל *(dalal)* which means “to diminish,” and
the latter from <span id="vii.i-p122.3"></span>דלה *(dalah)* which means
“to carry off by lifting up.” But let my readers consider if the word
“lifting up” be not more appropriate; for Hezekiah appears to complain
that his life, while it tended to advance farther, was suddenly east
down; just as if God should cause the sun to set, while it was still
ascending in the sky.

<span id="vii.i-p123"></span>*From day even to night.* He now adds that
in a short space of time he was brought down; and by this circumstance
again expresses the severity of God’s wrath; because he consumes men by
the breath of a moment; for to be laid low in a single day means that
men die very rapidly.

<span id="vii.i-p124"></span><span id="vii.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p125"></span>**13.** *I reckoned till the dawn.* Others
translate it “I determined,” or “I laid down.” Here it means what we
express by the ordinary phrase, *(Je fasoye mon compte,)”* I laid my
account.” From this verse it may be inferred that Hezekiah labored two
days at least under the disease; for in the preceding verse he
pronounced its severity to be so great that he expected immediate death.
And now, when one day was past, he still waited *till the dawn,* and
again, *from day even to night,* so that he said that he would die every
moment. The meaning therefore is, that though he reached “the dawn,”
still through constant tossings he was hastening to death, because,
having been struck by a terrible judgment of God, he cared nothing about
his life; and as the Greeks, when they intended to say that nothing is
more vain than man, said that he was (<span
id="vii.i-p125.1"></span>ἐφήμερον) “an *ephemeral* animal,” that is,
“the creature of a day,” so Hezekiah means by “the life of a day” that
which is fading and has no duration.

<span id="vii.i-p126"></span>*As a lion, so hath he broken my bones.*
The comparison of God to *a lion* ought not to be reckoned strange,
though God is naturally “gracious, merciful, and kind.” (<span
id="vii.i-p126.1"></span>[Ex 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)<span
id="vii.i-p126.1"></span>.) Nothing certainly can more truly belong to
God than these attributes; but we cannot be aware of that gentleness,
when we have provoked him by our crimes and urged him to severity by our
wickedness. Besides, there is no cruelty and fierceness in wild beasts
that is fitted to strike such terror as we feel from the bare mention of
the name of God, and justly; for the Lord’s chastisements must have
sufficient power to humble and cast us down to hell itself, so that we
shall be almost destitute of consolation and regard everything as full
of horror. In like manner also, we see that David has described these
terrors, when he says that “his bones are numbered, his couch is
moistened with tears, his soul is troubled, and hell is opened.” (<span
id="vii.i-p126.2"></span>[Ps. 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#003),
[Ps. 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017), [Ps.
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)<span id="vii.i-p126.2"></span>.)
Thus must the godly be sometimes terrified by the judgment of God, that
they may be more powerfully excited to desire his favor.

<span id="vii.i-p127"></span><span id="vii.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p128"></span>**14.** *As a crane, or a swallow.*
Hezekiah cannot satisfy himself in explaining the severity of his
anguish. He now says that he was reduced so low that he could not utter
an articulate voice, but muttered some confused sound, like persons who
are almost at the point of death. Hence it is evident that his distress
was excruciating; for the severity of the pain took away his voice, and
his voice, he says, stuck in his throat; nothing was heard but
indistinct groans.

<span id="vii.i-p129"></span>Such is the import of these metaphors of
“the crane and the swallow,” which the Prophet employs. Still it is
certain that this indistinct sound of the voice is nevertheless heard by
God; though all our senses are oppressed by pain, and our throat is
choked by grief, still God beholds our hearts and listens to godly
sighs,  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) which will be even more
powerful than plain and direct words, provided that the Spirit is
present, who produces in us those “groanings that cannot be uttered,” of
which Paul speaks. (<span id="vii.i-p130.2"></span>[Ro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="vii.i-p130.2"></span>.)
There is no believer who does not feel that in prayer, when his heart is
oppressed by any heavy sorrow, he either stammers or is almost dumb.

<span id="vii.i-p131"></span>*My eyes were lifted up on high.* These
words are translated by some, “My eyes are weakened;” but that would not
agree with the phrase, “on high.”  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)
On this account we must adopt a simpler meaning, that, although
Hezekiah’s eyes were nearly worn out with weakness, so that he almost
fainted, yet. he did not cease to lift up his eyes to heaven; and that
he never was stupified to such a degree as not to know that he ought to
ask assistance from God. Let us therefore learn by the example of
Hezekiah to lift up our eyes to heaven, when our hearts are afflicted
and troubled; and let us know that God does not demand from us great
eloquence.

<span id="vii.i-p133"></span>*O Lord, it hath oppressed me;*  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) *comfort me.* He confirms the sentiment
already expressed, by immediately directing his discourse to God and
imploring his aid. Being oppressed by the violence of disease, he
desires that God would be present to assist him. Some render the words,
“Be surety for me;”  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) and the verb
<span id="vii.i-p135.3"></span>ערב *(gnarab)* is often used in this
sense; but it is more appropriate to say, “Comfort me,” or “Cheer me.”
Or perhaps it will be thought preferable to translate, as some have
done, “Cause me to rest.” Undoubtedly he asks comfort from God, that he
may not sink under the violence of disease; and we ought to be assured
of this, that the greater the weight of afflictions that oppresses us,
the more will God be ready to give us assistance.

<span id="vii.i-p136"></span><span id="vii.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p137"></span>**15.** *What shall I say?* This is
generally supposed to be an exclamation, such as frequently bursts forth
in a season of joy, as if he congratulated himself on having already
obtained his wish. But I think differently. Hezekiah appears to proceed
in his complaints; for he speaks as men commonly do when they are
overcome by grief; “What shall I say? for *he who said it hath also done
it;”* that is, “life and death are in his hand; *it is useless for me to
argue or contend* with him; it is useless for me to complain.” In the
book of Job also words and sayings of this sort are often found. (<span
id="vii.i-p137.1"></span>[Job 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#004)<span
id="vii.i-p137.1"></span>.) I think that this is the true meaning; for
Hezekiah previously looked around on all sides to see if any assistance
appeared, and now, when he sees that he is about to die, and that God
has threatened it, he concludes that he ought no longer to resist but to
obey.

<span id="vii.i-p138"></span>Yet we ought to mark the emphatic
statement, that God hath actually fulfilled what he had threatened by
his word. They who explain it to mean simply, “what God said to me by
the Prophet he hath fulfilled,” express a part of the truth, but. not
the whole; for Hezekiah does not coldly relate that he has perceived the
effect of the word, but, by bringing forward the power of God, he cuts
off every occasion to murmur or complain. Thus also David says, “I am
dumb, because thou hast done it.” (<span id="vii.i-p138.1"></span>[Ps
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)<span id="vii.i-p138.1"></span>.)
We never cease to complain until we are restrained by the fear of the
power of God. Thus also Job, considering that he has to deal with God,
says, “I will lay my finger on my mouth,” (<span
id="vii.i-p138.2"></span>[Job
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004)<span id="vii.i-p138.2"></span>,)
and “I will humbly make supplication to my judge.” (<span
id="vii.i-p138.3"></span>[Job
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015)<span id="vii.i-p138.3"></span>.)
Hezekiah, therefore, enjoins silence on himself on this ground, that it
is useless to contend with God.

<span id="vii.i-p139"></span>At the same time, he means that he has no
hope of life, because the Lord gives actual demonstration that it was a
serious threatening; and hence he infers that he gains nothing, because
there are no means of evasion. This sentiment, it is true, proceeds from
despair; because in this manner, thinking that God is his enemy, he
shuts the door against his prayers. But that in very severe distresses
words of this kind should escape our lips, which deter us from
confidence in prayer, is neither new nor strange, provided that, on the
other hand, we rely on that calling upon God which the views of the
flesh pronounce to be of no avail. There is reason to believe that the
pious king labored under such perplexity that he fainted through
weakness; but that he chiefly considered what I have said, that there
was nothing preferable to silence, because that it would serve no
purpose to dispute with God, will appear more clearly from what
immediately follows.

<span id="vii.i-p140"></span>*I shall walk trembling*  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) *all my life.* Hence we may infer that he
now holds out to his view the dreadful power of God, in order to dispose
himself to true humility. As <span id="vii.i-p141.1"></span>דדה
*(dadah)* sometimes signifies “to move,” and sometimes “to walk softly,”
<span id="vii.i-p141.2"></span>אדדה *(eddaddeh)* is translated by some
commentators, “I shall be moved,” or “I shall be troubled,” and by
others, “I shall walk softly.” For my own part, I have no doubt that it
denotes a trembling and feeble step; for Hezekiah had been reduced to so
great weakness that he despaired of ever afterwards recovering his
former strength. This trembling must be attributed to fear, for it
immediately follows, *in bitterness;* which means, that the sorrow which
he had endured was so deeply rooted in his heart, that it could never be
removed. Hence arose that weakness which he mentioned.

<span id="vii.i-p142"></span><span id="vii.i-p142.1"></span>אדדה
*(eddaddeh)* is translated by the Vulgate, “I will call to remembrance,”
on which account this passage has been tortured by Papists to support
auricular confession, but so absurdly that even old wives can laugh at
it. But the plain meaning is, that Hezekiah does not speak of calling to
remembrance, but of that agitation and trembling with which he says that
he will be struck during the whole period of his life.

<span id="vii.i-p143"></span><span id="vii.i-p143.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p144"></span>**16.** *O Lord, even to all who shall live
after them.* The concise style of the Prophet has given rise to various
interpretations. The interpretation most commonly received is “O Lord,
they shall live beyond those years,  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) ” that is, “they shall lengthen their
life.” This is equivalent to saying, “When thou shalt have lengthened my
life, thou wilt grant that others also shall enjoy the same favor.” But
that meaning does not agree with the text, and I look upon it as forced.
I rather think that Hezekiah’s meaning was this*” O Lord, whosoever
shall live beyond those years, to them also will the life of my spirit
be known.”* We must therefore supply the relative <span
id="vii.i-p145.2"></span>אשר, *(asher,) who,* as the Hebrew writers
frequently do, and there will be nothing forced in this interpretation;
for there can be no doubt, and nobody denies it, that he speaks of the
years which the Lord had lengthened out to him. Thus he means that, this
favor will be acknowledged not only by the men of that age, but also by
posterity.

<span id="vii.i-p146"></span>*And didst cause me to sleep, and didst
make me alive.* In this way he magnifies the greatness of the favor,
because it will also be well known to a future age, and will continue to
be engraven on the remembrance of all, even when Hezekiah himself is
dead, and not only so, but will be reckoned to be a kind of
resurrection. By the word *sleep* he means death, as the Scriptures
frequently do. (<span id="vii.i-p146.1"></span>[1Co
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030)<span id="vii.i-p146.1"></span>;
<span id="vii.i-p146.2"></span>[1Th
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014)<span id="vii.i-p146.2"></span>;
<span id="vii.i-p146.3"></span>[2Pe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004)<span id="vii.i-p146.3"></span>.)
Thus he compares this mortal disease to death; for he was so near death
that he utterly despaired of life.

<span id="vii.i-p147"></span><span id="vii.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p148"></span>**17.** *Lo, in peace ray bitterness was
bitter.*  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) Again, another
circumstance aggravates the severity of the distress; for sudden and
unexpected calamities disturb us more than those which come upon us in a
gradual manner. The grievousness of the disease was the more
insupportable, because it seized him suddenly while he enjoyed ease and
quietness; for nothing was farther from his thoughts than that he was
about to depart from this life. We know also that the saints sometimes
rely too much on prosperity, and promise to themselves unvarying
success, which David too acknowledges to have happened to himself, “In
my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved; but thou didst hide thy
face, and I was troubled.” (<span id="vii.i-p149.1"></span>[Ps.
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)<span id="vii.i-p149.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p150"></span>Nothing more distressing, therefore, could
happen to Hezekiah than to be taken out of life, especially when the
discomfiture and ruin of his enemy left him in the enjoyment of peace;
for I think that Hezekiah fell into this disease after the defeat of
Sennacherib, as has been already said. Amidst that joy and peace which
smiled upon him, lo, a heavy sickness by which Hezekiah is fearfully
distressed and tormented. This warns us that, since nothing is solid or
lasting in this life, and since all that delights us may be speedily
taken away, we ought not to grow sluggish in prosperity, but, even while
we enjoy peace, we ought to think of war, and adversity, and
afflictions, and, above all, to seek that peace which rests on God’s
fatherly kindness, on which our consciences may safely repose.

<span id="vii.i-p151"></span>*And thou hast been pleased (to rescue) my
soul from the pit.* This part of the verse admits of two meanings. Since
the verb <span id="vii.i-p151.1"></span>חשק *(chashak)* signifies
sometimes “to love,” and sometimes “to wish,” that meaning would not be
unsuitable, “It hath pleased thee to deliver my soul.” But if nothing be
understood, the style will be equally complete, and will flow not less
agreeably, “Thou, O God, didst embrace my soul with favor and kindness,
while it was lying in the grave.”  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)
It is well known that “soul” means “life;” but here the goodness of God
is proclaimed, in not ceasing to love Hezekiah, even when he might be
regarded as dead. In this way the copulative particle must be translated
*But.*

<span id="vii.i-p153"></span>*For thou hast cast behind thy back all my
sins.* By assigning the reason, he now leads us to the fountain itself,
and points out the method of that cure; for otherwise it might have been
thought that hitherto he had spoken of nothing else than the cure of the
body, but now he shews that he looks at something higher, namely, that
he had been guilty before God, but by his grace had been forgiven. He
affirms, indeed, that life has been restored to him, but reckons it of
higher value that he has been reconciled to God than a hundred or a
thousand lives. And, indeed,

<span id="vii.i-p154"></span>“it would have been better for us never to
have been born” (<span id="vii.i-p154.1"></span>[Mt
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#024)<span id="vii.i-p154.1"></span>)

<span id="vii.i-p155"></span>than by living a long life to add
continually new offenses, and thus to bring down on ourselves a heavier
judgment. He therefore congratulates himself chiefly on this ground,
that the face of God smiles cheerfully upon him; for to enjoy his favor
is the highest happiness.

<span id="vii.i-p156"></span>At the same time he declares that all the
distresses which God inflicts upon us ought to be attributed to our
sins, so that they who accuse God of excessive severity do nothing else
than double their’ guilt; and he does not only condemn himself for one
sin, but confesses that he was laden with many sins, so that he needed
more than one pardon. If, then, we sincerely seek alleviation of our
distresses, we must begin here; because when God is appeased, it is
impossible that it can be ill with us; for he takes no pleasure in our
distresses. It often happens with us as with foolish and thoughtless
persons, when they are sick; for they fix their attention on nothing but
(<span id="vii.i-p156.1"></span>συμπτώματα) symptoms or accidental
circumstances, and the pains which they feel, and overlook the disease
itself. But we ought rather to imitate skillful physicians, who examine
the causes of disease, and give their whole attention to eradicate those
causes. They know that outward remedies are useless, and even hurtful,
if the inward cause be unknown; for such remedies drive the whole force
of the disease inward, and promote and increase it, so that there is no
hope of cure.

<span id="vii.i-p157"></span>Hezekiah therefore perceived the cause of
his distress, that is, his sins; and when he had received the
forgiveness of them, he knew that punishment also ceased and was
remitted. Hence we see how absurd is the distinction of the Papists, who
wish to separate the remission of punishment from the remission of
guilt. But Hezekiah here testifies that punishment has been remitted to
him, because guilt has been remitted.

<span id="vii.i-p158"></span>We ought carefully to observe the form of
expression which Isaiah employs, *thou hast cast behind thy back;* for
it means that the remembrance of them is altogether effaced. In like
manner, a Prophet elsewhere says that God

<span id="vii.i-p159"></span>“casteth them into the depths of the sea.”
(<span id="vii.i-p159.1"></span>[Mic
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#019)<span id="vii.i-p159.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p160"></span>It is likewise said in another passage,
that he casteth them away

<span id="vii.i-p161"></span>“as far as the east is distant from the
west.”  
(<span id="vii.i-p161.2"></span>[Ps
103:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#012)<span
id="vii.i-p161.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p162"></span>By these modes of expression God assures us
that he will not impute to us the sins which he has pardoned; and if,
notwithstanding of this, he chastise us, he does it not as a judge, but
as a father, to train his children and keep them in the discharge of
their duty. Papists are mistaken in dreaming that punishments contain
some kind of satisfaction,  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) as if
God exacted vengeance, because he would not bestow a free pardon. But
when God chastises his people, he promotes their future advantage.

<span id="vii.i-p164"></span><span id="vii.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p165"></span>**18.** *For hell shall not confess thee*
 <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) When he says that he would not
have celebrated the praises of God, if his life had been taken away, he
promises that he will be thankful and will keep it in remembrance, and
at the same time declares that the highest and most desirable advantage
that life can yield to him is, that he will praise God. But although it
is a sign of true piety to desire life for no other reason than to spend
it in the unceasing praises of God, yet Hezekiah appears to employ
language which is too exclusive; for the death of believers declares the
glory of God not less than their life, and, being after death perfectly
united to God, they do not cease to proclaim his praises along with the
angels. Again, another question arises, “Why was Hezekiah so eager to
avoid death and so earnestly desirous of an earthly life?” And though
even this second question were answered, still the reader will likewise
call to remembrance, that this terror was not produced by death alone,
for the same Hezekiah, when his life was ended, did not resist, but
willingly yielded to God; but that the pious king, when he had been
struck by God’s wrath, grieved only on this account, that by his sins he
had excluded himself from life, as if he would never afterwards enjoy
any favor or blessing.

<span id="vii.i-p167"></span>On this also depends the answer to the
first question; for we need not wonder if the pious king, not only
supposing that he must depart out of life, but thinking that death is
the punishment of sins and the vengeance of God, groan and weep that he
is condemned as unworthy of devoting himself to the advancement of the
glory of God. All who have been struck by this thunderbolt are unable,
either living or dead, to celebrate the praises of God, but, being
overwhelmed with despair, must be dumb. In the same sense also David
says,

<span id="vii.i-p168"></span>“In death there is no remembrance of thee;
in the grave who shall praise thee?” (<span id="vii.i-p168.1"></span>[Ps
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="vii.i-p168.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p169"></span>And the whole Church says,

<span id="vii.i-p170"></span>“The dead shall not praise thee, nor those
that go down into silence.” (<span id="vii.i-p170.1"></span>[Ps
115:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#017)<span
id="vii.i-p170.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i-p171"></span>The reason is, that they who are ruined and
lost will have no ground of thanksgiving.

<span id="vii.i-p172"></span>Yet it ought likewise to be observed that
the saints, when they spoke in this manner, did not consider what kind
of condition awaited them after death, but, under the influence of the
pain which they now felt, looked only at the end for which they were
created and preserved in the world. The chief object of life, as we said
a little before, is that men should be employed in the service of God;
and with the same design God protects his Church in the world, because
it is his will that his name shall be celebrated. Now, he who sees
himself cast down, because he does not deserve to be reckoned, or to
hold a place, among the worshippers of God, does not calmly and
attentively, consider what he shall do after death, but, under the
darkening influence of grief, as if after death all the exercise of
piety would cease, takes from the dead the power of praising God,
because the glory of God appears to be buried along with the witnesses
of it.

<span id="vii.i-p173"></span><span id="vii.i-p173.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p174"></span>**19.** *The living, the living, he shall
confess thee.* He does not include all men without exception; for many
*live,* who yet extinguish the glory of God by their ingratitude, as far
as lies in their power, and undoubtedly have nothing farther from their
thoughts than that they were born to praise God. But he simply declares
that men, so long as God supports them in this life, may justly be
regarded as the lawful heralds of his glory, when he invites them, by
his kindness, to the discharge of that office. And this contrast shews
that the statement which he made a little before, that “in death or in
the grave there is no remembrance of God,” is a general declaration,
that they who would willingly be employed in praising God are deprived
of this favor, when they are driven out of the world.

<span id="vii.i-p175"></span>*As I do this day.* He solemnly declares
that he will be one of the witnesses of the glory of God, and thus gives
a manifest indication of gratitude towards God; for he declares that he
will not be forgetful, but will continually give thanks to God, and will
make known the favor which he has received; and that not only to the men
of his own age, but also to posterity, that they too may celebrate those
praises and adore the author of so great a favor.

<span id="vii.i-p176"></span>*The father shall make known to the sons
thy truth.* Hence we ought to learn a useful lesson, that children are
given to men on the express condition, that every man, by instructing
his children, shall endeavor, to the utmost of his power, to transmit
the name of God to posterity; and, therefore, the fathers of families
are chiefly enjoined to be careful in this respect, that they shall
diligently mention the benefits which God has bestowed on them. By the
word *truth h*e means that faithfulness which God exercises towards his
people, and all the testimonies of his grace by which he proves that he
is *true.*

<span id="vii.i-p177"></span><span id="vii.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p178"></span>**20.** *Jehovah to save me.*  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) He acknowledges that he was delivered,
not by the aid or industry of men, but solely by the kindness of God.
The rendering given by some, “It belongs to the Lord to save me,” does
not express enough, and appears to be more remote from the literal
meaning; for he praises not only the power of God, but also the work by
which he hath given an evident proof of it. In a word, he contrasts
God’s keeping with the death to which he had been sentenced; because,
having formerly dreaded him as a severe judge, he now avows him as his
deliverer, and leaps with joy.  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)

<span id="vii.i-p181"></span>*And we will sing our songs.* For the
reason now stated, he not only prepares himself for singing in token of
gratitude, but also calls on others to join and accompany him in this
duty, and on this account mentions *the Temple,* in which the assemblies
of religious men were held. Had be been a private individual and one of
the common people, still it would have been his duty to offer a public
sacrifice to God, that he might encourage others by his example. Much
more then was the king bound to take care that he should bring others to
unite with him in thanksgiving; especially because in his person God had
provided for the advantage of the whole Church.

<span id="vii.i-p182"></span>*All the days of our life.* He declares
that he will do his endeavor that this favor of God may be known to all,
and that the remembrance of it may be preserved, not only for one day or
for one year, but as long as he shall live. And indeed at any time it
would have been exceedingly base to allow a blessing of God so
remarkable as this to pass away or be forgot, ten; but, being forgetful,
we continually need spurs to arouse us. At the same time, he takes a
passing notice of the reason why God appointed holy assemblies. It was,
that all as with one mouth might praise him, and might excite each other
to the practice of godliness.

<span id="vii.i-p183"></span><span id="vii.i-p183.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p184"></span>**21.** *And Isaiah said* Isaiah now
relates what was the remedy which he prescribed to Hezekiah. Some think
that it was not a remedy, because*figs* are dangerous and hurtful to
*boils;* but that the pious king was warned and clearly taught by this
sign that the cure proceeded from nothing else than from the favor of
God alone. As the bow in the sky,  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)
by which God was pleased to testify that mankind would never be
destroyed by a flood, (<span id="vii.i-p185.2"></span>[Ge
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#013)<span id="vii.i-p185.2"></span>,)
appears to denote what is absolutely contrary to this; (for it makes its
appearance, when very thick clouds are gathering, and ready to fall as
if they would deluge the whole world;) so they think that a plaster,
which was not at all fitted for curing the disease, was purposely
applied by the Prophet, in order to testify openly that God cured
Hezekiah without medicines. But since figs are employed even by our own
physicians for maturing a pustule, it is possible that the Lord, who had
given a promise, gave also a medicine, as we see done on many other
occasions; for although the Lord does not need secondary means, as they
are called, yet he makes use of them whenever he thinks proper. And the
value of the promise is not lessened by this medicine, which without the
word would have been vain and useless; because he had received another
supernatural sign, by which he had plainly learned that he had received
front God alone that life of which he despaired.

<span id="vii.i-p186"></span><span id="vii.i-p186.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p187"></span>**22.** *Now, Hezekiah had said.* Some
explain this verse as if this also had been a sign given to Hezekiah,
and therefore, view it as connected with the preceding verse, and look
upon it as an exclamation of astonishment. But it is more probable that
in this passage the order has been reversed, as frequently takes place
with Hebrew writers, and that what was spoken last is related first.
Isaiah did not at the beginning say that Hezekiah had asked a sign,
though the sacred history (<span id="vii.i-p187.1"></span>[2Ki
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008)<span id="vii.i-p187.1"></span>)
attests it; and therefore he adds what he had left out at the proper
place.

<span id="vii.i-p188"></span>*That I shall go up.* He means that it will
be his chief object throughout his whole life to celebrate the name of
God; for he did not desire life for the sake of living at ease and
enjoying pleasure, but in order to defend the honor of God and the
purity of his worship. Let us therefore remember that God prolongs our
life, not that we may follow the bent of our natural disposition, or
give ourselves up to luxury, but that we may cultivate piety, perform
kind offices to each other, and frequently take part in the assembly of
the godly and the public exercises of religion, that we may proclaim the
truth and goodness of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc15006.htm#fr_70) <span
id="vii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p51"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p51.1"></span>S’ils ont
quelque loisir de reprendre haleine.” “If they have any leisure to draw
breath.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc15006.htm#fr_71) <span
id="vii.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p55"></span> “Set thine house in order. Heb., Give
charge concerning thy house.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc15006.htm#fr_72) <span
id="vii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p56"></span> <span id="vii.i-p56.1"></span>Quoad domum
taam, vel, domui tuae.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc15006.htm#fr_73) <span
id="vii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p79"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p79.1"></span>Puis qu’il
estoit ills et successeur de David.” “Since he was a son and successor
of David.”

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc15006.htm#fr_74) <span
id="vii.i-p82.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p83"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p83.1"></span>Si nous ne
daignons ouvrir la bouche pour prier.” “If we do not deign to open our
mouth in prayer.”

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc15006.htm#fr_75) <span
id="vii.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p88"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p88.1"></span>Quand on
leur apportoit nouvelles de *l’ ennemi.”* “When news were brought to
them about the enemy.”

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc15006.htm#fr_76) <span
id="vii.i-p90.8"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p91"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p91.1"></span>Tant sous le
vieil que sous le nouveau testament.” “Both under the Old and under the
New Testament.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc15006.htm#fr_77) <span
id="vii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p96"></span> This is evidently an oversight, but the
author’s reading is “ascenderat.” which corresponds to the French
version, “<span id="vii.i-p96.1"></span>qu’il estoit monte“ In Calvin’s
version, prefixed to the commentary on this chapter, <span
id="vii.i-p96.3"></span>ירדה *(yaradah)* is correctly rendered “<span
id="vii.i-p96.4"></span>descenderat,” that is, “had gone down.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc15006.htm#fr_78) <span
id="vii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p98"></span> See Note at the end of this volume — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc15006.htm#fr_79) <span
id="vii.i-p100.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p101"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p101.1"></span>Doit
considerer et savoir que ce que fait ici Ezechias, luy est enjoint en
cas semblable.” “Ought to consider and know that what Hezekiah does here
is enjoined on him in a similar case.”

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc15006.htm#fr_80) <span
id="vii.i-p101.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p102"></span> “The conjecture of Grotius, that Isaiah
dictated the psalm, or put it into Hezekiah’s mouth, is perfectly
gratuitous. That Hezekiah should compose a psalm is not more strange
than that he should make a collection of proverbs. (<span
id="vii.i-p102.1"></span>[Pr 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#001)<span
id="vii.i-p102.1"></span>.) It would have been far more strange if one
so much like David, in character and spirit, had not followed his
example in the practice of devotional composition.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc15006.htm#fr_81) <span
id="vii.i-p107.4"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p108"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p108.1"></span>Pour
adoucir la tristesse des fideles de ces tempsla.” “For soothing the
grief of the believers of that age.”

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc15006.htm#fr_82) <span
id="vii.i-p110.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p111"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p111.1"></span>Qu’il
faisoit son conte de mourir.” “That he laid his account with dying.”

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc15006.htm#fr_83) <span
id="vii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p117"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p117.1"></span>יה יה
(Yahh *Yahh)* is not an error of the text for <span
id="vii.i-p117.2"></span>יהוה (Yehovah) (Houbigant,) but an intensive
repetition similar to those in verses 17, 19. Or the second may be added
to explain and qualify the first. He did expect to see God, but not in
the land of the living.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc15006.htm#fr_84) <span
id="vii.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p130"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p130.1"></span>Et exauce
les souspirs faits en foy.” “And listens to sighs heaved in faith.”

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc15006.htm#fr_85) <span
id="vii.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p132"></span> The sense of “lifting-up” belongs not to
<span id="vii.i-p132.1"></span>דלל *(dalal)* but to <span
id="vii.i-p132.2"></span>דלה *(dalah)* Jerome adopted the sense of
“weakened,” and brought out the meaning by a supplement, in which he has
been followed by almost all modern commentators. “My eyes were weakened
(looking) on high.” This rendering has been almost literally adapted in
diodati’s *Italian* version. “<span id="vii.i-p132.3"></span>I mici
occhi erano scemati (riguardando) ad alto.” Professor Alexander
translates thus, “My eyes are weak (with looking) upward, or, on high.)”
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc15006.htm#fr_86) <span
id="vii.i-p133.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p134"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p134.1"></span>Le mal m’
oppresse.” “Disease oppresses me.”

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc15006.htm#fr_87) <span
id="vii.i-p134.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p135"></span> “Undertake for me; rescue me out of the
hand of the angel of death, and answer for me, to deliver me. The word
signifies ‘answering,’ or, as we say, ‘suretiship;’ as in that passage,
Answer (or, be surety) for thy servant for good. (<span
id="vii.i-p135.1"></span>[Ps
119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122)<span
id="vii.i-p135.1"></span>.)” — *Jarchi.* “Or, contend for me, undertake
my cause; for thus, according to Jarchi, <span
id="vii.i-p135.2"></span>עשוק *(gnashuk)* must be translated, if we read
it with Sin, (not Schin,) as he appears to have done; and in the
*Hebrew* copy which I have used the point is on the left horn of the
letter.” — *Breithaupt.*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc15006.htm#fr_88) <span
id="vii.i-p140.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p141"></span> I shall go softly. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc15006.htm#fr_89) <span
id="vii.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p145"></span> <span id="vii.i-p145.1"></span>Outre ces
ans-ci.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc15006.htm#fr_90) <span
id="vii.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p149"></span> “Behold, for peace I had great
bitterness,” or, “On my peace came great bitterness.” — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc15006.htm#fr_91) <span
id="vii.i-p151.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p152"></span> “Thou hast loved my soul, from the pit of
destruction. (This exactly agrees with our authors marginal reading.)
“We have here another instance of pregnant construction, to love from,
that is, so to love as to deliver from. This sense is expressed in the
English Bible by a circumlocution.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc15006.htm#fr_92) <span
id="vii.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p163"></span> “<span
id="vii.i-p163.1"></span>Satisfaction ou recompenses.” “Satisfaction or
compensations.”

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc15006.htm#fr_93) <span
id="vii.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p166"></span> “For the grave cannot praise thee.” — Eng.
Ver.  
“For the grave shall not confess thee.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc15006.htm#fr_94) <span
id="vii.i-p178.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p179"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p179.1"></span>Le
Seigneur m’a delivre.” “The Lord hath delivered me.”

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc15006.htm#fr_95) <span
id="vii.i-p179.2"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p180"></span> “The obvious ellipsis in the first clause
may be variously filled with ‘came, hastened, commanded, was ready, be
pleased,’ or with the verb ‘is,’ as an idiomatic periphrasis of the
future, ‘is to save’ for ‘will save.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc15006.htm#fr_96) <span
id="vii.i-p184.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p185"></span> “<span id="vii.i-p185.1"></span>L’arc en
la nuce.” “The bow in the cloud.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 39](cc15007)
