[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc15016)  [Next](cc15018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 15: Isaiah, Part III*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="xviii-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="xviii-p3"></span>THE PROPHECIES OF ISAIAH.

<span id="xviii-p4"></span>CHAPTERS 33—48

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 33

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1** Wo to thee that spoilest, And was not
spoiled; Who dealest wickedly, And they dealt not wickedly with thee!
When thou shalt have ceased to spoil, Thou shalt be spoiled; When thou
shalt have ceased to deal wickedly, They shall deal wickedly with thee.

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span>**2** O Jehovah, have pity upon us; We have
hoped in thee; Be thou, who hast been their arm in the morning, Our
salvation also in the time of trouble.

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**3** At the voice of the tumult the people
fled; At thy exaltation the nations were dispersed.

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>**4** And your prey shall be gathered by
your gathering of cater-pillars, Advancing thither, according to the
running of locusts.

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span>**5** Jehovah is exalted, who dwelleth on
high; He hath filled Zion with judgment And righteousness.

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span>**6** And the stability of thy times shall
be Strength, salvation, wisdom, And knowledge; The fear of Jehovah is
his treasure.

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span>**7** Behold, their messengers shall cry
without; The ambassadors of peace shall weep bitterly.

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span>**8** The roads are deserted, The traveler
hath ceased; He hath violated the treaty, He hath despised the cities,
He hath paid no regard to any man.

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>**9** The earth hath mourned And
languished; Lebanon is ashamed And hewn down; Sharon hath been made like
a wilderness; Bashan And Carmel have been shaken.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>**10** Now will I arise, saith Jehovah;
Now will I be exalted; Now will I lift up myself.

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span>**11** Ye shall conceive chaff; Ye shall
bring forth stubble; The fire of your breath shall devour you.

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span>**12** And the peoples shall be the
burnings of lime;  <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) As thorns cut
up shall they be burnt in the fire.

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span>**13** Hear, ye that are far off, what I
have done; Ye that are near, acknowledge my power.

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span>**14** The sinners in Zion are afraid;
Terror hath seized the hypocrites.  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) Which of us  <span
id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) shall dwell with devouring fire? Which
of us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

<span id="xviii.i-p20"></span>**15** He who walketh in righteousnesses
And speaketh what is right; Who despiseth the gain from violence And
calumny; Who shaketh his hands from accepting a bribe; Who stoppeth his
ear, that he may not hear blood; Who shutteth his eyes, that he may not
see evil.

<span id="xviii.i-p21"></span>**16** He shall dwell in high places;
Fortifications of rocks shall be his refuge; Bread shall be given to
him, And his waters (shall be) sure.

<span id="xviii.i-p22"></span>**17** Thine eyes shall see the king in
his beauty; They shall behold the land (that is) very far off.

<span id="xviii.i-p23"></span>**18** Thine heart shall meditate terror.
Where is the scribe? where is the weigher? Where is he who singleth out
the principal houses?

<span id="xviii.i-p24"></span>**19** The fierce people thou shalt not
see, The people of a confused lip, so that thou canst not understand; Of
a stammering tongue, so that thou canst not comprehend.

<span id="xviii.i-p25"></span>**20** Look at Zion, the city of our
solemnities;  <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) Thine eyes shall
see Jerusalem a peaceful habitation, A tent which shall not be carried
away, The stakes of which shall never be removed, And of which none of
the ropes shall be broken:

<span id="xviii.i-p27"></span>**21** Thus,  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) shall the mighty Jehovah there be to
us, A place of streams, of broad rivers, Through which there shall not
pass a ship with oars, And through which a splendid ship shall not pass.

<span id="xviii.i-p29"></span>**22** For Jehovah is our Judge; Jehovah
is our Lawgiver; Jehovah is our King; He himself will save us.

<span id="xviii.i-p30"></span>**23** Thy cords were loosed, So that they
did not fasten their mast, Nor spread the sail; Then was the prey of
much spoil divided; The lame also seized the prey.

<span id="xviii.i-p31"></span>**24** And the inhabitant shall not say, I
am sick; The people that dwell in it have been freed from iniquity.

<span id="xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 34

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span>**1** Draw near, ye nations, to hear; And
ye peoples, hearken. Let the earth hear, And its fullness; The world,
And all its productions.

<span id="xviii.ii-p4"></span>**2** For the indignation of Jehovah is on
all nations, And his fury on all their army; He hath destroyed them; He
hath delivered them to slaughter.

<span id="xviii.ii-p5"></span>**3** Their slain shall be east out; And
from their carcasses shall come up their stench; And the mountains shall
melt on account of their blood.

<span id="xviii.ii-p6"></span>**4** And all the armies of heaven shall
fade away, And shall be rolled up as a scroll. The heavens And all their
armies shall fall down, As a leaf falleth down from a vine, And as it
falleth from the fig-tree.

<span id="xviii.ii-p7"></span>**5** For my sword is made drunken in the
heavens. Behold, it shall come down on Edom, Even on the people of my
curse to judgment.

<span id="xviii.ii-p8"></span>**6** The sword of Jehovah hath been
filled with blood; It hath been made fat with fatness; Even with the
blood of lambs And of goats, With the fat of the kidneys of rams; For
the sacrifice of Jehovah is on Bozrah, And a great slaughter in the land
of Edom.

<span id="xviii.ii-p9"></span>**7** And the unicorns shall come down
with them, And the bullocks with the bulls; And their land shall be made
drunken with blood, And their dust shall be made fat with fatness.

<span id="xviii.ii-p10"></span>**8** For (it is) the day of vengeance of
Jehovah, The year of recompenses for the cause of Zion.

<span id="xviii.ii-p11"></span>**9** And her streams shall be turned
into pitch, And her dust into brimstone; And her land shall become
burning pitch.

<span id="xviii.ii-p12"></span>**10** By night And by day it shall not
be quenched; Its smoke shall continually go up; From generation to
generation it shall lie waste; Tone shall pass through it for ever And
ever.

<span id="xviii.ii-p13"></span>**11** Therefore shall the pelican And
the owl take possession of it; The great owl And the raven shall dwell
in it; And he shall stretch over it the cord of emptiness, And the
plummets of vanity.

<span id="xviii.ii-p14"></span>**12** They shall call her nobles without
a kingdom, And all her princes shall be nothing.

<span id="xviii.ii-p15"></span>**13** In her palaces she shall bring
forth thorns, And nettles And thistles in her fortresses; And she shall
be a habitation for dragons, And an abode for the young ones of the
ostrich.

<span id="xviii.ii-p16"></span>**14** And the wild beasts shall meet
with the satyrs; And the screech-owl shall cry to his companion; There
also shall the fairy dwell, And shall find for herself a peaceful abode.

<span id="xviii.ii-p17"></span>**15** There shall the owl make her nest,
And lay, And hatch And gather her young under her shadow; Yea, there
shall the vultures be gathered together, Every one with her mate.

<span id="xviii.ii-p18"></span>**16** Inquire at the book of Jehovah,
And read. Not one of those shall fail; Tot one shall want her mate; For
his mouth hath commanded, And his Spirit hath gathered them.

<span id="xviii.ii-p19"></span>**17** And he hath cast the lot for them;
And his hand hath divided it to them for ever, as by a cord. Therefore
they shall inhabit it; From generation to generation they shall dwell in
it.

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 35

<span id="xviii.iii-p3"></span>**1** The wilderness And the desert shall
be glad; The loathsome place shall rejoice, And shall flourish like the
lily.

<span id="xviii.iii-p4"></span>**2** Flourishing it shall flourish, And
shall even rejoice with rejoicing, And shall sing; The glory of Lebanon
shall be given to it, The beauty of Carmel And Sharon; They shall see
the glory of Jehovah, The majesty of our God.

<span id="xviii.iii-p5"></span>**3** Strengthen ye the weak hands,
Confirm the tottering knees.

<span id="xviii.iii-p6"></span>**4** Say to them that are trembling in
heart, Be strong, fear not. Behold, your God will come with vengeance;
God himself will come with a recompense,  <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) And will save you.

<span id="xviii.iii-p8"></span>**5** Then shall the eyes of the blind be
opened, And the ears of the deaf shall be opened.

<span id="xviii.iii-p9"></span>**6** Then shall the lame man leap like a
stag, The tongue of the dumb mall shall sound loudly; For waters shall
be digged in the desert, And rivers in the wilderness.

<span id="xviii.iii-p10"></span>**7** The dry place shall be changed
into a pool, And the parched country into fountains of waters; And in
the habitation of dragons, And in its lair, Shall be a place for the
reed And the rush.

<span id="xviii.iii-p11"></span>**8** And a path shall be there, And a
way, And it shall be called, The holy way. An unclean person shall not
pass through it; And he shall be to them one that walketh in the way,
That fools may not go astray.

<span id="xviii.iii-p12"></span>**9** There shall not be there a lion;
Nor shall a wild beast go up by it; Neither shall it be found there;
That the redeemed may walk.

<span id="xviii.iii-p13"></span>**10** Therefore shall the redeemed of
Jehovah return, And shall come to Zion with rejoicing; And everlasting
joy shall be on their head; And they shall obtain joy And gladness; And
sorrow And sighing shall flee away.

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 36

<span id="xviii.iv-p3"></span>**1** It came to pass in the fourteenth
year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib, king of Assyria, came up
against all the defended cities of Judah, And took them.

<span id="xviii.iv-p4"></span>**2** Then the king of Assyria sent
Rabshakch from Lachish, with a powerful army, to Jerusalem, to king
Hezekiah, who stood at the conduit of the upper pool in the way of the
fullers field.

<span id="xviii.iv-p5"></span>**3** And there came out to him Eliakim,
son of Hilkiah, who was over the house, And Shebna the chancellor, And
Joab, the son of Asaph, the secretary.

<span id="xviii.iv-p6"></span>**4** And Rabshakeh said to them: Say now
to Hezekiah? Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What
confidence is this in which thou trustest? I have said, (only a word of
the lips.)

<span id="xviii.iv-p7"></span>**5** Counsel And strength for war. Now in
whom hast thou trusted, that thou hast rebelled against me?

<span id="xviii.iv-p8"></span>**6** Behold, thou hast rusted in that
broken staff of reed, on Egypt, on which if one lean, it will go into
his hand And pierce it. Such is Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to all who have
confidence in him.

<span id="xviii.iv-p9"></span>**7** And if thou shalt say to me, We
trust in Jehovah our God; is it not, he whose high places And altars
Hezekiah hath taken away, And hath said to Judah And Jerusalem, Ye shall
worship before this altar?

<span id="xviii.iv-p10"></span>**8** Now, come, give a hostage to my
master, the king of Assyria. I will give thee two thousand horses; wilt
thou have horsemen to set upon them?

<span id="xviii.iv-p11"></span>**9** And how dost thou despise the face
of one captain of the least of my masters servants, And place thy
confidence in Egypt for chariots And horsemen?

<span id="xviii.iv-p12"></span>**10** And have I now come up without
Jehovah to this land, to destroy it? Jehovah said to me: Go up against
this land, to destroy it.

<span id="xviii.iv-p13"></span>**11** Then said Eliakim, And Shebna, And
Joah, to Rabshakeh: Speak, I pray, to thy servants, in the Syrian
language, (for we understand it,) And speak not to us in the Jewish
language, in the hearing of the people who are on the wall.

<span id="xviii.iv-p14"></span>**12** And Rabshakeh said: Hath my master
sent me to thy master And to thee to speak those words? Is it not to the
men who sit on the wall, that they may eat their own dung, And drink
their own urine with you?

<span id="xviii.iv-p15"></span>**13** Therefore Rabshakeh stood, And
cried with a loud voice in the Jewish language, And said: Hear the words
of the great king, the king of Assyria.

<span id="xviii.iv-p16"></span>**14** Thus saith the king, Let not
Hezekiah impose upon you, for he will not be able to deliver you.

<span id="xviii.iv-p17"></span>**15** And let not Hezekiah make you
trust in Jehovah, saying, By delivering will Jehovah deliver us; this
city shall not be given up into the hand of the king of Assyria.

<span id="xviii.iv-p18"></span>**16** Listen not to Hezekiah; for thus
saith the king of Assyria, Make with me a blessing, And come out; And
let every one eat of his own vine, And let every one eat of his own
fig-tree, And let every one drink the waters of his own well.

<span id="xviii.iv-p19"></span>**17** Till I come And take you into a
land like your own land, a land of corn And wine, a land of bread And
vineyards.

<span id="xviii.iv-p20"></span>**18** Lest perhaps Hezekiah deceive you,
saying, Jehovah will deliver us. Have any of the gods of the nations
delivered their land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

<span id="xviii.iv-p21"></span>**19** Where is the god of Hamath And
Arpad? Where is the god of Sepharvaim? Have they delivered Samaria out
of my hand?

<span id="xviii.iv-p22"></span>**20** Who is there among all the gods of
those lands that hath delivered his land out of my hand; that Jehovah
should rescue Jerusalem out of my hand?

<span id="xviii.iv-p23"></span>**21** They were silent, And did not
answer him a word; for this was the commandment of the king, Do not
answer him.

<span id="xviii.iv-p24"></span>**22** Then came Eliakim, who was over
the house And Shebna the chancellor, And Joab, the son of Asaph, the
secretary, to Hezekiah, with rent garments, And told him the words of
Rabshakeh.

<span id="xviii.v"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 37

<span id="xviii.v-p3"></span>**1** Now, it came to pass, that Hezekiah,
when he heard this rent his clothes, And covered himself with sackcloth,
And went into the house of Jehovah.

<span id="xviii.v-p4"></span>**2** At the same time he sent Eliakim, who
was over the palace, And Shebna the chancellor, and the eldest of the
priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the son of Amoz, the prophet.

<span id="xviii.v-p5"></span>**3** Who said to him, Thus saith Hezekiah,
This is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, And of blasphemy; for the
children have come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring
forth.

<span id="xviii.v-p6"></span>**4** If, perhaps, Jehovah thy God will
hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom his master, the king of Assyria, hath
sent to curse the living God, And to rebuke with words which Jehovah thy
God hath heard. Thou shalt therefore lift up a prayer for the remnant
that is still left.

<span id="xviii.v-p7"></span>**5** The servants of King Hezekiah came to
Isaiah.

<span id="xviii.v-p8"></span>**6** And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall
ye say to your master: Thus saith Jehovah, Fear not the words which thou
hast heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have
reproached me.

<span id="xviii.v-p9"></span>**7** Behold, I will bring a wind upon him;
for he shall hear a report, And shall return to his own land; And I will
cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.

<span id="xviii.v-p10"></span>**8** And Rabshakeh, having returned,
found the king of Assyria besieging Libnah; for he had heard that he was
departed from Lachish.

<span id="xviii.v-p11"></span>**9** And hearing concerning Tirhakah,
king of Ethiopia, He hath gone out to fight against thee; after having
heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying:

<span id="xviii.v-p12"></span>**10** Thus shall ye say to Hezekiah king
of Judah: Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee, saying,
Jerusalem shall not be given up into the hand of the king of Assyria.

<span id="xviii.v-p13"></span>**11** Behold, thou hast heard what the
kings of Assyria have done to at hands, how they have destroyed them;
And shalt thou be delivered?

<span id="xviii.v-p14"></span>**12** Have the gods of the nations
delivered those whom my fathers destroyed, Gozan, And Itaran, And
Rezeph, And the children of Edom, who were in Telassar?

<span id="xviii.v-p15"></span>**13** Where is the king of Hamath, the
king of Arphad, the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena And Iva?

<span id="xviii.v-p16"></span>**14** Hezekiah received the letter from
the hand of the messengers, And read it, And went up to the house of
Jehovah, and spread it before Jehovah.

<span id="xviii.v-p17"></span>**15** Then Hezekiah prayed to God,
saying:

<span id="xviii.v-p18"></span>**16** O Jehovah of hosts, God of Israel,
who dwellest between the cherubim, thou alone art God over all the
kingdoms of the earth; thou hast made heaven And earth.

<span id="xviii.v-p19"></span>**17** Incline thine ear, O Jehovah, And
hear; open thine eyes, O Jehovah, And see; And hear all the words of
Sennacherib, who hath sent to reproach the living God.

<span id="xviii.v-p20"></span>**18** Truly, O Jehovah, the kings of
Assyria have destroyed all the nations, And their land,

<span id="xviii.v-p21"></span>**19** And have cast their gods into the
fire; for they were not gods, but the work of men’s hands, wood, And
stone; therefore they have destroyed them.

<span id="xviii.v-p22"></span>**20** And now, O Jehovah our God, save us
from his hand; that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou
alone art Jehovah.

<span id="xviii.v-p23"></span>**21** Then Isaiah, the son of Amoz, sent
to Hezekiah, saying: Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, Since thou
hast prayed to me concerning Sennacherib, king of Assyria;

<span id="xviii.v-p24"></span>**22** This is the word which Jehovah hath
spoken concerning him: The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee,
hath laughed at thee; The daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at
thee. Whom hast thou reproached?

<span id="xviii.v-p25"></span>**23** And whom hast thou blasphemed?
Against whom hast thou exalted thy Voice, And lifted up thy hands on
high? Even against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="xviii.v-p26"></span>**24** By the hand of thy servants thou
hast reproached the Lord, And hast said, By the multitude of my chariots
I will go up, To the heights of the mountains, To the sides of Lebanon;
I will cut down the tallest of her cedars, Her choice firs; Then will I
come to the height of his border, And even to his level forest.  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249)

<span id="xviii.v-p28"></span>**25** I will dig, And will drink waters;
With the sole of my feet I will dry up all the lakes of the siege.

<span id="xviii.v-p29"></span>**26** Hast thou not heard that I made it
long ago, That I formed it from ancient days? And should I now bring it
to be a desolation, To be heaps of ruins, like fortified cities?

<span id="xviii.v-p30"></span>**27** For their inhabitants were maimed,
Were terrified And confounded; They were made like the grass of the
field And the green herb, Like the grass of the house-tops, which
withereth before it is ripe.

<span id="xviii.v-p31"></span>**28** I know thy sitting down, And thy
going out, And thy entrance, And thy indignation against me.

<span id="xviii.v-p32"></span>**29** Because thou wast angry against me,
Thy tumult hath come up into my ears. Therefore will I put my hook
 <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) in thy nostril, And my bridle
ill thy lips, And will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

<span id="xviii.v-p34"></span>**30** And this shall be a sign to thee;
Thou shalt eat this year that which groweth of itself, And in the second
year that which springeth up of itself; And in the third year ye shall
sow And reap, And shall plant vineyards, And eat the fruit of them.

<span id="xviii.v-p35"></span>**31** And that which shall be preserved
of the house of Judah, And that which shall be left, Shall vet strike
root downward, And shall bear fruit upward.

<span id="xviii.v-p36"></span>**32** For out of Jerusalem shall go forth
a remnant, And that which shall be preserved of Mount Zion. The zeal of
Jehovah of hosts will do this.

<span id="xviii.v-p37"></span>**33** Therefore thus saith Jehovah
concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not enter into this city, Nor
throw an arrow into it; And he who is defended by a shield shall not
seize it, Nor cast a balister against it.

<span id="xviii.v-p38"></span>**34** By the way that he came shall he
return, And shall not enter into this city, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xviii.v-p39"></span>**35** And I will be a protector to this
city, To save it, for my own sake, And for the sake of my servant David.

<span id="xviii.v-p40"></span>**36** And the angel of Jehovah went
forth, And smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred And eighty-five
thousand; And when the people arose early in the morning, behold, they
were all corpses of dead men.

<span id="xviii.v-p41"></span>**37** Then Sennacherib, king of Assyria,
departed, And went, And returned, And dwelt in Nineveh.

<span id="xviii.v-p42"></span>**38** And it came to pass, while he was
worshipping his god in the temple of Nisroch,  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) that his sons, Adrammeleeh And
Sharezar, smote him with the sword, And fled into the land of Armenia;
And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="xviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 38

<span id="xviii.vi-p3"></span>**1** In those days was Hezekiah sick unto
death. And Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came to him, And said to
him: Thus saith Jehovah, Give charge concerning thy house;  <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252) for thou shalt die, And shalt not
live.

<span id="xviii.vi-p5"></span>**2** Then Hezekiah turned his face to the
wall, And prayed to Jehovah.

<span id="xviii.vi-p6"></span>**3** And he said, I beseech thee, O
Jehovah, remember now that I have walked before thee in truth, And with
a perfect heart, And have done what was right in thine eyes. And
Hezekiah wept with sore weeping.  <span
id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253)

<span id="xviii.vi-p8"></span>**4** Then was communicated the word of
Jehovah to Isaiah, saying,

<span id="xviii.vi-p9"></span>**5** Go, And say to Hezekiah: Thus saith
Jehovah, the God of Jacob thy father: I have heard thy prayer, And have
seen thy tears: Behold, I add to thy days fifteen years.

<span id="xviii.vi-p10"></span>**6** And I will deliver thee And this
city out of the hand of the king of Assyria; And I will be a protector
to this city.

<span id="xviii.vi-p11"></span>**7** And this shall be a sign to thee
from Jehovah, that Jehovah will do this thing, of which he hath spoken:

<span id="xviii.vi-p12"></span>**8** Behold, I bring back the shadow of
degrees, by which it hath gone down on the sun-dial of Ahaz, ten
degrees. And he sun went back on the sundial ten degrees, by which it
had already gone down.

<span id="xviii.vi-p13"></span>**9** The writing of Hezekiah, king of
Judah, when he had been sick, And had recovered from his sickness.

<span id="xviii.vi-p14"></span>**10** I said in the cutting off of my
days, I shall go to the gates of the grave; I am deprived of the residue
of my years.

<span id="xviii.vi-p15"></span>**11** I said, I shall not see God, God
in the land of the living; I shall no longer behold man with the
inhabitants of the world.

<span id="xviii.vi-p16"></span>**12** Sly habitation is departed, And is
removed from me as a shepherds tent; I have cut off; as a weaver, my
life: From lifting up  <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) he will
cut me off; From day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

<span id="xviii.vi-p18"></span>**13** I reckoned  <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) till the dawn; As a lion, so he hath
broken my bones; From the dawn till night thou wilt make an end of me.

<span id="xviii.vi-p20"></span>**14** As a crane or a swallow, I
chattered; I mourned as a dove. My eyes were lifted up on high, O Lord,
it hath oppressed me; comfort me.

<span id="xviii.vi-p21"></span>**15** What shall I say? He who hath
spoken to me hath done it. I shall be moved  <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) all the days of my life In the
bitterness of my soul.

<span id="xviii.vi-p23"></span>**16** O Lord, by all who shall live
beyond those (years) Shall the life of my spirit (be known;) And that
thou didst cause me to sleep, And didst make me alive.

<span id="xviii.vi-p24"></span>**17** Behold, in peace my bitterness was
bitter; And thou hast been pleased (to rescue) my soul from the pit;
 <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) For thou hast east behind thy
back all my sins.

<span id="xviii.vi-p26"></span>**18** For hell shall not confess thee;
Death shall not praise thee; They that go down into the pit shall not
wait for thy truth.

<span id="xviii.vi-p27"></span>**19** The living, the living, he shall
confess to thee, As I (do) this day; The father to the sons shall make
known thy truth.

<span id="xviii.vi-p28"></span>**20** Jehovah to save me; And we will
sing our songs All the days of our life in the house of Jehovah.

<span id="xviii.vi-p29"></span>**21** Now, Isaiah had said, They shall
take a mass of figs, and apply it to the boil, And they shall live.

<span id="xviii.vi-p30"></span>**22** For  <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) Hezekiah had said, What is the sign
that I shall go up into the house of the Lord?

<span id="xviii.vii"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 39

<span id="xviii.vii-p3"></span>**1** At that time Merodach-Baladan, son
of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters And a present to Hezekiah,
after having heard that he had been sick, And was recovered.

<span id="xviii.vii-p4"></span>**2** And Hezekiah was glad on account of
them, And showed to them the house of his treasure, silver, And gold,
And spices, precious ointment, And all his armory, And all that was
contained in his treasures; there was not anything in his house, And in
all his kingdom, which Hezekiah did not show.

<span id="xviii.vii-p5"></span>**3** Then came Isaiah the prophet to
king Pezekiah, And said to him, What did those men say. And whence came
they to thee. Hezekiah answered, They came to me from a distant country,
from Babylon.

<span id="xviii.vii-p6"></span>**4** Then he said, What have they seen
in thy house? And Hezekiah said, They have seen all that is in my house;
And there is nothing in my treasures which I have not showed to them.

<span id="xviii.vii-p7"></span>**5** Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Hear
the word of Jehovah of hosts:

<span id="xviii.vii-p8"></span>**6** Behold, the days come, that all
that is in thy house, And all that thy fathers have treasured up till
this day, shall be carried to Babylon; And nothing shall be left, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="xviii.vii-p9"></span>**7** Of thy sons which shall issue from
thee, whom thou shalt beget, shall they take; And they shall be eunuchs
in the palace of the king of Babylon.

<span id="xviii.vii-p10"></span>**8** Hezekiah said to Isaiah, Good is
the word of Jehovah which thou hast spoken. And he said, At least there
shall be peace And permanency in my days.

<span id="xviii.viii"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 40

<span id="xviii.viii-p3"></span>**1** Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people,
Saith your God.

<span id="xviii.viii-p4"></span>**2** Speak ye according to the heart of
Jerusalem; And cry to her, That her warfare is accomplished; That her
iniquity  <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) is pardoned; For she
hath received at the hand of Jehovah Double for all her sins.

<span id="xviii.viii-p6"></span>**3** A voice crying in the wilderness,
Prepare the way of Jehovah; Make straight in the desert a path for our
God.

<span id="xviii.viii-p7"></span>**4** Every valley shall be exalted, And
every mountain And hill shall be laid low; And the crooked shall be made
straight, And the rough places shall become a plain.

<span id="xviii.viii-p8"></span>**5** And the glory of Jehovah shall be
revealed, And all flesh shall see it together; That the mouth of Jehovah
hath spoken it.

<span id="xviii.viii-p9"></span>**6** The voice said,  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) Cry; And I said, What shall I cry? All
flesh is grass, And all the goodliness of it as the flower of the field.

<span id="xviii.viii-p11"></span>**7** The grass is withered; The flower
is faded; Because the breath of Jehovah hath blown upon it. Surely, the
people is grass.

<span id="xviii.viii-p12"></span>**8** The grass withereth; The flower
fadeth; But the word of our God shall stand for ever.

<span id="xviii.viii-p13"></span>**9** Go up into the high mountain, O
Zion, that bringest tidings; Lift up thy voice aloud, O Jerusalem, that
bringest tidings; Lift it up, be not afraid; Say to the cities of Judah,
Behold your God!

<span id="xviii.viii-p14"></span>**10** Behold, the Lord Jehovah shall
come with strength; And his arm shall be powerful. Behold, his reward is
with him, And his work is before his face.

<span id="xviii.viii-p15"></span>**11** He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd; He shall gather the lambs in his arm, And shall early them in
his bosom, And shall gently lead those that are with young.

<span id="xviii.viii-p16"></span>**12** Who hath measured the waters in
the hollow of his hand, And measured the heavens with his palm, And held
with three fingers the dust of the earth, And weighed the mountains in
scales, And the heavens in a balance?

<span id="xviii.viii-p17"></span>**13** Who hath instructed the spirit
of Jehovah, Or hath guided him by counsel, And hath taught him?

<span id="xviii.viii-p18"></span>**14** From whom sought he counsel,
that he might advise him? And who taught him the path of judgment, And
instructed him in knowledge, And showed to him the way of wisdom?

<span id="xviii.viii-p19"></span>**15** Lo, the nations are as a drop of
a bucket, And are reckoned as the small dust of the balance; Lo, he
taketh up the islands as a very little thing.

<span id="xviii.viii-p20"></span>**16** And Lebanon would not be
sufficient to make a fire, Nor its beasts for a burnt-offering.

<span id="xviii.viii-p21"></span>**17** All nations are as nothing
before him, And in comparison of him are reckoned less than nothing, And
what hath no existence.

<span id="xviii.viii-p22"></span>**18** To whom then have ye likened
God? Or what resemblance will ye appoint to him?

<span id="xviii.viii-p23"></span>**19** The workman prepareth a graven
image, The goldsmith overlayeth it with gold, And (casteth) golden
chains.

<span id="xviii.viii-p24"></span>**20** The poor man chooseth for his
offering wood that will not rot; He procureth a skilful workman. To
prepare a graven image that shall not be moved.

<span id="xviii.viii-p25"></span>**21** Do ye not know? Have ye not
heard? Hath it not been told you from the beginning? Have ye not been
instructed from the foundations of the earth?

<span id="xviii.viii-p26"></span>**22** It is he that sitteth on the
circle of the earth, The inhabitants of which are as locusts; He
stretcheth out heaven as a curtain, And spreadeth it out as a tent to be
inhabited.

<span id="xviii.viii-p27"></span>**23** He bringeth the mighty to
nothing, The rulers of the earth as if they were not.

<span id="xviii.viii-p28"></span>**24** It is as if they had not been
planted; It is as if they had not been sown; It is as if their stock had
no root in the earth. Even while he bloweth on them, they wither, And
the whirlwind carrieth them away as stubble.

<span id="xviii.viii-p29"></span>**25** And to whom will ye liken me,
That I may be like? saith the Holy One.

<span id="xviii.viii-p30"></span>**26** Lift up your eyes on high, And
see who hath created those things, Bringing out their army by number; He
will call to all of them by name; By the greatness of his strength, And
by the might of his power, None shall fail.  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261)

<span id="xviii.viii-p32"></span>**27** Why wilt thou say,  <span
id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) O Jacob? And why wilt thou speak, O
Israel? My way is hidden from Jehovah, And my judgment passeth away from
my God.

<span id="xviii.viii-p34"></span>**28** Hast thou not known? hast thou
not heard That Jehovah is the God of eternity, Who hath created the ends
of the earth? He fainteth not, And is not worn out by fatigue; And there
is no searching of his understanding.

<span id="xviii.viii-p35"></span>**29** He giveth power to the faint,
And to him who hath no might he imparteth strength.

<span id="xviii.viii-p36"></span>**30** The youths are wearied, And they
faint; And the young men by falling full.

<span id="xviii.viii-p37"></span>**31** But they who wait upon Jehovah
shall gather new strength; They shall raise their wings as eagles; They
shall run, And shall not be wearied; They shall walk, And shall not
faint.

<span id="xviii.ix"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 41

<span id="xviii.ix-p3"></span>**1** Be silent to me, O islands; And let
the peoples collect their strength; Let them draw near; then let them
speak; Let us come near together to judgment.

<span id="xviii.ix-p4"></span>**2** Who raised up righteousness from the
east, Called him to his foot, Gave nations before him, And subdued
kings; Gave them as dust to his sword, And as driven stubble to his bow?

<span id="xviii.ix-p5"></span>**3** He pursued them; he departed in
peace, By the way that his foot had not gone.

<span id="xviii.ix-p6"></span>**4** Who hath appointed And done it. He
who calleth the nations from the beginning. I Jehovah am the first, And
with the last I am the same.

<span id="xviii.ix-p7"></span>**5** The islands saw, And were afraid;
The farthest boundaries of the earth trembled; They drew near And came.

<span id="xviii.ix-p8"></span>**6** Every one brought assistance to his
neighbor, And said to his neighbor, Be courageous.

<span id="xviii.ix-p9"></span>**7** The carver encouraged the founder,
And he that beateth with the hammer him that striketh by turns; And he
said, It is good for soldering; And he fastened it with nails, that it
might not be moved.

<span id="xviii.ix-p10"></span>**8** But thou, O Israel, (art) my
servant, O Jacob, whom I have chosen, Thou seed of Abraham my friend.

<span id="xviii.ix-p11"></span>**9** For I have taken thee from the ends
of the earth; From its eminences have I called thee; And I have said to
thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, And have not cast thee
off;

<span id="xviii.ix-p12"></span>**10** Fear not, for I am with thee; Be
not terrified, for I am thy God; For I strengthen thee; yea,  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) I will help thee; Yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

<span id="xviii.ix-p14"></span>**11** Behold, they who provoke thee,
Shall be ashamed And shall blush; They who contend with thee, Shall
become as nothing, And shall perish.

<span id="xviii.ix-p15"></span>**12** Thou shalt seek them, And shalt
not find them; They who contend with thee shall be as nothing, And they
who fight with thee shall be as consumption.

<span id="xviii.ix-p16"></span>**13** For I (am) Jehovah thy God, Taking
hold of thy right hand, And saying to thee, Fear not, I will help thee.

<span id="xviii.ix-p17"></span>**14** Fear not, thou worm Jacob, Ye dead
men of Israel. I will help thee, saith Jehovah, And thy Redeemer,  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="xviii.ix-p19"></span>**15** Behold, I have made thee a cart,
Like a sharp thrashing instrument having teeth; Thou shalt thrash the
mountains, And beat them small; And thou shalt reduce the hills to dust.

<span id="xviii.ix-p20"></span>**16** Thou shalt winnow them; And the
wind shall carry them away, And the whirlwind shall scatter them. But
thou shalt rejoice in Jehovah; Thou shalt glory in the Holy One of
Israel.

<span id="xviii.ix-p21"></span>**17** The needy And poor shall seek
waters, Which are nowhere to be seen; Their tongue shall be parched with
thirst. I Jehovah will listen to them; I the God of Israel will not
forsake them.

<span id="xviii.ix-p22"></span>**18** I will open rivers on lofty
mountain-tops, And fountains in the midst of a plain; I will make the
wilderness pools of waters, And the dry land fountains of waters.

<span id="xviii.ix-p23"></span>**19** In the wilderness I will give the
cedar, The sloe, the myrtle, And the pine; I will set in the desert the
fir-tree, The elm And poplar together.

<span id="xviii.ix-p24"></span>**20** Therefore let them see And know;
Let them likewise think And understand; That the hand of Jehovah hath
done this, And that the Holy One of Israel hath created it.

<span id="xviii.ix-p25"></span>**21** Plead your cause, saith Jehovah;
Produce your strong reasons, saith the king of Jacob.

<span id="xviii.ix-p26"></span>**22** Let them bring them forth, And let
them tell us what is to come; Let them declare the former things which
were, And we will lay our heart to them; And we shall know the latest of
those things; And declare ye to us what is to come.

<span id="xviii.ix-p27"></span>**23** Tell what shall be hereafter, That
we may know that ye are gods; Yea, do good, or do evil, That we may
relate And likewise may see  <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) it.

<span id="xviii.ix-p29"></span>**24** Behold, you are of nothing, And
your work is of nothing; (The man) hath chosen abomination in you.

<span id="xviii.ix-p30"></span>**25** I have raised him from the north,
And he hath come; From the rising of the sun shall he call on my name;
And he shall come to princes, as to clay; And he shall tread the clay
like a potter.

<span id="xviii.ix-p31"></span>**26** Who hath declared from the
beginning, that we may know? Beforehand, And we will say, (He is)
righteous. Surely, there is none that declareth; Surely, there is none
that causeth (us) to hear; Surely, there is none that heareth your
words.

<span id="xviii.ix-p32"></span>**27** The first to Zion; Behold, behold
them; And I will give a messenger to Jerusalem.

<span id="xviii.ix-p33"></span>**28** I looked, And there was none; I
inquired at them, And there was no counselor; I asked them, And they
answered not a word.

<span id="xviii.ix-p34"></span>**29** Behold, all are vanity; And their
works are a failure; Their images are wind And confusion.

<span id="xviii.x"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 42

<span id="xviii.x-p3"></span>**1** Behold, my servant; I will lean upon
him;  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) Mine sleet, in whom my
soul is well pleased. I have put my Spirit upon him; He shall exhibit
judgment to the nations.

<span id="xviii.x-p5"></span>**2** He shall not cry aloud; He shall not
lift up, Nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets.

<span id="xviii.x-p6"></span>**3** A bruised reed he shall not break,
And the smoking flax he shall not quench; He shall bring forth judgment
in truth.

<span id="xviii.x-p7"></span>**4** He shall not thine, nor be
discouraged, Till he set judgment in the earth; And the islands shall
wait for his law.

<span id="xviii.x-p8"></span>**5** Thus saith God  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) Jehovah, The Creator of the heavens,
And who stretcheth them out; Who spreadeth out the earth, And its
productions; Giving breath to the people who dwell in it, And spirit to
them who walk on it.

<span id="xviii.x-p10"></span>**6** I Jehovah have called thee in
righteousness, And will hold thee by thy hand; And will keep thee, And
will place thee for a covenant of the people, For a light of the
nations;

<span id="xviii.x-p11"></span>**7** That thou mayest open the eyes of
the blind; That thou mayest bring out the prisoners from the prison, And
from the house of the prison those who sit in darkness.

<span id="xviii.x-p12"></span>**8** I am Jehovah, that is my name; And
my glory will I not give to another, Nor my praise to graven images.

<span id="xviii.x-p13"></span>**9** Behold, the former things have come;
And new things do I declare; Before they spring up, I will make them
known to you.

<span id="xviii.x-p14"></span>**10** Sing to Jehovah a new song, His
praise from the end of the earth; Ye who go down to the sea, And its
fullness; Ye islands, And their inhabitants.

<span id="xviii.x-p15"></span>**11** Let the desert And its cities cry
aloud, The villages where Kedar dwelleth; Let the inhabitants of the
rock sing; And let them shout from the top of the mountains.

<span id="xviii.x-p16"></span>**12** Let them give glory to Jehovah, And
let them declare his praise in the islands.

<span id="xviii.x-p17"></span>**13** Jehovah shall go forth as a giant;
And as a warrior shall he rouse his zeal; He shall cry aloud; he shall
shout; He shall strengthen himself against his adversaries.

<span id="xviii.x-p18"></span>**14** I have kept silence for a long
time; I have been silent, And have refrained myself; I will cry like a
woman in travail; I will destroy And swallow at once.

<span id="xviii.x-p19"></span>**15** I will reduce mountains And hills
to a wilderness; I will dry up all their herbage; I will make the rivers
islands; And I will dry up the pools.

<span id="xviii.x-p20"></span>**16** And I will lead the blind by a way
which they knew not; I will cause them to walk in paths which they had
not known; And I will turn darkness before them into light, And crooked
ways into a plain. These things  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268)
will I do to them, And I will not forsake them.

<span id="xviii.x-p22"></span>**17** They shall be turned back, With
shame shall they be ashamed, Who trust in a graven image; And who say to
a molten image; Ye are our gods.

<span id="xviii.x-p23"></span>**18** O ye deaf, hear; And ye blind, be
attentive to see.

<span id="xviii.x-p24"></span>**19** Who is blind but my servant? Who is
deaf but my messenger whom I send? Who is blind as he that is perfect,
And blind as the servant of Jehovah?

<span id="xviii.x-p25"></span>**20** By seeing many things which thou
observest not; By opening the ears, so that he may not hear.

<span id="xviii.x-p26"></span>**21** Jehovah is well-pleased on account
of his righteousness, That he may honor And magnify his law.

<span id="xviii.x-p27"></span>**22** But this people hath been robbed
And trodden down; They shall all be snared in prisons, And they shall be
hidden in caves; They shall be made a spoil, And there shall be none to
deliver; A prey, And none shall say, Restore.

<span id="xviii.x-p28"></span>**23** Who among you will hear this? Who
will hearken? Who will attend for the time to come?

<span id="xviii.x-p29"></span>**24** Who gave Jacob to be a prey, And
gave up Israel to the robbers? Was it not Jehovah? Because we have
sinned against him, And they would not walk in his ways, And did not
hearken to his law.

<span id="xviii.x-p30"></span>**25** Therefore he hath poured upon him
The fury of his anger, And the strength of battle. It set him on fire on
every side, And he gave no heed to it; It burned him, But he laid it not
to heart.

<span id="xviii.xi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 43

<span id="xviii.xi-p3"></span>**1** And now thus saith Jehovah, Thy
Creator, O Jacob, And thy Former, O Israel; Fear not, for I have
redeemed (thee); I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine.

<span id="xviii.xi-p4"></span>**2** When thou shalt pass through the
waters, I will be with thee; Through rivers, they shall not overflow
thee; When thou shalt pass through the fire itself, thou shalt not be
scorched; And the flame shall not kindle on thee.

<span id="xviii.xi-p5"></span>**3** For I am Jehovah thy God; The Holy
One of Israel, thy Savior; I have given Egypt as the price of thy
redemption, Ethiopia And Sheba in thy room.

<span id="xviii.xi-p6"></span>**4** Because thou hast been precious in
my eyes, Thou hast been honorable, And I have loved thee. I will give a
man in thy stead, And peoples instead of thy soul.

<span id="xviii.xi-p7"></span>**5** Fear not, for I am with thee; I will
bring thy seed from the East, And I will gather thee from the West.

<span id="xviii.xi-p8"></span>**6** I will say to the North, Give; And
to the South, Hinder not; Bring my sons from a distance, And my
daughters from the end of the earth.

<span id="xviii.xi-p9"></span>**7** All are called by my name, And I
have created them for my glory; I have formed them; yea, I have made
them.

<span id="xviii.xi-p10"></span>**8** That I may bring forth the blind
people, who have eyes; And the deaf, who have ears.

<span id="xviii.xi-p11"></span>**9** Let all the nations be assembled
together, And let the peoples be gathered. Who is there among them to
declare this, And to cause us to hear the former things? Let them
produce their witnesses, they shall be declared righteous; But let them
hear, And they shall says, It is truth.

<span id="xviii.xi-p12"></span>**10** Ye are my witnesses, saith
Jehovah, And my servant, whom I have chosen. Therefore ye shall know And
believe me; And ye shall understand that I am He; Before me there was no
god formed; Nor shall there be after me.

<span id="xviii.xi-p13"></span>**11** I, I  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) am Jehovah; And there is no Savior
besides me.

<span id="xviii.xi-p15"></span>**12** I have declared, And have saved,
And have made you to heat; And there is no strange (god) among you. Ye
are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, That I am God.

<span id="xviii.xi-p16"></span>**13** Even before the day was, I was;
And there is none to deliver out of my hand. I will do; And who shall
disannul it?

<span id="xviii.xi-p17"></span>**14** Thus saith Jehovah, your Redeemer,
The Holy One of Israel; For your sake have I sent to Babylon, And have
made them come down. They are all fugitives; And the cry of the
Babylonians is in the ships.

<span id="xviii.xi-p18"></span>**15** I am Jehovah, your Holy One; The
Creator of Israel, your King.

<span id="xviii.xi-p19"></span>**16** Thus saith Jehovah, Who maketh a
way in the sea, And a path in the stormy waters.

<span id="xviii.xi-p20"></span>**17** When he bringeth (them) out, The
chariot And the horse, The army And the power, Lie down together, so
that they do not rise. They are quenched; they are quenched like flax.

<span id="xviii.xi-p21"></span>**18** Remember not the former things,
And mention not the things that are ancient.

<span id="xviii.xi-p22"></span>**19** Behold, I do a new thing; Now it
shall arise; Shall ye not know it? This time  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) I will make a way ill the wilderness,
Rivers in the desert.

<span id="xviii.xi-p24"></span>**20** The beast of the field shall honor
me; The dragons, And the young of the ostrich; Because I will give
waters in the wilderness, Rivers in the desert, To give drink to my
people, my chosen.

<span id="xviii.xi-p25"></span>**21** This people have I created for
myself; They shall declare my praise.

<span id="xviii.xi-p26"></span>**22** And thou hast not called on me, O
Jacob; But thou hast been wearied of me, O Israel.

<span id="xviii.xi-p27"></span>**23** Thou hast not brought to me the
cattle of thy burnt-offerings; And thou hast not honored me with thy
sacrifices; I have not made thee to serve with offering, Nor to be
wearied with incense.

<span id="xviii.xi-p28"></span>**24** Thou hast not bought cane for me
with money, And hast not made me drunk with the fat of thy sacrifices;
But thou hast made me to serve with thy sills; And thou hast made me to
weary with thine iniquities.

<span id="xviii.xi-p29"></span>**25** I, I  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) am He, Who blot out thine iniquities
for my own sake; Therefore I will not remember thy sins.

<span id="xviii.xi-p31"></span>**26** Bring to my remembrance; Let us
plead together; declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.

<span id="xviii.xi-p32"></span>**27** Thy first father hath sinned, And
thy teachers have transgressed against me.

<span id="xviii.xi-p33"></span>**28** Therefore I will pollute the
princes of the sanctuary; And I will make Jacob a curse, And Israel a
reproach.

<span id="xviii.xii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 44

<span id="xviii.xii-p3"></span>**1** Yet now hear, O Jacob, my servant,
And Israel whom I have chosen.

<span id="xviii.xii-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah, thy Maker, And
thy Former from the womb; He will help thee. Fear not, O Jacob, my
servant, O beloved, whom I have chosen.

<span id="xviii.xii-p5"></span>**3** For I will pour waters on that
which is thirsty, And floods on the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit on
thy seed, And my blessing on thy productions.

<span id="xviii.xii-p6"></span>**4** And they shall spring up as among
the grass, As willows near the streams of waters.

<span id="xviii.xii-p7"></span>**5** One shall say, I belong to Jehovah;
And another shall be called by the name of Jacob; Another shall write
with his hand, (I belong) to Jehovah, And shall be surnamed by the name
of Israel.

<span id="xviii.xii-p8"></span>**6** Thus saith Jehovah, the King of
Israel, And his Redeemer, Jehovah of hosts; I am the first, And I am
also the last; And besides me there is no God.

<span id="xviii.xii-p9"></span>**7** And who as I shall call, Shall
declare this, And set it in order before me, Since I appointed the
people of the age? And let them tell them the things that are coming,
And the things that shall come.

<span id="xviii.xii-p10"></span>**8** Fear ye not, And be not terrified.
Have I not since then made thee to hear? And have I not declared it?
Therefore ye are my witnesses, That there is no God besides me, And
there is no strong God whom I know not.

<span id="xviii.xii-p11"></span>**9** The formers of a graven image are
all vanity; And their desirable things do no; profit; And they are their
own witnesses That they do not see, nor know; And therefore they shall
be confounded.

<span id="xviii.xii-p12"></span>**10** Who is the maker of God? And who
is it that hath molten a graven image, Which is profitable for nothing?

<span id="xviii.xii-p13"></span>**11** Behold, all his companions shall
be ashamed; And the workmen themselves are of men; Though they all
assemble, And stand up, They shall tremble, And be ashamed together.

<span id="xviii.xii-p14"></span>**12** The worker in iron shall take the
file;  <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) He shall work in the
coals; He shall form it with hammers; He shall work in it with the arm
of his strength; He shall even be hungry, so that his strength shall
fail; He shall not drink water, so that he shall faint.

<span id="xviii.xii-p16"></span>**13** The carpenter stretcheth out his
rule; He marketh it with a dyed thread; He adjusteth it with planes; He
shapeth it with a compass; He maketh it according to the shape of a man,
According to the image of a man, That it may remain in the house.

<span id="xviii.xii-p17"></span>**14** He shall cut down for himself
cedars; He shall take the pine And the oak; He shall supply himself with
trees of the forest; He shall plant a pine which the rain shall nourish.

<span id="xviii.xii-p18"></span>**15** Then shall a man have them for
burning; For he shall take of them, And shall warm himself; Yea, he
shall heat an oven, And shall bake bread; He shall also make a god, And
worship it; He shall make an idol, And shall bow down before it.

<span id="xviii.xii-p19"></span>**16** Part of it he shall burn in the
fire; Of a part he shall make ready flesh, And shall cat it; He shall
roast roast. And shall be satisfied. Next, he shall warm himself, And
shall say, Ah! I am warmed, And have seen the fire.

<span id="xviii.xii-p20"></span>**17** The remainder of it he turneth
into a god, Into his graven image; He boweth down before it; He
worshippeth And prayeth to it, Saying, Deliver me; for thou art my God.

<span id="xviii.xii-p21"></span>**18** They have not known, nor
understood; For he hath smeared their eyes, that they may not see, And
their heart, that they may not understand.

<span id="xviii.xii-p22"></span>**19** It cloth not return into their
heart; They have not knowledge, nor understanding, to say, Part of it I
have burned in the fire; Yea, on the coals of it have I baked bread; I
have roasted flesh, And have eaten it; Shall I turn the remainder of it
into an abomination? Shall I bow down before the stock of a tree?

<span id="xviii.xii-p23"></span>**20** He feedeth on ashes: A deceived
heart turneth him aside, So that he cannot deliver his soul, nor sly, Is
there not a lie in my right hand?

<span id="xviii.xii-p24"></span>**21** Remember these things, O Jacob;
And Israel, for thou art my servant; I have formed thee; thou art my
servant; O Israel, do not thou forget me.

<span id="xviii.xii-p25"></span>**22** I have blotted out, as a cloud,
thy iniquities; As a vapor, thy sins. Return thou to me; For I have
redeemed thee.

<span id="xviii.xii-p26"></span>**23** Praise, O ye heavens; For Jehovah
hath done it; Shout, ye lower parts of the earth; Burst forth into
praise, ye mountains; O forest. And every tree that is in it; For
Jehovah hath redeemed Jacob, And will be glorified ill Israel.

<span id="xviii.xii-p27"></span>**24** Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer,
And thy Maker from the womb: I am Jehovah, who maketh all things, Who
stretcheth out the heavens above, Who spreadeth out the earth by my
power;  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273)

<span id="xviii.xii-p29"></span>**25** Who frustrateth the tokens of the
diviners; Who maketh the soothsayers mad; Who turneth wise men backward;
And who maketh their knowledge foolishness;

<span id="xviii.xii-p30"></span>**26** Who upholdeth the word of his
servant, And performeth the counsel of his messengers; Saying to
Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; And to the cities of Judah, Ye shall
be built; And I will raise up her ruins.

<span id="xviii.xii-p31"></span>**27** Who saith to the deep, Be thou
dried up; And I will make dry thy rivers;

<span id="xviii.xii-p32"></span>**28** Who saith to Cyrus, Thou art my
shepherd; And he shall fulfil all my will; Even saying to Jerusalem,
Thou shalt be built; And to the Temple, Thou shalt be founded.

<span id="xviii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 45

<span id="xviii.xiii-p3"></span>**1** Thus saith Jehovah to his
anointed, To Cyrus, whose right hand I have taken hold of, To subdue
nations before him; Therefore will I loose  <span
id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) the loins of kings; To open the doors
before him; Therefore the gates shall not be shut.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p5"></span>**2** I will go before thee; And will
make straight the crooked ways; I will break asunder the brazen doors;
And I will hew down the iron bars.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p6"></span>**3** And I will give thee treasures of
darkness, And things hidden in secret places; That thou mayest know that
I am Jehovah, Who call thee by thy name; Even the God of Israel.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p7"></span>**4** For the sake of my servant Jacob,
And for the sake of Israel, mine elect; I will call thee by thy name; I
will surname thee, though thou hast not known me.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p8"></span>**5** I am Jehovah, And there is none
besides me; There is no god besides me; I have girded thee, though thou
hast not known me.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p9"></span>**6** Therefore shall they know, From
the rising of the sun, And from the west, That there is none besides me.
I am Jehovah; And there is none besides me.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p10"></span>**7** Forming light, And creating
darkness; Making peace, And creating evil; I Jehovah do all these
things.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p11"></span>**8** Drop down, ye heavens, from
above; And let the clouds pour down righteousness; Let the earth be
opened; And let salvation And righteousness come forth; Let her bring
them forth together: I Jehovah have created it.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p12"></span>**9** Wo to him that striveth with his
Maker! A potsherd to the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to
his maker, Why hast thou made? And, Thy work hath no hands?

<span id="xviii.xiii-p13"></span>**10** Wo to him that saith to his
father, Why hast thou begotten And to the woman, Why dost thou bring
forth?

<span id="xviii.xiii-p14"></span>**11** Thus saith Jehovah, The Holy One
of Israel, And his Maker; Ask me of things to come; Concerning my sons
command ye me, And concerning the work of my hands.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p15"></span>**12** I have made the earth, And have
created man upon it; It is I, whose hands have stretched out the
heavens; And all their army have I commanded.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p16"></span>**13** I have raised him up in
righteousness, And will make straight all his ways. He shall build my
city, And shall release my captivity; Not for price nor for reward,
Saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p17"></span>**14** Thus saith Jehovah; The labor of
Egypt, the merchandise of Ethiopia, And the Sabeans of great stature,
Shall pass over to thee, And shall be thine; They shall walk behind
thee; In chains shall they pass over, And shall reverence And beseech
thee. Surely  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) God is in thee;
And there is no other besides God.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p19"></span>**15** Truly thou art a God that hidest
thyself, O God of Israel, the Savior!

<span id="xviii.xiii-p20"></span>**16** All of them shall be covered
with shame, And shall even blush: With shame shall go away together All
the makers of graven images.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p21"></span>**17** Israel hath been saved in
Jehovah with eternal salvation; Ye shall not be covered with shame;
Neither shall ye blush even for ever.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p22"></span>**18** For thus saith Jehovah, who
createth the heavens; God himself, the Maker of the earth; Who made it,
And furnished it; He created it not empty; He formed it to be inhabited;
I am Jehovah, And there is none besides me.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p23"></span>**19** Not in secret have I spoken, In
a place of the darkness of the earth; Not in vain have I said to the
seed of Jacob, Seek me; I Jehovah speak righteousness; I declare what is
right.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p24"></span>**20** Assemble yourselves, And come;
Draw near together, ye rejected  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276)
of the nations. They know nothing, who carry about the wood of a graven
image, And who pray to a god who cannot save.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p26"></span>**21** Publish ye, And bring forward;
Yea, let them consult together. Who hath caused this to be heard from
the beginning? And who hath declared it from ancient times? Is it not I
Jehovah? And there is no other god besides me; A just God, And a Savior;
There is none besides me.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p27"></span>**22** Look to me, And ye shall be
saved, All the ends of the earth; For I am God, And there is none else.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p28"></span>**23** By myself have I sworn; In
righteousness hath the word gone out of my mouth, Which shall not
return; That to me every knee shall bend; Every tongue shall swear.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p29"></span>**24** Surely in Jehovah, will he say,
Have I righteousness And strength; To him shall he come; And all who
provoke him shall be ashamed.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p30"></span>**25** In Jehovah all the seed of
Israel Shall be justified, And shall glory.

<span id="xviii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 46

<span id="xviii.xiv-p3"></span>**1** Bel hath bowed down; Nebo is
fallen; Their images shall be on the beasts And the cattle; They who
carry you are burdened by you; A wearisome burden.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p4"></span>**2** They bowed down; they stooped
together; And they could not withdraw themselves from the binden; And
their soul hath gone away into captivity.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p5"></span>**3** Hear me, O house of Jacob; All ye
the remnant of the house of Israel; Who are borne from the womb; Who are
carried from the breast.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p6"></span>**4** And even to old age I am the same;
And even to gray hairs I will carry. I have made, And I will bear; I
will carry, And will save.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p7"></span>**5** To whom will ye liken, And make me
equal, And compare me, that I may be like?

<span id="xviii.xiv-p8"></span>**6** Lavishing gold out of bags;
Weighing silver in a balance; They shall hire a goldsmith, to make of it
a god; To bow down before it, And to worship it.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p9"></span>**7** They shall carry him on the
shoulder; They shall lead him about; They shall put him in his place;
There shall he stand; From his place shall he not remove; Moreover, if
any one cry to him, he will not answer, Nor deliver him from his
trouble.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p10"></span>**8** Remember ye this, And blush;
 <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) Return to your heart, ye
transgressors.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p12"></span>**9** Remember the former things of old;
For I am God, And there is none besides, And there is none like me.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p13"></span>**10** Declaring the latest event from
the beginning, And from antiquity those things which had not yet been
done; Saying, My counsel shall stand, And I will do whatever I wish.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p14"></span>**11** Calling a bird  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) from the east, From a distant country
the man of my counsel; I have spoken, And accordingly I will accomplish
it; I have thought, And I will do it.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p16"></span>**12** Hear me, ye that are stubborn in
heart, Who are far from righteousness.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p17"></span>**13** I will cause my righteousness to
come near, And it shall not be delayed; And my salvation shall not
tarry; And I will place salvation in Zion, And my glory in Jerusalem.

<span id="xviii.xv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 47

<span id="xviii.xv-p3"></span>**1** Come down, And sit in the dust, O
virgin daughter of Babylon; Sit on the ground; There is no throne for
the daughter of the Babylonians; For they shall no more call thee tender
And delicate.

<span id="xviii.xv-p4"></span>**2** Take millstones, And grind meal;
Unbind thy curled locks, make bare the feet; Uncover the limbs, that
thou mayest cross the rivers.

<span id="xviii.xv-p5"></span>**3** Thy baseness shall be exposed, And
thy shame shall be seen; I will take vengeance, And will not meet a man.
 <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279)

<span id="xviii.xv-p7"></span>**4** Our Redeemer, his name is Jehovah of
hosts, The Holy One of Israel.

<span id="xviii.xv-p8"></span>**5** Sit thou silent, enter into
darkness, O daughter of the Babylonians; For they shall no longer call
thee the mistress of kingdoms.

<span id="xviii.xv-p9"></span>**6** I was angry with my people; I
profaned my inheritance; And I gave them up into thy hand; Thou didst
not show compassion to them; On the old man didst thou heavily lay thy
yoke.

<span id="xviii.xv-p10"></span>**7** And thou saidst, I shall for ever
be a mistress. Hitherto thou hast not applied thy mind to it, And hast
not remembered her end.

<span id="xviii.xv-p11"></span>**8** But now hear this, thou delicate
woman, That sitteth confidently; Who saith in her heart, I am, And there
is none besides me; I shall not sit as a widow, And I shall not know
bereavement.

<span id="xviii.xv-p12"></span>**9** But those two things shall suddenly
come to thee, Bereavement And widowhood; In their perfection shall they
come upon thee, For the multitude  <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) of thy divinations, And for the
abundance of thy auguries.

<span id="xviii.xv-p14"></span>**10** For thou trustedst in thy malice;
Thou saidst, No one seeth me. Thy wisdom And thy knowledge have led thee
astray; And thou saidst in thy heart, It is I, And there is none besides
me.

<span id="xviii.xv-p15"></span>**11** Therefore shall evil come upon
thee, the dawn of which thou knowest not crushing shall fall upon thee,
which thou shalt not be able to avert; Destruction shall suddenly come
upon thee, which thou knowest not;  <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281)

<span id="xviii.xv-p17"></span>**12** Stand now amidst thy divinations,
And amidst the multitude of thy auguries, In which thou hast wearied
thyself from thy youth: If perhaps thou mayest be profited, If perhaps
thou mayest prevail.

<span id="xviii.xv-p18"></span>**13** Thou hast wearied thyself with the
multitude of thy counsels; Let the binders of the heavens, The watchers
of the stars, who predict by the moon, Stand now And deliver thee, From
those things which shall come upon thee.

<span id="xviii.xv-p19"></span>**14** Behold, they shall he as stubble;
The fire shall burn them; They shall not deliver their soul from the
strength of the flame; There shall not be a coal to warm, Nor a light at
which they may sit.

<span id="xviii.xv-p20"></span>**15** So shall they be to thee with whom
thou weariedst thyself, Thy traders from thy youth. Every one shall
wander into his own quarter; There shall be no one to save thee.

<span id="xviii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 48

<span id="xviii.xvi-p3"></span>**1** Hear this, O house of Jacob, Ye who
are called by the name of Israel, Who have come forth from the waters of
Judah, Who swear by the name of Jehovah, And remember the God of Israel,
Not in truth, nor in righteousness.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p4"></span>**2** For from the holy city they are
called, And they rely on the God of Israel, Whose name is Jehovah of
hosts.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p5"></span>**3** Long ago did I declare the former
things; They went out of my mouth; I published them; I did them
suddenly, And they came.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p6"></span>**4** For I knew that thou art obstinate;
And thy neck is all iron sinew; And thy forehead is of brass.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p7"></span>**5** Long ago did I declare them to
thee; Before they came, I showed to thee; Lest perhaps thou shouldst
say, My idol hath done these things; My graven image And my molten image
hath commanded them.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p8"></span>**6** Thou hast heard; see all things;
And will ye not declare them? Even now have I made thee to hear new
things, And hidden things, which thou didst not know.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p9"></span>**7** Now for the first time have they
been created, And not long ago, nor by a succession of time; Thou hadst
not heard them; Lest thou shouldst say, Behold, I knew.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p10"></span>**8** Surely thou hadst not heard;
Surely thou hadst not known; Surely it is not long since thine ear was
opened; For I knew that by transgressing thou didst transgress;
Therefore have I called thee a rebel from the womb.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p11"></span>**9** For my names sake I will delay my
fury; And for my praise I will restrain myself toward thee, So as not to
cut thee off.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p12"></span>**10** Behold, I have tried thee, And
not like silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p13"></span>**11** For mine own sake, for mine own
sake, will I do it; For how shall my name be profaned? And I will not
give my glory to another.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p14"></span>**12** Hear me, O Jacob, And O Israel,
my called; I, even I, am the first; Also I am the last.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p15"></span>**13** Surely my hand hath founded the
earth; And my right hand hath measured  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) the heavens with the palm; When I call
them they stand up  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) together.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p18"></span>**14** Assemble yourselves, all of you,
And hear. Who among them declareth those things? Jehovah hath loved him,
And will execute his pleasure against Babylon, And his arm  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) against the Babylonians.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p20"></span>**15** I, I  <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) have spoken; Surely I have called him,
I have led him; Therefore he shall prosper in his way.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p23"></span>**16** Draw near to me, hear this. I
have not spoken in secret from the beginning; Since the thing was done,
there was I; And now the Lord Jehovah, And his Spirit, hath sent me.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p24"></span>**17** Thus saith Jehovah, thy Redeemer,
The Holy One of Israel. I am Jehovah thy God, Who teacheth thee
profitably, Who directeth thee in the way which thou goest.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p25"></span>**18** O if thou hadst hearkened to my
commandments! Then should thy peace have been as a river, And thy
righteousness as the waves of the sea.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p26"></span>**19** Thy seed should have been as the
sand, And the children of thy womb as the small stones of it; Her name
would not be cut off, And would not be destroyed before my face.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p27"></span>**20** Come forth from Babylon; Flee
from the Babylonians. With the voice of rejoicing tell this; Publish,
And carry it even to the end of the earth. Say ye, Jehovah hath redeemed
his servant Jacob.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p28"></span>**21** Therefore they thirsted not when
he led them through the deserts; He made water to flow to them from the
rock; He clave the rock, And the waters flowed out.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p29"></span>**22** There is no peace, saith Jehovah
to the wicked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc15017.htm#fr_243) <span
id="xviii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span> Or, Burnt lime.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc15017.htm#fr_244) <span
id="xviii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p18"></span> Or, The wicked.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc15017.htm#fr_245) <span
id="xviii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p19"></span> Or, Who instead of us?

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc15017.htm#fr_246) <span
id="xviii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p26"></span> Or, Of our assemblies.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc15017.htm#fr_247) <span
id="xviii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p28"></span> Or, For if.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc15017.htm#fr_248) <span
id="xviii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p7"></span> Or, He will come with the recompense of
God.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc15017.htm#fr_249) <span
id="xviii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p27"></span> Or, To the forest of his plain.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc15017.htm#fr_250) <span
id="xviii.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p33"></span> Or, My ring.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc15017.htm#fr_251) <span
id="xviii.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p43"></span> Or, While he was worshipping in the
temple of Nisroch, his god.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc15017.htm#fr_252) <span
id="xviii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p4"></span> Or, Give charge to thy house.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc15017.htm#fr_253) <span
id="xviii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="xviii.vi-p7.1"></span>Et
Ezechias pleura amerement.” “And Hezekiah wept bitterly.”

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc15017.htm#fr_254) <span
id="xviii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p17"></span> Or, Through leanness; or, Through
sickness; or, By taking away.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc15017.htm#fr_255) <span
id="xviii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p19"></span> Or, I determined; or, I laid down.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc15017.htm#fr_256) <span
id="xviii.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p22"></span> Or, I shall walk trembling.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc15017.htm#fr_257) <span
id="xviii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p25"></span> Or, Thou hast loved my soul from the pit
of destruction.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc15017.htm#fr_258) <span
id="xviii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p31"></span> Or, Now.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc15017.htm#fr_259) <span
id="xviii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p5"></span> Or, Her misery is ended.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc15017.htm#fr_260) <span
id="xviii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p10"></span> Or, Was saying.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc15017.htm#fr_261) <span
id="xviii.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p31"></span> Or, None shall be wanting.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc15017.htm#fr_262) <span
id="xviii.viii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p33"></span> Or, Why wouldst thou say?

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc15017.htm#fr_263) <span
id="xviii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p13"></span> Or, Surely.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc15017.htm#fr_264) <span
id="xviii.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p18"></span> Or, Thy Protector.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc15017.htm#fr_265) <span
id="xviii.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p28"></span> Or, May be astonished.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc15017.htm#fr_266) <span
id="xviii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p4"></span> Or, I will uphold him.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc15017.htm#fr_267) <span
id="xviii.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p9"></span> Or, The mighty.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc15017.htm#fr_268) <span
id="xviii.x-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p21"></span> Or, These words.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc15017.htm#fr_269) <span
id="xviii.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p14"></span> “<span id="xviii.xi-p14.1"></span>Ce
suis-je, ce suis-je.” “It is I, it is I.”

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc15017.htm#fr_270) <span
id="xviii.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p23"></span> Or, Surely.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc15017.htm#fr_271) <span
id="xviii.xi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p30"></span> “<span id="xviii.xi-p30.1"></span>Ce
suis-je, ce suis-je.” “It is I, it is I.”

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc15017.htm#fr_272) <span
id="xviii.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p15"></span> Or, The tongs.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc15017.htm#fr_273) <span
id="xviii.xii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p28"></span> Or, By myself.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc15017.htm#fr_274) <span
id="xviii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p4"></span> Or, I will ungird.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc15017.htm#fr_275) <span
id="xviii.xiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p18"></span> Or, Only.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc15017.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xviii.xiii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p25"></span> Or, Ye distant.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc15017.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xviii.xiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p11"></span> Or, Take courage.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc15017.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xviii.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p15"></span> Or, a thought.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc15017.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xviii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p6"></span> Or, As a man.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc15017.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xviii.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p13"></span> Or, In the multitude.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc15017.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xviii.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p16"></span> “<span id="xviii.xv-p16.1"></span>Et tu
ne sqauras d’ou il viendra.” “And thou shalt not know whence it shall
come.”

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc15017.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xviii.xvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p16"></span> Or, Hath upheld.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc15017.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xviii.xvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p17"></span> Or, They shall stand up.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc15017.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xviii.xvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p19"></span> Or, It is work.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc15017.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xviii.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p21"></span> “<span id="xviii.xvi-p21.1"></span>Ce
suis-je, ce suis-je.” “It is I, it is I”

<span id="xviii.xvi-p22"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sun-Dial of Ahaz](cc15018)
