[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu05)  [Next](mu07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### CHAPTER III.

### THE INTERNATIONAL LEGION OF VIGILANTES

### AND

### THE LEADERSHIP OF ETERNAL RIGHT IDEAS

**For countless centuries men have accepted or have rejected a new
idea,—not from the standpoint of whether the "Idea" was good or bad, but
from the wholly unintelligent and idiotically illogical basis, of
whether they have or have not liked the one who presented it.** If such
a one is a member of their profession, their lodge, or their church, and
if he is as tall or as short, as stout or as slender as they may prefer;
and if the sound of his voice is pleasant and the color of his eyes
attractive, then of course the idea he is presenting must be all right,
and so from this profound basis of judgment,—they accept it. **There is
but little thought given as to whether the "Idea" itself is "Right" or
"Wrong,"—"Good" or "Bad," since human personality has constituted the
major factor in its consideration.**

**However, if the one who seeks to present a plan or an idea to a group
of men, does not happen to "Belong," or if such men do not like the way
he combs his hair, there is but little chance that they will even take
the time to listen to his idea.**

After spending over sixty years of time,—more than sixty millions of
dollars ($60,000,000.00).—and (in the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

case of a number of the members) virtually a lifetime in testing and
demonstrating irrefutably and conclusively each and every one of their
discoveries,—The Sponsors of The International Institute of Universal
Research and Administration have had no intention of giving any person
or group of persons, the opportunity of judging their program for the
establishment of a much needed new worldwide economic system, **from the
standpoint of the color of its Sponsors' hair.**

**Three plus three equals six, and is just as true and just as useful in
the working out of a mathematical problem when stated by a "tall man,"
as it is when stated by a "short one."**

**It is high time those of us who think that we are intelligent
creatures, started using the priceless faculties of "Reason and
Independence of Thought " with which we have been divinely endowed.** It
is high time that we learned to "judge righteously and justly," and when
an idea is presented for our consideration, that we judge its value by
whether we think it is good or bad, right or wrong, and not by whether
we like or dislike the personality of its sponsors, or the method of its
presentation. Therefore, due to the previously described necessity of
keeping the headquarters of The Institute and the identities of its
Sponsors permanently unknown, and of the further desirability and wisdom
of having its program and recommendations judged entirely upon their
merits, a plan was finally adopted which complies with both of these
requirements, and which will be able to win the requisite approval and
support of the two hundred million

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (200,000,000)
intelligent, right-thinking men and women, who will comprise our
world-wide audience.

**By the year 1919, our Research Department had learned that there was
but "One Solution" to mankind's age-old problems of war and poverty, and
that the concerted action of not less than two hundred million
(200,000,000) people would be required for the successful application of
this One and Only Solution. They had learned that The Institute's
Sponsors and their organization's headquarters must remain permanently
unknown or this plan could not possibly succeed. "The only leaders the
world could ever be allowed to know, would have to consist of the
Institute's ideas and ideals."**

Towards the end of the year 1919, the first steps in the accomplishment
of these results were taken. It was decided that some hundreds of young
men and women would be chosen from all parts of the world, representing
each of the major nationalities and racial groups, each of the
agricultural, industrial, professional, vocational and cultural groups,
and that they would be selected only after they had proven their sincere
desire to serve mankind. These young men and women, chosen for their
qualities of morality, integrity, courage, industry, perseverance,
education and intelligence, would be invited to undergo a fifteen year
part-time course of instruction under the supervision of the various
members of The Institute's Research Department. Before being accepted
they would each be shown a number of the Research Department's
discoveries, to assist them in forming what would be the most vital
decision of their entire lives. They would then

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

be offered the opportunity of participating,—as a member of The
International Legion of Vigilantes,—in the consummation of The
Institute's program. Provided however, that in consideration of the
privilege of instruction and the opportunity of directly participating
in this great world program, that they would sign a contract of which
the following is a partial outline:

1st. To the best of their understanding and ability, to obey the Golden
Rule in their relationships with their brother man, and to ceaselessly
strive to benefit all mankind, irrespective of race, color, religion,
education, training or ability;

2nd. To never reveal their association with The International Institute
of Universal Research and Administration, nor to ever attempt to
discover the identity of any member thereof (nor to ever seek such
information) without the personal authorization of the director in
charge of their instruction. Should one's affiliation become known, even
to the members of that one's own family, without such previous
authorization, or under circumstances beyond his control, he would
immediately sever any and all direct relationship with the activities of
The Institute;

3rd. To obey without question or delay, any and all orders received from
one's director, even though one might thereby jeopardize his freedom or
life, provided however, that such orders in no way conflict with Christ
Jesus’ Sermon on The Mount, The Ten Commandments as written in the King
James version of the Old Testament, nor the established laws of any
nation which grants its citizens

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

the privileges of free speech and the rights of peaceable assembly;

4th. To neither use, nor purchase for the use of others, any
intoxicating liquors, opium, or any form of dope, nor to use any food or
drug or indulge in any action which might even temporarily deprive one
of the full and unimpaired use of his mental faculties;

5th. To serve The Research and Administrative Departments of The
International Institute of Universal Research and Administration, to the
best of one's talents and abilities, throughout one's lifetime, without
either financial remuneration or monetary profit of any kind whatsoever.
To freely render such service in behalf of the human race, that peace
and joy might some day erase the age-old signs of suffering and
privation, from the fear-lined faces of the world's starving and
homeless millions;

6th. When the order is publicly released announcing the program of The
International Institute of Universal Research and Administration, to
thereafter ceaselessly strive to direct the thoughts of those to whom
the program is presented,—not to one's official position, importance or
personality,—but wholly to the value of The Institute's program, and to
the eternal and unchanging dependability of the leadership of
**"Constructive Ideas,"** based upon the **"Golden Rule"** and equality
of economic security for all. To ceaselessly strive to prove to mankind
the wisdom of selecting such ideas as the only solid or safe foundation
upon which to build a new world-wide economic system and to do so in
order that the value of useful and constructive

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

ideas may thereby be recognized as a more dependable type of leadership
to support and to follow, than the constantly changing, and seldom
dependable qualities of human personality, "which are here for a day and
have gone on the morrow."

**These vows together with a number of similar and irrevocable pledges,
constituted the conditions under which some hundreds of deeply sincere
young men and women were selected from the world's various civilized
nations, and accepted as co-workers by the members of The Institute's
Research and Administration Department.**

Before the end of the year 1936, the beneficial influence of this
International Legion of Vigilantes was recognized and willingly accepted
by many of the clear-thinking men and women of every nation. Although
but few of its members will ever be known to the public,—due to the
hazard of revealing their identities and the obstructions which would
thereafter be invariably placed in their way by subversive
influences,—nevertheless, their efforts will be increasingly felt
through the avenues of world newspapers, magazines, radio broadcasts,
moving pictures, pulpits, and lecture platforms. The world will never
know the identity of the individuals "primarily responsible" for the
dissemination of the many warnings and recommendations publicly
promulgated through such avenues, but the effort of preparing the
thoughts of mankind for The Institute's thirty (30) day program, will
ceaselessly be going forward. Their ideals,—frequently voiced by
ministers, lecturers and writers, who are unknowingly repeating ideas
originally released to the world

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

by The Institute's Legion of Vigilantes,—are rapidly preparing public
thought for The Institute's inspiring, "War and
Poverty-destroying,"—revolutionary proclamation and 30-day program.

During the past fifteen years the members of The International Legion of
Vigilantes have not only been obliged to remain entirely unknown to one
another, but they have likewise never been permitted to know the
identity of any member of The Institute's Research Department. Though
trained to recognize certain symbols of identification, which would
enable them to know that the one from whom they receive their orders and
instructions is fully empowered and authorized to act directly for The
Institute, nevertheless, neither the voice nor the physical features of
such an individual have ever been known to any member of the Vigilantes.
The voice and features of each of the Vigilantes are, of course,
familiar to the various members of The Institute,—who have given them
their instructions and orders during the past fifteen years,—however,
these directors will never be privileged to reveal their own identities
in connection with the activities of The Institute to any of their
Vigilante co-workers. An insistence upon these extreme precautions has
been necessary in order that even under the influences of torture, no
member could ever be made to reveal the identity of any official or
other direct associate of The International Institute of Universal
Research and Administration, or of The International Legion of
Vigilantes.

**The Pacific Coast Division of North America, is the only branch of The
Institute's organization which is authorized**

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

**to publish information of any kind whatsoever, relative to either The
Institute or its Vigilantes. This branch is operated under the name of
The International Registration Bureau, and any printed or written
statements not emanating from such Pacific Coast Division, and duly
copyrighted under the Laws of The United States of America, are wholly
unauthorized and spurious.**

Although many hundreds of The Institute's Vigilantes have been
ceaselessly active during the past fifteen years,—and will continue so
until the conclusion of the 30-day proclamation and official
program,—the majority of them are none-the-less obliged to withhold any
acknowledgment of their official association with either The Institute
or its program, both before and after its consummation. In no other way
can the danger of "personality leadership" be permanently avoided. In no
other way will The Institute's **"Ideas and Ideals"** be accepted by the
public as the only lastingly dependable form of leadership, and that
which they should support and work for, rather than the human
personality of some individual—be he ever so worthy—who may be here
today for men to follow, hut gone by tomorrow.

Three plus three equaled six a million years ago, and it will still
equal six a million years from now. True ideas never change and never
leave us, they are always here for us to act upon, but people whom we
are willing to work for and follow frequently annul the effects of our
efforts and sacrifices when they pass on, whereas the efforts we expend
to promulgate or advance a constructive idea are lasting and do not lose
their beneficial effect when some

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

human being passes on. If mankind had worked for the world's acceptance
of good and constructive ideas such as the Golden Rule—Unity of Action
for the equal benefit of all etc., instead of striving to help some
human being to develop power or influence which would largely disappear
within a few weeks after he passed on,—this world would by now have
almost become the Heaven which Christ Jesus tried to teach mankind is
here and at hand, whenever men will learn to live together as brothers
instead of like wolves, and will strive for the universal adoption of
right ideas of human relationship instead of the glorification of human
personalities.

**The "Golden Rule" and all for which it stands, will be indestructibly
blended into the structure and charter of the great co-operative
corporation which will be formed by a world-wide vote of acceptance at
the conclusion of . The Institute's 30-day program. The eternally
good,—and by agreement—permanently unchangeable nature of a charter and
set of by-laws irrevocably wedded to the Golden Rule and the great
universal and changeless laws of God,—to which Christ Jesus referred in
His teachings which men have named "The Sermon on the Mount,"—constitute
the "One and Only Form of Leadership" which will ever bring war and
poverty to an end in the lives of men.**

This great co-operatively owned Universal Service Corporation will have
its officials and executives, and its Board of Directors selected for
office on the basis of their talents and unselfish desires to serve
mankind, and not because of favoritism or the fact that they may be
relatives

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

or friends of some other official or director. Nor will those who become
officials through the majority vote of the employees and of their
associate workers, ever be granted the power to alter the corporation's
charter or policy of relationship with the public and its members or
employees. The men and women who will be invited by formal vote to
become the members of an executive board, will occupy such positions,
not for personal gain, power or self-glorification, but solely for the
purpose of officially directing the production and distribution of the
necessities and luxuries of human life, together with the numerous
educational and benevolent activities of this world-wide Universal
Service Corporation, in behalf of the human race. Inasmuch as their
share of its products and benefits will be no greater than even the most
lowly employee, there will be no jealousy of them, although it will of
course be considered an honor to have attained to such a position of
service. Through the adoption of an unalterable feature of the proposed
corporation charter, no one will be permitted to occupy any official or
honorary position longer than three years. This ruling will not only
provide all capable workers with an opportunity to occupy the most
desirable positions, but through such rotation in office, it will also
prevent envy, jealousy, or the feelings of superiority or
self-importance, which frequently arise when one is in charge of others
who will never be able to advance as far as such a one.

The task of inviting some two hundred million (200,000,000) of the
intelligently industrious and clear-thinking men and women of the
principal civilized nations, to indicate their interest in the release
of The Institute's

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

free 30-day program, and the establishment of its International
Corporation, has been,—without hope of financial remuneration or public
recognition of any kind whatsoever,—willingly accepted by each unit of
the world-wide membership of The International Legion of Vigilantes.

These men and women who have given generously and unstintingly of the
past fifteen years of their lives to what has frequently been a most
hazardous form of public service, will never receive either the
slightest advantage of salary or position, when they later
apply,—unknown as Vigilantes,—to the Corporation's publicly elected
Boards of Examiners for a position to which they may believe their
capabilities or talents qualify them. Each of these men and women, over
fifteen years ago, waived any and all advantages which might normally be
expected to accrue to them in recognition of such services as they have
rendered. It was the desire to serve mankind which constituted the sole
motive of their original acceptance of The Institute's offer to instruct
them in its program, and they are willing in this most severe manner to
remain unknown, and thereby prove the sincerity of their purpose.

That the world may be given at least a slight concept of what these vows
of service have cost those who made them, and that a fuller appreciation
of the vitally important and "Unselfed Service-inspiring Nature" of The
Institute's program may be universally recognized, this little book is
published as a living testimony to the fact that each of the hundreds of
men and women who made such vows, would willingly do so again, even
though they now know and have felt the full weight of the sacrifices
which have resulted therefrom.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

That they might aid in bringing to fulfillment the vision of a world in
which there would be no more wars,—no more poverty,—no more starving and
broken-spirited men, women and little children, the members of The
International Legion of Vigilantes, (The Institute's co-workers), have
willingly and without complaint or regret sacrificed what the world
would term the youthful and most highly-prized years of their lives.

That there might be no more fear-filled, tear-stained faces, or broken
hearts from the age-old curses of manmade wars and poverty, these young
men and women during the past fifteen years have devoted their Saturday
afternoons, their Sundays, holidays and vacation periods, as well as all
other leisure hours, in ceaseless study and preparation for the various
responsibilities they will be expected to assume during The Institute's
30-day program of public proclamations.

During these past fifteen years they have each had but one vacation
period of less than ten (10) days' time. They have also been allowed an
average of but three Saturday or Sunday afternoons each year, for their
own use. The remainder of their time, when not engaged in their
respective vocations or professions, has been freely given to assist The
Research Department of The Institute, and to receive their necessary
instructions and training.

Without compensation,—or any privilege in the future of ever receiving
either financial rewards, expressions of public recognition or any
personal forms of appreciation, these young people have voluntarily
denied themselves

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

not only their leisure hours, but also the joys of either a home or a
family. The world has had to be their home, and its millions of
starving, fear-filled homeless little children,—their children.

**The world's citizens will be asked to make no such sacrifices, nor to
subject themselves to either danger or self-denial, "but they 'ARE'
asked for their moral support," good will and encouragement, by
carefully and understandingly reading this Bulletin and bringing it to
the attention of all clear-thinking men and women throughout the
world.** Only when this has been done, and when The Institute's Sponsors
are assured by its Vigilantes, that at least two hundred million
(200,000,000) clear-thinking men and women have received its warnings,
and an invitation to attend its 30 days of free,
simultaneously-released, world-wide proclamations, can the Research
Department safely disclose its discoveries to the human race, or present
its program for the establishment of a great, equally-owned,
profit-sharing Universal Service Corporation, for a world-wide vote of
acceptance or rejection.

**Any plan of procedure which did not have such an assurance of
simultaneous world-wide attention, and an organization consisting of a
sufficient number of people to protect and immediately apply its
recommendations through the concerted action of not less than two
hundred million (200,000,000) individuals,—and "in all parts of the
world simultaneously"—would through lack of sufficient strength or
influence,—be doomed to certain destruction by those who control the
world's financial structure.**

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

We ask, therefore, only the assurance of public attention during a
30-day period,—the dates of which will be internationally announced in
the manner described in the concluding chapter of this Bulletin;—and at
the end of said 30-day program, that you cast your vote either for or
against The Institute's recommendations in accordance with your own
individual and unbiased judgment.

In recognition of the adage that "Like attracts like" The Institute's
various co-workers have—since the year 1919—been preparing to organize
and draw around them, groups of people who would understand and
appreciate similar ideals, and be motivated by aspirations similar to
their own. Certain aspects of our program have been gradually imparted
to these groups in preparation for the time when Our Research
Department, during its international 30-day proclamation, would fully
warn mankind of the war of extermination which is planned—by the world's
War Lords and its Hidden Rulers—to bring about the slaughter of four
hundred million (400,000,000) educated and religious people. The
consummation of this plot can only be thwarted by the concerted action
of not less than two hundred million (200,000,000) unselfish,
intelligent, and clear-thinking men and women. *However, it is believed
that the present influence of the Institute will succeed in temporarily
delaying this orgy of wholesale murder*.

Although most of The Institute's preliminarily-formed organizations and
groups of people, have not been made aware of the fact that the ideals
they have had described to them,—or in other instances, the warnings
they have received,—emanate from the Research Staff of The International
Institute of Universal Research and Administration,—

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

nor have they even been made aware of the fact that there is such a
research bureau in existence,—nevertheless, their thoughts are being
gradually prepared through many avenues today, such as newspapers,
books, magazines, radio broadcasts, moving pictures, pulpits and lecture
platforms, in order that they may be unprejudiced and receptive at such
a time as The Institute's sixty (60) years of investigations,
discoveries and revolutionary mechanical inventions, are offered to the
world.

Many of Our Research Department's discoveries are so startling, that
human indignation over the atrocities of greed., selfishness and
bestiality, in the lives of those whom the human race has looked to for
leadership, will cause the world's intelligently industrious and
right-thinking men and women to raise their voices in one mighty
worldwide demand for a new medium of currency, and the destruction of a
monetary system which makes men into swinish monsters. **They will
demand that those who uphold "Man's inhumanity to man," be no longer
allowed to dictate either the world's financial, industrial, political
or educational policies, nor allowed to perpetuate poverty in a world of
plenty, and the wholesale slaughter, century after century, of millions
upon millions of human beings in revolutions and wars, planned and
executed solely for the profit of those who barter in human suffering,
that they may thereby add to their power or wealth.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Universal Security, Peace and Happiness Versus
Poverty, Fear and War](mu07)
