[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu13)  [Next](mu15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

### SHALL WE BE MASTER BUILDERS

### OR

### MASTER MURDERERS

### "EXTERMINATION" OR "ECONOMIC EQUALITY"

### ?

### MANKIND MUST CHOOSE

What do you think would happen if every one on this earth today would
put aside the struggle for individual financial superiority over others
for just ten short years? What do you think would happen if all would
unite their efforts for the purpose of supplying each family on this
earth with a beautiful home, with enough to eat and to wear—with
beautiful surroundings and lovely parks in which to spend generous
leisure hours, and would build the facilities with which to enable
**"all people"** to travel throughout the world to its many points of
interest and beauty; . . . . would establish educational institutions in
order that all might be enlightened regarding those things worthy of
man's investigation and understanding; and then would strive to live as
one great family—**"One for All and All for One"**—with no "superiority"
or "inferiority" complexes ever allowed to develop; . . . . "all people"
helping to provide opportunities for the cultivation of strong
constructive traits of character which would enable them to look forward
with joy,—and "limitless" expectations of happiness,—to their lives,
instead of cultivating the weaker qualities of character and the
enslaving false appetites which inevitably result in a loathing of one's
self,

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

and a final hatred of life—(one's own life and experiences, as well as
others)?  What do you think would happen if we would develop an
educational system which would help to make us ambitious for the future
of **"mankind"** and capable of working for **"humanity's benefit"** and
not just our own; . . . **and finally, instead of teaching children that
the primal object of life, (and the main purpose for which they live),
is to "make more money," or to "gain fame and public acclaim" because of
their "superiority" over others—teach them rather that their only
ambition should be to each day be a little "kinder," a little "finer" in
their thoughts and speech and actions—a little "cleaner"—a little
"stronger"—a little "more grateful" to their Creator for their lives and
for the universe He has given them as their home;—and each day a little
"more worthy" of the countless blessings existing here on our earth in
limitless abundance and variety for man's use; . . . AGAIN WE ASK, IF
THESE WERE MANKIND'S GOALS, WOULD NOT THE WORLD—SOON THEREAFTER—BE
TRANSFORMED INTO THE GARDEN OF EDEN,—"THE HEAVEN" WE ALL ENJOY THINKING
OF AS OUR ETERNAL HOME?**

**LET US UNITE OUR EFFORTS FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING "EQUALITY OF
OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL," AND THEN WHEN THE TIME COMES TO PASS ALONG TO
ANOTHER EXPERIENCE, WE SHALL NOT HAVE TO BE ASHAMED OF THE USE TO WHICH
WE HAVE PUT LIFE'S "PRICELESS GIFT" OF INTELLIGENCE,—NOR ASHAMED OF THE
WAY WE HAVE LIVED OUR LIVES.**

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

Mankind seem to be laboring under the false impression that there are
not enough of the necessary or desirable things of life for everyone on
this globe, and that therefore each man must struggle with someone else
for what he needs or wants, and that only those who are stronger than
their fellows can possibly survive this struggle. Can you not see how
either this "conscious" or "subconscious" attitude of mind has,
throughout the centuries, caused fear, greed, selfishness, envy,
jealousy, resentment, hate, robbery and murder to occur among
individuals—resulting in feuds between families and groups, and
finally,—(as this attitude expands and takes hold of communities and
nations),—the all-consuming flames of jealousy, envy, hate and fear of
the people of one nation towards those of another, bring to pass the
wars of each generation? And do you not see that these qualities of
thought are perpetuated largely by those who acquire "financial gain"
from doing so?

Do you not see how the citizens of the various nations are taught to
believe that they must go out in armies and kill one another, in order
that they may weaken the ones from whom they may desire to steal some
possession which they have been "mesmerized" into thinking they can get
in no other way,—or that they must "kill" in order to protect their own
possessions which they have been taught to think someone might attempt
to take from them? It is not difficult to recognize the fact that
jealousy, envy, fear, or hate, constitute the "primal causes" of crime,
murder and war. **NOR IS IT DIFFICULT TO RECOGNIZE THE FACT THAT MANY OF
THE WORLD'S MOST WEALTHY AND INFLUENTIAL FAMILIES DERIVE**

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **THEIR "ENTIRE
PROFITS" FROM STIMULATING AND PERPETUATING THESE QUALITIES OF HUMAN
THOUGHT, IN ORDER THAT WARS MAY BE FOUGHT, AND THAT THE ARMAMENTS AND
MERCHANDISE OF WAR IN WHICH THEY DEAL, MAY BE BOUGHT FROM THEM.**

**MENTIONING ONLY ONE OF THE BY-PRODUCTS OF THESE FALSE TEACHINGS, WE
REMIND YOU OF A FACT WHICH IS HARDLY LESS IMPORTANT THAN THE
HUMANLY-PLANNED AND DIRECTED CAUSES OF WAR; NAMELY, THAT THE WORLD'S
LEADING PSYCHIATRISTS AND PHYSICIANS—AS WELL AS ITS MOST PROMINENT
METAPHYSICIANS,—ARE UNANIMOUS IN THEIR AGREEMENT THAT THESE SAME
QUALITIES OF FEAR, ENVY, JEALOUSY AND HATE, "CAUSE THE GREATER PART OF
MAN'S PHYSICAL AILMENTS," AND "THE DEPLETION OF HIS ENERGIES " AS WELL
AS THE DEGENERATION OF HIS CHARACTER.**

Looking still further into this struggle to accumulate possessions, we
find it causing two distinct qualities of character in men, and both of
them abominable and totally unworthy of any intelligent creature;
namely, "inferiority" or "superiority" complexes of thought. The one
who, through lack of educational or cultural opportunities, has
developed a sense of self-depreciation—or who starts losing his
individual battle in mankind's needless struggle for existence—is soon
forced into a belief of being inferior. With his spirit broken, his
confidence in himself completely

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

destroyed, (and without even attempting to estimate his "incalculable"
loss of happiness or his loneliness and grief), such a one becomes just
so much "dead timber"—a lifeless "dead weight" and burden on the
shoulders of mankind;—hopeless and ceasing to try, he soon becomes
useless to himself and everyone else.

**However, the fact of the matter is, that in nine hundred and
ninety-nine instances of ordinarily intelligent men or women out of
every one thousand whose spirits have been broken, their failures merely
evidence a lack of the necessary talent or ability to keep up their end
of the "wolfish struggle" for food.** But this does not necessarily mean
that they might not have found happiness and become useful to themselves
and to the world in some entirely different direction,—for there is
ample reason to believe that every individual on this globe possesses
some quality of intelligence of value to the human race, and there is
not the slightest question but that the world's so-called failures
would, in the majority of cases, never have been forced to acknowledge
their inferiority had they been helped and educated to find their place
in the scheme of things in an activity they could enjoy expressing.

**WHO ARE WE TO JUDGE OTHERS? IS IT NOT POSSIBLE THAT EVERY ONE OF THE
COUNTLESS BILLIONS OF MEN AND WOMEN THROUGHOUT THE CENTURIES—(WHO HAVE
MADE A FAILURE OF LIFE)—WOULD HAVE ADDED IMMEASURABLY TO THE SUM
TOTAL—NOT ONLY OF THEIR OWN HAPPINESS—BUT TO THAT OF THE ENTIRE HUMAN
RACE, HAD THEY BEEN**

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **GIVEN THE
ADVANTAGES WHICH WOULD HAVE DEVELOPED THEIR PARTICULAR TALENTS OR
ABILITIES?**

**MULTIPLY BY ONE MILLION, THE BEAUTIFUL POEMS, THE GLORIOUS PAINTINGS
AND INSPIRING MUSICAL COMPOSITIONS OF THE PAST ONE HUNDRED (100) YEARS;
. . . ADD TO THIS TOTAL "A MILLION TIMES" THE NUMBER OF INVENTIONS AND
DISCOVERIES IN THE FIELDS OF CHEMISTRY, PHYSICS, AND THE ENGINEERING
SCIENCES OF THE DAY,—AND THEN YOU MAY START TO UNDERSTAND WHAT THE "EACH
WOLF FOR HIMSELF" PRIVATE PROFIT SYSTEM HAS COST MANKIND. AND YET THIS
TOTAL WOULD BE BUT THE SMALLEST FRACTIONAL PART OF THE ACTUAL VOLUME OF
BENEFITS WHICH MANKIND MIGHT NOW BE ENJOYING, HAD EVERY MAN AND WOMAN ON
OUR GLOBE BEEN ENCOURAGED AND HELPED TO FULLY DEVELOP THEIR LATENT
POWERS AND NATURAL TALENTS! THIS BRIEF ILLUSTRATION MAY HELP ONE TO GAIN
SOME "SLIGHT" COMPREHENSION OF THE LOSS TO MANKIND, AND THE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR HAPPINESS OUT OF WHICH WE HAVE BEEN CHEATED BY THOSE
WHO HAVE PERMITTED THE PERPETUATION OF A SYSTEM BUILT UPON THE THEORY OF
"THE SURVIVAL OF THE FITTEST;"—A THEORY WORTHY ONLY OF "SWINE" WITH
THEIR SNOUTS IN TROUGHS**

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

**OF SWILL, OR "PACKS OF WOLVES" TEARING AT THE THROATS OF LESS
FEROCIOUS ANIMALS.**

Is it not possible that "all of us" are created to add something of
value—(and that we each really have something to add)—to the happiness
and welfare of the entire human race as well as to our own families or
ourselves? Is it not possible that nothing more is needed than the
removal from around the roots of each one's life, of the weeds of fear,
envy, jealousy and hate, in order that there may be revealed the useful
natural qualities and talents possessed in abundant measure by even the
most lowly of human beings?

**A garden is surely lovelier when it is aglow with a variety of shades
of color and beauty, than when it is overgrown with weeds, and with but
an occasional blossom able to survive. So, also will this world become a
place of greater beauty and loveliness, when each one of its occupants
receives the advantages which will cultivate latent abilities and truly
constructive qualities of character.**

When the weeds of fear, envy, jealousy and hate are permanently uprooted
and forever destroyed, and one's mental and bodily unfoldment takes
place in an atmosphere I of brotherly love and good will, instead of
rivalry and distrust, what a vision of joyous beauty our world will soon
become.

Why shouldn't mankind build an economic system which would help them to
develop into that which they were ordained by their Creator to become?
Surely men are not just animals, ceaselessly struggling and fighting to
prove their superiority over one another!

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

**SINCE GREED—FEAR—ENVY—JEALOUSY—AND HATE LEAD TO DEPRAVITY, DISEASED
MINDS, SICK BODIES—CRIME—MURDER AND WAR, WHY DON'T WE UPROOT THAT WHICH
CONSTITUTES THEIR ORIGIN; NAMELY, "POVERTY AND ECONOMIC INEQUALITY?" WHY
DON'T WE AT ONCE AND FOR ALL TIME, DESTROY THESE PRIMAL CAUSES OF MAN'S
SUFFERING AND WOES? WHAT IS THERE TO HINDER US FROM DOING SO? SURELY THE
WORLD HAS ENOUGH MACHINERY, EXECUTIVES, TRAINED WORKERS, AND
RESOURCES—AS WELL AS DESIRE—FOR THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF SUCH A RESULT!**

Throughout the centuries there has never been a time when the practical
application—on a world-wide scale—of the principle of human relationship
to which we refer as **"The Golden Rule,"** would not have amply met the
needs of every one on our globe, if coupled with it we had shackled and
controlled the insane selfishness and mad ambitions of a small
percentage of mankind.

Now let us see what happens to the few who win in the struggle of "the
survival of the fittest," or who are born with a thousand times as much
money and as many opportunities, or a thousand times more of the
abundance of this world's goods than the average man possesses. In most
instances, we find that there is planted in their minds an almost
unavoidable feeling of their "superiority" over their fellow beings, and
soon they develop an "ever-growing" desire to prove this
superiority—**not over their**

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

**own "inferior qualities" of character or "animalic natures,"** but
over their brother man. If this feeling of superiority continues for
long, there quickly develops an insane desire for personal power,—not
that they might thereby glorify their Creator or make the lives of their
fellows happier,—but to use for satisfying a ceaseless desire to glorify
themselves, or to prove how much more they know or how much more
powerful and important they are than others. Gradually such an
insistence that mankind recognize their power and superiority takes
possession of their mentalities, that even the murder of millions upon
millions of their fellow beings seems justified to their depraved
intellects. **MORAL IDIOCY SOON PLACES "A BLIND OBSESSION" FOR POWER IN
FULL CONTROL OF THEIR ACTIONS.** They will then unhesitatingly plot and
execute a war among the inhabitants of the entire earth, if it becomes
necessary to do so, in order to gain more wealth or to further convince
themselves of their power and influence. To maintain their prestige,
**they will even sacrifice their own sons to the "god of War,"** when
the lust for power and public recognition has obsessed and warped their
mentalities sufficiently.

**THE HUMAN RACE WILL NEVER BE FREED FROM WARS AND WILL NEVER FIND PEACE
UNTIL IT RECOGNIZES THE FACT THAT IT IS AS VITAL TO "PREVENT" TOO MUCH
POWER FROM REACHING THE HANDS OF THOSE WHO HAVE NOT "FULLY PROVEN THEIR
LOVE FOR HUMANITY"—AND THEIR "ABSOLUTE SELFLESSNESS OF CHARACTER"—AS IT
IS TO PREVENT**

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **THE DANGERS OF
POVERTY, JEALOUSY, OR FEAR FROM GENERATING "ENVY" AND "HATE" IN THE
HEARTS OF MEN. THE LATTER IS A KILLER IN A SMALL WAY, BUT "INSANE GREED"
AND THE CRAVING FOR POWER OR WEALTH CONDUCTS ITS KILLINGS BY THE
MILLIONS, AND HAS CONSTITUTED THROUGHOUT TENS OF THOUSANDS OF YEARS, A
FORCE WHICH HAS INVARIABLY DESTROYED EACH AND EVERY CIVILIZATION THAT
THE INDUSTRIOUS AND RIGHT-THINKING MEN AND WOMEN OF THE HUMAN RACE HAVE
EVER CONSTRUCTED.**

Mortal man is not God, nor should he be glorified or worshiped as such.
Let his joy and his reward come from bringing greater happiness and
security into the lives of his brothers—not from the accumulation of
power, excessive wealth, or flattery. Instead, let him be so filled with
the desire to make this world ever more joyous and beautiful, that he
has no room left within his mentality for a desire to seek praise or to
be thanked. Let him forever be turning the thoughts of mankind to
gratitude and thanksgiving to the Creator of this vast limitlessly
beautiful universe, and to an acquaintanceship with the "All-wise" and
"All-loving" Father and Mother of us all. Let no man desire to draw the
attention of others to himself more than to another, **for we all have
the same "Divine Parent" and this universe—"Our Home"—belongs as much to
one as to another. Is it not time then, that the inhabitants of our
world unite into one family, with no favorites?**

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

**LET THE STRONG GLADLY SHARE THE FRUITAGE OF THEIR GREATER TALENTS OR
ABILITIES WITH THOSE LESS FORTUNATE, AND IT WILL NOT BE LONG BEFORE A
CONDITION OF ABUNDANCE, BROTHERLY LOVE, AND AN "EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY"
FOR SELF-IMPROVEMENT AND MUTUAL RESPECT, APPRECIATION AND CONFIDENCE,
WILL UNIVERSALLY EXIST AMONG MEN.**

**LET NONE BE TOO WEAK NOR NONE TOO STRONG IN HIS OR HER OWN EYES, AND
FOR THE PRESENT,—UNTIL WE CAN BE TRULY PROUD OF THE "JUSTICE" AND
"EQUALITY" OF THE ECONOMIC SYSTEM UNDER WHICH WE LIVE,—LET ALL HONOR OR
PRAISE GO TO THE "ALL-WISE" CREATOR OF THE UNIVERSE FROM WHOM ALL LIFE
HAS COME;—HE WHO IS FATHER AND MOTHER OF US ALL,—AND FROM WHENCE COMES
ALL OF MAN'S STRENGTH, ALL OF MAN'S CONSTRUCTIVE IDEAS, AND ALL OF HIS
WORTHY ACCOMPLISHMENTS.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Limitless Fields Of Interest . . . A “Universe” To
Explore](mu15)
