[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu15)  [Next](mu17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span> <span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

### CHAPTER XIII.

### DOES OUR WORLD BELONG

### ANY MORE TO ONE THAN TO ANOTHER

### ?

**ALL PLANS OF "ECONOMIC SECURITY" WHICH HAVE EVER BEEN ADOPTED BY THE
HUMAN RACE—(WHETHER PROPOSED AS A POLICY OF GOVERNMENT OR UNDER THE
SPONSORSHIP OF THE VARIOUS RELIGIOUS ORDERS OF THE DAY)—HAVE BEEN TRIED
AND TESTED, YET THEY HAVE "ALL" FAILED.**

**EVERY KNOWN METHOD OF PRODUCING AND DISTRIBUTING THE NECESSITIES AND
LUXURIES OF LIFE AND OF PROVIDING PEACE AND SECURITY FOR THE HUMAN RACE
HAS BEEN TRIED "EXCEPT ONE;" BUT THIS "ONE" NOT EVEN THE WORLD'S MOST
TRUSTED LEADERS HAVE "DARED" TO RECOMMEND,—FOR "SPIRITUAL WICKEDNESS IN
HIGH PLACES" HAS PRODUCED A RACE OF "MORAL COWARDS."**

Fear of ridicule or criticism occupies such an important place in human
thought that no one with influence and power in public life, and to
whose voice all the world would listen, has dared to suggest the
**"One"** and **"Only"** plan of human relationship which—if applied to
the

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

production and distribution of the needs of human life—could
successfully solve the all-important problem of bringing to pass the
**"Peace on Earth"** and **"Good Will Among Men"** for which mankind
have ceaselessly prayed throughout countless ages.

This **"One"** solution has never been tried because of the fact that
those who know enough to make such a recommendation,—and who have
sufficient power and influence to enforce it,—would be obliged to
sacrifice their precious egotistical belief in their own "superiority"
and the conviction that, because of their exalted positions, they
deserve a "greater share" of the world's goods than their fellows. This
**"One"** solution might be described in just **"two"** words—if men
were unselfish enough to recognize and acknowledge their true import and
intended meaning. Yes; if the plan for ending poverty and war were
founded upon the **"Spirit"** as well as the **"Letter"** of Christ
Jesus’ **"Golden Rule,"** and if men were not too egotistical to accept
a system established upon **"Absolute Economic Equality,"**—the concept
of **"One for All and All for One,"**—then there would be no difficulty
in completely describing the solution of these age-old world problems
with just two words:—**"MANKIND UNITED."**

**Whether men are black or yellow, white or red, tall or short, stout or
thin, they are nevertheless the children of "identically" the same
Creator as ourselves and, whether we like it or not, they are still our
brothers and sisters, with "identically" the same rights of occupancy of
this world home and the use of all it contains as the greatest**

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

**genius or the most sublime egotist—either man or woman—who has ever
trod this globe.**

**OF THOSE WHO HAVE OCCUPIED EITHER THE "MOST LOWLY" OR THE "MOST SOUGHT
AFTER" STATIONS IN HUMAN LIFE, NONE HAVE EVER BROUGHT EVEN ONE LOAF OF
BREAD WITH THEM WHEN THEY ARRIVED HERE, NOR HAVE YET SUCCEEDED IN
REMOVING OR TAKING EVEN ONE LOAF OF BREAD WITH THEM WHEN THEY LEFT. EACH
NORMAL MAN OR WOMAN ARRIVES WITH THE SAME NUMBER OF HANDS AND FEET, BUT
THEY COME WITH THEIR HANDS EMPTY AND NO SHOES ON THEIR FEET, AND THEY
LEAVE THE SAME WAY. THEY BRING NO PROOFS OF THEIR SUPERIORITY WITH THEM
WHEN THEY COME AND THEY TAKE NONE WITH THEM WHEN THEY GO. DURING THEIR
LIFETIME HERE, THE SUN GIVES NO EVIDENCE OF DESIRING TO SHINE ON ONE
MORE THAN ON ANOTHER, NOR THE EARTH TO FEED OR PROVIDE—OUT OF ITS
LIMITLESS TREASURE HOUSE OF GIFTS FOR MANKIND—ANY GREATER GIFTS TO ONE
THAN TO ANOTHER.**

**"Man Only"** has assumed the responsibility of classifying one human
being as more important than another and has determined what the rewards
of such a classification shall be. The only way in which such a system
could possess any elements of justice, would be for every man, woman and
child on our earth to have an equal voice in

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

determining what the various scales of compensation or reward should
be,—both for those who are accepted by their fellows as being superior,
and also the rewards of those who arc supposed to have inferior
capabilities.

However, the odd part of our economic system,—which permits a greater
accumulation of this world's goods for one than for another,—is that the
deciding voices in such matters, and the voices which determine just who
should be considered as superior, and who shall receive the greatest
rewards, have always been the voices, not of those who have rendered the
greatest service to the human race;—nor those who have lived the most
exemplary lives;—nor composed the world's most beautiful music, poems
and literature;—nor painted its grandest pictures;—nor developed its
most useful inventions, but instead, those who have "actually" had the
deciding voice in the distribution of life's luxuries—and even its
barest requirements—have—**"WITHOUT EVEN ONE EXCEPTION IN HUMAN
HISTORY"**—been those who have rendered the "least" service to mankind,
and left the "fewest" evidences of having brought happiness into the
lives of our earth's inhabitants.

**IN FACT, THOSE WHO HAVE USUALLY FORMULATED AND ENFORCED THE HUMANLY
DEVISED LAWS UNDER WHICH MEN LIVE,—AND WHICH DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF
THIS WORLD'S GOODS THEY MAY POSSESS,—HAVE ALMOST INVARIABLY BEEN THOSE
WHO HAVE BROUGHT ABOUT THE WHOLESALE SLAUGHTER OF THE GREATEST NUMBER
OF**

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **THEIR FELLOW
BEINGS, AND PRODUCED THE GREATEST AMOUNT OF HUMAN SUFFERING IN THE FORM
OF BROKEN HEARTS AND STARVED BODIES.**

The **"Napoleons"** throughout human history have been the ones that
have decided who shall be called superior, and whether life shall be
**"A Feast"** or **"A Famine;"**—the rest of the human family occupying
this earthly home have stood silently by, either too filled with "awe"
and "admiration" over the virile qualities of leadership and personality
exemplified by these "Napoleons," or too greatly filled with "fear" and
the misery of under-fed emaciated starved aching bodies, to demand
justice; **IN FACT, THEY HAVE USUALLY NOT HAD ENOUGH MENTAL OR PHYSICAL
VITALITY WITH WHICH TO EVEN "RAISE THEIR VOICES" IN PROTEST.**

Other than those who have become mankind's **"self-appointed"**
rulers—and the **"Money Changers"** for the race—there are none who
would not willingly consent to a sufficiently abundant production and
distribution of the world's goods to insure an ample variety and
quantity of the needful or desirable requirements of life for the people
of every land. With the exception of mankind's "self-appointed" rulers,
there are but few who would not joyously welcome a system of human
relationship which would value and estimate qualities of "superiority,"
solely from the standpoint of the greater service to the human race that
one might render over another; or who would not willingly agree that
such people should receive as a reward, not a greater amount of the
world's goods—(**which are,**

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

**after all, lent to each of us equally by our Creator and belong no
more to one than to another, neither are they actually ours to give or
to take away from each other)—**but instead, that they should be
appointed as instructors, guides and directors,—in order that they might
thereby help others to learn how to constructively seek individual
happiness, and yet—at the same time—succeed in serving their brother man
more effectually.

Any other method of appointing leaders or of rewarding exemplary
service, brings about one of two results; namely, either through
"bribery" or "favoritism" incompetent men or women frequently gain
positions of authority over their fellows and—**"the blind leading the
blind"**—chaos results; or if rewards are in the form of a greater
amount of this world's goods than others are enabled to possess, then
jealousy and envy breed bitterness and hate, and bitterness and hate
breed murder and war;—**NOR CAN THESE EFFECTS "EVER" BE AVOIDED SO LONG
AS AN ECONOMIC SYSTEM WHICH PERMITS SUCH INEQUALITIES TO EXIST CONTINUES
TO GOVERN THE LIVES OF MEN.**

**"MANKIND UNITED"—"ONE FOR ALL AND ALL FOR ONE"—"DOING UNTO OTHERS AS
WE WOULD HAVE OTHERS DO UNTO US," CONSTITUTES THE "ONE" AND "ONLY"
SOLUTION OF THE DUAL CURSES—"POVERTY AND WAR," FROM WHICH HUMAN BEINGS
HAVE ENDLESSLY SUFFERED.**

Whether or not we think we are "too good" to soil our hands, or to
degrade our precious concept of our own

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "superiority"
through association with others whom we believe to be less capable than
ourselves, or of a different color of skin, or members of different
fraternal or religious associations—as the case may be,—the fact still
remains that this world home of ours was provided **"equally"** for the
people of every nation, and for those of every color, and the sun was
meant to shine as much upon one as upon another.

**WE ARE INDISPUTABLY "OUR BROTHER'S KEEPER" IN THE SENSE OF GRANTING
HIM EQUAL RIGHTS TO "LIFE, LIBERTY AND . THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS," AND
OF PREVENTING SUCH RIGHTS FROM EVER BEING WITHHELD FROM ANY HUMAN BEING
ON THIS EARTH.**

We have no more right to shut our eyes to the inexcusable suffering
caused by greed, selfishness, egotism, and the insanely depraved
scramble of a world-wide "pack of wolves" for power, dominion, flattery
and wealth, than we would have to sit down and enjoy a delicious meal
knowing that our mother, brother or sister were in the next room slowly
wasting away from under-nourishment, and gradually starving to death.

**Destroying cattle, wheat and other foodstuffs, in a world with five
hundred million (500,000,000) people daily suffering from insufficient
food and thirty million (30,000,000) human beings "starving to death"
each year, is a far greater form of human selfishness and cruelty than
any individual could possibly express through the neglect of his
immediate family, relatives or friends, yet that is "exactly" what we
are permitting our "so-called" leaders**

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

**to do year after year,—and during an age which we proudly acclaim to
be "civilized."**

Men will find but little opportunity to develop feelings of security or
happiness—(other than those of dumb brutes or self-centered ferocious
beasts)—until they feel "at least secure," and in time grow conscious of
a sense of "justifiable" self-respect, through feeling that they are not
only living "abundantly,"—but also permitting others to do likewise.

**MANKIND WILL NEVER FIND HAPPINESS UNTIL THERE IS AN INTELLIGENTLY
EXPRESSED SEMBLANCE OF "EQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY AND FREEDOM," AND A
LIMITLESS WORLDWIDE ABUNDANCE—"FOR EVERYONE"—OF THE NECESSARY OR
DESIRABLE REQUIREMENTS OF HUMAN LIFE,—TOGETHER WITH THE LEISURE TIME FOR
THEIR ENJOYMENT.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Earnings—Hours—Education—Generous Benefits and Ample
Vacations](mu17)
