[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mu19)  [Next](mu21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Mankind United*, by Arthur Bell, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

### CHAPTER XVII.

### MANKIND UNITED —&— THE INTERNATIONAL 4-4-8-3-4 CLUB

The name "Mankind United," selected as the title for this "Explanatory"
bulletin, is also the name of the worldwide organization whose members
will comprise the international audience of 200,000,000 men and women,
now being formed for the Research Department of The International
Institute of Universal Research and Administration, by The International
Registration Bureau.

**Each purchaser of a copy of this volume, thereby simultaneously
becomes an honorary member of "Mankind United," and as such, will be
duly notified of the date of our Research Department's 30-day program.**
When said program date is officially announced, full instructions
relative to the steps which you will be invited to take, in

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

order to receive the proclamations and reports of the discoveries of The
Institute's Research Department, and full instructions together with the
necessary ballots containing one hundred (100) separate measures upon
which you will be invited to vote at the conclusion of said free 30-day
program—will be duly sent to you.

**YOUR MEMBERSHIP IN "MANKIND UNITED" IS ENTIRELY AN HONORARY ONE, AND
THERE ARE NEITHER INITIATION FEES, DUES, NOR OBLIGATIONS OF ANY KIND
WHATSOEVER ATTACHED THERETO.**

Only the men and women who order one or more copies of this book, and
who thereby become members of the group which will comprise our
world-wide audience of 200,000,000 people (known as "Mankind United")—or
those to whom a direct invitation is extended by The International
Registration Bureau will be allowed to receive our 30-day program, or be
permitted to vote upon the various measures pertaining to the formation
of The Universal Service Corporation described herein.

**The world's intelligent clear-thinking people are fully aware of the
fact that there is no justifiable reason for further "poverty or wars,"
and that there are more than enough agricultural and industrial leaders,
efficient executives, highly trained and willing workers; more than
enough machinery and mechanical inventions—(together with millions upon
millions of years of "unused resources")—ready to be co-ordinated for
the limitless use of all mankind,—and it is well known that all of these
advantages are**

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

**available just as soon as a sufficient number of "independent,"
"clear-thinking," "courageous" men and women, "simultaneously demand"
that such resources immediately be used for the equal benefit of all.
YOUR PURCHASE OF A NUMBER OF COPIES OF THIS BOOK—FOR CIRCULATION AMONG
YOUR MANY FRIENDS AND ACQUAINTANCES—WILL CONSTITUTE AN EXPRESSION OF
"YOUR" RECOGNITION OF THIS FACT.**

Those who co-operate with us towards the fulfillment of this program,
will have the satisfaction of having helped to bring to pass a result
more vital, more important, and more lasting than the economic
accomplishments of any individual or group of individuals—heretofore
known—throughout all of human history. Although it may seem to be but a
"very little thing" that you are doing, in aiding this volume to
circulate through the hands of the world's clear-thinking people,
nevertheless the cumulative effect of many millions of men and women
granting such cooperation, will inevitably result in the complete
fulfillment of each and every one of the promises of freedom described
herein.

Men and women who may feel that they have had but little opportunity to
render any service which might stand as "a lasting monument" to their
memories, or be of permanent value to the human race,—or men and women
who may feel that they are so far along in years that they have now very
nearly "lived their lives"—and therefore that there is but little they
could do to aid such an ambitious program as ours—should bear in mind
the fact that no

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

human being is "actually" of less importance than another. They should
remember that if each "little drop of water" were to depreciate its
importance and "linger in the sky"—instead of dropping upon our
earth—all of human life would soon perish from our planet;—and so
likewise (only to an "infinitely" greater extent) is the value of each
of the earth's inhabitants in his or her relative importance to the
progress and welfare of the human race.

**No adult is either "too young" or "too old," to do his full share of
making it possible for us to develop an audience large enough to warrant
the release of our research department's discoveries, proclamations and
recommendations.**

**When 200,000,000 people have each read and purchased a copy of this
book, or other publications of The International Registration
Bureau,—(as an indication to our research department of not only the
interest but also the preparedness of public thought for the discoveries
and information which they propose at that time to release to the human
race,)—then, "and only then," can the promises described herein be
brought to fulfillment by The International Institute of Universal
Research and Administration; for only then will there be sufficient
"unity of purpose"—evidenced by the world's right-thinking men and
women—to warrant the release of our research department's indescribably
important discoveries and recommendations.**

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

**THE**

**INTERNATIONAL**

**4-4-8-3-4**

**CLUB**

When you have purchased five (5) or more copies of this book—and have
placed four of them in circulation through the Branch Registration
Bureau which first brought our program to your attention, and have
established your own bureau—you will be invited to form a branch of our
International 4-4-8-3-4 Club. To those who are familiar with our
program, this name will be an instant reminder of the goal towards which
we are striving, and the benefits—which are partly described
herein—relative to the immediate availability of a universal labor
schedule of only (4) hours per day, (4) days per week, (8) months each
year, with a (3) day per week and (4) months per year vacation
period,—to which the numerals, "4-4-8-3-4," appearing in. the Club's
name, refer.

It will be necessary for us to form not less than eight million
(8,000,000) of these Clubs, as avenues of direct contact with those who
read and become interested in promulgating the message "Mankind United"
contains. These "4-4-8-3-4 Clubs," will also provide an opportunity for
men and women of similar interests, desires, and aspirations, to meet on
the common ground of their "mutual desire" to aid our program, and to
bring about the early formation of our requisite world-wide audience.

When you form a branch of The International 4-4-8-3-4 Club, your
membership will consist of the men

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

and women who not only have read one of the copies of "Mankind United"
which you may have purchased and personally put into circulation, but
who also have purchased copies of said book from you, in order that they
might thereby assist in the further promulgation of our message. No one
will be eligible for membership in your branch of this Club, until he
has complied with this qualification by purchasing at least one copy of
said "Explanatory" bulletin through you, and has thoroughly studied the
contents thereof.

**ALTHOUGH YOU WILL NOT BE PERMITTED TO CHARGE EITHER INITIATION FEES OR
DUES, NEVERTHELESS THE FORMATION OF ONE OF THESE CLUBS WILL NOT ONLY
PROVIDE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR INTERESTING STUDY AND DISCUSSIONS RELATIVE TO
OUR PROGRAM, BUT IT WILL ALSO PROVIDE SUITABLE FINANCIAL REMUNERATION IN
EXCHANGE FOR YOUR EFFORTS, IF YOU SO DESIRE.**

**FULL INFORMATION PERTAINING TO THE FORMATION OF A BRANCH OF OUR
INTERNATIONAL 4-4-8-3-4 CLUB WILL BE FORWARDED TO YOU WITH YOUR FIRST
PURCHASE OF A COPY OF "MANKIND UNITED."**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Not A Mad Dream](mu21)
