[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc34003)  [Next](cc34005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>THE AUTHOR’S EPISTLE DEDICATORY

<span id="v-p2"></span>To The

<span id="v-p3"></span>TRULY HONOURABLE AND ILLUSTRIOUS LORDS,

<span id="v-p4"></span>THE SYNDICS AND COUNCIL OF GENEVA,

<span id="v-p5"></span>JOHN CALVIN

<span id="v-p6"></span>SUPPLICATES FROM THE LORD THE SPIRIT OF WISDOM
AND FIRMNESS, AND A PROSPEROUS ADMINISTRATION.

<span id="v-p7"></span>I never call to remembrance that saying of
Christ, in which he sets so high a value on the duty of receiving
strangers with kindness as to reckon it done to himself, without
considering, at the same time, the extraordinary honor which he has been
pleased to confer on you, by making your city the resort, not of one or
a few individuals, but of his Church at large. Among heathen countries
hospitality was always commended, and was even accounted one of the
principal virtues; and, accordingly, when they intended to denounce any
people as barbarians and savages of the lowest stamp, they called them,
<span id="v-p7.1"></span>ἀξένους, or — which means the same thing —
*inhospitable*. But far higher praise is due to you that, in these
troublesome and unhappy times, the Lord has appointed you to be the
persons whose support and protection should be solicited by godly and
inoffensive men banished and driven from their native countries by the
wicked and cruel tyranny of Antichrist. And not only so, but he has also
dedicated to his name a sacred dwelling-place among you, where his
worship may be maintained in purity.

<span id="v-p8"></span>Whoever attempts, in the slightest degree, openly
to invade, or secretly to take from you, these two advantages, not only
labors to deprive your city of its brightest ornaments, but beholds its
existence and safety with an envious eye. For though the kind offices
which are here performed towards Christ and his scattered members excite
the barking of wicked men against you, still you ought to look upon
yourselves as abundantly compensated by this single consideration, that
angels bless you from heaven, and the children of God bless you from
every quarter of the world; so that you may boldly despise the foul
slander of those men who are not restrained either by scruples of
conscience, or by shame, from pouring out more outrageous insults on God
himself than on you, — nay, who, when they wish to calumniate you, begin
with blaspheming God. Though this very occasion  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) kindles the rage of many people against you,
yet you have no reason to dread any danger arising from it, so long as
their fury shall be counteracted by the protection of His hand who hath
promised that He will be the faithful Guardian of those cities in which
the doctrine of His Gospel shall remain, and in which godly men, whom
the world cannot endure, shall be permitted to dwell. I say nothing as
to its being unnecessary to give yourselves any uneasiness about
conciliating this class of enemies; for there is no man that is hostile
to you for the sake of the Gospel, who would not desire to see you
ruined or oppressed on other grounds. But granting that there were no
other reason why you are hated by the avowed enemies of sound doctrine,
than because they see you employed in defending it, still, disregarding
their stratagems and threatenings, you ought resolutely to defend those
two impregnable bulwarks, the purity of religious worship, and a godly
anxiety to maintain the Church which Christ has placed under the shelter
of your wings.

<span id="v-p10"></span>So far as relates to the slanders which are
thrown at us by the Pope’s hired brawlers — that we have apostatized
from the Church, because we have withdrawn from subjection to the See of
Rome — I wish it were as much in our power to protest with unshaken
confidence before God and the angels, that we are at the greatest
possible distance from that filthy puddle, as we can easily and readily
defend ourselves from the crime which they are in the habit of laying to
our charge. They boast, indeed, of the name of the Catholic Church,
though no part of the whole doctrine of the Law and the Gospel has been
permitted by them to remain free from shameful corruptions, though they
have profaned the whole worship of God by the filth of their
superstitions, and have not scrupled to debase all the ordinances of God
by their inventions. Nay more, so *Catholic* — so universal — is the
mass of errors by which they have overturned the whole of religion, that
it would be enough to destroy and swallow up the Church a hundred times
over. We can never, therefore, extol, in terms so lofty as the matter
deserves, the unbounded goodness of God, by which we have miraculously
escaped from that destructive whirlpool, and have fixed the anchor of
our faith on the firm and everlasting truth of God.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) And, indeed, this Commentary will itself, I
trust, be a sufficient proof that Popery is nothing else than a monster
formed out of the innumerable deceptions of Satan, and that what they
call the Church is more confused than Babylon.

<span id="v-p12"></span>Yet I will candidly acknowledge — what is
actually true — that we are not at a sufficient distance from that
filthy pit, the contagion of which is too widely spread. Antichrist
complains that we have fallen away from him; but we  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) are compelled to groan that too many of the
pollutions with which he has infected the whole world remain amongst us.
God has graciously restored to us  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)
uncontaminated purity of doctrine, religion in its primitive state, the
unadulterated worship of God, and a faithful administration of the
Sacraments, as they were delivered to us by Christ. But the principal
cause which hinders us from attaining that reformation of conduct and of
life which ought to exist is, that very many persons, remembering that
unbridled licentiousness in which the Papists indulge in opposition to
the command of God, cannot become accustomed to the yoke of Christ.
Accordingly, when our enemies, in order to excite against us unfounded
dislike among the ignorant, raise a vexatious outcry that we have broken
all discipline, their calumny is abundantly refuted (even though we
should remain silent) by this single consideration, that at home we have
no contest more severe than about — what is considered, at least, by
many people to be — our excessive severity. But since you are the most
competent witnesses for myself and my colleagues, that we are not more
rigid and severe than the claim of duty demands and even compels us to
be, as we freely submit to the decision of your conscience respecting
us; so, on the other hand, you will easily perceive at a glance the
singularly ridiculous impudence of our enemies on this subject.

<span id="v-p15"></span>I shall now say a few words about myself as an
individual. Though I trust that my numerous writings will be a
sufficient attestation to the world in what manner I have taught this
Church, yet I have thought that it would be of very great importance for
me to draw up a special record on this subject inscribed with your name;
for it is highly necessary that the kind of doctrine which you
acknowledge to be taught by me should be exhibited to the view of all.
 <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) Now though, in all the books which I
have hitherto published, it has been my endeavor that you and the people
under your charge should derive advantage from them even after my death,
and though it would be highly unbecoming that the doctrine which has
emanated from your city to foreign nations should yield fruit
extensively, but be neglected in the place of its abode, yet I trust
that this Commentary, which is especially dedicated to you, will take a
firmer hold of your memory. For this purpose I pray to God to inscribe
it so deeply with His own finger on your hearts that it may never be
obliterated by any stratagem of Satan; for to Him does it belong to
crown my labor with success, who has hitherto given me such courage as
to desire nothing more than to watch faithfully over the safety of you
all. Farther, as I freely acknowledge before the world that I am very
far from possessing the careful diligence and the other virtues which
the greatness and excellence of the office requires in a good Pastor,
and as I continually bewail before God the numerous sins which obstruct
my progress Do I venture to declare that I am not without an honest and
sincere desire to perform my duty. And if, in the meantime, wicked men
do not cease to annoy me, as it is my duty — by well-doing — to refute
their slanders, so it will belong to you to restrain those slanders by
the exercise of that sacred authority with which you are invested.
Wherefore, my Illustrious and highly honored Lords, I recommend you to
the protection of our good God, entreating Him to give you always the
spirit of prudence and virtue for governing aright, and to make your
administration prosperous, so that His name may be thereby glorified,
and that the result may be happy for you and yours.  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

<span id="v-p18"></span>Geneva,  
1st January, 1553.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc34004.htm#fr_1) <span id="v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v-p9"></span> (“<span id="v-p9.1"></span>Ascavoir que
l’Evangile, et ceux qui y veulent adherer, ont yei leur retraitte,”) —
(namely, that the gospel, and those who wish to abide by it, have their
retreat here)

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc34004.htm#fr_2) <span id="v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v-p11"></span> The French version adds “<span
id="v-p11.1"></span>a ce qu’elle ne flottast plus parmi les traditions
des hommes;” — “that it might no longer be tossed about among; the
traditions of men.”

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc34004.htm#fr_3) <span id="v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v-p13"></span> “<span id="v-p13.1"></span>Nous qui taschons de
remettre l’estat de l’Eglise a son entier;” — “we who endeavor to
restore the Church to her original condition.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc34004.htm#fr_4) <span id="v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v-p14"></span> “<span id="v-p14.1"></span>Dieu par sa grace
nous a restitue.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc34004.htm#fr_5) <span id="v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v-p16"></span> The French copy adds: “<span
id="v-p16.1"></span>afin qu’on n’en juge point a l’aventure, ni a,
credit;” — “that they may not judge of it at random, or on trust.”

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc34004.htm#fr_6) <span id="v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v-p17"></span> In the concluding sentence, the more amplified
form of the French version has been followed. — *Ed*.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Argument](cc34005)
