[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc34014)  [Next](cc34016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[John
10:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Verily, verily, I say to you, He who
entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but climbeth by another
way, is a thief and a robber. **2.** But he who entereth by the door is
the shepherd of the sheep. **3.** To him the porter openeth, and the
sheep hear his voice, and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth
them out. **4.** And having put out his own sheep, he goeth before them,
and the sheep follow him; for they know his voice. **5.** But they will
not follow a stranger, but will flee from him; for they know not the
voice of strangers. **6.** Jesus spoke this parable to them; but they
did not understand what those things were which he spoke to them.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span><span id="xvi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Verily, verily, I say to you.* As
Christ had to do with scribes and priests, who were reckoned pastors of
the Church, it was necessary that they should be divested of the honor
of this title, if he wished his doctrine to be received. The small
number of believers might also diminish greatly the authority of his
doctrine. He therefore contends that we ought not to reckon, in the
number of *shepherds* or of *sheep*, all who outwardly claim a place in
the Church. But we shall never be able, by means of this mark, to
distinguish the lawful *shepherds* from the reprobate, and the true
*sheep* from the counterfeit, if all have the same object, and
beginning, and end.

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span>This warning has been highly useful in all
ages, and in the present day it is especially necessary. No plague is
more destructive to the Church, than when wolves ravage under the garb
of *shepherds* We know also how grievous an offense it is, when bastard
or degenerate Israelites pretend to be the sons of the Church, and, on
this pretense, insult believers. But in the present day, there is
nothing by which weak and ignorant persons are more alarmed, than when
they see the sanctuary of God occupied by the greatest enemies of the
Church; for it is not easy to make them understand, that it is the
doctrine of Christ which the *shepherds* of the Church so fiercely
resist. Besides, as the greater part of men are led into various errors
by false doctrines, while the views and expectations of each person are
directed to others, scarcely any person permits himself to be conducted
into the right path.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>We must therefore, above all things, guard
against being deceived by pretended *shepherds* or counterfeit *sheep*,
if we do not choose, of our own accord, to expose ourselves to *wolves*
and *thieves* The name of “The Church” is highly honorable, and justly
so; but the greater the reverence which it deserves, so much the more
careful and attentive ought we to be in marking the distinction between
true and false doctrine. Christ here declares openly, that we ought not
to reckon as *shepherds* all who boast of being such, and that we ought
not to reckon as sheep all who boast of outward marks. He speaks of the
Jewish Church, but what he says applies equally well to our own. We
ought also to consider his purpose and design, that weak consciences may
not be alarmed or discouraged, when they perceive that they who rule in
the Church, instead of *pastors* or *shepherds*, are hostile or opposed
to the Gospel; and that they may not turn aside from the faith, because
they have few fellow-disciples, in listening to Christ, among those who
are called Christians.

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>*He who entereth not by the door.* It is
useless, I think, to scrutinize too closely every part of this parable.
Let us rest satisfied with this general view, that, as Christ states a
resemblance between the Church and a *sheepfold*, in which God assembles
all his people, so he compares himself to a *door*, because there is no
other entrance into the Church but by himself. Hence it follows that
they alone are good *shepherds* who lead men straight to Christ; and
that they are truly gathered into the *fold* of Christ, so as to belong
to his flock, who devote themselves to Christ alone.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>But all this relates to doctrine; for, since

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
are hidden in Christ,  
(<span id="xvi.i-p10.2"></span>[Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p10.2"></span>,)

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span>he who turns aside from him to go elsewhere
neither keeps the road nor *enters by the door.* Now, whoever shall not
despise Christ or his instructor will easily rid himself of that
hesitation which keeps so many in a state of perplexity, what is the
Church, and who are they to whom we ought to listen as *shepherds* For
if they who are called shepherds attempt to lead us away from Christ, we
ought to flee from them, at the command of Christ, as we would flee from
*wolves* or *thieves*; and we ought not to form or maintain intercourse
with any society but that which is agreed in the pure faith of the
Gospel. For this reason Christ exhorts his disciples to separate
themselves from the unbelieving multitude of the whole nation, not to
suffer themselves to be governed by wicked priests, and not to allow
themselves to be imposed upon by proud and empty names.

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span><span id="xvi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>**3.** *To him the porter openeth.* If by
the word *Porter*  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) any one
choose to understand God, I do not object; and Christ even appears
expressly to contrast the judgment of God with the false opinion of men
in approving of pastors, as if he had said, “There are others, indeed,
whom the world generally applauds, and on whom it willingly confers
honor; but God, who holds the reins of government, does not acknowledge
or approve of any but those who lead *the sheep* by this road.”

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span>*He calleth his own sheep by name.* I
consider this as referring to the mutual consent of faith; because the
disciple and the teacher are united together by the one Spirit of God,
so that the teacher goes before, and the disciple follows. Some think
that it denotes the intimate knowledge which every *shepherd* ought to
have of each of his flock, but I do not know if this rests on solid
grounds.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span><span id="xvi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span>**4.** *Because they know his voice.* Though
he speaks here of ministers, yet, instead of wishing that they should be
*heard*, he wishes that God should be *heard* speaking by them; for we
must attend to the distinction which he has laid down, that he alone is
a faithful *pastor* or *shepherd*  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) of the Church, who conducts and
governs his sheep by the direction of Christ. We must attend to the
reason why it is said that *the sheep follow*; it is, because *they
know* how to distinguish *shepherds* from wolves by *the voice* This is
the spirit of discernment, by which the elect discriminate between the
truth of God and the false inventions of men. So then, in *the sheep* of
Christ a knowledge of the truth goes before, and next follows an earnest
desire to obey, so that they not only understand what is true, but
receive it with warm affection. And not only does he commend the
obedience of the faith, because the sheep assemble submissively at *the
voice* of the shepherd, but also because they do not listen to the voice
of *strangers,* and do not disperse when any one cries to them.

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span><span id="xvi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>**6.** *This parable.* This is the reason
why, proudly vaunting of their wisdom, they rejected the light of
Christ; for in a matter not very obscure they are exceedingly dull of
apprehension.

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span>*But they did not understand what things
they were which he spoke to them.* In this clause the Greek manuscripts
differ. Some copies might be literally rendered, *they did not
understand what he said* Another reading, which I have followed, is more
full, though it amounts to the same meaning. The third reading is, that
*they did not know that he who spoke of himself was the Son of God*; but
this is not much approved.

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
10:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007)<span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**7.** And Jesus again said to them, Verily,
verily, I say to you, that I am the door of the sheep. **8.** All who
have entered before me are thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not
hear them. **9.** I am the door. If any man enter by me, he shall be
saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. **10.** The thief
cometh not but to steal, and to kill, and to destroy; I am come, that
they may have life, and that they may have it more abundantly.

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span>**7.** *I am the door.* If this explanation
had not been added, the whole discourse would have been allegorical. He
now explains more clearly what was the chief part of the parable when he
declares that *he is the door* The amount of what is stated is, that the
principal point of all spiritual doctrine, on which souls are fed,
consists in Christ. Hence also Paul, one of the shepherds, says:

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span>I reckon nothing to be worth knowing but
Jesus Christ,  
(<span id="xvi.ii-p6.2"></span>[1Co
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002)<span id="xvi.ii-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span>And this mode of expression conveys the same
meaning as if Christ had testified that to him alone we must all be
gathered together. Therefore, he invokes and exhorts all who desire
salvation to come to him. By these words, he means that in vain do they
wander about who leave him to go to God, because there is but one open
*door*, and all approach in any other way is prohibited.

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span>**8.** *All who came before me.* The words
<span id="xvi.ii-p9.1"></span>πάντες ὅσοι may be literally rendered, all
as many as *came before me* They who restrict this expression to Judas
the Galilean, and such persons, depart widely, in my opinion, from
Christ’s meaning; for he contrasts all false doctrine, in general, with
the Gospel, and all false prophets with faithful teachers. Nor would it
even be unreasonable to extend this statement to the Gentiles, that all
who, from the beginning of the world, have professed to be teachers, and
have not labored to gather *sheep* to Christ, have abused this title for
destroying souls. But this does not at all apply to Moses and the
Prophets, who had no other object in view than to establish the kingdom
of Christ. For it ought to be observed, that a contrast is here made
between the words of Christ and those things which are opposed to them.
But so far are we from discovering any contradiction between the Law and
the doctrine of the Gospel, that the Law is nothing else than a
preparation for the Gospel. In short, Christ testifies that all the
doctrines, by which the world has been led away from him, are so many
deadly plagues; because, apart from him, there is nothing but
destruction and horrible confusion. Meanwhile, we see of what importance
antiquity is with God, and in what estimation it ought to be held by us,
when it enters, as it were, into a contest with Christ. That no man may
be moved by the consideration, that there have been teachers, in all
ages, who gave themselves no concern whatever about directing men to
Christ, Christ expressly states that it is of no consequence how many
there have been of this description, or how early they began to appear;
for it ought to be considered that there is but *one door*, and that
they who leave it, and make openings or breaches in the walls, are
*thieves*

<span id="xvi.ii-p10"></span>*But the sheep did not hear them.* He now
confirms more clearly what he had already spoken more obscurely and in
the figure of an allegory, that they who were led out of the way by
impostors did not belong to the Church of God. This is said, first, that
when we see a great multitude of persons going astray, we may not
resolve to perish through their example; and, next, that we may not
waver, when God permits impostors to deceive many. For it is no light
consolation, and no small ground of confidence, when we know that
Christ, by his faithful protection, has always guarded his *sheep,*
amidst the various attacks and crafty devices of wolves and robbers, so
that there never was one of them that deserted him.  <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283)

<span id="xvi.ii-p12"></span>But here a question arises, When does a
person begin to belong to the flock of the Son of God?  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) For we see many who stray and wander
through deserts during the greater part of their life, and are at length
brought into the fold of Christ. I reply, the word *sheep* is here used
in two ways. When Christ says afterwards, that he has *other sheep*
besides, he includes all the elect of God, who had at that time no
resemblance to *sheep* At present, he means *sheep* which bore the
shepherd’s mark. By nature, we are at the greatest possible distance
from being *sheep*; but, on the contrary, are born lions, tigers,
wolves, and bears,  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) until the
Spirit of Christ tames us, and from wild and savage beasts forms us to
be mild *sheep* Thus, according to the secret election of God, we are
already *sheep* in his heart, before we are born; but we begin to be
*sheep* in ourselves by the calling, by which he gathers us into his
fold. Christ declares that they who are called into the order of
believers are so firmly bound together, that they cannot stray or
wander, or be carried about by any wind of new doctrine.

<span id="xvi.ii-p15"></span>It will perhaps be objected, that even
those who had been devoted to Christ frequently go astray, and that this
is proved by frequent experience, and that it is not without good reason
that Ezekiel ascribes it to the good Shepherd, that he gathers *the
scattered sheep*, (<span id="xvi.ii-p15.1"></span>[Eze
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#012)<span id="xvi.ii-p15.1"></span>.)
I readily acknowledge that it frequently happens, that they who had
belonged to the household of faith are, for a time, estranged; but this
is not at variance with Christ’s statement, for, so far as they go
astray, they cease, in some respects, to be *sheep* What Christ means is
simply this, that all the elect of God, though they were tempted to go
astray in innumerable ways, were kept in obedience to the pure faith, so
that they were not exposed as a prey to Satan, or to his ministers. But
this work of God is not less astonishing, when he again gathers *the
sheep* which had wandered for a little, than if they had all along
continued to be shut up in the fold. It is always true, and without a
single exception, that

<span id="xvi.ii-p16"></span>they who go out from us were not of us,  
but that they who were of us remain with us to the end,  
(<span id="xvi.ii-p16.3"></span>[1Jo
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="xvi.ii-p16.3"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.ii-p17"></span>This passage ought to strike us with the
deepest shame; first, because we are so ill accustomed to *the voice* of
our *Shepherd*, that there are hardly any who do not listen to it with
indifference; and, next, because we are so slow and indolent to follow
him. I speak of the good, or of those who are at least passable; for the
greater part of those who boast that they are Christ’s disciples kick
fiercely against him. Lastly, as soon as the voice of any *stranger* has
sounded in our ears, we are hurried to and fro; and this lightness and
unsteadiness sufficiently shows how little progress we have hitherto
made in the faith. But if the number of believers is smaller than might
be desired, and if out of this small number a large proportion be
continually dropping off, faithful teachers have this consolation to
support them, that the elect of God, who are Christ’s *sheep,* listen to
them. It is our duty, indeed, to labor diligently, and to strive by
every possible method, that the whole world may be brought, if possible,
into the unity of the faith; but let us, in the meantime, be well
satisfied with belonging to the number.

<span id="xvi.ii-p18"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p19"></span>**9.** *If any man enter by me.* The
highest consolation of believers is, that when they have once embraced
Christ, they learn that they are out of danger; for Christ promises to
them salvation and happiness. He afterwards divides it into two parts.

<span id="xvi.ii-p20"></span>*He shall go in and out, and find pasture.*
First, they shall go safely wherever they find necessary; and, next,
they shall be fed to the full. By *going in and out*, Scripture often
denotes all the actions of the life, as we say in French, *aller et
venir*, (*to go and come*,)  <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286)
which means, *to dwell* These words, therefore, present to us a twofold
advantage of the Gospel, that our souls shall find pasture in it, which
otherwise become faint and famished, and are fed with nothing but wind;
and, next, because he will faithfully protect and guard us against the
attacks of wolves and robbers.

<span id="xvi.ii-p22"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p23"></span>**10.** *The thief cometh not.* By this
saying, Christ — if we may use the expression — pulls our ear, that the
ministers of Satan may not come upon us by surprise, when we are in a
drowsy and careless state; for our excessive indifference exposes us, on
every side, to false doctrines. For whence arises credulity so great,
that they who ought to have remained fixed in Christ, fly about in a
multitude of errors, but because they do not sufficiently dread or guard
against so many false teachers? And not only so, but our insatiable
curiosity is so delighted with the new and strange inventions of men,
that, of our own accord, we rush with mad career to meet thieves and
wolves. Not without reason, therefore, does Christ testify that false
teachers, whatever may be the mildness and plausibility of their
demeanour, always carry about a deadly poison, that we may be more
careful to drive them away from us. A similar warning is given by Paul,

<span id="xvi.ii-p24"></span>See that no man rob you through vain
philosophy,  
(<span id="xvi.ii-p24.2"></span>[Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="xvi.ii-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.ii-p25"></span>*I am come.* This is a different
comparison; for Christ, having hitherto called himself *the door,* and
declared that they who bring sheep to this *door* are true *shepherds*,
now assumes the character of a shepherd, and indeed affirms that he is
the only *shepherd* Indeed, there is no other to whom this honor and
title strictly belongs; for, as to all the faithful *shepherds* of the
Church, it is he who raises them up, endows them with the necessary
qualifications, governs them by his Spirit, and works by them; and
therefore they do not prevent him from being the only Governor of his
Church, or from holding the distinction of being the only *Shepherd*
For, though he employs their ministry, still he does not cease to
fulfill and discharge the office of a *shepherd* by his own power; and
they are masters and teachers in such a manner as not to interfere with
his authority as a Master. In short, when the term *shepherd* is applied
to men, it is used, as we say, in a subordinate sense; and Christ shares
the honor with his ministers in such a manner, that he still continues
to be the only *shepherd* both of themselves and of the whole flock.

<span id="xvi.ii-p26"></span>*That they may have life.* When he says
that *he is come*, *that the sheep may have life*, he means that they
only who do not submit to his *staff and crook* (<span
id="xvi.ii-p26.1"></span>[Ps 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span
id="xvi.ii-p26.1"></span>) are exposed to the ravages of wolves and
thieves; and — to give them greater confidence — he declares that *life*
is continually increased and strengthened in those who do not revolt
from him. And, indeed, the greater progress that any man makes in faith,
the more nearly does he approach to fullness of *life,* because the
Spirit, who is life, grows in him.

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
10:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span
id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span>**11.** I am the good shepherd; the good
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep. **12.** But the hireling, and he
who is not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf
coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth, and the wolf teareth them,
and scattereth the sheep. **13.** The hireling fleeth, because he is a
hireling, and careth not for the sheep. **14.** I am the good shepherd,
and know my sheep, and am known by mine. **15.** As the Father knoweth
me, I also know the Father, and I lay down my life for the sheep.

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span>**11.** *The good shepherd giveth his life
for the sheep.* From the extraordinary affection which he bears towards
the *sheep,* he shows how truly he acts towards them as a *shepherd;*
for he is so anxious about their salvation, that he does not even spare
his own life. Hence it follows, that they who reject the guardianship of
so kind and amiable a *shepherd* are exceedingly ungrateful, and deserve
a hundred deaths, and are exposed to every kind of harm. The remark of
Augustine is exceedingly just, that this passage informs us what we
ought to desire, what we ought to avoid, and what we ought to endure, in
the government of the Church. Nothing is more desirable than that the
Church should be governed by good and diligent *shepherds* Christ
declares that *he is the good shepherd*, who keeps his Church safe and
sound, first, by himself, and, next, by his agents. Whenever there is
good order, and fit men hold the government, then Christ shows that he
is actually *the shepherd* But there are many wolves and thieves who,
wearing the garb of *shepherds*, wickedly scatter the Church. Whatever
name such persons may assume, Christ threatens that we must avoid them.

<span id="xvi.iii-p6"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p7"></span>**12.** *But the hireling.* By *hirelings*
we are to understand those who retain the pure doctrine, and who
proclaim the truth, as Paul says, to serve a purpose rather than from
pure zeal. Though such persons do not serve Christ faithfully, yet we
ought to hear them; for Christ wished that *the Pharisees* should be
heard, *because they sat in Moses*’ *seat*, (<span
id="xvi.iii-p7.1"></span>[Mt 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002)<span
id="xvi.iii-p7.1"></span>;) and, in like manner, we ought to give such
honor to the Gospel, as not to shrink from its ministers, though they be
not good men. And as even the slightest offenses render the Gospel
distasteful to us, that we may not be hindered by such false delicacy,
let us always remember what I have formerly suggested, that if the
Spirit of Christ does not operate so powerfully in ministers, as to make
it plainly evident that he is their *shepherd*, we suffer the punishment
of our sins, and yet our obedience is proved.

<span id="xvi.iii-p8"></span>*And he who is not the shepherd.* Though
Christ claims for himself alone the name of a *shepherd,* yet he
indirectly states that, in some respects, he holds it in common with the
agents by whom he acts. For we know that there have been many, since the
time of Christ, who did not hesitate to shed their blood for the
salvation of the Church; and even the prophets, before his coming, did
not spare their own life. But in his own person he holds out a perfect
example, so as to lay down a rule for his ministers. For how base and
shameful is our indolence, if our life is more dear to us than the
salvation of the Church, which Christ preferred to his own life!

<span id="xvi.iii-p9"></span>What is here said about *laying down life
for the sheep*, may be viewed as an undoubted and principal mark of
paternal affection. Christ intended, first, to demonstrate what a
remarkable proof he gave of his love toward us, and, next, to excite all
his ministers to imitate his example. Yet we must attend to the
difference between them and him. He *laid down his life* as the price of
satisfaction, shed his blood to cleanse our souls, offered his body as a
propitiatory sacrifice, to reconcile the Father to us. Nothing of all
this can exist in the ministers of the Gospel, all of whom need to be
cleansed, and receive atonement and reconciliation to God by that single
sacrifice. But Christ does not argue here about the efficacy or benefit
of his death, so as to compare himself to others, but to prove with what
zeal and affection  <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) he is moved
towards us, and, next, to invite others to follow his example. In short,
as it belongs exclusively to Christ to procure life for us by his death,
and to fulfill all that is contained in the Gospel, so it is the
universal duty of all *pastors* or *shepherds*, to defend the doctrine
which they proclaim, even at the expense of their life, and to seal the
doctrine of the Gospel with their blood, and to show that it is not in
vain that they teach that Christ has procured salvation for themselves
and for others.

<span id="xvi.iii-p11"></span>But here a question may be put. Ought we
to reckon that man *a hireling,* who, for any reason whatever, shrinks
from encountering the wolves? This was anciently debated as a practical
question, when tyrants raged cruelly against the Church. Tertullian, and
others of the same class, were, in my opinion, too rigid on this point.
I prefer greatly the moderation of Augustine, who allows pastors to flee
on the condition that, by their flight, they contribute more to the
public safety than they would do by betraying the flock committed to
their charge. And he shows that this is done, when the Church is not
deprived of well-qualified ministers, and when the life of the pastor in
particular is so eagerly sought, that his absence mitigates the rage of
enemies. But it the flock — as well as the pastor — be in danger,  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) and if there be reason to believe that
the pastor flees, not so much from a desire to promote the public
advantage as from a dread of dying, Augustine contends that this is not
at all lawful, because the example of his flight will do more injury
than his life can do good in future. The reader may consult the Epistle
to Bishop Honoratus, (<span id="xvi.iii-p12.2"></span>Ep. 108<span
id="xvi.iii-p12.2"></span>) On this ground it was lawful for Cyprian to
flee, who was so far from shuddering at death, that he nobly refused to
accept the offer of saving his life by a treacherous denial of his
Master. Only it must be held that a pastor ought to prefer his flock, or
even a single sheep, to his own life.

<span id="xvi.iii-p13"></span>*Whose own the sheep are not.* Christ
appears here to make all *shepherds* besides himself to be, without
exception, *hirelings*; for, since he alone is *shepherd*, none of us
have a right to say that the sheep which he feeds are *his own* But let
us remember that they who are guided by the Spirit of God reckon that to
be *their own* which belongs to their Head; and that not in order to
claim power for themselves, but to keep faithfully what has been
committed to their charge. For he who is truly united to Christ will
never cease to take an interest in that which He valued so highly. This
is what he afterwards says:

<span id="xvi.iii-p14"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p15"></span>**13.** *The hireling fleeth.* The reason
is, *because he careth not for the sheep*, which means, that his heart
is not moved by the scattering of the flock, because he thinks that it
does not at all belong to him. For he who looks to the *hire*, and not
to the flock, though he may deceive others, when the Church is in a
state of tranquillity, yet when he comes into the contest, will give
proof of his treachery.

<span id="xvi.iii-p16"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p17"></span>**14.** *And I know my sheep, and am known
by mine.* In the former clause, he again holds out his love towards us;
for *knowledge* proceeds from love, and is accompanied by care. But it
means also that he utterly disregards all who do not obey the Gospel, as
he repeats in the second clause, and confirms what he had formerly said,
that — on the other hand — *he is known by the sheep*

<span id="xvi.iii-p18"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p19"></span>**15.** *As the Father knoweth me.* It is
unnecessary, and is not even expedient, that we should enter into those
thorny questions, How is it that the Father knows his Wisdom? For Christ
simply declares that, so far as he is the bond of our union with God, he
is placed between Him and us; as if he had said, that it is no more
possible for him to forget us, than that he should be rejected or
disregarded by the Father. At the same time, he demands the duty which
we mutually owe to him, because, as he employs all the power which he
has received from the Father for our protection, so he wishes that we
should be obedient and devoted to him, as he is wholly devoted to his
Father, and refers everything to him.

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
10:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span>**16.** And I have other sheep, which are
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice,
and there shall be one fold and one shepherd. **17.** On this account
the Father loveth me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it
again. **18.** No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I
have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This
commandment have I received from my Father.

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span>**16.** *And I have other sheep.* Though
some refer this indiscriminately to all, both Jews and Gentiles, who
were not yet disciples of Christ, yet I have no doubt that he had in his
eye the calling of the Gentiles. For he gives the appellation *fold* to
the assemblage of the ancient people, by which they were separated from
the other nations of the world, and united into one body as the heritage
of God. The Jews had been adopted by God in such a manner, that he
surrounded them with certain enclosures, which consisted of rites and
ceremonies, that they might not be confounded with unbelievers, though
the door of the *fold* was the gracious covenant of eternal life
confirmed in Christ. For this reason he calls those *sheep* which had
not the same mark, but belonged to a different class, *other sheep* In
short, the meaning is, that the pastoral office of Christ is not
confined within the limits of Judea, but is far more extensive.

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span>Augustine’s observation on this passage is
undoubtedly true, that, as there are many wolves *within* the Church, so
there are many sheep *without* But this is not applicable, in every
respect, to the present passage, which relates to the outward aspect of
the Church, because the Gentiles, who had been strangers for a time,
were afterwards invited into the kingdom of God, along with the Jews.
Yet I acknowledge that Augustine’s statement applies in this respect,
that Christ gives the name of *sheep* to unbelievers, who in themselves
were the farthest possible from being entitled to be called *sheep* And
not only does he point out, by this term, what they will be, but rather
refers this to the secret election of God, because we are already God’s
*sheep*, before we are aware that He is our shepherd. In like manner, it
is elsewhere said that *we were enemies*, *when he loved us*, (<span
id="xvi.iv-p6.1"></span>[Ro 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010)<span
id="xvi.iv-p6.1"></span>;) and for this reason Paul also says that *we
were known by God*, *before we knew him*, (<span
id="xvi.iv-p6.2"></span>[Ga 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)<span
id="xvi.iv-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span>*Them also I must bring.* He means that the
election of God will be secure, so that nothing of all that he wishes to
be saved shall perish.  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) For the
secret purpose of God, by which men were ordained to life, is at length
manifested in his own time by the calling, — the effectual calling, when
he regenerates by his Spirit, to be his sons, those who formerly were
begotten of flesh and blood.

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span>But it may be asked, How were the Gentiles
brought to be associated with the Jews? For the Jews were not under the
necessity of rejecting the covenant which God made with their fathers,
in order to become Christ’s disciples; and the Gentiles, on the other
hand, were not under the necessity of submitting to the yoke of the Law,
that, being ingrafted in Christ, they might be associated with the Jews.
Here we must attend to the distinction between the substance of the
covenant and the outward appendages. For the Gentiles could not assent
to the faith of Christ in any other way than by embracing that
everlasting covenant on which the salvation of the world was founded. In
this manner were fulfilled the predictions,

<span id="xvi.iv-p10"></span>Strangers shall speak the language of
Canaan,  
(<span id="xvi.iv-p10.2"></span>[Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)<span id="xvi.iv-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p11"></span>Again,

<span id="xvi.iv-p12"></span>Ten men of the Gentiles shall take hold of
the cloak of one Jew, and say,  
We will go with you,  
(<span id="xvi.iv-p12.3"></span>[Zec
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#023)<span id="xvi.iv-p12.3"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p13"></span>Again,

<span id="xvi.iv-p14"></span>Many nations shall come, and say,  
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,  
(<span id="xvi.iv-p14.3"></span>[Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)<span id="xvi.iv-p14.3"></span>;
<span id="xvi.iv-p14.4"></span>[Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002)<span id="xvi.iv-p14.4"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p15"></span>Abraham was also called

<span id="xvi.iv-p16"></span>*a father of many nations*, (<span
id="xvi.iv-p16.1"></span>[Ge 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005)<span
id="xvi.iv-p16.1"></span>; <span id="xvi.iv-p16.2"></span>[Ro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span id="xvi.iv-p16.2"></span>,)
because they shall come from the East and from the West, who shall sit
down with him in the kingdom of God,  
(<span id="xvi.iv-p16.4"></span>[Mt
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)<span id="xvi.iv-p16.4"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p17"></span>As to ceremonies, they are *the middle wall
of partition*, which, Paul informs us, *hath been thrown down*, (<span
id="xvi.iv-p17.1"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="xvi.iv-p17.1"></span>.)
Thus, we have been associated with the Jews in the unity of the faith,
as to the substance; and the ceremonies were abolished, that there might
be nothing to prevent the Jews from stretching out their hand to us.

<span id="xvi.iv-p18"></span>*And there shall be one fold*  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) *and one shepherd* That is, that all
the children of God may be gathered and united  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) into one body; as we acknowledge that
there is one holy universal Church,  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) and there must be one body with one
head.

<span id="xvi.iv-p22"></span>There is one God, says Paul, one faith, one
baptism.  
Therefore we ought to be one, as we are called into one hope,  
(<span id="xvi.iv-p22.3"></span>[Eph.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span id="xvi.iv-p22.3"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p23"></span>Now though this *flock* appears to be
divided into different *folds,* yet they are kept within enclosures
which are common to all believers who are scattered throughout the whole
world; because the same word is preached to all, they use the same
sacraments, they have the same order of prayer, and every thing that
belongs to the profession of faith.

<span id="xvi.iv-p24"></span>*And they shall hear my voice.* We must
observe the way in which the flock of God is gathered. It is, when all
have *one shepherd*, and when *his voice alone*  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) *is heard* These words mean that, when
the Church submits to Christ alone, and obeys his commands, and hears
*his voice* and his doctrine,  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294)
then only is it in a state of good order. If Papists can show us that
there is any thing of this sort among them, let them enjoy the title of
The Church, of which they vaunt so much. But if Christ is silent there,
if his majesty is trodden under foot, if his sacred ordinances are held
up to scorn, what else is their unity but a diabolical conspiracy, which
is worse and far more to be abhorred than any dispersion? Let us
therefore remember that we ought always to begin with the Head. Hence
also the Prophets, when they describe the restoration of the Church,
always join David the king with God; as if they said, that there is no
Church where Christ does not reign, and that there is no kingdom of God,
but where the honor of *shepherd* is granted to Christ.

<span id="xvi.iv-p27"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p28"></span>**17.** *On this account the Father loveth
me.* There is, indeed, another and a higher reason why *the Father
loveth the Son*; for it was not in vain that a voice was heard from
heaven,

<span id="xvi.iv-p29"></span>This is my beloved Son, in whom the
good-pleasure of God dwells,  
(<span id="xvi.iv-p29.2"></span>[Matt.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017), [Matt.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="xvi.iv-p29.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p30"></span>But as he was made man on our account, and
as the Father delighted in him, in order that he might reconcile us to
himself, we need not wonder if he declares it to be the reason why *the
Father loveth him*, that our salvation is dearer to him than his own
life. This is a wonderful commendation of the goodness of God to us, and
ought justly to arouse our whole souls into rapturous admiration, that
not only does God extend to us the love which is due to the
only-begotten Son, but he refers it to us as the final cause. And indeed
there was no necessity that Christ should take upon him our flesh, in
which he was *beloved*, but that it might be the pledge of the mercy of
*his Father* in redeeming us.

<span id="xvi.iv-p31"></span>*That I may take it again. As* the
disciples might be deeply grieved on account of what they had heard
about the death of Christ, and as their faith might even be greatly
shaken, he comforts them by the hope of his resurrection, which would
speedily take place; as if he said, that he would not die on the
condition of being swallowed up by death, but in order that he might
soon rise again as a conqueror. And even at the present day, we ought to
contemplate the death of Christ, so as to remember, at the same time,
the glory of his resurrection. Thus, we know that he is *life*, because,
in his contest with death, he obtained a splendid victory, and achieved
a noble triumph.

<span id="xvi.iv-p32"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p33"></span>**18.** *No man taketh it from me.* This is
another consolation, by which the disciples may take courage as to the
death of Christ, that he does not die by constraint, but offers himself
willingly for the salvation of his flock. Not only does he affirm that
men have no power to put him to death, except so far as he permits them,
but he declares that he is free from every violence of necessity. It is
otherwise with us, for we are laid under a necessity of dying on account
of our sins. True, Christ himself was born a mortal man; but this was a
voluntary submission, and not a bondage laid upon him by another. Christ
intended, therefore, to fortify his disciples, that, when they saw him
shortly afterwards dragged to death, they might not be dismayed, as if
he had been oppressed by enemies, but might acknowledge that it was done
by the wonderful Providence of God, that he should die for the
redemption of his flock. And this doctrine is of perpetual advantage,
that the death of Christ is an expiation for our sins, because it was a
voluntary sacrifice, according to the saying of Paul,

<span id="xvi.iv-p34"></span>By the obedience of one many were made
righteous,  
(<span id="xvi.iv-p34.2"></span>[Ro
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="xvi.iv-p34.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p35"></span>*But I lay it down of myself.* These words
may be explained in two ways; either that Christ divests himself of
life, but still remains what he was, just as a person would lay aside a
garment from his body, or, that he dies by his own choice.

<span id="xvi.iv-p36"></span>*This commandment have I received from my
Father.* He recalls our attention to the eternal purpose of the Father,
in order to inform us that He had such care about our salvation, that he
dedicated to us his only-begotten Son great and excellent as he is;
 <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) and Christ himself, who came
into the world to be in all respects obedient to *the Father*, confirms
the statement, that he has no other object in view than to promote our
benefit.

<span id="xvi.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p1"></span><span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>[John
10:19-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#019)<span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p2"></span>**19.** A division therefore arose again
among the Jews on account of those sayings. **20.** And many of them
said, He hath a devil, and is mad: why do you hear him? **21.** Others
said, These are not the words of a demoniac. Can a devil open the eyes
of the blind? **22.** And it was the feast of Dedication at Jerusalem,
and it was winter. **23.** And Jesus was walking in the temple in
Solomon’s porch. **24.** The Jews then surrounded him, and said to him,
How long dost thou keep our soul in suspense? If thou be the Christ,
tell us plainly. **25.** Jesus answered them, I have told you, but you
do not believe. The works which I do in my Father’s name testify of me.
**26.** But you do not believe, because you are not of my sheep, as I
said to you. **27.** My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me. **28.** And I give them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, nor shall any one wrest them out of my hand. **29.** My Father,
who gave them to me, is greater than all; and none can wrest them out of
my Father’s hand. **30.** I and my Father are one.

<span id="xvi.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.v-p4"></span><span id="xvi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p5"></span>**19.** *A division therefore arose again.*
The advantage gained by Christ’s discourse was, that it procured him
some disciples; but as his doctrine has also many adversaries, hence
arises *a division*, so that they are split into parties, who formerly
appeared to be one body of the Church. for all, with one consent,
professed that they worshipped the God of Abraham and complied with the
Law of Moses; but now, when Christ comes forward, they begin to differ
on his account. If that profession had been sincere, Christ, who is the
strongest bond of charity, and whose office it is to gather those things
which are scattered, would not break up their agreement. But Christ, by
the light of his Gospel, exposes the hypocrisy of many who, while they
had nothing but a false and hypocritical pretense, boasted that they
were the people of God.

<span id="xvi.v-p6"></span>Thus, the wickedness of many is still the
reason why the Church is troubled by *divisions*, and why contentions
are kindled. Yet those who disturb the peace, throw the blame on us, and
call us Schismatics; for the principal charge which the Papists bring
against us is, that our doctrine has shaken the tranquillity of the
Church. Yet the truth is, that, if they would yield submissively to
Christ, and give their support to the truth, all the commotions would
immediately be allayed. But when they utter murmurs and complaints
against Christ, and will not allow us to be at rest on any other
condition than that the truth of God shall be extinguished, and that
Christ shall be banished from his kingdom, they have no right to accuse
us of the crime of schism; for it is on themselves, as every person
sees, that this crime ought to be charged. We ought to be deeply grieved
that the Church is torn by *divisions* arising among those who profess
the same religion; but it is better that there are some who separate
themselves from the wicked, to be united to Christ their Head, than that
all should be of one mind in despising God. Consequently, when schisms
arise, we ought to inquire who they are that revolt from God and from
his pure doctrine.

<span id="xvi.v-p7"></span><span id="xvi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p8"></span>**20.** *He hath a devil.* They employ the
most offensive reproach which they can devise, in slandering Christ,
that all may shudder at the thought of hearing him. For wicked men, that
they may not be forced to yield to God, in a furious manner, and with
closed eyes, break out into proud contempt of him, and excite others to
the same rage, so that not a single word of Christ is heard in silence.
But the doctrine of Christ has sufficient power in itself to defend it
against slanders. And this is what believers mean by their reply,

<span id="xvi.v-p9"></span><span id="xvi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p10"></span>**21.** *These are not the words of a
demoniac.* It is as if they demanded that men should judge from the fact
itself; for the truth, as we have said, is strong enough to maintain
itself. And this is the only protection of our faith, that wicked men
will never be able to hinder the power and wisdom of God, and his
goodness also,  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) from shining in
the Gospel.

<span id="xvi.v-p12"></span><span id="xvi.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p13"></span>**22.** *And it was the feast of
Dedication.* The Greek word (<span id="xvi.v-p13.1"></span>ἐγκαίνια)
which we have translated *dedication*,  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) properly signifies *renovations*;
because the temple, which had been polluted, was again consecrated by
the command of Judas Maccabaeus; and at that time it was enacted that
the day of the new *dedication* or *consecration* should be celebrated
every year as a festival, that the people might recall to remembrance
the grace of God, which had put an end to the tyranny of Antiochus.
Christ appeared *in the temple* at that time, according to custom, that
his preaching might yield more abundant fruit amidst a large assembly of
men.

<span id="xvi.v-p15"></span><span id="xvi.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p16"></span>**23.** *And Jesus was walking in the
temple, in Solomon’s porch.* The Evangelist gives to *Solomon’s porch*
the designation of *the temple*; not that it was the sanctuary, but only
an appendage to *the temple* Nor does he mean the ancient *porch* which
was built by *Solomon*, which had been altogether destroyed by the
Chaldeans, but that which the Jews — perhaps immediately after their
return from the Babylonish captivity — built after the pattern of the
ancient *porch*, and gave it the same name, that it might be more highly
honored; and Herod afterwards built a new temple.

<span id="xvi.v-p17"></span><span id="xvi.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p18"></span>**24.** *The Jews therefore surrounded him.*
This was undoubtedly a cunning attack on Christ, at least on the part of
those with whom the scheme originated. For the common people might,
without any fraud, desire that Christ would openly declare that God had
sent him to be a deliverer; but a few persons, by trick and stratagem,
wished to draw this word from him amidst the crowd, that he might be
killed by a mob, or that the Romans might lay hands on him.

<span id="xvi.v-p19"></span>*How long dost thou keep our soul in
suspense?* By complaining of being *kept in suspense*, they pretend that
they are so ardently desirous of the promised redemption, that their
minds are eagerly and incessantly occupied by the expectation of Christ.
And this is the true feeling of piety, to find nowhere else than in
Christ alone, what will satisfy our minds, or give them true composure;
as he himself says,

<span id="xvi.v-p20"></span>Come to me, all you who labor and are heavy
laden, and I will refresh you, and your souls shall find rest,  
(<span id="xvi.v-p20.2"></span>[Matt.
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span id="xvi.v-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.v-p21"></span>Therefore, those who come to Christ ought to
be prepared in the same manner as those men pretend to be. But they are
wrong in accusing Christ, as if he had not hitherto confirmed their
faith; for it was entirely their own fault that they had not a full and
perfect knowledge of him. But this is always the case with unbelievers,
that they choose rather to remain in doubt than to be founded on the
certainty of the word of God. Thus, in our own day, we see many who
voluntarily shut their eyes, and spread the clouds of their doubt, in
order to darken the clear light of the Gospel. We see also many light
spirits, who fly about in idle speculations, and never find, throughout
their whole life, a permanent abode.

<span id="xvi.v-p22"></span>*Tell us plainly.* When they demand that
Christ shall declare himself *freely*, or openly and boldly, their
meaning is, that he may no longer convey his meaning indirectly, and in
a circuitous manner. Thus they charge his doctrine with obscurity,
which, on the contrary, was abundantly plain and distinct, if the men
who heard it had not been deaf. Now this history warns us, that we
cannot avoid the artifices and slanders of wicked men, if we are called
to preach the Gospel. Wherefore, we ought to be on the watch, and not to
be surprised at it as a new thing, when the same thing happens to us as
to our Master.

<span id="xvi.v-p23"></span><span id="xvi.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p24"></span>**25.** *I have told you.* Our Lord Jesus
 <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) does not conceal that he is the
Christ, and yet he does not teach them as if they were willing to learn,
but rather reproaches them with obstinate malice, because, though they
had been taught by the word and works of God, they had not yet made any
progress. Accordingly, that they do not know him, he imputes to their
own fault, as if he said: “My doctrine is easily enough understood, but
the blame lies with you, because you maliciously resist God.”

<span id="xvi.v-p26"></span>*The works which I do.* He speaks of his
*works,* in order to convict them of being doubly obstinate; for,
besides the doctrine, they had a striking testimony in his miracles, if
they had not been ungrateful to God. He twice repeats the words, *You do
not believe*, in order to prove that, of their own accord, they were
deaf to doctrine, and blind to works; which is a proof of extreme and
desperate malice. He says that *he did the works in the name of his
Father;* because his design was, to testify the power of God in them, by
which it might be openly declared that he came from God.

<span id="xvi.v-p27"></span><span id="xvi.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p28"></span>**26.** *Because you are not of my sheep.*
He assigns a higher reason why they do not believe either in his
miracles or in his doctrine. It is, because they are reprobate. We must
observe Christ’s design; for, since they boasted of being the Church of
God, that their unbelief may detract nothing from the authority of the
Gospel, he affirms that the gift of *believing* is a special gift. And,
indeed, *before that men know God*, *they must first be known by him*,
as Paul says, (<span id="xvi.v-p28.1"></span>[Ga
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)<span id="xvi.v-p28.1"></span>.) On
the other hand, those to whom God does not look must always continue to
look away from him. If any one murmur at this, arguing that the cause of
unbelief dwells in God, because he alone has power to make *sheep*; I
reply, He is free from all blame, for it is only by their voluntary
malice that men reject his grace. God does all that is necessary to
induce them to believe, but who shall tame wild beasts?  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) This will never be done, till the
Spirit of God change them into *sheep* They who are wild will in vain
attempt to throw on God the blame of their wildness, for it belongs to
their own nature. In short, Christ means that it is not wonderful, if
there are few who obey his Gospel, because all whom the Spirit of God
does not subdue to the obedience of faith are wild and fierce beasts. So
much the more unreasonable and absurd is it, that the authority of the
Gospel should depend on the belief of men; but believers ought rather to
consider, that they are the more strongly bound to God, because, while
others remain in a state of blindness, they are drawn to Christ by the
illumination of the Spirit. Here, too, the ministers of the Gospel have
ground of consolation, if their labor be not profitable to all.

<span id="xvi.v-p30"></span><span id="xvi.v-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p31"></span>**27.** *My sheep hear my voice.* He proves
by an argument drawn from contraries, that they are not *sheep*, because
they do not obey the Gospel. For God effectually calls all whom he has
elected, so that the *sheep* of Christ are proved by their faith. And,
indeed, the reason why the name of *sheep* is applied to believers is,
that they surrender themselves to God, to be governed by the hand of the
Chief Shepherd, and, laying aside the fierceness of their nature, become
mild and teachable. It is no small consolation to faithful teachers,
that, though the greater part of the world do not listen to Christ, yet
he has his *sheep whom he knows*, *and by whom he is also known* Let
them do their utmost to bring the whole world into the fold of Christ;
but when they do not succeed according to their wish, let them be
satisfied with this single consideration, that they who are *sheep* will
be gathered by their agency. The rest has been already explained.

<span id="xvi.v-p32"></span><span id="xvi.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p33"></span>**28.** *And they shall never perish.* It is
an inestimable fruit of faith, that Christ bids us be convinced of our
security when we are brought by faith into his fold. But we must also
observe on what foundation this certainty rests. It is because he will
be a faithful guardian of our salvation, for he testifies that our
salvation is in *his hand* And if this were not enough, he says that
they will be safely guarded by the power of *his Father* This is a
remarkable passage, by which we are taught that the salvation of all the
elect is not less certain than the power of God is invincible. Besides,
Christ did not intend to throw this word foolishly into the air, but to
give a promise which should remain deeply axed in their minds; and,
therefore, we infer that the statement of Christ is intended to show
that the elect are absolutely certain of their salvation. We are
surrounded, indeed, by powerful adversaries, and so great is our
weakness, that we are every moment in imminent danger of death; but as
He who *keeps what we have committed to him* (<span
id="xvi.v-p33.1"></span>[2Ti 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.v-p33.1"></span>) is *greater* or more powerful *than all*, we
have no reason to tremble as if our life were in danger.

<span id="xvi.v-p34"></span>Hence, too, we infer how mad is the
confidence of the Papists, which relies on free-will, on their own
virtue, and on the merits of their works. Widely different is the manner
in which Christ instructs his followers, to remember that, in this
world, they may be said to be in the midst of a forest, surrounded by
innumerable robbers, and are not only unarmed and exposed as a prey, but
are aware that the cause of death is contained in themselves, so that,
relying on the guardianship of God alone, they may walk without alarm.
In short, our salvation is certain, because it is *in the hand* of God;
for our faith is weak, and we are too prone to waver. But God, who has
taken us under his protection, is sufficiently powerful to scatter, with
his breath alone, all the forces of our adversaries. It is of great
importance for us to turn our eye to this, that the fear of temptations
may not dismay us; for Christ even intended to point out the way in
which *sheep* are made to live at ease in the midst of wolves.

<span id="xvi.v-p35"></span>*And none can wrest them out of my Father’s
hand.* The word *and,* in this passage, means *therefore* For, since the
power of God is invincible, Christ infers that the salvation of
believers is not exposed to the ungovernable passions of their enemies,
because, ere they perish, God must be overcome, who has taken them under
the protection of *his hand.*

<span id="xvi.v-p36"></span><span id="xvi.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p37"></span>**30.** *I and my Father are one.* He
intended to meet the jeers of the wicked; for they might allege that the
power of God did not at all belong to him, so that he could promise to
his disciples that it would assuredly protect them. He therefore
testifies that his affairs are so closely united to those of the Father,
that the Father’s assistance will never be withheld from himself and his
*sheep* The ancients made a wrong use of this passage to prove that
Christ is (<span id="xvi.v-p37.2"></span>ὁμοούσιος) of the same essence
with the Father. For Christ does not argue about the unity of substance,
but about the agreement which he has with the Father, so that whatever
is done by Christ will be confirmed by the power of his Father.

<span id="xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
10:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031)<span id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p2"></span>**31.** Then the Jews again took up stones
to stone him. **32.** Jesus answered them, Many good works I have shown
you from my Father. For which of those works do you stone me? **33.**
The Jews answered him, We stone thee not for the sake of a good work,
but for blasphemy, and, because thou, being a man, makest thyself God.
**34.** Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your Law, I said, You
are gods? **35.** If it called them gods, to whom the word of God was
addressed, and Scripture cannot, be broken, **36.** Do you say that I,
whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, blaspheme, because I
said, I am the Son of God?

<span id="xvi.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.vi-p4"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p5"></span>**31.** *Then the Jews again took up
stones.* As true religion, in maintaining the glory of God, burns with
its own zeal which the Spirit of God directs, so unbelief is the mother
of rage, and the devil hurries on the wicked in such a manner, that they
breathe nothing but slaughter. This result shows with what intention
they put the question to Christ; for the open confession, of which they
pretended to be desirous, instantly drives them to madness. And yet,
though they are hurried along, with such violence, to oppress Christ,
there can be no doubt that they assigned some plausible reason for their
judgment, as if they were acting according to the injunction of the Law,
by which God commands that false prophets shall be stoned, (<span
id="xvi.vi-p5.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005)<span id="xvi.vi-p5.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.vi-p6"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p7"></span>**32.** *Many good works I have shown you.*
Here Christ not only says that they have no reason for their cruelty,
but accuses them of ingratitude, in making so unjust a requital for
God’s favors. Nor does he only state that he has done them a service by
one or two works, but that in many ways he has been kind to them. Next,
he upbraids them with being ungrateful, not only to himself, but rather
to God, when he says that he is the minister of the Father, who openly
manifested his power, that it might be known and attested to them. For
when he says that *the good works* were *from the Father*, he means that
God was the Author of them. The meaning may be thus summed up, “God
intended to make known to you, by me, distinguished benefits; he has
conferred them upon you by my hand. Banish me as much as you please, I
have done nothing that does not deserve praise and good-will. In
persecuting me, therefore, you must show your rage against the gifts of
God.” But the question has greater force to pierce their consciences
than if he had made a direct assertion.

<span id="xvi.vi-p8"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p9"></span>**33.** *We stone thee not for a good work.*
Though wicked men carry on open war with God, yet they never wish to sin
without some plausible pretense. The consequence is, that when they rage
against the Son of God, they are not content with this cruelty, but
bring an unprovoked accusation against him, and constitute themselves
advocates and defenders of the glory of God. A good conscience must
therefore be to us a wall of brass, by which we boldly repel the
reproaches and calumnies with which we are assailed. For whatever
plausibility may adorn their malice, and whatever reproach they may
bring on us for a time, if we fight for the cause of God, he will not
refuse to uphold his truth. But as the wicked never want pretences for
oppressing the servants of God, and as they have also hardened
impudence, so that, even when vanquished, they do not cease to slander,
we have need of patience and meekness, to support us to the end.

<span id="xvi.vi-p10"></span>*But for blasphemy.* The word *blasphemy,*
which among profane authors denotes generally every kind of reproach,
Scripture refers to God, when his majesty is offended and insulted.

<span id="xvi.vi-p11"></span>*Because thou, being a man, makest thyself
God.* There are two kinds of *blasphemy,* either when God is deprived of
the honor which belongs to him, or when anything unsuitable to his
nature, or contrary to his nature, is ascribed to him. They argue
therefore that Christ is a *blasphemer* and a sacrilegious person,
because, *being a mortal man*, he lays claim to Divine honor. And this
would be a just definition of *blasphemy,* if Christ were nothing more
than a man. They only err in this, that they do not design to
contemplate his Divinity, which was conspicuous in his miracles.

<span id="xvi.vi-p12"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p13"></span>**34.** *Is it not written in your Law?* He
clears himself of the crime charged against him, not by denying that he
is the Son of God, but by maintaining that he had justly said so. Yet he
adapts his reply to the persons, instead of giving a full explanation of
the fact; for he reckoned it enough for the present to expose their
malice. In what sense he called himself the Son of God he does not
explain fully, but states indirectly. The argument which he employs is
not drawn from equals, but from the less to the greater.

<span id="xvi.vi-p14"></span>*I said, You are gods.* Scripture gives the
name of *gods* to those on whom God has conferred an honorable office.
He whom God has separated, to be distinguished above all others, is far
more worthy of this honorable title. Hence it follows, that they are
malicious and false expounders of Scripture, who admit the first, but
take offense at the second. The passage which Christ quotes is in <span
id="xvi.vi-p14.2"></span>[Ps 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span
id="xvi.vi-p14.2"></span>,

<span id="xvi.vi-p15"></span>I have said, You are gods,  
and all of you are children of the Most High;

<span id="xvi.vi-p16"></span>where God expostulates with the kings and
judges of the earth, who tyrannically abuse their authority and power
for their own sinful passions, for oppressing the poor, and for every
evil action. He reproaches them that, unmindful of Him from whom they
received so great dignity, they profane the name of God. Christ applies
this to the case in hand, that they receive the name of *gods*, because
they are God’s ministers for governing the world. For the same reason
Scripture calls the angels *gods*, because by them the glory of God
beams forth on the world. We must attend to the mode of expression:

<span id="xvi.vi-p17"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p18"></span>**35.** *To whom the word of God was
addressed.* For Christ means that they were authorized by an undoubted
command of God. Hence we infer that empires did not spring up at random,
nor by the mistakes of men, but that they were appointed by the will of
God, because he wishes that political order should exist among men, and
that we should be governed by usages and laws. For this reason Paul
says, that all who

<span id="xvi.vi-p19"></span>resist the power are rebels against God,
because there is no power but what is ordained by God,  
(<span id="xvi.vi-p19.2"></span>[Rom.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#002)<span id="xvi.vi-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.vi-p20"></span>It will, perhaps, be objected, that other
callings also are from God, and are approved by him, and yet that we do
not, on that account, call farmers, or cowherds, or cobblers, *gods* I
reply, this is not a general declaration, that all who have been called
by God to any particular way of living are called *gods*; but Christ
speaks of kings, whom God has raised to a more elevated station, that
they may rule and govern. In short, let us know that magistrates are
called *gods*, because God has given them authority. Under the term
*Law,* Christ includes the whole doctrine by which God governed his
ancient Church; for since the prophets were only expounders of the Law,
the Psalms are justly regarded as an appendage to the Law. That *the
Scripture cannot be broken* means, that the doctrine of Scripture is
inviolable.

<span id="xvi.vi-p21"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p22"></span>**36.** *Whom the Father hath sanctified.*
There is a *sanctification* that is common to all believers. But here
Christ claims for himself something far more excellent, namely, that he
alone was separated from all others, that the power of the Spirit and
the majesty of God might be displayed in him; as he formerly said, that
*him hath God the Father sealed*, (<span id="xvi.vi-p22.1"></span>[Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span id="xvi.vi-p22.1"></span>.)
But this refers strictly to the person of Christ, so far as he is
manifested in the flesh. Accordingly, these two things are joined, that
he has been *sanctified and sent into the world.* But we must also
understand for what reason and on what condition *he was sent* It was to
bring salvation from God, and to prove and exhibit himself, in every
possible way, to be *the Son of God.*

<span id="xvi.vi-p23"></span>*Do you say that I blaspheme?* The Arians
anciently tortured this passage to prove that Christ is not God by
nature, but that he possesses a kind of borrowed Divinity. But this
error is easily refuted, for Christ does not now argue what he is in
himself, but what we ought to acknowledge him to be, from his miracles
in human flesh. For we can never comprehend his eternal Divinity, unless
we embrace him as a Redeemer, so far as the Father hath exhibited him to
us. Besides, we ought to remember what I have formerly suggested, that
Christ does not, in this passage, explain fully and distinctly what he
is, as he would have done among his disciples; but that he rather dwells
on refuting the slander of his enemies.

<span id="xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>[John
10:37-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037)<span
id="xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p2"></span>**37.** If I do not the works of my Father,
believe me not. **38.** But if I do,  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) though you believe not me, believe the
works; that you may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in
him. **39.** Therefore they sought again to seize him, but he escaped
 <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) out of their hands. **40.** And
again he went away beyond Jordan, to the place where John first
baptized, and abode there. **41.** And many came to him, and said, John
indeed did no miracle; but all that John spoke about this man was true.
**42.** And many believed on him there.

<span id="xvi.vii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.vii-p6"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p7"></span>**37.** *If I do not the works* Lest the
Jews might reply that it was in vain for him to boast of
*sanctification*, and of all that depended on it, he again draws their
attention to his miracles, in which there was a sufficiently evident
proof of his Divinity. This is in the shape of a concession, as if he
had said, “I do not wish you to be bound to give me credit on any other
condition than that you see the fact plainly before your eyes.  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) You may safely reject me, if God has
not openly given testimony to me.”

<span id="xvi.vii-p9"></span>*The works of my Father.* He gives them
this name, because those works were truly Divine, and because so great
power shone in them, that they could not be ascribed to a man.

<span id="xvi.vii-p10"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p11"></span>**38.** *But if I do.* He shows that they
are held plainly convicted of unbelieving and sacrilegious contempt,
because they render no reverence or honor  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) to what are undoubtedly the works of
God. This is a second concession, when he says, “Though I allow you to
doubt of my doctrine, you cannot deny, at least, that the miracles which
I have performed are from God. You therefore openly reject God, and not
a man.”

<span id="xvi.vii-p13"></span>*That you may know and believe.* Though he
places *knowledge* before faith, as if *faith* were inferior to it, he
does so, because he has to do with unbelieving and obstinate men, who
never yield to God, until they are vanquished and constrained by
experience; for rebels wish to *know* before they *believe* And yet our
gracious God indulges us so far, that he prepares us for *faith* by a
*knowledge* of his works. But the *knowledge* of God and of his secret
wisdom comes after *faith*, because the obedience of *faith* opens to us
the door of the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="xvi.vii-p14"></span>*That the Father is in me, and I in him.*
He repeats the same thing which he had said before in other words, *I
and my Father are one* All tends to this point, that in his ministry
there is nothing contrary to his Father. “*The* *Father*, he says, *is*
in me; that is, Divine power is manifested in me.”

<span id="xvi.vii-p15"></span>*And I am in my Father;* that is, “I do
nothing but by the command of God, so that there is a mutual connection
between me and my Father.” For this discourse does not relate to the
unity of essence, but to the manifestation of Divine power in the person
of Christ, from which it was evident that he was sent by God.

<span id="xvi.vii-p16"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p17"></span>**39.** *Therefore they sought again to
seize him.* This was undoubtedly that they might drive him out of the
temple, and immediately stone him; for their rage was not at all abated
by the words of Christ. As to what the Evangelist says, that *he escaped
out of their hands,* this could not be accomplished in any other way
than by a wonderful exertion of Divine power. This reminds us that we
are not exposed to the lawless passions of wicked men, which God
restrains by his bridle, whenever he thinks fit.

<span id="xvi.vii-p18"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p19"></span>**40.** *He went away beyond Jordan.*
Christ passed *beyond Jordan,* that he might not have to fight
continually without any advantage. He has therefore taught us, by his
example, that we ought to avail ourselves of opportunities, when they
occur. As to the place of his retreat, the reader may consult the
observations which I have made at Chapter 1, verse 28.  <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304)

<span id="xvi.vii-p21"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p22"></span>**41.** *And many came to him.* This large
assembly shows that Christ did not seek solitude, in order to cease from
the discharge of his duty, but to erect a sanctuary of God in the
wilderness, when Jerusalem, which was his own abode and dwelling-place,
 <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) had obstinately driven him out.
And indeed this was a dreadful vengeance of God, that, while the temple
chosen by God was *a den of robbers*, (<span
id="xvi.vii-p23.2"></span>[Jer
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011)<span id="xvi.vii-p23.2"></span>;
<span id="xvi.vii-p23.3"></span>[Mt
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013)<span
id="xvi.vii-p23.3"></span>,) the Church of God was collected in a
despised place.

<span id="xvi.vii-p24"></span>*John indeed did no miracle.* They infer
that Christ is more excellent than *John*, because he has distinguished
himself by so many miracles, while *John did not perform a single
miracle* Not that we ought always to judge from *miracles,* but that
*miracles*, when united with doctrine, have no small weight, as has
already been repeatedly mentioned. Their argument is defective; for they
compare Christ with John, but they express only one part of the
comparison. Besides, they take for granted, that John was an eminent
prophet of God, and that he was endued with extraordinary grace of the
Holy Spirit. They justly argue, therefore, that Christ ought to be
preferred to John, because it was only by the fixed Providence of God
that it was brought about that *John,* though in other respects a very
great prophet, yet was not honored by performing any miracle. Hence they
conclude, that this was done on Christ’s account, that he might be more
highly esteemed.

<span id="xvi.vii-p25"></span>*But all that John said.* It appears that
this was not spoken by themselves, but was added by the Evangelist, in
order to show that there were two reasons which induced them to believe
in Christ. On the one hand,  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306)
they saw that the testimony which John had given to him was true; and,
on the other hand,  <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) the miracles
of Christ procured for him greater authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc34015.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xvi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p14.1"></span>Si par ce
mot de *Portier*.”

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc34015.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xvi.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span> The word *pastor* signifies *shepherd*,
but, for the sake of the reader, who may not be aware of its etymology,
it has been found necessary, in some cases, to employ both of the words,
especially where the figure holds so prominent a place in the
discussion. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc34015.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xvi.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p11.1"></span>En sorte
qu’il n’y en a pas eu une seule qui l’ait laisse.”

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc34015.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xvi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p13.1"></span>Du
troupeau du Fils de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc34015.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xvi.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p14.1"></span>Lions,
tygres, loups, et ours.”

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc34015.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xvi.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p21"></span> A phrase in Scottish law, denoting a full
right to occupy a house or any property, is, *free ish* (issue) *and
entrance*, or, in other words, a right *to go out and to come in*, as
the occupant pleases. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc34015.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xvi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p10.1"></span>De quel
zele et affection.”

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc34015.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xvi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p12.1"></span>Que s’il
y a danger aussi bien pour les brebis que pour la personne du pasteur.”

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc34015.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xvi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p8.1"></span>Rien de tout
ce qu’il veut estre sauve.”

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc34015.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xvi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p19"></span> So it runs in the French version, “<span
id="xvi.iv-p19.1"></span>*Et* *il y aura une bergerie et un Pasteur*.”
But in the Latin original, our Author, either through choice or
inadvertency, has altered the translation, by substituting <span
id="xvi.iv-p19.2"></span>*grex* (flock) for <span
id="xvi.iv-p19.3"></span>*ovile*, (fold.) “<span
id="xvi.iv-p19.4"></span>*Et fiet unus grex*;” — “*and* *there shall be
one flock*.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc34015.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xvi.iv-p19.5"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p20.1"></span>Assemblez
et unis.”

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc34015.htm#fr_292) <span
id="xvi.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p21"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p21.1"></span>Une
saincte Eglise universelle.”

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc34015.htm#fr_293) <span
id="xvi.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p25"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p25.1"></span>Sa voix
seule.”

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc34015.htm#fr_294) <span
id="xvi.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p26"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p26.1"></span>Sa voix et
sa doctrine.”

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc34015.htm#fr_295) <span
id="xvi.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p37"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p37.1"></span>Aussi
grand et excellent qu’il peut estre.”

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc34015.htm#fr_296) <span
id="xvi.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p11"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p11.1"></span>Et aussi sa
boute.”

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc34015.htm#fr_297) <span
id="xvi.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p14"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p14.1"></span>Le mot Grec
pour lequel nous avons mis Dedicace.”

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc34015.htm#fr_298) <span
id="xvi.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p25"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p25.1"></span>Nostre
Seigneur Jesus.”

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc34015.htm#fr_299) <span
id="xvi.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p29"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p29.1"></span>Mais qui
apprivoisera des bestes sauvages?”

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc34015.htm#fr_300) <span
id="xvi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="xvi.vii-p3.1"></span>Et si je
les fay;” — “and if I do them.”

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc34015.htm#fr_301) <span
id="xvi.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p4"></span> “<span id="xvi.vii-p4.1"></span>Mais il
eschappa.”

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc34015.htm#fr_302) <span
id="xvi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.vii-p8.1"></span>Sinon que
vous voyez le faict evident devant vos yeux.”

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc34015.htm#fr_303) <span
id="xvi.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p12"></span> “<span id="xvi.vii-p12.1"></span>Aucune
reverence ni honneur.”

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc34015.htm#fr_304) <span
id="xvi.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p20"></span> See page 62 of this volume.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc34015.htm#fr_305) <span
id="xvi.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p23"></span> “<span id="xvi.vii-p23.1"></span>Qui
estoit le propre siege et habitation de celuy.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc34015.htm#fr_306) <span
id="xvi.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p26"></span> “<span id="xvi.vii-p26.1"></span>D’un
coste.”

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc34015.htm#fr_307) <span
id="xvi.vii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p27"></span> “<span
id="xvi.vii-p27.1"></span>D’autrepart.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc34016)
