[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc34012)  [Next](cc34014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 34: John, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[John
8:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** But Jesus went to the mountain of
Olives. **2.** And early in the morning he again came to the temple, and
all the people came to him; and sitting down, he taught them **3.** And
the scribes and Pharisees bring to him a woman caught in adultery, and
placing her in the midst, **4.** They say to him, Master, this woman was
caught in the very act, while she was committing adultery. **5.** Now in
the law Moses commanded us to stone such persons; but what sayest thou?
**6.** Now they said this, trying him, that they might have ground for
accusing him. But Jesus, casting down his eyes,  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) wrote with the finger on the ground.
**7.** And as they persisted in asking him, he lifted up his eyes,
 <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) and said to them, He who is
without sin amongst you, let him first cast a stone at her. **8.** And
again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground. **9.** And having heard
that, and being reproved by their conscience, they went out one by one,
beginning at the eldest even to the last; so that Jesus was left alone,
and the woman who stood in the midst. **10.** And Jesus, lifting up his
eyes, having seen nobody but the woman, said to her, Woman, where are
thy accusers? Hath no man condemned thee? **11.** She said, No man,
Lord. Jesus answered her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no
more.

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span><span id="xiv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>**3.** *And the scribes and Pharisees bring
to him.* It is plain enough that this passage was unknown anciently to
the Greek Churches; and some conjecture that it has been brought from
some other place and inserted here. But as it has always been received
by the Latin Churches, and is found in many old Greek manuscripts, and
contains nothing unworthy of an Apostolic Spirit, there is no reason why
we should refuse to apply it to our advantage. When the Evangelist says
that *the scribes brought to him a woman,* he means that it was done by
an agreement among them, in order to lay traps for Christ. He expressly
mentions *the Pharisees,* because they were the chief persons in the
rank of *scribes* In adopting this pretense for slander, they display
enormous wickedness, and even their own lips accuse them; for they do
not disguise that they have a plain commandment of the Law, and hence it
follows that they act maliciously in putting a question as if it were a
doubtful matter. But their intention was, to constrain Christ to depart
from his office of preaching grace, that he might appear to be fickle
and unsteady. They expressly state that adulteresses are condemned by
Moses, (<span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>[Le
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010)<span id="xiv.i-p7.1"></span>,)
that they may hold Christ bound by the sentence already given by the
Law, for it was not lawful to acquit those whom the Law condemned; and,
on the other hand, if he had consented to the Law, he might be thought
to be somewhat unlike himself.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span><span id="xiv.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span>**6.** *And Jesus stooping down.* By this
attitude he intended to show that he despised them. Those who conjecture
that *he wrote* this or the other thing, in my opinion, do not
understand his meaning. Nor do I approve of the ingenuity of Augustine,
who thinks that in this manner the distinction between the Law and the
Gospel is pointed out, because Christ did not write on *tables of
stone*, (<span id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>[Ex
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018)<span id="xiv.i-p9.1"></span>,)
but on man, who is dust and earth. For Christ rather intended, by doing
nothing, to show how unworthy they were of being heard; just as if any
person, while another was speaking to him, were to draw lines on the
wall, or to turn his back, or to show, by any other sign, that he was
not attending to what was said. Thus in the present day, when Satan
attempts, by various methods, to draw us aside from the right way of
teaching, we ought disdainfully to pass by many things which he holds
out to us. The Papists teaze us, to the utmost of their power, by many
trifling cavils, as if they were throwing clouds into the air. If godly
teachers be laboriously employed in examining each of those cavils, they
will begin to weave Penelope’s web;  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) and therefore delays of this sort,
which do nothing but hinder the progress of the Gospel, are wisely
disregarded.

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span><span id="xiv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**7.** *He who is without sin among you.* He
said this according to the custom of the Law; for God commanded that the
witnesses should, with their own hands, put malefactors to death,
according to the sentence which had been pronounced on them; that
greater caution might be used in bearing testimony, (<span
id="xiv.i-p12.1"></span>[De 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007)<span
id="xiv.i-p12.1"></span>.) There are many who proceed rashly to
overwhelm their brother by perjury, because they do not think that they
inflict a deadly wound by their tongue. And this very argument, had
weight with those slanderers, desperate as they were; for no sooner do
they obtain a sight of it, than they lay aside those fierce passions
with which they were swelled when they came. Yet there is this
difference between the injunction of the Law and the words of Christ,
that in the Law God merely enjoined that they should not condemn a man
with the tongue, unless they were permitted to put him to death with
their own hands; but here Christ demands from the witnesses perfect
innocence, so that no man ought to accuse another of crime, unless he be
pure, and free from every fault. Now what he said, at that time, to a
few persons, we ought to view as spoken to all, that whoever accuses
another, ought to impose on himself a law of innocence; otherwise, we do
not pursue wicked actions, but rather are hostile to the persons of men.

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span>In this way, however, Christ appears to take
out of the world all judicial decisions, so that no man shall dare to
say that he has a right to punish crimes. For shall a single judge be
found, who is not conscious of having something that is wrong? Shall a
single witness be produced who is not chargeable with some fault? He
appears, therefore, to forbid all witnesses to give public testimony,
and all judges to occupy the judgment-seat. I reply: this is not an
absolute and unlimited prohibition, by which Christ forbids sinners to
do their duty in correcting the sins of others; but by this word he only
reproves hypocrites, who mildly flatter themselves and their vices, but
are excessively severe, and even act the part of felons, in censuring
others. No man, therefore, shall be prevented by his own sins from
correcting the sins of others, and even from punishing them, when it may
be found necessary, provided that both in himself and in others he hate
what ought to be condemned; and in addition to all this, every man ought
to begin by interrogating his own conscience, and by acting both as
witness and judge against himself, before he come to others. In this
manner shall we, without hating men, make war with sins.

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span><span id="xiv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span>**9.** *And being reproved by their
conscience.* Here we perceive how great is the power of an evil
conscience. Though those wicked hypocrites intended to entrap Christ by
their cavils, yet as soon as he pierces their consciences by a single
word, shame puts them to flight. This is the hammer with which we must
break the pride of hypocrites. They must be summoned to the
judgment-seat of God. Though it is possible that the shame, with which
they were struck before men, had greater influence over them than the
fear of God, still it is a great matter that, of their own accord, they
acknowledge themselves to be guilty, when they thus fly away as if they
were confounded. It is immediately added,

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>*Beginning from the eldest even to the
last.* Our attention is drawn to this circumstance, that, according as
each of them surpassed the others in honorable rank, he was the more
quickly moved by his condemnation. And would to God that  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) our *scribes*, who in the present day
sell their labors to the Pope to make war with Christ, had at least as
much modesty as those men; but they are so destitute of shame that,
while they have rendered themselves infamous by every detestable crime,
they glory in the fact that they are permitted to be as abominable as
they choose, without being punished. We ought also to observe how widely
this conviction of sin, by which the scribes were affected, differs from
true repentance. For we ought to be affected by the judgment of God in
such a manner, that we shall not seek a place of concealment to avoid
the presence of the Judge, but rather shall go direct to Him, in order
to implore his forgiveness.

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>*Jesus was left alone.* This was brought
about by the Spirit of wisdom, that those wicked men, having gained
nothing by tempting Christ, went away. Nor is there any reason to doubt
that we shall succeed in defeating all the contrivances of our enemies,
provided that we permit ourselves to be governed by the same Spirit. But
it frequently happens that they gain an advantage over us, because, not
attending to their snares, we are not careful to take advice, or rather,
trusting to our own wisdom, we do not consider how much we need the
government of the Holy Spirit. He says that Christ remained *alone;* not
that the people, whom he was formerly teaching, had left him, but
because all the *scribes*, who had brought the adulteress, gave him no
farther annoyance. When it is said that *the woman* remained with
Christ, let us learn by this example that there is nothing better for us
than to be brought, as guilty, to his tribunal, provided that we
surrender ourselves mildly and submissively to his government.

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span><span id="xiv.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span>**11.** *Neither do I condemn thee.* We are
not told that Christ absolutely acquitted the woman, but that he allowed
her to go at liberty. Nor is this wonderful, for he did not wish to
undertake any thing that did not belong to his office. He bad been sent
by the Father to gather *the lost sheep*, (<span
id="xiv.i-p20.1"></span>[Mt 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006)<span
id="xiv.i-p20.1"></span>;) and, therefore, mindful of his calling, he
exhorts the woman to repentance, and comforts her by a promise of grace.
They who infer from this that adultery ought not to be punished with
death, must, for the same reason, admit that inheritances ought not to
be divided, because Christ refused to arbitrate in that matter between
two brothers, (<span id="xiv.i-p20.2"></span>[Lu
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013)<span id="xiv.i-p20.2"></span>.)
Indeed, there will be no crime whatever that shall not be exempted from
the penalties of the law, if adultery be not punished; for then the door
will be thrown open for any kind of treachery, and for poisoning, and
murder, and robbery. Besides, the adulteress, when she bears an unlawful
child, not only robs the name of the family, but violently takes away
the right of inheritance from the lawful offspring, and conveys it to
strangers. But what is worst of all, the wife not only dishonors the
husband to whom she had been united, but prostitutes herself to shameful
wickedness, and likewise violates the sacred covenant of God, without
which no holiness can continue to exist in the world.

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>Yet the Popish theology is, that in this
passage Christ has brought to us the Law of grace, by which adulterers
are freed from punishment. And though they endeavor, by every method, to
efface from the minds of men the grace of God, such grace as is every
where declared to us by the doctrine of the Gospel, yet in this passage
alone they preach aloud the Law of grace. Why is this, but that they may
pollute, with unbridled lust, almost every marriage-bed, and may escape
unpunished? Truly, this is the fine fruit  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) which we have reaped from the
diabolical system of celibacy, that they who are not permitted to marry
a lawful wife can commit fornication without restraint. But let us
remember that, while Christ forgives the sins of men, he does not
overturn political order, or reverse the sentences and punishments
appointed by the laws.

<span id="xiv.i-p23"></span>*Go, and sin no more.* Hence we infer what
is the design of the grace of Christ. It is, that the sinner, being
reconciled to God, may honor the Author of his salvation by a good and
holy life. In short, by the same word of God, when forgiveness is
offered to us, we are likewise called to repentance. Besides, though
this exhortation looks forward to the future, still it humbles sinners
by recalling to remembrance their past life.

<span id="xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[John
8:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span id="xiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p2"></span>**12.** Therefore Jesus spoke again to them,
saying, I am the light of the world; he who followeth me shall not walk
in darkness, but shall have the light of life. **13.** The Pharisees
therefore said to him, Thou testifiest concerning thyself, thy testimony
is not true.  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) **14.** Jesus
answered, and said to them, Though I testify concerning myself, my
testimony is true:  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) for I know
whence I came, and whither I go; but you know not whence I come, and
whither I go.

<span id="xiv.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ii-p6"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p7"></span>**12.** *I am the light of the world.* Those
who leave out the former narrative, which relates to the adulteress,
 <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) connect this discourse of
Christ with the sermon which he delivered on the last day of the
assembly. It is a beautiful commendation of Christ, when he is called
*the light of the world;* for, since we are all blind by nature, a
remedy is offered, by which we may be freed and rescued from darkness
and made partakers of the true *light* Nor is it only to one person or
to another that this benefit is offered, for Christ declares that he is
*the light of the whole world*; for by this universal statement he
intended to remove the distinction, not only between Jews and Gentiles,
but between the learned and ignorant, between persons of distinction and
the common people.

<span id="xiv.ii-p9"></span>But we must first ascertain what necessity
there is for seeking this *light*; for men will never present themselves
to Christ to be illuminated, until they have known both that *this
world* is darkness, and that they themselves are altogether blind. Let
us therefore know that, when the manner of obtaining this light is
pointed out to us in Christ, we are all condemned for blindness, and
everything else which we consider to be *light* is compared to darkness,
and to a very dark night. For Christ does not speak of it as what
belongs to him in common with others, but claims it as being peculiarly
his own. Hence it follows, that out of Christ there is not even a spark
of true *light* There may be some appearance of brightness, but it
resembles lightning, which only dazzles the eyes. It must also be
observed, that the power and office of illuminating is not confined to
the personal presence of Christ; for though he is far removed from us
with respect to his body, yet he daily sheds his light upon us, by the
doctrine of the Gospel, and by the secret power of his Spirit. Yet we
have not a full definition of this light, unless we learn that we are
illuminated by the Gospel and by the Spirit of Christ, that we may know
that the fountain of all knowledge and wisdom is hidden in him.

<span id="xiv.ii-p10"></span>*He who followeth me.* To the doctrine he
adds an exhortation, which he immediately afterwards confirms by a
promise. For when we learn that all who allow themselves to be governed
by Christ are out of danger of going astray, we ought to be excited to
follow him, and, indeed, by stretching out his hand — as it were — he
draws us to him. We ought also to be powerfully affected by so large and
magnificent a promise, that they who shall direct their eyes to Christ
are certain that, even in the midst of darkness, they will be preserved
from going astray; and that not only for a short period, but until they
have finished their course. For that is the meaning of the words used in
the future tense, *he* *shall not walk in darkness*, *but shall have the
light of life* Such is also the import of this latter clause, in which
the perpetuity of *life* is stated in express terms. We ought not to
fear, therefore, lest it leave us in the middle of the journey, for it
conducts us even to *life* The genitive *of life*, in accordance with
the Hebrew idiom, is employed, instead of the adjective, to denote the
effect; as if he had said, *the life-giving light* We need not wonder
that such gross darkness of errors and superstitions prevails in *the
world*, in which there are so few that have their eyes fixed on Christ.

<span id="xiv.ii-p11"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p12"></span>**13.** *The Pharisees therefore said.*
They adduce as an objection what is commonly said, that no man ought to
be trusted, when speaking in his own cause. For a *true testimony* is
put for “what is lawful and worthy of credit.” In short, they mean that
it is of no use for him to speak, unless he bring proof from some other
quarter.

<span id="xiv.ii-p13"></span><span id="xiv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p14"></span>**14.** *Though I testify concerning
myself.* Christ replies, that his testimony possesses sufficient credit
and authority, because he is not a private person belonging to the great
body of men, but holds a very different station. For when he says, that
*he knoweth whence he came, and whither he goeth,* he thus excludes
himself from the ordinary rank of men. The meaning therefore is, that
every man is heard with suspicion in his own cause, and it is provided
by the laws, that no man shall be believed, when he speaks for his own
advantage. But this does not apply to the Son of God, who holds a rank
above the whole world; for he is not reckoned as belonging to the rank
of men, but has received from his Father this privilege, to reduce all
men to obedience to him by a single word.

<span id="xiv.ii-p15"></span>*I know whence I came.* By these words he
declares that his origin is not from the world, but that he proceeded
from God, and therefore that it would be unjust and unreasonable that
his doctrine, which is Divine, should be subjected to the laws of men.
But as he was at that time clothed with the form of a servant, in
consequence of which they despised him on account of the mean condition
of the flesh, he sends them away to the future glory of his
resurrection, from which his Divinity, formerly hidden and unknown,
received a clear demonstration. That intermediate condition, therefore,
ought not to have prevented the Jews from submitting to God’s only
ambassador, who had been formerly promised to them in the Law.

<span id="xiv.ii-p16"></span>*But you know not whence I came, and
whither I go.* He means that his glory is not at all diminished by their
unbelief. Again, as he has given the same testimony to us, our faith
ought to despise all the reports and slanders of wicked men; for it
cannot be founded upon God without rising far above the loftiest pride
of the world. But in order that we may perceive the majesty of his
Gospel, we ought always to direct our eyes to the heavenly glory of the
Son of God,  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) and to hear him
speaking in the world, so as to remember *whence he came*, and what
authority he now possesses, after having discharged his embassy. For as
he humbled himself for a time, so now he is highly exalted  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) at the right hand of the Father, *that
every knee may bow to him*, (<span id="xiv.ii-p18.2"></span>[Php
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="xiv.ii-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[John
8:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#015)<span id="xiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p2"></span>**15.** You judge according to the flesh; I
judge no man. **16.** And if I judge, my judgment is true;  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) for I am not alone, but I and the
Father, who hath sent me. **17.** It is even written in your law, that
the testimony of two men is true. **18.** I am one who testify
concerning myself, and the Father who hath sent me testifieth concerning
me. **19.** They said therefore to him, Where is thy Father? Jesus
answered, You neither know me nor my Father. If you had known me, you
would have known my Father also. **20.** These words Jesus spoke in the
treasury, teaching in the temple; and no man seized him, because his
hour was not yet come.

<span id="xiv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p6"></span>**15.** *You judge according to the flesh.*
This may be explained in two ways; either that they *judge according to*
the wicked views of *the flesh*, or that they *judge according* to the
appearance of the person. For *the flesh* sometimes denotes the outward
appearance of a man; and both meanings agree well with this passage,
since wherever either the feelings of *the flesh* prevail, or a regard
to the person regulates the judgment, neither truth nor justice dwells.
But I think that the meaning will be more certain, if you contrast *the
flesh* with *the Spirit*, understanding his meaning to be, that they are
not lawful and competent judges, because they have not the Spirit for
their guide.

<span id="xiv.iii-p7"></span>*I judge no man.* Here, too, commentators
differ. Some distinguish it thus, that *he* *does not judge* as man.
Others refer it to the time, that while he was on earth, he did not
undertake the office of a *Judge* Augustine gives both expositions, but
does not decide between them. But the former distinction cannot at all
apply. For this sentence contains two clauses, that Christ *does not
judge*, and that *if he judge*, *his judgment is solid and just*,
because it is divine. As to the former clause, therefore, in which he
says that *he does not judge*, I confine it to what belongs peculiarly
to this passage. For in order the more fully to convict his enemies of
pride, he employs this comparison, that they unjustly assume the liberty
to *judge,* and yet cannot condemn him, while he merely teaches and
abstains from performing the office of a *judge.*

<span id="xiv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p9"></span>**16.** *And if I judge,* He adds this
correction, that he may not appear entirely to surrender his right. *If
I judge,* says he, *my judgment is true,* that is, it is entitled to
authority. Now the authority arises from this consideration, that he
does nothing but according to the commandment of the Father.

<span id="xiv.iii-p10"></span>*For I am not alone.* This phrase amounts
to an affirmative, that he is not one of the ordinary rank of men, but
that he must be considered along with the office which was assigned to
him by the Father. But why does he not rather make an open assertion of
his Divinity, as he might truly and justly have done? The reason is,
that as his Divinity was concealed under the veil of the flesh, he
brings forward his Father, in whom it was more manifest. Still, the
object of the discourse is, to show that all that he does and teaches
ought to be accounted Divine.

<span id="xiv.iii-p11"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p12"></span>**17.** *Even in your law it is written.*
The argument might, at first sight, appear to be weak, because no man is
received as a witness in his own cause. But we ought to remember what I
have already said, that the Son of God  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) ought to be excluded from the ordinary
number of other men,  <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) because he
neither is a private individual, nor transacts his own private business.
As to his distinguishing himself from his Father, by doing so he
accommodates himself to the capacity of his hearers, and that on account
of his office, because he was at that time a servant of the Father, from
whom, therefore, he asserts that all his doctrine has proceeded.

<span id="xiv.iii-p15"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p16"></span>**19.** *Where is thy father*? There can
be no doubt whatever, that it was in mockery that they inquired about
*his Father* For not only do they, with their wonted pride, treat
contemptuously what he had said about *the Father*, but they likewise
ridicule him for talking loftily about *his Father*, as if he had drawn
his birth from heaven. By these words, therefore, they mean that they do
not value so highly Christ’s *Father*, as to ascribe any thing to the
Son on his account. And the reason why there are so many in the present
day who, with daring presumption, despise Christ, is, that few consider
that God has sent him.

<span id="xiv.iii-p17"></span>*You neither know me nor my Father.* He
does not deign to give them a direct reply, but in a few words
reproaches them with the ignorance in which they flattered themselves.
They inquired about *the Father*; and yet when they had the Son before
their eyes, *seeing*, *they did not see*, (<span
id="xiv.iii-p17.1"></span>[Mt
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013)<span
id="xiv.iii-p17.1"></span>.) It was therefore a just punishment of their
pride and wicked ingratitude, that they who despised the Son of God, who
had been familiarly offered to them, never approached to *the Father*
For how shall any mortal man ascend to the height of God, unless he be
raised on high by the hand of his Son? God in Christ condescended to the
mean condition of men, so as to stretch out his hand; and do not those
who reject God, when he thus approaches to them, deserve to be excluded
from heaven?

<span id="xiv.iii-p18"></span>Let us know that the same thing is spoken
to us all; for whoever aspires to know God, and does not begin with
Christ, must wander — as it were — in a labyrinth; for it is not without
good reason that Christ is called the image of the Father, as has been
already said. Again, as all who, leaving Christ, attempt to rise to
heaven, after the manner of *the giants*,  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) are destitute of all right knowledge
of God, so every man who shall direct his mind and all his senses to
Christ, will be led straight to the Father. For on good grounds does God
declare that,

<span id="xiv.iii-p20"></span>by the mirror of the Gospel, we clearly
behold God in the person of Christ,  
(<span id="xiv.iii-p20.2"></span>[2Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span id="xiv.iii-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.iii-p21"></span>And certainly it is an astonishing reward
of the obedience of faith, that whosoever humbles himself before the
Lord Jesus,  <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) penetrates above
all the heavens, even to those mysteries which the angels behold and
adore.

<span id="xiv.iii-p23"></span><span id="xiv.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p24"></span>**20.** *These words spoke Jesus in the
treasury. The treasury* was a part of the temple where the sacred
offerings were laid up. It was a much frequented place, and hence we
infer that this sermon was delivered by Christ amidst a large assembly
of men, so that the people had less excuse. The Evangelist likewise
holds out to us the astonishing power of God in this respect, that they
were constrained to endure Christ openly *teaching in the temple,*
though but lately they sought to seize him, and put him to death. For
since they held an undisputed sway *in the temple,* so that they ruled
there with the fierceness of tyrants, they might have banished Christ
from it by a single word. And when he ventured to take upon himself the
office of a teacher, why do they not instantly lay violent hands on him?
We see then that God caused men to hear him, and guarded him by his
protection, so that those savage beasts did not touch him, though they
had their throats opened to swallow him.  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) The Evangelist again mentions *his
hour*, that we may learn that it is not by the will of men, but by the
will of God, that we live and die.

<span id="xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[John
8:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021)<span id="xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p2"></span>**21.** Jesus therefore spake again to them,
I go, and you shall seek me, and you shall die in your sin. Whither I
go, you cannot come. **22.** The Jews therefore said, Will he kill
himself? Because he saith, Whither I go, you cannot come. **23.** Then
he said to them, You are from beneath, I am from above; you are of this
world, I am not of this world. **24.** Therefore I said to you, that you
shall die in your sins; for if you do not believe that I am, you shall
die in your sins.

<span id="xiv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.iv-p4"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p5"></span>**21.** *I go.* Perceiving that he is doing
no good among these obstinate men, he threatens their destruction; and
this is the end of all those who reject the Gospel. For it is not thrown
uselessly into the air, but must breathe *the odour either of life or of
death*, (<span id="xiv.iv-p5.1"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="xiv.iv-p5.1"></span>.)
The meaning of these words amounts to this. “The wicked will at length
feel how great loss they have suffered by rejecting Christ, when he
freely offers himself to them. They will feel it, but it will be too
late, for there will be no more room for repentance.” And to alarm them
still more by showing them that their judgment is near at hand, in the
first place, he says that he will soon *go* *away*, by which he means
that the Gospel is preached to them only for a short time, and that if
they allow this opportunity to pass away, *the accepted time and the
days appointed for salvation* (<span id="xiv.iv-p5.2"></span>[Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)<span id="xiv.iv-p5.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.iv-p5.3"></span>[2Co
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="xiv.iv-p5.3"></span>)
will not always last. Thus also, in the present day, when Christ knocks
at our door, we ought to go immediately to meet him, lest he be wearied
by our slothfulness and withdraw from us. And indeed we have learned, by
many experiments in all ages, how greatly this departure of Christ is to
be dreaded.

<span id="xiv.iv-p6"></span>*And you shall seek me.* We must first
ascertain in what manner the persons now spoken of *sought Christ*; for
if they had been truly converted, they would not have *sought* him in
vain; because he has not falsely promised that, as soon as a sinner
groans, he will be ready to assist him. Christ does not mean, therefore,
that they *sought him* by the right way of faith, but that they *sought
him*, as men, overwhelmed by the extremity of anguish, look for
deliverance on every hand. For unbelievers would desire to have God
reconciled to them, but yet they do not cease to fly from him. God calls
them; the approach consists in faith and repentance; but they oppose God
by hardness of heart, and, overwhelmed with despair, they exclaim
against him. In short, they are so far from desiring to enjoy the favor
of God, that they do not give him permission to assist them, unless he
deny himself, which he will never do.

<span id="xiv.iv-p7"></span>In this manner, however wicked the scribes
were, they would willingly have applied to themselves the redemption
which had been promised by the hand of the Messiah, provided that Christ
would transform himself, to suit their natural disposition. Wherefore,
by these words Christ threatens and denounces to all unbelievers, that,
after having despised the doctrine of the Gospel, they will be seized
with such anguish, that they shall be constrained to cry to God, but
their howling will be of no avail; because, as we have already said,
*seeking*, *they do not seek* And this is still more plainly expressed
in the next clause, when he says, *you shall die in your sin;* for he
shows that the cause of their destruction will be, that they were
disobedient and rebellious to the very last. What is the nature of
*their sin* we shall presently see.

<span id="xiv.iv-p8"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p9"></span>**22.** *Will he kill himself?* The scribes
persevere not only in fearless scorn, but likewise in effrontery; for
they ridicule what he had said, that *they cannot follow whither he
shall go*; as if they had said, “If he *kill himself*, we acknowledge
that we cannot accompany him, because we do not choose to do so.” They
regarded Christ’s absence as a matter of no moment, and thought that in
all respects they would gain a victory over him; and so they bid him
begone wherever he pleases. Shocking stupidity! But thus does Satan
infatuate the reprobate, that, intoxicated with more than brutal
indifference,  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) they may throw
themselves into the midst of the flame of the wrath of God. Do we not in
the present day behold the same rage in many who, having stupified their
consciences, insolently play off their jests and buffoonery on every
thing that they hear about the dreadful judgment of God? Yet it is
certain that this is an affected or sardonic smile, for they are pierced
inwardly with unseen wounds; but all on a sudden, like men bereft of
their senses, they burst out into furious laughter.

<span id="xiv.iv-p11"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p12"></span>**23.** *You are from beneath, I am from
above.* As they did not deserve that he should teach them, he wished
only to strike them with reproofs conveyed in few words, as in this
passage he declares that they do not receive his doctrine, because they
have an utter dislike of the kingdom of God. Under the words, *world*
and *beneath,* he includes all that men naturally possess, and thus
points out the disagreement which exists between his Gospel and the
ingenuity and sagacity of the human mind; for the Gospel is heavenly
wisdom, but our mind grovels on the earth. No man, therefore, will ever
be qualified to become a disciple of Christ, till Christ has formed him
by his Spirit. And hence it arises that faith is so seldom found in the
world, because all mankind are naturally opposed and averse to Christ,
except those whom he elevates by the special grace of his Holy Spirit.

<span id="xiv.iv-p13"></span><span id="xiv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p14"></span>**24.** *You shall die in your sins.*
Having formerly employed the singular number, *in your sin*, he now
resorts to the plural number, *in your sins;* but the meaning is the
same, except that in the former passage he intended to point out that
unbelief is the source and cause of all evils. Not that there are no
other sins but unbelief,  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) or
that it is unbelief alone which subjects us to the condemnation of
eternal death before God, as some men too extravagantly talk; but
because it drives us away from Christ, and deprives us of his grace,
from which we ought to expect deliverance from all our sins. That the
Jews reject the medicine with obstinate malice, is their mortal disease;
and hence it arises that the slaves of Satan do not cease to heap up
sins on sins, and continually to bring down upon themselves fresh
condemnations. And, therefore, he immediately adds, —

<span id="xiv.iv-p16"></span>*If you do not believe that I am.* For
there is no other way for lost men to recover salvation, but to betake
themselves to Christ. The phrase, *that I am*, is emphatic; for, in
order to make the meaning complete, we must supply all that the
Scripture ascribes to the Messiah, and all that it bids us expect from
him. But the sum and substance is — the restoration of the Church, the
commencement of which is the light of faith, from which proceed
righteousness and a new life. Some of the ancient writers have deduced
from this passage the Divine essence of Christ; but that is a mistake,
for he speaks of his office towards us. This statement is worthy of
observation; for men never consider sufficiently the evils in which they
are plunged; and though they are constrained to acknowledge their
destruction, yet they neglect Christ, and look around them, in every
direction, for useless remedies. Wherefore we ought to believe that,
until the grace of Christ be manifested to deliver us, nothing but a
boundless mass of all evils reigns perpetually in us.  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223)

<span id="xiv.v"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p1"></span><span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>[John
8:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025)<span id="xiv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p2"></span>**25.** Then they said to him. Who art thou?
Jesus said to them, From the beginning,  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) because I also speak to you.  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) **26.** I have many things to speak
and judge of you; but he who hath sent me is true, and I speak to the
world those things which I have heard from him. **27.** They knew not
that he spoke to them of the Father. Jesus therefore said to them,
**28.** When you shall have exalted the Son of man, then shall you know
that I am, and that I do nothing of myself; but as the Father hath
taught me, I speak. **29.** And he who hath sent me is with me. The
Father hath not left me alone, because I always do the things which
please him.

<span id="xiv.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xiv.v-p6"></span><span id="xiv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p7"></span>**25.** *From the beginning.* They who
translate the words <span id="xiv.v-p7.1"></span>τὴν ἀρχὴν, as if they
had been in the nominative case, *I am the beginning*,  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) and as if Christ were here asserting
his eternal Divinity, are greatly mistaken. There is no ambiguity of
this sort in the Greek, but still the Greek commentators also differ as
to the meaning. All of them, indeed, are agreed that a preposition must
be understood; but many give to it the force of an adverb, as if Christ
had said, “This ought *first* (<span id="xiv.v-p8.3"></span>τὴν ἀρχὴν)
to be observed.” Some too — among whom is Chrysostom — render it
continuously thus: *The* *beginning*, *who also speak to you*, *I have
many things to say and judge of you* This meaning has been put into
verse by Nonnus.  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227)

<span id="xiv.v-p22"></span><span id="xiv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p23"></span>**28.** *When you shall have exalted the Son
of man.* Offended at that stupidity which the Evangelist has described,
Christ again declares that they do not deserve that he should open his
mouth to speak to them any more.  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) “You now,” says he, “have all your
senses — as it were — fascinated, and, therefore, you understand nothing
of all that I say; but the time will yet come, when you shall know that
a Prophet of God has lived among you, and has spoken to you.” This is
the manner in which we ought to deal with wicked men; we ought expressly
to summon them to the judgment-seat of God. But this knowledge, which
Christ speaks of, comes too late, when the reprobate and unbelievers,
 <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) dragged to punishment,
reluctantly acknowledge that God, to whom they ought mildly to have
given honor and reverence, is their Judge. For he does not promise them
repentance, but declares that, after they have been struck with new and
unexpressed horror at the wrath of God, they will be aroused from that
sleep in which they now repose. Thus Adam’s eyes were opened, so that,
overwhelmed with shame, he sought in vain for places of concealment, and
ultimately was convinced that he was ruined. Yet that knowledge of Adam,
which was in itself useless, turned to his advantage through the grace
of God; but the reprobate, being overwhelmed with despair, have their
eyes opened only for this purpose, that they may perceive their
destruction. To this kind of knowledge God conducts them in a variety of
ways. Sometimes it happens that, constrained by heavy afflictions, they
learn that God is angry with them; sometimes, without any outward
punishment, he inwardly torments them; and, at other times, he permits
them to sleep until he call them out of the world.

<span id="xiv.v-p26"></span>By the term *exalt* Christ points out his
own death. He mentions his death, in order to warn them that, though
they destroy him according to the flesh, they will gain nothing by it;
as if he had said, “Now you treat me with haughty scorn, while I speak
to you; but ere long your wickedness will proceed farther, even so far
as to put me to death. Then will you triumph, as if you had gained your
wish, but within a short time you shall feel, to your utter ruin, how
widely my death differs from destruction.” He employs the word *exalt*,
in order to vex them the more. Their intention was to plunge Christ into
the lowest hell. He tells them that they will be completely
disappointed, and that the event will be altogether contrary to what
they thus expect. He may, indeed, have intended to allude to the outward
form of his death, that he was *to be lifted up* on the cross; but he
looked chiefly to the glorious result of it, which soon afterwards
followed, contrary to the expectation of all. True, indeed, *in the
cross* itself he gained a splendid triumph over Satan, before God and
the angels, by *blotting out the hand-writing* of sin, and cancelling
the condemnation of death, (<span id="xiv.v-p26.1"></span>[Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="xiv.v-p26.1"></span>;)
but it was only after that the Gospel had been preached, that this
triumph began to be made known to men. The same thing which happened
shortly afterwards — that Christ rose out of the grave, and ascended to
heaven — is what we ought daily to expect; for, notwithstanding all the
contrivances of wicked men to oppress Christ in his Church, not only
will he rise in spite of them, but he will turn their wicked efforts
into the means of promoting the progress of his kingdom.

<span id="xiv.v-p27"></span>*That I am.* I have already stated that this
does not refer to Christ’s Divine essence, but to his office; which
appears still more clearly from what follows, when he affirms that he
does nothing but by the command of the Father; for this means, that he
was sent by God, and that he performs his office faithfully.

<span id="xiv.v-p28"></span>*And that I do nothing of myself.* That is,
I do not put myself forward, to attempt anything rashly. Again, the word
*speak,* refers to the same thing, that is, to the office of teaching;
for when Christ wishes to prove that he does nothing but by the
commandment of the Father, he says that he *speaks* as he has been
taught by Him. The meaning of the words, therefore, may be summed up
thus: In the whole of these proceedings, which you condemn, no part is
my own, but I only execute what God has enjoined upon me; the words
which you hear from my mouth are his words, and my calling, of which He
is the Author, is directed by him alone. Let us remember, however, what
I have sometimes mentioned already, that these words are accommodated to
the capacity of the hearers. For, since they thought that Christ was
only one of the ordinary rank of men, he asserts that whatever in him is
Divine is not his own; meaning that it is not of man or by man; because
the Father teaches us by him, and appoints him to be the only Teacher of
the Church; and for this reason he affirms that *he has been taught by
the Father*

<span id="xiv.v-p29"></span><span id="xiv.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p30"></span>**29.** *And he who hath sent me is with
me.* He again boasts that God, under whose guidance and authority he
does every thing, will assist him, so that he shall not labor in vain
and to no purpose, as if he had said, that the power of the Spirit of
God accompanies his ministry. All faithful teachers ought to be endued
with the same confidence, so as to entertain no doubt that the hand of
God will be near them, when, with a pure conscience, they discharge such
a ministry as he demands. For God does not furnish them with his word,
in order that they may strike the air with an idle and useless sound,
but makes his word successful by the secret efficacy of his Spirit, and
at the same time guards them by his protection, that, when their enemies
shall have been subdued, they may remain invincible against the whole
world. And, indeed, if they judge of themselves and their own powers,
they must give way every hour; so that the only method of pursuing is,
to be convinced that they are supported by the hand of God.

<span id="xiv.v-p31"></span>*Because I do always the things which please
him.* We must observe the reason why Christ declares that God is on his
side, and that he will never be deprived of his assistance. It is,
because he is regulated entirely by his will, and serves him in
sincerity. For this is what he means by the word *always,* that he does
not obey God only in part, but is entirely and unreservedly devoted to
his service. Wherefore, if we desire to enjoy the same presence of God,
our whole reason must be subjected to his authority; for if our senses
hold the government in any degree, all our exertions will be fruitless,
because the blessing of God will not be on them. And though for a time
we may be delighted with the joyful prospect of success, yet the final
result will be dismal.

<span id="xiv.v-p32"></span>*The Father hath not left me alone* By these
words, he indirectly complains of the treachery of his nation, in which
he found scarcely any that gave him their support. Yet he shows that he
reckons this alone to be abundantly sufficient, that he has God to
protect him. Such is the courage with which we ought to be animated in
the present day, that we may not give way on account of the small number
of believers; for, though the whole world be opposed to his doctrine,
still we *are not alone* Hence, too, it is evident how foolish is the
boasting of the Papists, who, while they neglect God, proudly boast of
their vast numbers.

<span id="xiv.vi"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>[John
8:30-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#030)<span id="xiv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p2"></span>**30.** While he spoke these things, many
believed on him. **31.** Jesus therefore said to the Jews who believed
on him, If you continue in my word, you shall be truly my disciples.
**32.** And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.
**33.** They answered, We are Abraham’s seed, and never were enslaved to
any one; how then sayest thou, You shall be free? **34.** Jesus answered
them, Verily, verily, I say to you, That every man who committeth sin is
the slave of sin.  <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) **35.** And
the slave  <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) remaineth not always
in the house, but the son remaineth always. **36.** If the Son then
shall make you free, you shall be truly free. **37.** I know that you
are the seed of Abraham, but you seek to kill me, because my word
dwelleth not in you.  <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) **38.** I
speak what I have seen with my Father, and you do what you have seen
with your father.

<span id="xiv.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vi-p7"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p8"></span>**30.** *While he spoke these things.*
Though the Jews, at that time, almost resembled a dry and barren soil,
yet God did not permit the seed of his word to be entirely lost. Thus,
contrary to all hopes, and amidst so many obstructions, some fruit
appears. But the Evangelist inaccurately gives the name of *faith* to
that which was only a sort of preparation for *faith* For he affirms
nothing higher concerning them than that they were disposed to receive
the doctrine of Christ, to which also the preceding warning refers.

<span id="xiv.vi-p9"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p10"></span>**31.** *If you continue in my word.* Here
Christ warns them, in the first place, that it is not enough for any one
to have begun well, if their progress to the end do not correspond to
it; and for this reason he exhorts to perseverance in the faith those
who have tasted of his doctrine. When he says that they who are firmly
rooted *in his word*, so as *to continue* in him, *will truly be his
disciples*, he means that many profess to be *disciples* who yet are not
so in reality, and have no right to be accounted such. He distinguishes
his followers from hypocrites by this mark, that they who falsely
boasted of faith give way as soon as they have entered into the course,
or at least in the middle of it; but believers persevere constantly to
the end. If, therefore, we wish that Christ should reckon us to be his
disciples, we must endeavor to persevere.

<span id="xiv.vi-p11"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p12"></span>**32.** *And you shall know the truth.* He
says, that they who have arrived at some knowledge of it *shall know the
truth* True, those whom Christ addresses were as yet uneducated, and
scarcely knew the first elements, and therefore we need not wonder if he
promises them a more full understanding of his doctrine. But the
statement is general. Wherefore, whatever progress any of us have made
in the Gospel, let him know that he needs new additions. This is the
reward which Christ bestows on their perseverance, that he admits them
to greater familiarity with him; though in this way he does nothing more
than add another gift to the former, so that no man ought to think that
he is entitled to any reward. For it is he who impresses his word on our
hearts by his Spirit, and it is he who daily chases away from our minds
the clouds of ignorance which obscure the brightness of the Gospel. In
order that the truth may be fully revealed to us, we ought sincerely and
earnestly to endeavor to attain it. It is the same unvarying truth which
Christ teaches his followers from the beginning to the end, but on those
who were at first enlightened by him, as it were with small sparks, he
at length pours a full light. Thus believers, until they have been fully
confirmed, are in some measure ignorant of what they know; and yet it is
not so small or obscure a knowledge of faith as not to be efficacious
for salvation.

<span id="xiv.vi-p13"></span>*The truth shall make you free.* He
commends the knowledge of the Gospel from the fruit which we derive from
it, or — which is the same thing — from its effect, namely, that it
restores us to *freedom* This is an invaluable blessing. Hence it
follows, that nothing is more excellent or desirable than the knowledge
of the Gospel. All men feel and acknowledge that *slavery* is a very
wretched state; and since the Gospel delivers us from it, it follows
that we derive from the Gospel the treasure of a blessed life.

<span id="xiv.vi-p14"></span>We must now ascertain what kind of liberty
is here described by Christ, namely, that which *sets us free* from the
tyranny of Satan, sin, and death. And if we obtain it by means of the
Gospel, it is evident from this that we are by nature the *slaves* of
sin. Next, we must ascertain what is the method of our deliverance. For
so long as we are governed by our sense and by our natural disposition,
we are *in bondage* to sin; but when the Lord regenerates us by his
Spirit, he likewise *makes us free*, so that, loosed from the snares of
Satan, we willingly obey righteousness. But regeneration proceeds from
faith, and hence it is evident that freedom proceeds from the Gospel.

<span id="xiv.vi-p15"></span>Let Papists now go and proudly vaunt of
their free-will, but let us, who are conscious of our own slavery, glory
in none but Christ our Deliverer. For the reason why the Gospel ought to
be reckoned to have achieved our deliverance is, that it offers and
gives us to Christ *to be freed* from the yoke of sin. Lastly, we ought
to observe, that *freedom* has its degrees according to the measure of
their faith; and therefore Paul, though clearly *made free*, still
groans and longs after perfect freedom, (<span
id="xiv.vi-p15.1"></span>[Ro 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span
id="xiv.vi-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.vi-p16"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p17"></span>**33.** *We are Abraham’s seed.* It is
uncertain if the Evangelist here introduces the same persons who
formerly spoke,  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) or others. My
opinion is, that they replied to Christ in a confused manner, as usually
happens in a promiscuous crowd; and that this reply was made rather by
despisers than by those who believed. It is a mode of expression very
customary in Scripture, whenever the body of a people is mentioned, to
ascribe generally to all what belongs only to a part.

<span id="xiv.vi-p19"></span>Those who object that they are *Abraham*’*s
seed*, *and have always been free*, easily inferred from the words of
Christ that *freedom* was promised to them as to people who were
*slaves* But they cannot endure to have it said that they, who are a
holy and elect people, are reduced to *slavery* For of what avail was
*the adoption and the covenant*, (<span id="xiv.vi-p19.1"></span>[Ro
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)<span id="xiv.vi-p19.1"></span>,)
by which they were separated from other nations, but because they were
accounted the children of God? They think, therefore, that they are
insulted, when *freedom is* exhibited to them as a blessing which they
do not yet possess. But it might be thought strange that they should
maintain that they *never were enslaved,* since they had been so
frequently oppressed by various tyrants, and at that time were subjected
to the Roman yoke, and groaned under the heaviest burden of *slavery*;
and hence it may be easily seen how foolish was their boasting.

<span id="xiv.vi-p20"></span>Yet they had this plausible excuse, that
the unjust sway of their enemies did not hinder them from continuing to
be *free* by right. But they erred, first, in this respect, that they
did not consider that the right of adoption was founded on the Mediator
alone; for how comes it that *Abraham’s seed* is *free*, but because, by
the extraordinary grace of the Redeemer, it is exempted from the general
bondage of the human race? But there was another error less tolerable
than the former, that, though they were altogether degenerate, yet they
wished to be reckoned among the children of *Abraham*, and did not
consider that it is nothing else than the regeneration of the Spirit
that makes them lawful *children of Abraham* And indeed, it has been too
common a vice in almost all ages, to refer to the origin of the flesh
the extraordinary gifts of God, and to ascribe to nature those remedies
which Christ bestows for correcting nature. Meanwhile, we see how all
who, swelled with false confidence, flatter themselves on their
condition drive away from them the grace of Christ. And yet this pride
is spread over the whole world, so that there is scarcely one person in
a hundred who feels that he needs the grace of God.

<span id="xiv.vi-p21"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p22"></span>**34.** *Every man who committeth sin is
the slave of sin.* This is an argument drawn from contrary things. They
boasted that they were free. He proves that they are the *slaves of
sin,* because, being enslaved by the desires of the flesh, they
continually sin. It is astonishing that men are not convinced by their
own experience, so that, laying aside their pride, they may learn to be
humble. And it is a very frequent occurrence in the present day, that,
the greater the load of vices by which a man is weighed down, the more
fiercely does he utter unmeaning words in extolling free-will.

<span id="xiv.vi-p23"></span>Christ appears to say nothing more here
than what was formerly said by philosophers, that they who are devoted
to their lusts are subject to the most degrading *slavery*. But there is
a deeper and more hidden meaning; for he does not argue what evil men
bring on themselves, but what is the condition of human nature. The
philosophers thought that any man is a *slave* by his own choice, and
that by the same choice he returns to *freedom*. But here Christ
maintains, that all who are not delivered by him are in a state of
*slavery*, and that all who derive the contagion of sin from corrupted
nature are *slaves* from their birth. We must attend to the comparison
between grace and nature, on which Christ here dwells; from which it may
be easily seen that men are destitute of freedom, unless they regain it
from some other quarter. Yet this *slavery* is voluntary, so that they
who necessarily sin are not compelled to sin.

<span id="xiv.vi-p24"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p25"></span>**35.** *Now the slave remaineth not in the
house always.* He adds a comparison, taken from the laws and from
political law, to the effect that *a slave*, though he may have power
for a time, yet is not the heir of the house; from which he infers that
there is no perfect and durable *freedom*, but what is obtained through
*the Son* In this manner he accuses the Jews of vanity, because they
hold but a mask instead of the reality; for, as to their being
*Abraham*’*s offspring*, they were nothing but a mask. They held a place
in the Church of God, but such a place as Ishmael, *a slave*, rising up
against his *freeborn* brother, usurped for a short time, (<span
id="xiv.vi-p25.1"></span>[Ga 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029)<span
id="xiv.vi-p25.1"></span>.) The conclusion is, that all who boast of
being *Abraham*’*s children* have nothing but an empty and deceitful
pretense.

<span id="xiv.vi-p26"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p27"></span>**36.** *If then the Son shall make you
free.* By these words he means that the right of *freedom* belongs to
himself alone, and that all others, being born *slaves*, cannot be
delivered but by his grace. For what he possesses as his own by nature
he imparts to us by adoption, when we are ingrafted by faith into his
body, and become his members. Thus we ought to remember what I said
formerly, that the Gospel is the instrument by which we obtain our
*freedom* So then our *freedom* is a benefit conferred by Christ, but we
obtain it by faith, in consequence of which also Christ regenerates us
by his Spirit. When he says that they *shall be truly free,* there is an
emphasis on the word *truly;* for we must supply the contrast with the
foolish persuasion by which the Jews were swelled with pride, in like
manner as the greater part of the world imagine that they possess a
kingdom, while they are in the most wretched bondage.

<span id="xiv.vi-p28"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p29"></span>**37.** *I know that you are Abraham’s
seed.* I explain this as said by way of concession. Yet at the same time
he ridicules their folly in glorying in so absurd a title, as if he had
said: “Granting that on which you flatter yourselves so much, still what
avails it that those men are called *the children of Abraham*, who are
enraged against God and his ministers, and who are actuated by such
wicked and detestable hatred of the truth, that they rush headlong to
shed innocent blood?” Hence it follows that nothing is farther from
their true character than what they wished to be called, because they
have no resemblance to *Abraham*

<span id="xiv.vi-p30"></span>*You seek to kill me, because my word has
no place in you.* He means that they are not merely murderers, but are
driven to such rage by hatred of God and his truth, which is far more
heinous; for such an enormity does not merely extend to men, but
likewise dishonors God. He says, *that they cannot receive his words*,
because through malice they keep their minds shut, so that they cannot
admit anything wholesome.

<span id="xiv.vi-p31"></span><span id="xiv.vi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p32"></span>**38.** *I speak what I have seen with my
Father.* He had already made frequent mention of *his Father*; and now,
by an argument drawn from contrary things, he infers that they are
enemies to God, and are *the children of the devil*, because they oppose
his doctrine. “For my part,” says he, “I bring nothing forward, but what
I have learned from my Father. How comes it then that the word of God
excites you to such fury, but because you have an opposite *father*?” He
says that he *speaks*, and they *do*, because he discharged the office
of a teacher, while they labored strenuously to extinguish his doctrine.
At the same time, he protects the Gospel against contempt, by showing
that it is not wonderful if it be opposed by *the children of the devil*
Instead of *you do*, some render it, Do you *what you have seen with
your father*; as if Christ had said, “Come, show that you are the
children of the devil, by opposing me; for *I speak* nothing but what
God has commanded.”

<span id="xiv.vii"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>[John
8:39-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039)<span id="xiv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p2"></span>**39.** They answered, and said to him,
Abraham is our father. Jesus saith to them, If you were Abraham’s
children, you would do the works of Abraham. **40.** But now you seek to
kill me, a man who have spoken to you the truth which I have heard from
God: Abraham did not this. **41.** You do the works of your father. They
said therefore to him, We were not born of fornication; we have one
Father, who is God. **42.** Jesus said to them, If God were your Father,
you would love me: for I proceeded and came from God, for I did not
proceed from myself, but he sent me.

<span id="xiv.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.vii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p5"></span>**39.** *Abraham is our father.* This
altercation shows plainly enough how haughtily and fiercely they
despised all Christ’s reproofs. What they continually claim and vaunt of
is, that they are *Abraham’s children;* by which they do not simply mean
that they are the lineal descendants of *Abraham,* but that they are a
holy race, the heritage of God, and the children of God. And yet they
rely on nothing but the confidence of the flesh. But carnal descent,
without faith, is nothing more than a false pretense. We now understand
what it was that so greatly blinded them, so that they treated Christ
with disdain, though armed with deadly thunder. Thus the word of God,
which might move stones, is ridiculed in the present day by Papists, as
if it were a fable, and fiercely persecuted by fire and sword; and for
no other reason but that they rely on their false title of “the Church,”
and hope that they will be able to deceive both God and man. In short,
as soon as hypocrites have procured some plausible covering, they oppose
God with hardened obstinacy, as if he could not penetrate into their
hearts.

<span id="xiv.vii-p6"></span>*If you were the children of Abraham, you
would do the works of Abraham.* Christ now distinguishes more plainly
between the bastard and degenerate *children of Abraham*, and the true
and lawful children;  <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) for he
refuses to give the very name to all who do not resemble *Abraham* True,
it frequently happens that *children* do not resemble, in their conduct,
the parents from whom they are sprung; but here Christ does not argue
about carnal descent, but only affirms that they who do not retain by
faith the grace of adoption are not reckoned among *the children of
Abraham* before God. For since God promised to the seed of Abraham that
he would be their God, saying,

<span id="xiv.vii-p8"></span>I will establish my covenant between me and
thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting
covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee,  
(<span id="xiv.vii-p8.2"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="xiv.vii-p8.2"></span>,)

<span id="xiv.vii-p9"></span>all unbelievers, by rejecting this promise,
excluded themselves from the family of *Abraham*.

<span id="xiv.vii-p10"></span>The state of the question therefore is
this: Ought they to be accounted Abraham’s children who reject the
blessing offered to them in the word, so that, notwithstanding of this,
they shall be a holy nation, the heritage of God, and a royal
priesthood? (<span id="xiv.vii-p10.1"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="xiv.vii-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.vii-p10.2"></span>[Joe
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002)<span id="xiv.vii-p10.2"></span>.)
Christ denies this, and justly; for they who are the children of the
promise must be born again by the Spirit, and all who desire to obtain a
place in the kingdom of God ought to be new creatures. Carnal descent
from Abraham was not indeed useless, and of no value, provided that the
truth were added to it. For election dwells in the seed of Abraham, but
it is free, so that all whom God sanctifies by his Spirit are accounted
heirs of life.

<span id="xiv.vii-p11"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p12"></span>**40.** *But now you seek to kill me.* He
proves from the effect, that they are not the children of God, as they
boasted, because they oppose God. And, indeed, is there any thing in
Abraham that is more highly commended than the obedience of faith?
 <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) This then is the mark of
distinction, whenever we are required to distinguish between his
children and strangers; for empty titles, whatever estimation they may
procure before the world, are of no account with God. Christ therefore
concludes again, that they are the children of the devil, because they
hate with deadly hatred  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) true
and sound doctrine.

<span id="xiv.vii-p15"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p16"></span>**41.** *We were not born of fornication.*
They claim no more for themselves than they did formerly, for it was the
same thing with them to be Abraham’s children and to be God’s children.
But they erred grievously in this respect, that they imagined that God
was bound to the whole seed of Abraham. For they reason thus: “God
adopted for himself the family of Abraham; therefore, since we are
Abraham’s descendants, we must be the children of God.” We now see how
they thought that they had holiness from the womb, because they were
sprung from a holy root. In short, they maintain that they are the
family of God, because they are descended from the holy fathers. In like
manner, the Papists in the present day are exceedingly vain of an
uninterrupted succession from the fathers. By sorceries of this
description Satan deceives them, so that they separate God from his
word, the Church from faith, and the kingdom of heaven from the Spirit.

<span id="xiv.vii-p17"></span>Let us know, therefore, that they who have
corrupted the seed of life are at the farthest remove from being the
children of God, though, according to the flesh, they are not bastards,
but pretend a right to the plausible title of the Church. For let them
go about the bush as much as they please, still they will never avoid
the discovery that the only ground of their arrogant boasting is, “We
have succeeded the holy fathers; therefore, we are the Church.” And if
the reply of Christ was sufficient for confuting the Jews, it is not
less sufficient now for reproving the Papists. Never indeed will
hypocrites cease to employ the name of God falsely, with most wicked
effrontery; but those false grounds of boasting, on which they plume
themselves, will never cease to appear ridiculous in the eyes of all who
shall abide by the decision of Christ.

<span id="xiv.vii-p18"></span><span id="xiv.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p19"></span>**42.** *If God were your Father, you
would love me.* Christ’s argument is this: “Whoever is a child of God
will acknowledge his first-born Son; but you hate me, and therefore you
have no reason to boast, that you are God’s children.” We ought
carefully to observe this passage, that there is no piety and no fear of
God where Christ is rejected. Hypocritical religion, indeed,
presumptuously shelters itself under the name of God; but how can they
agree with the Father who disagree with his only Son? What kind of
knowledge of God is that in which his lively image is rejected? And this
is what Christ means, when he testifies that he came from the Father.

<span id="xiv.vii-p20"></span>*For I proceeded and came from God.* He
means that all that he has is divine; and therefore it is most
inconsistent that the true worshippers of God should fly from his truth
and righteousness. “I did not come,” says he, “of myself. You cannot
show that anything about me is contrary to God. In short, you will find
nothing that is either earthly or human in my doctrine, or in the whole
of my ministry.” For he does not speak of his essence, but of his
office.

<span id="xiv.viii"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>[John
8:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#043)<span
id="xiv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p2"></span>**43.** Why do you not understand my
language, that you cannot hear my word? **44.** You are of your father
the devil, and you wish to execute the desires of your father. He was a
murderer from the beginning, and he did not remain in the truth, because
there is no truth in him. **45.** And because I tell the truth, you do
not believe me.

<span id="xiv.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.viii-p4"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p5"></span>**43.** *Why do you not understand my
language?* In this passage, he reproaches the Jews with their obstinacy,
which was so great, that *they could not even endure to hear him speak*
Hence he infers, that they are actuated and hurried away by diabolical
rage. Some make a distinction here between *language* and *speech*, as
if *speech* had a more extensive meaning; but I do not see it;  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) and besides, it would not be
appropriate that the word which means less should be placed first. Many
point this verse in such a manner as to make the question close with the
word *language*;  <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) as if the
question consisted only of these words, *Why do you not understand my
language*? So that the reason is immediately assigned, *Because you
cannot hear my word.* But I think that it ought rather to be read in
immediate connection, as if he had said, “What is the reason why my
speech appears to you barbarous and unknown, so that I gain nothing by
speaking to you, and so that you do not even deign to open your ears to
receive what I say?” In the former clause, therefore, he reproves their
stupidity; in the latter, he reproves their obstinate and ungovernable
hatred of his doctrine; and he afterwards assigns a reason for both,
when he says, that they are sprung *from* *the devil* For by putting the
question, he intended to take out of their hands what was the subject of
their continual boasting, that they are led by reason and judgment to
oppose him.

<span id="xiv.viii-p8"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p9"></span>**44.** *You are of your father the
devil.* What he had twice said more obscurely, he now expresses more
fully, that they are *the devil*’*s children* But we must supply the
contrast, that they could not cherish such intense hatred to the Son of
God, were it not that they had for *their father* the perpetual enemy of
God. He calls them *children of the devil*, not only because they
imitate him, but because they are led by his instigation to fight
against Christ. For as we are called *the children of God*, not only
because we resemble him, but because he governs us by his Spirit,
because Christ lives and is vigorous in us, so as to conform us to the
image of his Father; so, on the other hand, the devil is said to be the
*father* or those whose understandings he blinds, whose hearts he moves
to commit all unrighteousness, and on whom, in short, he acts powerfully
and exercises his tyranny; as in <span id="xiv.viii-p9.1"></span>[2Co
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="xiv.viii-p9.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.viii-p9.2"></span>[Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span id="xiv.viii-p9.2"></span>,
and in other passages.

<span id="xiv.viii-p10"></span>The Manicheans foolishly and
ineffectually abused this passage to prove their absurd tenets. For
since, when Scripture calls us the children of God, this does not refer
to the transmission or origin of the substance, but to the grace of the
Spirit, which regenerates us to newness of life; so this swing of Christ
does not relate to the transmission of substance, but to the corruption
of nature, of which man’s revolt was the cause and origin. When men,
therefore, are born children of the devil, it must not be imputed to
creation, but to the blame of sin. Now Christ proves this from the
effect, because they willingly, and of their own accord, are disposed to
follow the devil.

<span id="xiv.viii-p11"></span>*He was a murderer from the beginning.*
He explains what are those desires, and mentions two instances, cruelty
and falsehood; in which the Jews too much resembled Satan. When he says
that the devil *was a murderer*, he means that he contrived the
destruction of man; for as soon as man was created, Satan, impelled by a
wicked desire of doing injury, bent his strength to destroy him. Christ
does not mean *the beginning* of the creation, as if God implanted in
him the disposition to do injury; but he condemns in Satan the
corruption of nature, which he brought upon himself. This appears more
clearly from the second clause, in which he says,

<span id="xiv.viii-p12"></span>*He did not remain in the truth.* For
though those who imagine that the devil was wicked by nature, endeavor
to make evasions, yet these words plainly state that there was a change
for the worse, and that the reason why Satan was *a liar* was, that *he
revolted from the truth* That he is *a liar*, arises not from his nature
having been always contrary to truth, but because he fell from it by a
voluntary fall. This description of Satan is highly useful to us, that
every person for himself may endeavor to beware of his snares, and, at
the same time, to repel his violence and fury; for

<span id="xiv.viii-p13"></span>he goeth about as a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour,  
(<span id="xiv.viii-p13.2"></span>[1Pe
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span id="xiv.viii-p13.2"></span>,)

<span id="xiv.viii-p14"></span>and has a thousand stratagems at his
command for deceiving. So much the more ought believers to be supplied
with spiritual arms for fighting, and so much the more earnestly ought
they to keep watch with vigilance and sobriety. Now, if Satan cannot lay
aside this disposition, we ought not to be alarmed at it, as if it were
a new and uncommon occurrence, when errors exceedingly numerous and
varied spring up; for Satan stirs up his followers like bellows, to
deceive the world by their impostures. And we need not wonder that Satan
puts forth such strenuous efforts to extinguish the light of *truth*;
for it is the only life of the soul. So, then, the most important and
most deadly wound for killing the soul is *falsehood*. As all who have
eyes to see perceive, in the present day, such a picture of Satan in
Popery, they ought, first, to consider with what enemy they carry on
war, and, next, to betake themselves to the protection of Christ their
Captain, under whose banner they fight.

<span id="xiv.viii-p15"></span>*Because the truth is not in him.* This
statement, which immediately follows the other, is a confirmation *a
posteriori*, as the phrase is; that is, it is drawn from the effect. For
Satan hates the truth, and therefore cannot endure it, but, on the
contrary, is entirely covered with falsehoods. Hence Christ infers, that
he is entirely fallen from the truth, and entirely turned away from it.
Let us not wonder, therefore, if he daily exhibits the fruits of his
apostacy.

<span id="xiv.viii-p16"></span>*When he speaketh falsehood.* These words
are generally explained as if Christ affirmed that the blame of
*falsehood* does not belong to God, who is the Author of nature, but, on
the contrary, proceeds from corruption. But I explain it more simply,
that it is customary with the devil to speak *falsehood*, and that he
knows nothing but to contrive corruptions, frauds, and delusions. And
yet we justly infer from these words, that the devil has this vice from
himself, and that, while it is peculiar to him, it may likewise be said
to be accidental; for, while Christ makes the devil to be the contriver
of *lying*, he evidently separates him from God, and even declares him
to be contrary to God. For *he is a liar*, *and the father of it* The
word *father* has the same object as the preceding statement; for the
reason why Satan is said to be the father *of falsehood* is, because he
is estranged from God, in whom alone truth dwells, and from whom it
flows as from the only fountain.

<span id="xiv.viii-p17"></span><span id="xiv.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p18"></span>**45.** *But because I speak the truth.*
He confirms the preceding statement; for, since they have no other
reason for opposing, but because truth is hateful and intolerable to
them, they show plainly that they are the children of Satan.

<span id="xiv.ix"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p1"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>[John
8:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#046)<span id="xiv.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p2"></span>**46.** Which of you convicteth me of sin?
And if I speak truth, why do you not believe me? **47.** He who is of
God heareth the words of God; you hear them not, because you are not of
God. **48.** The Jews therefore answered, and said to him, Do we not say
well, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil? **49.** Jesus
answered, I have not a devil, but I honor my Father, and you have
dishonored me. **50.** But I seek not my own glory; there is one who
seeketh it, and judgeth of it.  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240)

<span id="xiv.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.ix-p5"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p6"></span>**46.** *Which of you?* This question
proceeds from perfect confidence; for, knowing that they could not
justly bring any reproach against him, he glories over his enemies, as
having obtained a victory. And yet he does not say that he is free from
their slanders; for, though they had no reason for reproaching, still
they did not cease to pour out slanders on Christ; but he means that no
crime dwells in him. And such is the import of the Greek word <span
id="xiv.ix-p6.1"></span>ἐλέγχειν, as the Latins use *coarguere*, (*to
convict*,) when a person is held *convicted* of the fact. *Which of you
Convicteth me of sin?* Yet those who think that Christ here asserts his
complete innocence, because he alone surpassed all men, so far as he was
the Son of God, are mistaken. For this defense must be restricted to
what belongs to the passage, as if he had asserted that nothing could be
brought forward to show that he was not a faithful servant of God. In
like manner Paul also glories that he is not conscious of any crime
(<span id="xiv.ix-p6.2"></span>[1Co
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span id="xiv.ix-p6.2"></span>;)
for that does not extend to the whole life, but is only a defense of his
doctrine and apostleship. It is away from the subject, therefore, to
speculate, as some do, about the perfection of righteousness which
belongs to the Son of God alone; since the only object which he has in
view is, to give authority to his ministry, as appears more clearly from
what follows; for he again adds immediately afterwards, *If I speak
truth, why do you not believe me?* From which we infer that Christ is
rather defending his doctrine than his person.

<span id="xiv.ix-p7"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p8"></span>**47.** *He who is of God.* As he has a full
right to take this for granted, that he is the ambassador of the
heavenly Father, and that he discharges faithfully the office which has
been committed to him, he kindles into greater indignation against them;
for their impiety was no longer concealed, since they were so obstinate
in rejecting the word of God. He had showed that they could not bring
forward any thing which he had not taught as from the mouth of God. He
concludes, therefore, that they have nothing in common with God, for
they do not hear the words of God;  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) and, without saying any thing about
himself, he charges them with being at war with God. Besides, we are
taught by this passage, that there is not a more evident sign of a
reprobate mind, than when one cannot endure the doctrine of Christ, even
though, in other respects, it shone with angelic sanctity; as, on the
contrary, if we embrace that doctrine cheerfully, we have what may be
called a visible seal of our election. For he who has the word enjoys
God himself; but he who rejects it excludes himself from righteousness
and life. Wherefore, there is nothing which we ought to fear so much as
to fall under that dreadful sentence.

<span id="xiv.ix-p10"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p11"></span>**48.** *Do we not say well?* They show
more and more how greatly they are stupified by Satan; for, though they
are fully convicted, still they are enraged, and are not ashamed to show
that they are utterly desperate.  <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) Besides, though they bring a double
reproach against Christ, still they wish to do nothing more than to say
in a few words, that he is a detestable man, and that he is actuated by
a wicked spirit. The Jews reckoned *the Samaritans* to be apostates and
corrupters of the Law; and therefore, whenever they wished to stamp a
man with infamy, they called him *a Samaritan.* Having no crime more
heinous, therefore, to reproach Christ with, they seize at random, and
without judgment, this vulgar taunt. To express it in a few words, we
see that with effrontery they curse him, as men are wont to do when,
infuriated like enraged dogs, they cannot find any thing to say.

<span id="xiv.ix-p13"></span><span id="xiv.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p14"></span>**49.** *I have not a devil.* He passes by
the first charge, and clears himself only of the second. Some think that
he did so, because he disregarded the insult offered to his person, and
undertook only the defense of the doctrine. But they are mistaken, in my
opinion; for it is not probable that the Jews were so ingenious in
distinguishing between the life and the doctrine of the Lord Jesus.
 <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) Besides, the dislike of this
name arose, as we have said, from this circumstance, that the
*Samaritans*, being perverse and degenerate observers of the Law, had
debased it by many superstitions and corruptions, and had polluted the
whole worship of God by foreign inventions. Augustine flies to allegory,
and says that Christ did not refuse to be called a *Samaritan*, because
he is a true guardian of his flock. But Christ’s intention appears to me
to have been different; for since the two reproaches cast upon him had
the same object, by refuting the one, he refutes the other; and, indeed,
if the matter be duly considered, they insulted him more grievously by
calling him *a Samaritan* than by calling him *a demoniac* But, as I
have already said, Christ satisfies himself with a simple refutation,
which he draws from what is contrary, when he asserts that he labors to
promote the honor of his Father; for he who duly and sincerely honors
him must be guided by the Spirit of God, and must be a faithful servant
of God.

<span id="xiv.ix-p16"></span>*You have dishonored me.* This clause may
be explained, as if it were a complaint of Christ, that he does not
receive the honor due to him on account of his promoting the glory of
God. But I think that he looks much higher, and connects the glory of
the Father with his own, in this manner. “I claim nothing for myself
which does not tend to the glory of God; for his majesty shines in me,
his power and authority dwells in me; and therefore, when you treat me
so disdainfully, you pour contempt on God himself.” He immediately adds,
therefore, that God will revenge this insult. For they might have
alleged that he was ambitious, if he had not testified that it was not
from any personal feelings of a carnal nature that he cared about the
honor or contempt showed to himself, but so far as the honor or contempt
of God is concerned. Besides, though we are at a great distance from
Christ, let every man be fully convinced that, if he be sincerely
desirous to promote the glory of God, he will find that God has secured
for him abundant commendation; for we shall always find that saying to
be true,

<span id="xiv.ix-p17"></span>Those who honor me, I will render
honorable,  
(<span id="xiv.ix-p17.2"></span>[1Sa
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)<span id="xiv.ix-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.ix-p18"></span>If men not only despise, but even load him
with reproaches, let him calmly wait till the day of the Lord come.

<span id="xiv.x"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p1"></span><span id="xiv.x-p1.1"></span>[John
8:51-55](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051)<span id="xiv.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p2"></span>**51.** Verily, verily, I say to you, If any
man keep my word, he shall never see death. **52.** The Jews said
therefore to him, Now we know that thou hast the devil,  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) Abraham is dead, and the Prophets, and
thou sayest, If any man keep my word, he shall never taste of death.
**53.** Art thou greater than our father Abraham, who is dead? The
Prophets also are dead. Whom makest thou thyself? **54.** Jesus
answered, If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing; it is my Father who
glorifieth me, of whom you say that he is your God. **55.** And you know
him not, but I know him; and if I say that I do not know him, I shall be
a liar like you; but I know him, and keep his word.

<span id="xiv.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiv.x-p5"></span><span id="xiv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p6"></span>**51.** *Verily, verily, I say to you.*
Christ unquestionably knew that some persons in that multitude were
curable, and that others of them were not opposed to his doctrine. For
this reason, he intended to terrify the wicked whose malice was
desperate, but to do so in such a manner as to leave ground of
consolation for the good, or to draw to him those who were not yet
ruined. Whatever dislike of the word of God, therefore, may be
entertained by the greatest part of men, yet the faithful teacher ought
not to be wholly employed in reproving the wicked, but ought also to
impart the doctrine of salvation to the children of God, and endeavor to
bring them to sound views, if there be any of them who are not perfectly
incurable. In this passage, therefore, Christ promises eternal life to
his disciples, but demands disciples who shall not only prick up their
ears, like asses, or profess with the mouth that they approve of his
doctrine, but who shall keep his doctrine as a precious treasure. He
says that *they shall never see death*; for, when faith quickens the
soul of a man, death already has its sting extracted and its venom
removed, and so cannot inflict a deadly wound.

<span id="xiv.x-p7"></span><span id="xiv.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p8"></span>**52.** *Now we know.* The reprobate persist
in their stupidity, and are not moved by promises any more than by
threatenings; so that they can neither be led nor drawn to Christ. Some
think that they slanderously torture his words, by using the expression,
*taste of death*, which Christ had not used; but this appears to me to
be groundless. I rather think that both of the phrases, *to* *taste of
death* and *to see death*, were used by the Hebrews in the same sense;
namely, *to die* But they are false interpreters in this respect, that
they apply the spiritual doctrine of Christ to the body. No believer
*shall see death*, because believers, *having been born again of
incorruptible seed*, (<span id="xiv.x-p8.1"></span>[1Pe
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span id="xiv.x-p8.1"></span>,)
live even when they die; because, united to Christ their Head, they
cannot be extinguished by death; because *death* is to them a passage
into the heavenly kingdom; because

<span id="xiv.x-p9"></span>the Spirit, dwelling in them, is life on
account of righteousness,  
(<span id="xiv.x-p9.2"></span>[Ro
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010)<span id="xiv.x-p9.2"></span>,)

<span id="xiv.x-p10"></span>until he swallow up all that remains of
death. But those men, being carnal, cannot perceive any deliverance from
death, unless it appear manifestly in the body. And it is a disease too
common in the world, that the greatest part of men care almost nothing
about the grace of Christ, because they judge of it only by their carnal
perception. That the same thing may not happen to us, we must arouse our
minds, that they may discern spiritual life in the midst of death.

<span id="xiv.x-p11"></span><span id="xiv.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p12"></span>**53.** *Art thou greater than our father
Abraham?* This is another offense, that they endeavor to obscure the
glory of Christ by the splendor of *Abraham* and of the saints. But as
all the stars are thrown into the shade by the brightness of the sun, so
all the glory that is to be found in all the saints must fade away
before the incomparable brightness of Christ. They act unjustly and
absurdly, therefore, in contrasting the servants with the Lord; and they
even act improperly towards *Abraham and the Prophets*, by abusing their
name in opposition to Christ. But this wickedness has prevailed in
almost every age, and prevails even in the present day, that wicked men,
by mangling the works of God, make him appear to be contrary to himself.
God glorified himself by the Apostles and Martyrs; the Papists frame
idols for themselves out of the Apostles and Martyrs, that they may
occupy the place of God; and do they not, in this manner, manufacture
engines out of the very favors of God, to destroy his power? For how
little remains for God or for Christ, if the saints have all that the
Papists so lavishly bestow upon them! Wherefore, we ought to know that
the whole order of the Kingdom of God is destroyed, unless Prophets,
Apostles, and all that can be called Saints, be placed far below Christ,
that he alone may hold the highest rank. And, indeed, we cannot speak of
the Saints more respectfully than when we place them below Christ. But
the Papists, though they may deceive the ignorant by boasting that they
are faithful admirers of the Saints, offer an insult both to God and to
them, because, by assigning to them a lofty station, they reduce Christ
to a level with them. And, indeed, they are doubly in the wrong, because
they prefer the Saints to Christ in doctrine; and because, by clothing
themselves with the spoils of Christ, they deprive him of almost all his
power.

<span id="xiv.x-p13"></span><span id="xiv.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p14"></span>**54.** *If I glorify myself.* Before
replying to that unjust comparison, he begins by saying that *he* *does
not seek his own glory*, and thus meets their slander. If it be
objected, that Christ also glorified himself, the answer is easy, that
he did so, not as man, but by the direction and authority of God. For
here, as in many other passages, he distinguishes between himself and
God, by way of concession. In short, he declares that he desires no
glory whatever but what has been given him by the Father. We are taught
by these words that, when God glorifies his Son, he will not permit the
world to hate or despise him  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245)
with impunity.

<span id="xiv.x-p16"></span>Meanwhile, those voices sounding from
heaven, *Kiss the Son*, (<span id="xiv.x-p16.1"></span>[Ps
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)<span id="xiv.x-p16.1"></span>,)
*Let all the angels worship him*, (<span id="xiv.x-p16.2"></span>[Heb
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span id="xiv.x-p16.2"></span>,)
*Let every knee bow to him*, (<span id="xiv.x-p16.3"></span>[Php
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="xiv.x-p16.3"></span>,)
*Hear ye him*, (<span id="xiv.x-p16.4"></span>[Mt
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="xiv.x-p16.4"></span>,)
*Let the Gentiles seek him*, (<span id="xiv.x-p16.5"></span>[Ro
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#011)<span id="xiv.x-p16.5"></span>,)
and *Let all flesh be humbled*, ought greatly to encourage believers to
render honor and reverence to Christ. We are also reminded by these
words, that all the honor which men procure for themselves is trivial
and worthless. How blind then is ambition, when we labor so earnestly
about nothing! Let, us continually keep before our eyes that saying of
Paul,

<span id="xiv.x-p17"></span>Not he who commendeth himself is approved,
but whom God commendeth,  
(<span id="xiv.x-p17.2"></span>[2Co
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#018)<span id="xiv.x-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.x-p18"></span>Besides, as we are destitute of the glory of
God, let us learn to glory in Christ alone, so far as by his grace he
makes us partakers of his glory.

<span id="xiv.x-p19"></span>*Of whom you say that he is your God.* He
pulls off from them the false mask of the name of God which they were
accustomed to employ. “I know,” he says, “how presumptuously you boast
that you are the people of God; but it is a false title, for *you know
not God*.” Hence also we learn what is the true and lawful  <span
id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246) profession of faith. It is that which
proceeds from true knowledge. And whence comes that knowledge, but from
the word? Consequently, all who boast of the name of God without the
word of God are mere liars. Yet to their audacity Christ opposes the
assurance of his conscience; and thus all the servants of God ought to
be prepared in their hearts to be satisfied with this alone, that God is
on their side, though the whole world should rise against him. Thus
anciently the Prophets and Apostles had invincible courage and
magnanimity, which stood firm against the dreadful attacks of the whole
world, because they knew by whom they were sent. But when solid
knowledge of God is wanting, there is nothing to support us.

<span id="xiv.x-p21"></span>*And if I shall say that I know him.* By
this clause, Christ testifies that the necessity of his office
constrains him to speak, because silence would be a treacherous denim of
the truth. This is a remarkable statement, that God reveals himself to
us for this purpose, that we may confess before men the faith which we
have in our hearts, when it is needful. For it ought powerfully to
strike terror into our minds, that they who act hypocritically to please
men, and either deny the truth of God or disfigure it by wicked glosses,
not only are gently reproved, but are sent back to the children of the
devil.

<span id="xiv.xi"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p1"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p1.1"></span>[John
8:56-59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span id="xiv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p2"></span>**56.** Your father Abraham exulted to see
my day; and he saw it and rejoiced. **57.** The Jews then said to him,
Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? **58.**
Jesus said to them, Verily, verily, I tell you, before Abraham was, I
am. **59.** Then they took up stones to throw at him; but Jesus
concealed himself, and went out of the temple.

<span id="xiv.xi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiv.xi-p4"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p5"></span>**56.** *Your father Abraham.* He grants to
them, in words only, what he formerly took from them, that *Abraham is
their father* But he shows how idle is the objection drawn from the name
of *Abraham* “He had no other object,” says he, “during his whole life,
than to see my kingdom flourish. He longed for me when I was absent, you
despise me when I am present.” What Christ here asserts concerning
Abraham alone, applies to all the saints. But this doctrine has greater
weight in the person of Abraham, because he is the father of the whole
Church. Whoever then desires to be reckoned in the number of the godly,
let him rejoice, as he ought to do, in the presence of Christ, for which
Abraham ardently longed.

<span id="xiv.xi-p6"></span>*Exulted to see my day.* The word *exult*
expresses a vehement zeal  <span id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) and
ardent affection. We must now supply the contrast. Though the knowledge
of Christ was still so obscure, Abraham was inflamed by so strong a
desire, that he preferred the enjoyment of it to everything that was
reckoned desirable. How base then is the ingratitude of those who
despise and reject him, when he is plainly offered to them? The word
*day* does not, in this passage, denote eternity, (as Augustine
thought,) but the time of Christ’s kingdom, when he appeared in the
world clothed with flesh, to fulfill the office of Redeemer.

<span id="xiv.xi-p8"></span>But a question now arises, How did Abraham
behold, even with the eyes of faith, the manifestation of Christ? For
this appears not to agree with another statement of Christ,

<span id="xiv.xi-p9"></span>Many kings and prophets desired to see the
things which you see,  
and yet did not see them,  
(<span id="xiv.xi-p9.3"></span>[Lu
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#024)<span id="xiv.xi-p9.3"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.xi-p10"></span>I reply, faith has its degrees in beholding
Christ. Thus the ancient prophets beheld Christ at a distance, as he had
been promised to them, and yet were not permitted to behold him present,
as he made himself familiarly and completely visible, when he came down
from heaven to men.

<span id="xiv.xi-p11"></span>Again, we are taught by these words that,
as God did not disappoint the desire of *Abraham*, so he will not now
permit any one to breathe after Christ, without obtaining some good
fruit which shall correspond to his holy desire. The reason why he does
not grant the enjoyment of himself to many is — the wickedness of men;
for few desire him. *Abraham*’*s joy* testifies that he regarded the
knowledge of the kingdom of Christ as an incomparable treasure; and the
reason why we are told that he *rejoiced to see the day of Christ* is,
that we may know that there was nothing which he valued more highly. But
all believers receive this fruit from their faith, that, being satisfied
with Christ alone, in whom they are fully and completely happy and
blessed, their consciences are calm and cheerful. And indeed no man
knows Christ aright, unless he gives him this honor of relying entirely
upon him.

<span id="xiv.xi-p12"></span>Others explain it to mean, that Abraham,
being already dead, enjoyed the presence of Christ, when he appeared to
the world; and so they make the time of *desiring* and the time of
*seeing* to be different. And indeed it is true, that the coming of
Christ was manifested to holy spirits after death, of which coming they
were held in expectation during the whole of their life; but I do not
know if so refined an exposition agrees with Christ’s words.

<span id="xiv.xi-p13"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p14"></span>**57.** *Thou art not yet fifty years old.*
They endeavor to refute Christ’s saying, by showing that he had asserted
what was impossible, when he *who was not yet fifty years of age makes
himself equal to Abraham*, who died many centuries before. Though Christ
was not yet thirty-four years of age, yet they allow him to be somewhat
older, that they may not appear to be too rigid and exact in dealing
with him; as if they had said, “Thou certainly wilt not make thyself so
old, though thou wert to boast that thou art already *fifty years of
age*.” Consequently, those who conjecture that he looked older than he
actually was, or that the *years* mentioned in this passage are not
solar years, in either case labor to no purpose. The notion of Papias,
who says that Christ lived more than forty years, cannot at all be
admitted.

<span id="xiv.xi-p15"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p16"></span>**58.** *Before Abraham was.* As
unbelievers judge only from the appearance of the flesh, Christ reminds
them that he has something greater and higher than human appearance,
which is hidden from the senses of the flesh, and is perceived only by
the eyes of faith; and that, in this respect, he might be seen by the
holy fathers, before he was manifested in the flesh. But he uses
different verbs. *Before Abraham* was,  <span
id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) or, *Before Abraham* was born,  <span
id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) I am.  <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) But by these words he excludes himself
from the ordinary rank of men, and claims for himself a power more than
human,  <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) a power heavenly and
divine, the perception of which reached from the beginning of the world
through all ages.

<span id="xiv.xi-p21"></span>Yet these words may be explained in two
ways. Some think that this applies simply to the eternal Divinity of
Christ, and compare it with that passage in the writings of Moses, *I am
what I am*, (<span id="xiv.xi-p21.1"></span>[Ex
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="xiv.xi-p21.1"></span>.)
But I extend it much farther, because the power and grace of Christ, so
far as he is the Redeemer of the world, was common to all ages. It
agrees therefore with that saying of the apostle, *Christ yesterday*,
*and to-day*, *and for ever*, (<span id="xiv.xi-p21.2"></span>[Heb
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span id="xiv.xi-p21.2"></span>.)
For the context appears to demand this interpretation. He had formerly
said that Abraham longed for his day with vehement desire; and as this
seemed incredible to the Jews, he adds, that he himself also existed at
that time. The reason assigned will not appear sufficiently strong, if
we do not understand that he was even then acknowledged to be the
Mediator, by whom God was to be appeased. And yet the efficacy which
belonged, in all ages, to the grace of the Mediator depended on his
eternal Divinity; so that this saying of Christ contains a remarkable
testimony of his Divine essence.

<span id="xiv.xi-p22"></span>We ought also to observe the solemn form of
an oath, *Verily, verily.* Nor do I disapprove of the opinion of
Chrysostom, that the present tense of the verb is emphatic; for he does
not say, *I was*, but *I am;* by which he denotes a condition uniformly
the same from the beginning to the end. And he does not say, *Before
Abraham* was, but, *Before Abraham* was made; which implies that Abraham
had a beginning.

<span id="xiv.xi-p23"></span><span id="xiv.xi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p24"></span>**59.** *Then they took up stones.* There
is reason to believe that they did this, as if Christ ought to be stoned
according to the injunction of the Law, (<span
id="xiv.xi-p24.1"></span>[Le
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016)<span id="xiv.xi-p24.1"></span>.)
Hence we infer how great is the madness of inconsiderate zeal; for they
have no ears to know the cause, but they have hands ready to commit
murder. I have no doubt that Christ rescued himself by his secret power,
but yet under the appearance of a low condition; for he did not intend
to make a clear display of his Divinity without leaving something for
human infirmity. Some copies have the words, *And so Jesus passed
through the midst of them*; which Erasmus justly considers to have been
borrowed from the Gospel by <span id="xiv.xi-p24.2"></span>[Lu
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#030)<span id="xiv.xi-p24.2"></span>.
It deserves notice also, that the wicked priests and scribes, after
having banished Christ,

<span id="xiv.xi-p25"></span>in whom dwelleth all the fullness of the
Godhead,  
\|(<span id="xiv.xi-p25.2"></span>[Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="xiv.xi-p25.2"></span>,)

<span id="xiv.xi-p26"></span>retain possession of the outward temple;
but they are greatly deceived, when they think that they have a temple
in which God does not dwell. Such is the course now pursued by the Pope
and his followers. After having banished Christ, and in this manner
profaned the Church, they foolishly glory in the false disguise of a
Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc34013.htm#fr_205) <span
id="xiv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p3.1"></span>S’enclinant en
bas.” — “Stooping down.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc34013.htm#fr_206) <span
id="xiv.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p4.1"></span>Il se dressa.”

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc34013.htm#fr_207) <span
id="xiv.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p10.1"></span>Ce sera
toujours a recommencer;” — “they will always have to begin anew.”
Dropping the classical allusion, our Author has thus conveyed the
meaning to his countrymen in plain terms. All who have read Homer’s
Odyssey will remember *Penelope*, the wife of Ulysses, and especially
that part of her history to which Calvin refers, that what she wove
during the day she unravelled during the night, and thus accomplished
her resolution that she should be daily employed in weaving, and yet
that her web should not be finished till after her husband’s return.
<span id="xiv.i-p10.2"></span>*Penelopes telam texere*, *to weave
Penelope*’*s web*, was a proverbial expression, which the Romans
borrowed from the Greeks. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc34013.htm#fr_208) <span
id="xiv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p17.1"></span>Pleust a
Dieu que.”

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc34013.htm#fr_209) <span
id="xiv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p22"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p22.1"></span>Voyla la
beau fruict.”

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc34013.htm#fr_210) <span
id="xiv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p3.1"></span>Ton
tesmoignage n’est pas vrai; *c*’*est a dire*, *n*’*est point digne* de
foy.” — “Thy testimony is not true; that is, is not worthy of credit.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc34013.htm#fr_211) <span
id="xiv.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>Mon
tesmoignage est vray; *c*’*est a dire*, *digne de foy*.” — “My testimony
is true; *that is*, *worthy of credit*.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc34013.htm#fr_212) <span
id="xiv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p8.1"></span>De la femme
adultere.”

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc34013.htm#fr_213) <span
id="xiv.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p17.1"></span>Du Fils de
Dieu.”

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc34013.htm#fr_214) <span
id="xiv.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.ii-p18.1"></span>Aussi
maintenant est-il haut eleve.”

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc34013.htm#fr_215) <span
id="xiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p3.1"></span>Mon
jugement est vray; *c*’*est a dire*, *digne de foy*.” — “My judgment is
true; *that is*, *worthy of credit*.”

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc34013.htm#fr_216) <span
id="xiv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p13.1"></span>Le Fils
de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc34013.htm#fr_217) <span
id="xiv.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p14.1"></span>Du
nombre commun des autres hommes.”

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc34013.htm#fr_218) <span
id="xiv.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p19"></span> See page 223, n. 1.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc34013.htm#fr_219) <span
id="xiv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p22"></span> “<span
id="xiv.iii-p22.1"></span>Quiconque s’humilie devant le Seigneur Jesus.”

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc34013.htm#fr_220) <span
id="xiv.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iii-p25"></span> “<span id="xiv.iii-p25.1"></span>Combien
qu’ils eussent leurs gueules ouvertes pour l’engloutir.”

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc34013.htm#fr_221) <span
id="xiv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p10.1"></span>Enyvrez
d’une stupidite plus que brutale.”

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc34013.htm#fr_222) <span
id="xiv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p15.1"></span>Non pas
qu’il n’y a point d’autres pechez que l’incredulite.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc34013.htm#fr_223) <span
id="xiv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="xiv.iv-p17.1"></span>Il n’y a
qu’un amas infini de tous maux qui regne continuellement en nous.”

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc34013.htm#fr_224) <span
id="xiv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p3.1"></span>Ou, *ce dont
je vous parle des le commencement*;” — “or, *what I tell you from the
beginning*.”

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc34013.htm#fr_225) <span
id="xiv.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p4"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p4.1"></span>Ou, *comme
aussi je vous en parle*;” — “or, *as also I speak* of it *to you*.”

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc34013.htm#fr_226) <span
id="xiv.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p8"></span> <span id="xiv.v-p8.1"></span>Ceux qui
traduisent, “<span id="xiv.v-p8.2"></span>Je suis le commencement.”

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc34013.htm#fr_227) <span
id="xiv.v-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p9"></span> He refers to Nonnus, a Greek writer, who
rendered into hexameter verse the Gospel by John. The passage stands
thus:

<span id="xiv.v-p10"></span><span id="xiv.v-p10.1"></span>Ti&gt;v su&lt;
pe&gt;leiv kai&lt; Cristo&lt;v ajni&gt;acen, oa xiv.v-p11}*Who art
thou*? *and Christ cried aloud*, What (I say) to you from the beginning,
*having an innumerable multitude of things to say and judge* So far as
relates to <span id="xiv.v-p11.1"></span>τὴν ἀρχὴν, *Nonnus* appears to
agree with *Calvin*; for he renders it <span id="xiv.v-p11.2"></span>ἐξ
ἀρχη̈ς, *from the beginning*. — *Ed*

} But a different reading is more generally adopted, and appears to be
the true one. I interpret <span id="xiv.v-p11.3"></span>τὴν ἀρχὴν, *from
the beginning*; so that the meaning, in my opinion, is this: “I did not
arise suddenly, but as I was formerly promised, so now I come forth
publicly.” He adds,

<span id="xiv.v-p12"></span>*Because I also speak to you;* by which he
means that he testifies plainly enough who he is, provided that they had
ears. This word, <span id="xiv.v-p12.1"></span>ὄτι *because*, is not
employed merely to assign a reason, as if Christ intended to prove that
he was *from the beginning*, because *he now speaks*; but he asserts
that there is such an agreement between his doctrine and the eternity
which he has spoken of, that it ought to be reckoned an undoubted
confirmation of it. It may be explained thus: “*According to the
beginning*, that is, what I have formerly said, I now, as it were,
confirm anew;” or, “And truly what I now also speak, is in accordance
with the conditions made in all ages, so as to be a strong confirmation
of it.”

<span id="xiv.v-p13"></span>In short, this reply consists of two
clauses; for, under the word *beginning,* he includes an uninterrupted
succession of ages, during which God had made a covenant with their
fathers. When he says that *he also speaks*, he joins his doctrine with
the ancient predictions, and shows that it depends on them. Hence it
follows that the Jews had no other reason for their ignorance, than that
they did not believe either the Prophets or the Gospel; for it is the
same Christ that is exhibited in all of them. They pretended to be
disciples of the Prophets, and to look to the eternal covenant of God;
but still they rejected Christ, who had been promised *from the
beginning,* and presented himself before them.

<span id="xiv.v-p14"></span><span id="xiv.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p15"></span>**26.** *I have many things to say and judge
of you.* Perceiving that he is in the position of one who sings to the
deaf, he pursues his discourse no farther, but only declares that God
will defend that doctrine, which they despise, because he is the Author
of it. “If I wished to accuse you,” says he, “your malice and wickedness
supply me with ample materials; but I leave you for the present. But my
Father, who committed to me the office of a teacher, will not fail to
fulfill his promise; for he will always vindicate his word against the
wicked and sacrilegious contempt of men.” This saying of Christ is of
the same import with that of Paul,

<span id="xiv.v-p16"></span>If we deny him, he remaineth faithful, he
cannot deny himself,  
(<span id="xiv.v-p16.2"></span>[2Ti
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)<span id="xiv.v-p16.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.v-p17"></span>In short, he threatens the judgment of God
against unbelievers, who refuse to give credit to his word; and he does
so on this ground, that God must inevitably defend his truth. Now this
is the true firmness of faith, when we believe that God is alone
sufficient to establish the authority of his doctrine, though the world
should reject it. All who, relying on this doctrine, serve Christ
faithfully, may fearlessly accuse the whole world of falsehood.

<span id="xiv.v-p18"></span>*And I speak to the world those things which
I have heard from him.* He says that he utters nothing which he has not
received from the Father; and this is the only confirmation of a
doctrine, when the minister shows that what he speaks has proceeded from
the Father. Now we know that Christ sustained, at that time, the office
of a minister; and, therefore, we need not wonder, if he demands that
men listen to him, because he brings to them the commandments of God.
Besides, by his example he lays down a general law for the whole Church,
that no man ought to be heard, unless he speak from the mouth of God.
But while he lays low the wicked arrogance of those men who take upon
themselves to speak without the word of God, faithful teachers, who know
well the nature of their calling, are fortified and armed by him with
unshaken firmness, that, under the guidance of God, they may boldly bid
defiance to all mortals.

<span id="xiv.v-p19"></span><span id="xiv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p20"></span>**27.** *They did not know that he spoke to
them about the Father.* Hence we see how stupid those men are whose
understandings are possessed by Satan. Nothing could be more plain than
that they were summoned to the judgment-seat of God. But what then? They
are altogether blind. This happens daily to other enemies of the Gospel;
and such blindness ought to instruct us to walk with fear.  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228)

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc34013.htm#fr_228) <span
id="xiv.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p21"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p21.1"></span>A cheminer
en crainte.”

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc34013.htm#fr_229) <span
id="xiv.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p24"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p24.1"></span>Qu’il ouvre
plus sa bouche pour leur dire rein.”

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc34013.htm#fr_230) <span
id="xiv.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.v-p25"></span> “<span id="xiv.v-p25.1"></span>Les
reprouvez et infideles.”

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc34013.htm#fr_231) <span
id="xiv.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p3.1"></span>Il est serf
de peche.”

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc34013.htm#fr_232) <span
id="xiv.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p4"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p4.1"></span>Le serf.”

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc34013.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xiv.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p5"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p5.1"></span>Pource que
ma parole n’a point de lieu en vous;” — “because my word hath no place
in you.”

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc34013.htm#fr_234) <span
id="xiv.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vi-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.vi-p18.1"></span>Ceux-la
mesmes parlans, qui parloyent auparavant.”

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc34013.htm#fr_235) <span
id="xiv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p7.1"></span>Entre les
enfans d’Abraham qui sont bastars et forlignans, et le vrais et
legitimes.”

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc34013.htm#fr_236) <span
id="xiv.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p13"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p13.1"></span>Et de
faict, y a-il chose qu’on puisse plustost louer en Abraham?”

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc34013.htm#fr_237) <span
id="xiv.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.vii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiv.vii-p14.1"></span>Ils
haissent de haine mortelle.”

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc34013.htm#fr_238) <span
id="xiv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p6"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p6.1"></span>Aucuns
font ici difference entre Langage et Parole, pource que la parole
emporte plus, mais je n’y en voy point.”

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc34013.htm#fr_239) <span
id="xiv.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.viii-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.viii-p7.1"></span>En ce
mot Langage.”

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc34013.htm#fr_240) <span
id="xiv.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.ix-p3.1"></span>Il y a qui
la cherche, et qui en juge.”

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc34013.htm#fr_241) <span
id="xiv.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p9"></span> “<span id="xiv.ix-p9.1"></span>Ils n’oyent
point les paroles de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc34013.htm#fr_242) <span
id="xiv.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p12"></span> “<span
id="xiv.ix-p12.1"></span>Neantmoins, ils sont enragez, et n’ont pointe
honte de se monstrer du tout desesperez.”

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc34013.htm#fr_243) <span
id="xiv.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ix-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.ix-p15.1"></span>Du
Seigneur Jesus.”

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc34013.htm#fr_244) <span
id="xiv.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p3"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p3.1"></span>Que tu as le
diable.”

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc34013.htm#fr_245) <span
id="xiv.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p15"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p15.1"></span>En haine et
mespris.”

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc34013.htm#fr_246) <span
id="xiv.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.x-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.x-p20.1"></span>La vraye et
legitimo profession.”

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc34013.htm#fr_247) <span
id="xiv.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p7"></span> “<span id="xiv.xi-p7.1"></span>Un vehement
zele.”

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc34013.htm#fr_248) <span
id="xiv.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p17"></span> “<span id="xiv.xi-p17.1"></span>Avant
qu’Abraham fust.”

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc34013.htm#fr_249) <span
id="xiv.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p18"></span> “<span id="xiv.xi-p18.1"></span>Priusquam
Abraham nasceretur.”

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc34013.htm#fr_250) <span
id="xiv.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p19"></span> <span id="xiv.xi-p19.1"></span>πρὶν Αβραὰμ
γενέσθαι, ἐγώ εἰμι. Our Author’s idea, to which he merely alludes,
appears to be that, instead of saying, <span
id="xiv.xi-p19.2"></span>ἐγὼ ἐγενόμνη, or, <span
id="xiv.xi-p19.3"></span>ἐγὼ γίνομαι, Christ purposely said, <span
id="xiv.xi-p19.4"></span>ἐγώ εἰμι, because the verb <span
id="xiv.xi-p19.5"></span>εἰμῖ, standing contrasted with <span
id="xiv.xi-p19.6"></span>γενέσθαι, would convey the idea of underived
existence. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc34013.htm#fr_251) <span
id="xiv.xi-p19.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.xi-p20"></span> “<span id="xiv.xi-p20.1"></span>Une vertu
plus qu’humaine.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc34014)
