[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cml08)  [Next](cml10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809531534/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span id="ch-05"></span>

# THE GAELIC GODS AND THEIR STORIES

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### CHAPTER V

### THE GODS OF THE GAELS

Of the two Celtic races that settled in our islands, it is the earlier,
the Gaels, that has best preserved its old mythology. It is true that we
have in few cases such detailed account of the Gaelic gods as we gain of
the Hellenic deities from the Greek poets, of the Indian Devas from the
Rig Veda, or of the Norse Æsir from the Eddas. Yet none the less may we
draw from the ancient Irish manuscripts quite enough information to
enable us to set forth their figures with some clearness. We find them,
as might have been anticipated, very much like the divine hierarchies of
other Aryan peoples.

We also find them separated into two opposing camps, a division common
to all the Aryan religions. Just as the Olympians struggled with the
Giants, the Æsir fought the Jötuns, and the Devas the Asuras, so there
is warfare in the Gaelic spiritual world between two superhuman hosts.
On one side are ranged the gods of day, light, life, fertility, wisdom,
and good; on the other, the demons of night, darkness, death,
barrenness, and evil. The first were the great spirits symbolizing the
beneficial aspects of nature and the arts and intelligence of man; the
second were the hostile powers thought to be behind such baneful
manifestations as storm and

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

fog, drought and disease. The first are ranged as a divine family round
a goddess called Danu, from whom they took their well-known name of
*Tuatha Dé Danann*, <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) "Tribe" or "Folk
of the Goddess Danu". The second owned allegiance to a female divinity
called Domnu; their king, Indech, is described as her son, and they are
all called "Domnu's gods". The word "Domnu" appears to have signified
the abyss or the deep sea, <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56.md) and the
same idea is also expressed in their better-known name of "Fomors",
derived from two Gaelic words meaning "under sea". <span
id="fr_57"></span>[3](#fn_57.md) The waste of water seems to have always
impressed the Celts with the sense of primeval ancientness; it was
connected in their minds with vastness, darkness, and monstrous
births--the very antithesis of all that was symbolized by the earth, the
sky, and the sun.

Therefore the Fomors were held to be more ancient than the gods, before
whom they were, however, destined to fall in the end. Offspring of
"Chaos and Old Night", they were, for the most part, huge and deformed.
Some had but one arm and one leg apiece, while others had the heads of
goats, horses, or bulls. <span id="fr_58"></span>[4](#fn_58.md) The most
famous, and perhaps the most terrible of them all was Balor, whose
father is said to have been one Buarainech, that is, the
"cow-faced", <span id="fr_59"></span>[5](#fn_59.md) and who combined in
himself the two classical rôles of the Cyclops and the Medusa. Though he
had two eyes, one was always

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

kept shut, for it was so venomous that it slew anyone on whom its look
fell. This malignant quality of Balor's eye was not natural to him, but
was the result of an accident. Urged by curiosity, he once looked in at
the window of a house where his father's sorcerers were preparing a
magic potion, and the poisonous smoke from the cauldron reached his eye,
infecting it with so much of its own deadly nature as to make it
disastrous to others. Neither god nor giant seems to have been exempt
from its dangers; so that Balor was only allowed to live on condition
that he kept his terrible eye shut. On days of battle he was placed
opposite to the enemy, the lid of the destroying eye was lifted up with
a hook, and its gaze withered all who stood before it. The memory of
Balor and his eye still lingers in Ireland: the "eye of Balor" is the
name for what the peasantry of other countries call the "evil eye";
stories are still told of *Balar Beimann*, or "Balor of the Mighty
Blows"; and "Balor's Castle" is the name of a curious cliff on Tory
Island. This island, off the coast of Donegal, was the Fomorian outpost
upon earth, their real abode being in the cold depths of the sea.

This rule, however, as to the hideousness of the Fomors had its
exceptions. Elathan, one of their chiefs, is described in an old
manuscript as of magnificent presence--a Miltonic prince of darkness. "A
man of fairest form," it says, "with golden hair down to his shoulders.
He wore a mantle of gold braid over a shirt interwoven with threads of
gold. Five golden necklaces were round

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

his neck, and a brooch of gold with a shining precious stone thereon was
on his breast. He carried two silver spears with rivets of bronze, and
his sword was golden-hiked and golden-studded." <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) Nor was his son less handsome. His name
was Bress, which means "beautiful", and we are told that every beautiful
thing in Ireland, "whether plain, or fortress, or ale, or torch, or
woman, or man", was compared with him, so that men said of them, "that
is a Bress". <span id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md)

Balor, Bress, and Elathan are the three Fomorian personages whose
figures, seen through the mists of antiquity, show clearest to us. But
they are only a few out of many, nor are they the oldest. We can learn,
however, nothing but a few names of any ancestors of the Gaelic giants.
This is equally true of the Gaelic gods. Those we know are evidently not
without parentage, but the names of their fathers are no more than
shadows following into oblivion the figures they designated. The most
ancient divinity of whom we have any knowledge is Danu herself, the
goddess from whom the whole hierarchy of gods received its name of
Tuatha Dé Danann. She was also called Anu or Ana, and her name still
clings to two well-known mountains near Killarney, which, though now
called simply "The Paps", were known formerly as the "Paps of
Ana". <span id="fr_62"></span>[3](#fn_62.md) She was the

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

universal mother; "well she used to cherish the gods", says the
commentator of a ninth-century Irish glossary. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md) Her husband is never mentioned by name,
but one may assume him, from British analogies, to have been Bilé, known
to Gaelic tradition as a god of Hades, a kind of Celtic Dis Pater from
whom sprang the first men. Danu herself probably represented the earth
and its fruitfulness, and one might compare her with the Greek Demeter.
All the other gods are, at least by title, her children. The greatest of
these would seem to have been Nuada, called *Argetlám*, or "He of the
Silver Hand". He was at once the Gaelic Zeus, or Jupiter, and their
war-god; for among primitive nations, to whom success in war is
all-important, the god of battles is the supreme god. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64.md) Among the Gauls, Camulus, whose name meant
"Heaven", <span id="fr_65"></span>[3](#fn_65.md) was identified by the
Romans with Mars; and other such instances come readily to the mind. He
was possessed of an invincible sword, one of the four chief treasures of
the Tuatha Dé Danann, over whom he was twice king; and there is little
doubt that he was one of the most important gods of both the Gaels and
the Britons, for his name is spread over the whole of the British Isles,
which we may surmise the Celts conquered under his auspices. We may
picture him as a more savage Mars, delighting in battle and slaughter,
and worshipped, like his Gaulish affinities, Teutates and Hesus, of whom
the

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Latin poet Lucan
tells us, with human sacrifices, shared in by his female consorts, who,
we may imagine, were not more merciful than himself, or than that
Gaulish Taranis whose cult was "no gentler than that of the Scythian
Diana", and who completes Lucan's triad as a fit companion to the
"pitiless Teutates" and the "horrible Hesus". <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md) Of these warlike goddesses there were
five--Fea, the "Hateful", Nemon, the "Venomous", Badb, the "Fury",
Macha, a personification of "battle", and, over all of them, the
Morrígú, or "Great Queen". This supreme war-goddess of the Gaels, who
resembles a fiercer Herê, perhaps symbolized the moon, deemed by early
races to have preceded the sun, and worshipped with magical and cruel
rites. She is represented as going fully armed, and carrying two spears
in her hand. As with Arês <span id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md) and
Poseidon <span id="fr_68"></span>[3](#fn_68.md) in the "Iliad", her
battle-cry was as loud as that of ten thousand men. Wherever there was
war, either among gods or men, she, the great queen, was present, either
in her own shape or in her favourite disguise, that of a "hoodie" or
carrion crow. An old poem shows her inciting a warrior:

"Over his head is shrieking  
   A lean hag, quickly hopping  
Over the points of the weapons and shields;  
   She is the gray-haired Morrígú" <span id="fr_69"></span>[4](#fn_69.md)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> With her, Fea and
Nemon, Badb and Macha also

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

hovered over the fighters, inspiring them with the madness of battle.
All of these were sometimes called by the name of "Badb" <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md). An account of the Battle of Clontarf,
fought by Brian Boru, in 1014, against the Norsemen, gives a gruesome
picture of what the Gaels believed to happen in the spiritual world when
battle lowered and men's blood was aflame. "There arose a wild,
impetuous, precipitate, mad, inexorable, furious, dark, lacerating,
merciless, combative, contentious *badb*, which was shrieking and
fluttering over their heads. And there arose also the satyrs, and
sprites, and the maniacs of the valleys, and the witches and goblins and
owls, and destroying demons of the air and firmament, and the demoniac
phantom host; and they were inciting and sustaining valour and battle
with them." When the fight was over, they revelled among the bodies of
the slain; the heads cut off as barbaric trophies were called "Macha's
acorn crop". These grim creations of the savage mind had immense
vitality. While Nuada, the supreme war-god, vanished early out of the
Pantheon--killed by the Fomors in the great battle fought between them
and the gods--Badb and the Morrígú lived on as late as any of the Gaelic
deities. Indeed, they may be said to still survive in the superstitious
dislike and suspicion shown in all Celtic-speaking countries for their
*avatar*, the hoodie-crow. <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md)

After Nuada, the greatest of the gods was the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dagda, whose name
seems to have meant the "Good God". <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md)
The old Irish tract called "The Choice of Names" tells us that he was a
god of the earth; he had a cauldron called "The Undry", in which
everyone found food in proportion to his merits, and from which none
went away unsatisfied. He also had a living harp; as he played upon it,
the seasons came in their order--spring following winter, and summer
succeeding spring, autumn coming after summer, and, in its turn, giving
place to winter. He is represented as of venerable aspect and of simple
mind and tastes, very fond of porridge, and a valiant consumer of it. In
an ancient tale we have a description of his dress. He wore a brown,
low-necked tunic which only reached down to his hips, and, over this, a
hooded cape which barely covered his shoulders. On his feet and legs
were horse-hide boots, the hairy side outwards. He carried, or, rather,
drew after him on a wheel, an eight-pronged war-club, so huge that eight
men would have been needed to carry it; and the wheel, as he towed the
whole weapon along, made a track like a territorial boundary. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73.md) Ancient and gray-headed as he was, and
sturdy porridge-eater, it will be seen from this that he was a
formidable fighter. He did great deeds in the battle between the gods
and the Fomors, and, on one occasion, is even said to have captured
single-handed a hundred-legged and four-headed monster called Mata,
dragged him to the "Stone of Benn", near the Boyne, and killed him
there.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

The Dagda's wife was called Boann. She was connected in legend with the
River Boyne, to which she gave its name, and, indeed, its very
existence. <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) Formerly there was only a
well <span id="fr_75"></span>[2](#fn_75.md), shaded by nine magic
hazel-trees. These trees bore crimson nuts, and it was the property of
the nuts that whoever ate of them immediately became possessed of the
knowledge of everything that was in the world. The story is, in fact, a
Gaelic version of the Hebrew myth of "the Tree of the Knowledge of Good
and Evil". One class of creatures alone had this privilege--divine
salmon who lived in the well, and swallowed the nuts as they dropped
from the trees into the water, and thus knew all things, and appear in
legend as the "Salmons of Knowledge". All others, even the highest gods,
were forbidden to approach the place. Only Boann, with the proverbial
woman's curiosity, dared to disobey this fixed law. She came towards the
sacred well, but, as she did so, its waters rose up at her, and drove
her away before them in a mighty, rushing flood. She escaped; but the
waters never returned. They made the Boyne; and as for the all-knowing
inhabitants of the well, they wandered disconsolately through the depths
of the river, looking in vain for their lost nuts. One of these salmon
was afterwards eaten by the famous Finn mac Coul, upon whom all its
omniscience descended. <span id="fr_76"></span>[3](#fn_76.md) This way of
accounting for the existence of a river is a favourite one in Irish
legend. It is told also of the Shannon, which burst.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

like the Boyne, from an inviolable well, to pursue another presumptuous
nymph called Sinann, a grand-daughter of the sea-god Lêr. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md)

The Dagda had several children, the most important of whom are Brigit,
Angus, Mider, Ogma, and Bodb the Red. Of these, Brigit will be already
familiar to English readers who know no-thing of Celtic myth. Originally
she was a goddess of fire and the health, as well as of poetry, which
the Gaels deemed an immaterial, supersensual form of flame. But the
early Christianizers of Ireland adopted the pagan goddess into their
roll of saintship, and, thus canonized, she obtained immense popularity
as Saint Bridget, or Bride. <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78.md)

Angus was called *Mac Oc*, which means the "Son of the Young", or,
perhaps, the "Young God". This most charming of the creations of the
Celtic mythology is represented as a Gaelic Eros, an eternally youthful
exponent of love and beauty. Like his father, he had a harp, but it was
of gold, not oak, as the Dagda's was, and so sweet was its music that no
one could hear and not follow it. His kisses became birds which hovered
invisibly over the young men and maidens of Erin, whispering thoughts of
love into their ears. He is chiefly connected with the banks of the
Boyne, where he had a "brugh", or fairy palace; and many stories are
told of his exploits and adventures.

Mider, also the hero of legends, would seem to have been a god of the
underworld, a Gaelic

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pluto. As such, he
was connected with the Isle of Falga--a name for what was otherwise, and
still is, called the Isle of Man--where he had a stronghold in which he
kept three wonderful cows and a magic cauldron. He was also the owner of
the "Three Cranes of Denial and Churlishness", which might be described
flippantly as personified "gentle hints". They stood beside his door,
and when anyone approached to ask for hospitality, the first one said:
"Do not come! do not come!" and the second added: "Get away! get away!"
while the third chimed in with: "Go past the house! go past the
house!" <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) These three birds were,
however, stolen from Mider by Aitherne, an avaricious poet, to whom they
would seem to have been more appropriate than to their owner, who does
not otherwise appear as a churlish and illiberal deity. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80.md) On the contrary, he is represented as the
victim of others, who plundered him freely. The god Angus took away his
wife Etain, <span id="fr_81"></span>[3](#fn_81.md) while his cows, his
cauldron, and his beautiful daughter Blathnat were carried off as spoil
by the heroes or demi-gods who surrounded King Conchobar in the golden
age of Ulster.

Ogma, who appears to have been also called Cermait, that is, the
"honey-mouthed", was the god of literature and eloquence. He married
Etan, the daughter of Diancecht, the god of medicine, and had several
children, who play parts more or less prominent in the mythology of the
Gaelic Celts. One of them was called Tuirenn, whose

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

three sons murdered the father of the sun-god, and were compelled, as
expiation, to pay the greatest fine ever heard of--nothing less than the
chief treasures of the world. <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82.md)
Another son, Cairpré, became the professional bard of the Tuatha Dé
Danann, while three others reigned for a short time over the divine
race. As patron of literature, Ogma was naturally credited with having
been the inventor of the famous *Ogam* alphabet. This was an indigenous
script of Ireland, which spread afterwards to Great Britain,
inscriptions in ogmic characters having been found in Scotland, the Isle
of Man, South Wales, Devonshire, and at Silchester in Hampshire, the
Roman city of Calleva Attrebatum. It was originally intended for
inscriptions upon upright pillar-stones or upon wands, the equivalents
for letters being notches cut across, or strokes made upon one of the
faces of the angle, the alphabet running as follows:

<span id="img_05800"></span> ![Ogam Alphabet](img/05800.jpg.md)

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

When afterwards written in manuscript, the strokes were placed over,
under, or through a horizontal line, in the manner above; and the vowels
were represented by short lines instead of notches, as:

<span id="img_05900"></span> ![Ogam Vowels](img/05900.jpg.md)

A good example of an ogmic inscription is given in Professor Rhys's
*Hibbert Lectures*. It comes from a pillar on a small promontory near
Dunmore Head, in the west of Kerry, and, read horizontally, reads:

<span id="img_05901"></span> ![Ogham inscription](img/05901.jpg.md)

ERC, THE SON OF THE SON OF ERCA (DESCENDANT OF) MODOVINIA. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The origin of this
alphabet is obscure. Some authorities consider it of great antiquity,
while others believe it entirely post-Christian. It seems, at any rate,
to have been based upon, and consequently to presuppose a knowledge of,
the Roman alphabet.

Ogma, besides being the patron of literature, was the champion, or
professional strong man of the Tuatha Dé Danann. His epithet is
*Grianainech*,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

that is, the "Sunny-faced", from his radiant and shining countenance.

The last of the Dagda's more important children is Bodb <span
id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md) the Red, who plays a greater part in later
than in earlier legend. He succeeded his father as king of the gods. He
is chiefly connected with the south of Ireland, especially with the
Galtee Mountains, and with Lough Dearg, where he had a famous *sídh*, or
underground palace.

The Poseidon of the Tuatha Dé Danann Pantheon was called Lêr, but we
hear little of him in comparison with his famous son, Manannán, the
greatest and most popular of his many children. Manannán mac Lir <span
id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85.md) was the special patron of sailors, who
invoked him as "God of Headlands", and of merchants, who claimed him as
the first of their guild. His favourite haunts were the Isle of Man, to
which he gave his name, and the Isle of Arran, in the Firth of Clyde,
where he had a palace called "Emhain of the Apple-Trees". He had many
famous weapons--two spears called "Yellow Shaft" and "Red Javelin", a
sword called "The Retaliator", which never failed to slay, as well as
two others known as the "Great Fury" and the "Little Fury". He had a
boat called "Wave-sweeper", which propelled and guided itself wherever
its owner wished, and a horse called "Splendid Mane", which was swifter
than the spring wind, and travelled equally fast on land or over the
waves of the sea. No weapon could hurt him through his magic mail and
breast-plate, and on his helmet there shone two magic jewels

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

bright as the sun. He endowed the gods with the mantle which made them
invisible at will, and he fed them from his pigs, which, like the boar
Sæhrimnir, in the Norse Valhalla, renewed themselves as soon as they had
been eaten. Of these, no doubt, he made his "Feast of Age", the banquet
at which those who ate never grew old. Thus the people of the goddess
Danu preserved their immortal youth, while the ale of Goibniu the
Smith-God bestowed invulnerability upon them. It is fitting that
Manannán himself should have been blessed beyond all the other gods with
inexhaustible life; up to the latest days of Irish heroic literature his
luminous figure shines prominent, nor is it even yet wholly forgotten.

Goibniu, the Gaelic Hephaestus, who made the people of the goddess Danu
invulnerable with his magic drink, was also the forger of their weapons.
It was he who, helped by Luchtainé, the divine carpenter, and Credné,
the divine bronze-worker, made the armoury with which the Tuatha Dé
Danann conquered the Fomors. Equally useful to them was Diancecht, the
god of medicine. <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md) It was he who once
saved Ireland, and was indirectly the cause of the name of the River
Barrow. The Morrígú, the heaven-god's fierce wife, had borne a son of
such terrible aspect that the physician of the gods, foreseeing danger,
counselled that he should be destroyed in his infancy. This was done;
and Diancecht opened the infant's heart, and found

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

within it three serpents, capable, when they grew to full size, of
depopulating Ireland. He lost no time in destroying these serpents also,
and burning them into ashes, to avoid the evil which even their dead
bodies might do. More than this, he flung the ashes into the nearest
river, for he feared that there might be danger even in them; and,
indeed, so venomous were they that the river boiled up and slew every
living creature in it, and therefore has been called "Barrow" (boiling)
ever since. <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87.md)

Diancecht had several children, of whom two followed their father's
profession. These were Miach and his sister Airmid. There were also
another daughter, Etan, who married Cermait (or Ogma), and three other
sons called Cian, Cethé, and Cu. Cian married Ethniu, the daughter of
Balor the Fomor, and they had a son who was the crowning glory of the
Gaelic Pantheon--its Apollo, the Sun-God,--Lugh <span
id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88.md), called *Lamhfada* <span
id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_89.md), which means the "Long-handed", or the
"Far-shooter". It was not, however, with the bow, like the Apollo of the
Greeks, but with the rod-sling that Lugh performed his feats; his
worshippers sometimes saw the terrible weapon in the sky as a rainbow,
and the Milky Way was called "Lugh's Chain". He also had a magic spear,
which, unlike the rod-sling, he had no need to wield, himself; for it
was alive, and thirsted so for blood that only by steeping its head in a
sleeping-draught of pounded poppy leaves could it be kept at rest. When
battle was near, it

 

<span id="img_06200"></span>

[![LUGH'S MAGIC SPEAR&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From the Drawing by H. R.
Millar&lt;/i&gt;](tn/06200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06200.jpg.md)  
LUGH'S MAGIC SPEAR  
*From the Drawing by H. R. Millar*  

 

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

was drawn out; then it roared and struggled against its thongs; fire
flashed from it; and, once slipped from the leash, it tore through and
through the ranks of the enemy, never tired of slaying. Another of his
possessions was a magic hound which an ancient poem, <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md) attributed to the Fenian hero, Caoilte,
calls--

"That hound of mightiest deeds,  
Which was irresistible in hardness of combat,  
Was better than wealth ever known,  
A ball of fire every night.

"Other virtues had that beautiful hound  
(Better this property than any other property),  
Mead or wine would grow of it,  
Should it bathe in spring water."

This marvellous hound, as well as the marvellous spear, and the
indestructible pigs of Manannán were obtained for Lugh by the sons of
Tuirenn as part of the blood-fine he exacted from them for the murder of
his father Cian. <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91.md) A hardly less
curious story is that which tells how Lugh got his name of the
*Ioldanach*, or the "Master of All Arts". <span
id="fr_92"></span>[3](#fn_92.md)

These are, of course, only the greater deities of the Gaelic Pantheon,
their divinities which answered to such Hellenic figures as Demeter,
Zeus, Herê, Cronos, Athena, Eros, Hades, Hermes, Hephaestus,
Aesculapius, and Apollo. All of them had many descendants, some of whom
play prominent parts

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

in the heroic cycles of the "Red Branch of Ulster" and of the "Fenians".
In addition to these, there must have been a multitude of lesser gods
who stood in much the same relation to the great gods as the rank and
file of tribesmen did to their chiefs. Most of these were probably local
deities of the various clans--the gods their heroes swore by. But it is
also possible that some may have been divinities of the aboriginal race.
Professor Rhys thinks that he can still trace a few of such Iberian gods
by name, as Nêt, Ri or Roi, Corb, and Beth. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93.md) But they play no recognizable part in the
stories of the Gaelic gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[48:1](cml09.htm#fr_55.md) Pronounced *Tooăha dae
donnann*.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[48:2](cml09.htm#fr_56.md) Rhys: *Hibbert
Lectures*, 1886. Lecture VI--"Gods, Demons, and Heroes".

<span id="fn_57"></span>[48:3](cml09.htm#fr_57.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[48:4](cml09.htm#fr_58.md) De Jubainville: *Le
Cycle Mythologique Irlandais*, chap. v.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[48:5](cml09.htm#fr_59.md) De Jubainville: *Cycle
Mythologique Irlandais*, chap. IX.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[50:1](cml09.htm#fr_60.md) From the fifteenth
century Harleian MS. in the British Museum, numbered 5280, and called
the *Second Battle of Moytura*.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[50:2](cml09.htm#fr_61.md) Harleian MS. 5280.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[50:3](cml09.htm#fr_62.md) "In Munster was
worshipped the goddess of prosperity, whose name was Ana, and from her
are named the Two Paps of Ana over Luachair Degad." From *Coir Anmann*,
the *Choice of Names*, a sixteenth-century tract, published by Dr.
Whitley Stokes in *Irische Texte*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[51:1](cml09.htm#fr_63.md) Attributed to Cormac,
King-Bishop of Cashel.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[51:2](cml09.htm#fr_64.md) Rhys: *Hibbert
Lectures*, 1886--"The Zeus of the Insular Celts".

<span id="fn_65"></span>[51:3](cml09.htm#fr_65.md) Rhys: *Hibbert
Lectures*, 1886--"The Gaulish Pantheon".

<span id="fn_66"></span>[52:1](cml09.htm#fr_66.md) *Pharsalia*, Book I, 1.
444, &c.:

"Et quibus immitis placatur sanguine diro  
Teutates, horrensque feris altaribus Hesus;  
Et Taranis Scythicae non mitior ara Dianae".

<span id="fn_67"></span>[52:2](cml09.htm#fr_67.md) Iliad, Book V.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[52:3](cml09.htm#fr_68.md) *Op, cit.*, Book XIV.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[52:4](cml09.htm#fr_69.md) It commemorates the
battle of Magh Rath.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[53:1](cml09.htm#fr_70.md) The word is
approximately pronounced *Bive* or *Bibe*.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[53:2](cml09.htm#fr_71.md) For a full account of
these beings see a paper by Mr. W. M. Hennessey in Vol. 1 of the *Revue
Celtique*, entitled "The Ancient Irish Goddess of War".

<span id="fn_72"></span>[54:1](cml09.htm#fr_72.md) De Jubainville: *Le
Cycle Mythologique*. Rhys: *Hibbert Lectures*, p. 154. The *Coir
Anmann*, however, translates it "Fire of God".

<span id="fn_73"></span>[54:2](cml09.htm#fr_73.md) *The Second Battle of
Moytura*. Harleian MS. 5280.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[55:1](cml09.htm#fr_74.md) The story is told in the
Book of Leinster.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[55:2](cml09.htm#fr_75.md) Now called "Trinity
Well".

<span id="fn_76"></span>[55:3](cml09.htm#fr_76.md) See [chap.
XIV](cml18.htm#ch-14.md)--"Finn and the Fenians".

<span id="fn_77"></span>[56:1](cml09.htm#fr_77.md) Book of Leinster. A
paraphrase of the story will be found in O’Curry's *Manners and Customs
of the Ancient Irish*, Vol. II, p. 143.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[56:2](cml09.htm#fr_78.md) See [chap.
XV](cml19.htm#ch-15.md)--"The Decline and Fall of the Gods".

<span id="fn_79"></span>[57:1](cml09.htm#fr_79.md) Rhys: *Hibbert
Lectures*, p. 331.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[57:2](cml09.htm#fr_80.md) Rhys: *Hibbert
Lectures*, p. 331.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[57:3](cml09.htm#fr_81.md) See [chap.
XI](cml15.htm#ch-11.md)--"The Gods in Exile".

<span id="fn_82"></span>[58:1](cml09.htm#fr_82.md) See [chap.
VIII](cml12.htm#ch-08.md)--"The Gaelic Argonauts".

<span id="fn_83"></span>[59:1](cml09.htm#fr_83.md) Rhys: *Hibbert
Lectures*, p. 524.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[60:1](cml09.htm#fr_84.md) Pronounced *Bove*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[60:2](cml09.htm#fr_85.md) Lêr--genitive Lir.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[61:1](cml09.htm#fr_86.md) Pronounced *Dianket*.
His name is explained, both in the *Choice of Names* and in Cormac's
*Glossary*, as meaning "God of Health".

<span id="fn_87"></span>[62:1](cml09.htm#fr_87.md) Standish O’Grady: *The
Story of Ireland*, p. 17

<span id="fn_88"></span>[62:2](cml09.htm#fr_88.md) Pronounced *Luga* or
*Loo*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[62:3](cml09.htm#fr_89.md) Pronounced *Lavāda*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[63:1](cml09.htm#fr_90.md) Translated by O’Curry in
*Atlantis*, Vol. III, from the Book of Lismore.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[63:2](cml09.htm#fr_91.md) Chap. VIII--"The Gaelic
Argonauts".

<span id="fn_92"></span>[63:3](cml09.htm#fr_92.md) Chap. VII--"The Rise of
the Sun-God".

<span id="fn_93"></span>[64:1](cml09.htm#fr_93.md) Rhys: *Celtic Britain*,
chap. VII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Gods Arrive](cml10.md)
