[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cml04)  [Next](cml06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809531534/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span id="ch-01"></span>

# THE MYTHOLOGY OF THE BRITISH ISLANDS

### CHAPTER I

### THE INTEREST AND IMPORTANCE OF CELTIC MYTHOLOGY

It should hardly be necessary to remind the reader of what profound
interest and value to every nation are its earliest legendary and
poetical records. The beautiful myths of Greece form a sufficing
example. In threefold manner, they have influenced the destiny of the
people that created them, and of the country of which they were the
imagined theatre. First, in the ages in which they were still fresh,
belief and pride in them were powerful enough to bring scattered tribes
into confederation. Secondly, they gave the inspiration to sculptor and
poet of an art and literature unsurpassed, if not unequalled, by any
other age or race. Lastly, when "the glory that was Greece" had faded,
and her people had, by dint of successive invasions, perhaps even ceased
to have any right to call themselves Hellenes, they have passed over
into the literatures of the modern

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

world, and so given to Greece herself a poetic interest that still makes
a petty kingdom of greater account in the eyes of its compeers than many
others far superior to it in extent and resources.

This permeating influence of the Greek poetical mythology, apparent in
all civilized countries, has acted especially upon our own. From almost
the very dawn of English literature, the Greek stories of gods and
heroes have formed a large part of the stock-in-trade of English poets.
The inhabitants of Olympus occupy, under their better-known Latin names,
almost as great a space in English poetry as they did in that of the
countries to which they were native. From Chaucer downwards, they have
captivated the imagination alike of the poets and their hearers. The
magic cauldron of classic myth fed, like the Celtic "Grail", all who
came to it for sustenance.

At last, however, its potency became somewhat exhausted. Alien and
exotic to English soil, it degenerated slowly into a convention. In the
shallow hands of the poetasters of the eighteenth century, its figures
became mere puppets. With every wood a "grove", and every rustic maid a
"nymph", one could only expect to find Venus armed with patch and
powder-puff, Mars shouldering a musket, and Apollo inspiring the
versifier's own trivial strains. The affectation killed--and fortunately
killed--a mode of expression which had become obsolete. Smothered by
just ridicule, and abandoned to the commonplace vocabulary of the
inferior hack-writer, classic myth became a subject

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

which only the greatest poets could afford to handle.

But mythology is of such vital need to literature that, deprived of the
store of legend native to southern Europe, imaginative writers looked
for a fresh impulse. They turned their eyes to the North. Inspiration
was sought, not from Olympus, but from Asgard. Moreover, it was believed
that the fount of primeval poetry issuing from Scandinavian and Teutonic
myth was truly our own, and that we were rightful heirs of it by reason
of the Anglo-Saxon in our blood. And so, indeed, we are; but it is not
our sole heritage. There must also run much Celtic--that is, truly
British--blood in our veins. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) And
Matthew Arnold was probably right in asserting that, while we owe to the
Anglo-Saxon the more practical qualities that have built up the British
Empire, we have inherited from the Celtic side that poetic vision which
has made English literature the most brilliant since the Greek. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

We have the right, therefore, to enter upon a new spiritual possession.
And a splendid one it is! The Celtic mythology has little of the heavy
crudeness that repels one in Teutonic and Scandinavian story.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is as beautiful
and graceful as the Greek ; and, unlike the Greek, which is the
reflection of a clime and soil which few of us will ever see, it is our
own. Divinities should, surely, seem the inevitable outgrowth of the
land they move in! How strange Apollo would appear, naked among
icebergs, or fur-clad Thor striding under groves of palms! But the
Celtic gods and heroes are the natural inhabitants of a British
landscape, not seeming foreign and out-of-place in a scene where there
is no vine or olive, but "shading in with "our homely oak and bracken,
gorse and heath.

Thus we gain an altogether fresh interest in the beautiful spots of our
own islands, especially those of the wilder and more mountainous west,
where the older inhabitants of the land lingered longest. Saxon conquest
obliterated much in Eastern Britain, and changed more; but in the West
of England, in Wales, in Scotland, and especially in legend-haunted
Ireland, the hills and dales still keep memories of the ancient gods of
the ancient race. Here and there in South Wales and the West of England
are regions-once mysterious and still romantic-which the British Celts
held to be the homes of gods or outposts of the Other World. In Ireland,
not only is there scarcely a place that is not connected in some way
with the traditionary exploits of the "Red Branch Champions", or of Finn
and his mighty men, but the old deities are still remembered, dwarfed
into fairies, but keeping the same attributes and the same names as of
yore. Wordsworth's complaint <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

that, while Pelion and Ossa, Olympus and Parnassus are "in immortal
books enrolled", not one English mountain, "though round our sea-girt
shore they rise in crowds", had been "by the Celestial Muses glorified"
doubtless seemed true to his own generation. Thanks to the scholars' who
have unveiled the ancient Gaelic and British mythologies, it need not be
so for ours. On Ludgate Hill, as well as on many less famous eminences,
once stood the temple of the British Zeus. A mountain not far from
Bettws-y-Coed was the British Olympus, the court and palace of our
ancient gods.

It may well be doubted, however, whether Wordsworth's contemporaries
would have welcomed the mythology which was their own by right of birth
as a substitute for that of Greece and Rome. The inspiration of classic
culture, which Wordsworth was one of the first to break with, was still
powerful. How some of its professors would have held their sides and
roared at the very notion of a British mythology! Yet, all the time, it
had long been secretly leavening English ideas and ideals, none the less
potently because disguised under forms which could be readily
appreciated. Popular fancy had rehabilitated the old gods, long banned
by the priests' bell, book, and candle, under various disguises. They
still lived on in legend as kings of ancient Britain reigning in a
fabulous past anterior to Julius Caesar--such were King Lud, founder of
London; King Lear, whose legend was immortalized by Shakespeare; King
Brennius, who conquered Rome; as well as many others who will be found

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

filling parts in old drama. They still lived on as long-dead saints of
the early churches of Ireland and Britain, whose wonderful attributes
and adventures are, in many cases, only those of their original
namesakes, the old gods, told afresh. And they still lived on in
another, and a yet more potent, way. Myths of Arthur and his cycle of
gods passed into the hands of the Norman story-tellers, to reappear as
romances of King Arthur and his Knights of the Table Round. Thus spread
over civilized Europe, their influence was immense. Their primal poetic
impulse is still resonant in our literature; we need only instance
Tennyson and Swinburne as minds that have come under its sway.

This diverse influence of Celtic mythology upon English poetry and
romance has been eloquently set forth by Mr. Elton in his *Origins of
English History*. "The religion of the British tribes", he writes, "has
exercised an important influence upon literature. The mediæval romances
and the legends which stood for history are full of the 'fair
humanities' and figures of its bright mythology. The elemental powers of
earth and fire, and the spirits which haunted the waves and streams
appear again as kings in the Irish Annals, or as saints and hermits in
Wales. The Knights of the Round Table, Sir Kay and Tristrem and the bold
Sir Bedivere, betray their mighty origin by the attributes they retained
as heroes of romance. It was a goddess, '*Dea quaedam phantastica*', who
bore the wounded Arthur to the peaceful valley. 'There was little
sunlight on its woods and streams, and the nights were dark

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

and gloomy for want of the moon and stars.' This is the country of
Oberon and of Sir Huon of Bordeaux. It is the dreamy forest of Arden. In
an older mythology, it was the realm of a King of Shadows, the country
of Gwyn ap Nudd, who rode as Sir Guyon in the 'Fairie Queene'--

And knighthood took of good Sir Huon's hand,  
When with King Oberon he came to Fairyland'." <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

To trace Welsh and Irish kings and saints and hermits back to "the
elemental powers of earth and fire, and the spirits that haunted the
woods and streams" of Celtic imagination, and to disclose primitive
pagan deities under the mediæval and Christian trappings of "King
Arthur's Knights" will necessarily fall within the scope of this volume.
But meanwhile the reader will probably be asking what evidence there is
that apocryphal British kings like Lear and Lud, and questionable Irish
saints like Bridget are really disguised Celtic divinities, or that the
Morte D’Arthur, with its love of Launcelot and the queen, and its quest
of the Holy Grail, was ever anything more than an invention of the
Norman romance-writers. He will demand to know what facts we really
possess about this supposed Celtic mythology alleged to have furnished
their prototypes, and of what real antiquity and value are our
authorities upon it.

The answer to his question will be found in the next chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](cml05.htm#fr_0) "There is good ground to
believe", writes Mr. E. W. B, Nicholson, M.A., the librarian of the
Bodleian Library, in the preface to his recently-published *Keltic
Researches*, "that Lancashire, West Yorkshire, Staffordshire,
Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire, Rutland, Cambridgeshire,
Wiltshire, Somerset, and part of Sussex, are as Keltic as Perthshire and
North Munster; that Cheshire, Shropshire, Herefordshire, Monmouthshire,
Gloucestershire, Devon, Dorset, Northamptonshire, Huntingdonshire, and
Bedfordshire are more so--and equal to North Wales and Leinster; while
Buckinghamshire and Hertfordshire exceed even this degree and are on a
level with South Wales and Ulster. Cornwall, of course, is more Keltic
than any other English county, and as much so as Argyll.
Inverness-shire, or Connaught."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:2](cml05.htm#fr_1) *The Study of Celtic
Literature*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:1](cml05.htm#fr_2) In a sonnet written in
1801.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:1](cml05.htm#fr_3) Elton: *Origins of English
History*, chap. x.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Sources of Our Knowledge of the Celtic
Mythology](cml06)
